Kenya’s anti-torture law shows India’s failure to criminalise torture
October 30, 2018
Asian Centre For Human RightsKenya had a very tumultuous history. Kenyans suffered unspeakable and horrific gross violations of human rights at the hands of the British colonial administration between 1895 and 1963. In order to establish its authority in Kenya, the colonial government employed violence on the local population on an unprecedented scale, including massacres, torture and ill-treatment and […]Custodial torture and custodial deaths have been rampant in Bihar. Tacit sanction by the police top brass and impunity has worsened the situation. This report discusses custodial torture in Bihar, torture in India during September 2018, UN Action Against Torture in September 2018, EU’s action to eradicate torture and lessons for India from the anti-torture law in the […]Prisons in India are synonymous with deplorable conditions amounting to inhuman and degrading treatment and deaths of the prisoners from denial of basic medical facilities to torture. Prison reform is the least priority of the society and the State. Would Justice (retd) Amitava Roy Committee therefore be able to reform the shameful prisons of India? […]Custodial torture and custodial deaths have been rampant in Bihar. Tacit sanction by the police top brass and impunity has worsened the situation. As per the data collated, the NHRC recorded 55 deaths in police custody and 1,025 deaths in prison custody during 2008-2018 as given below: Table: Custodial deaths in Bihar from 2008-2018 Year […]Across India, cases of torture in police and judicial custody continue to be reported on regular basis. Emblematic cases of torture in police custody On 22 September 2018, two Punjab crime branch officials identified as Palwinder Singh and Ravinder Singh (both inspector rank) beaten up Jaswinder Kaur at her family house at Shehzada village under […]UN Committee against Torture On 10 September 2018, the UN Committee against Torture (CAT) ruled against the expulsion of an Eritrean national from Switzerland to Italy, saying it would deprive him of the necessary conditions for his rehabilitation as a torture survivor. The committee concluded that the expulsion would contravene the UN Convention against Torture […]The fight against torture is one of the long-standing policy priorities of the European Union (EU). Ukraine: On 6 September 2018, the Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) published the report on its most recent visit to Ukraine from 8 to 21 December 2017. […]For the last fifty years, Philippines has faced serious and active insurgency starting with the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) and its New People’s Army (NPA) which launched its armed struggle in 1968.[1] The southern Philippines has a long history of conflict, with armed groups including the Muslim separatists, who comprise of – the […]New Delhi: In its report, “Kerala: God’s Own Country or the Land of ‘Urutti Kola’?, released today, Asian Centre for Human Rights (ACHR) stated that ‘Urutti Kola’ i.e. murder by ‘rolling’ a heavy wooden log or iron pipe over the body, specially over the thighs of the victims is Kerala’s contribution to the lexicon of custodial violence in the […]Kerala, marketed as God’s Own Country by the State government, has been affected by the worst floods in the last 100 years in July-August 2018. The State government is currently in the process of rebuilding the State that stands devastated. The State government must equally re-build its criminal justice system destroyed by the rampant use of […]Asian Centre for Human Rights
(ACHR has Special Consultative Status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council)
C-3/441-C, Janakpuri, New Delhi-110058, India • Phone:+91-11-25620583 • Email: secretariat@achrweb.orgEmail *Check your inbox or spam folder to confirm your subscription.