ACHR’s submission to the Parliamentary Select Committee to the Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010
September 21, 2010
Asian Centre For Human RightsA. UN Committee Against Torture: Tajikistan On 18 May 2018, the UN Committee against Torture (UNCAT) concluded its sixty-third session during which the Committee adopted concluding observations and recommendations on Belarus, Czech Republic, Norway, Qatar, Senegal and Tajikistan on the implementation of the provisions of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading […]The interventions of the Asian Centre for Human Rights led to the rescue of two Scheduled Tribe girls of Assam, aged 12 years and 19 years, and their reunion with their families after they were abducted and trafficked to Mumbai in 2012. The tribal girls namely Dibya Devi Chakma (12 years), d/o Natun Chandra Chakma […]On 3 August 2009, the ACHR submitted a complaint before the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) seeking its urgent interventions against the trafficking of 29 tribal minor children including 11 girls from Nagaland to Andhra Pradesh in the name of providing free education. According to the complaint, one Henry Rongmei, claiming himself […]Due to the lack of financial resources, Torture in India 2011 covering the incidents of 2010 cannot be printed and is only available online. Torture in India series which started in 2008 were previously published under the National Campaign for the Prevention of Torture – a programme funded by the European Commission. The project from […]PSC-PTB2010-RajyaSabhaTorture is rampant and institutionalised in India. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has recorded 16,836 custodial deaths, or an average of 1,203 per year during the period 1994 to 2008; these included 2,207 deaths in police custody and 14,629 deaths in judicial custody. Given well-established practices and consistent documentation of persons being tortured to […]“At a conference of Chief Justices and Chief Ministers some time back, I had pointed out that the Indian legal and judicial system, in some sense, reflects a great contradiction. Our democracy and our legal and judicial system have strengths that are admired the world over. We have a free press, a truly independent judiciary […]On 28 January 2010, Asian Centre for Human Rights submitted a petition to the National Commission for Women seeking its action against trafficking of three girls from Mizoram by Mr. H. Kapthuama, Chairman of Jan Shikshan Sansthan under the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India in the name of providing job at Ramada […]Dear Honourable Members of Parliament, Asian Centre for Human Rights on behalf of the participants of the National Conference on the Prevention of Torture Bill, 2008 (as drafted by the government of India) is writing this letter to seek your intervention with the Honourable Prime Minister of India to place the Prevention of Torture Bill after ensuring […]Since its inception, Asian Centre for Human Rights (ACHR) has been at the forefront of establishing accountability for human rights violations. While ACHR has made a considerable contribution to policy making and standard setting both at national and international levels, its focus is on victims of human rights violations. Victims remain concern primarily on three […]Asian Centre for Human Rights
(ACHR has Special Consultative Status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council)
C-3/441-C, Janakpuri, New Delhi-110058, India • Phone:+91-11-25620583 • Email: secretariat@achrweb.orgEmail *Check your inbox or spam folder to confirm your subscription.