Dialogue – Issue 36: Dui Hua News
August 29, 2009
In April and May, Executive Director John Kamm and Program Associate Tobias Smith completed an advocacy and outreach trip. The first destination was Canada—one of eight countries engaged in human rights dialogues with China—with stops in Toronto and Ottawa. Kamm and Smith met with representatives from the Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the Ministry of International Cooperation, and gave a presentation at the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade. They also had discussions with Member of Parliament Scott Reid as well as parliamentary committees and China experts.On to New York, where they met Chinese Minister Counsellor La Yifan, Swiss Ambassador Peter Maurer, and human rights NGO representatives. They then headed to Connecticut, where Kamm spoke on human rights dialogues at the Yale China Law Center, met with the Smith Richardson Foundation, and was hosted to a gathering by Dui Hua supporter Gene Rostov.The trip concluded in Washington, DC, where Kamm and Smith held meetings with senior staff of the Senate Foreign Relations and House Foreign Affairs Committees, the Congressional-Executive Commission on China, the Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission, the US-China Working Group, and the State Department. Kamm also met with Chinese Counselor Ma Xinmin and Jeff Bader, senior director for Asian affairs on the National Security Council.A highlight in Washington was an event hosted by Dui Hua supporter Helen Manich. Manich also invited Rainbow Yang and John Zeng, two prominent house church organizers in China who sought asylum in the United States. Kamm had worked on their cases ten years ago, but the dinner at Manich’s residence was the first time the three had met in person.Wayne Tuan has resigned from Dui Hua’s Board of Directors to devote time to new business ventures. Elected to the board in 2001, Mr. Tuan is Senior Adviser to and a Member of the Board of Horizon Capital Management, Hong Kong. He was a 1989–1990 White House Fellow and served as a Special Assistant to the United States Trade Representative. Following this post, Mr. Tuan worked for several years in international finance, first with Bear Stearns and then with Merrill Lynch. In 1998, he became Portfolio Manager of Asian public equities with Olympus Capital Holdings and later served, from 2000 to 2003, as a Senior Vice President of Ziff Brothers Investments.“Dui Hua was very fortunate to have a man of such integrity and financial acumen on our board, especially during the early years of the foundation’s growth,” said John Kamm. “We will miss his counsel, but are heartened by his determination to stay involved with Dui Hua as a long-time friend and supporter.”This summer, the foundation created two new ways of connecting more conveniently with supporters located all around the world. This issue of Dialogue is the first one available as an e-newsletter, with links added to published articles and news items. In addition, Dui Hua created a Facebook Fan Page in June, and it has proven to be a useful portal for keeping friends of Dui Hua updated on the foundation’s most recent work and announcements. Dui Hua welcomes you to sign up for the new e-newsletter as well as join our fan page on Facebook.