Social rights: the pillar is already crumbling…
23 November 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Nevertheless, while the ambition of the European Commission and its President to establish a pillar of social rights is attractive and truly longed for by all European citizens, AEDH reminds that it is crucial not to be blinded by the spotlights surrounding the Pillar’s proclamation but to remain cautious about its actual solidity. Barely proclaimed, the latter seems indeed already rather relative and under such a configuration it is quite difficult to envisage real changes. By adopting a non-binding proclamation, the Heads of State and Government sought unanimity and succeeded in integrating those Member States refusing to commit in terms of social policy, but at what cost ? A non-binding text won’t be able to deliver concrete progress. With great regret, AEDH considers that one can legitimately doubt it. If the proclamation appears as interinstitutional and commits the European Union to respect the Pillar in its future policies, it is in fact carefully limited by the bargains that took place among Member States at the Council. Gothenburg was the victory of a façade unity rather than the triumph of social rights. To achieve a true triumph of social, another impetus was needed. AEDH reminds that in the end Member States remain the masters of their respective social policy, which are not covered by the Treaty of the European Union. Proof of this is the statements that suggest that the motto remains set on “social dumping”. Hence on the day for which the European Commission worked so hard to make a founding day for a new approach, Victor Orbán made it clear that he signed a rag of paper that will not prevent his country, Hungary, to continue exactly as it did before and won’t change its social model. In addition, Lars Løkke Rasmussen, Prime Minister of Denmark stated that “the social pillar should not create any new legal rights or obligations”. According to Jean-Claude Juncker, the Pillar “is not a poem, but a program”. Yet, what is a program without means of action but literature? AEDH calls for an action plan with clearly defined objectives, indicators and timetables to be set in place as soon as possible so that concrete rights emerge from the Gothenburg Summit. To counterbalance the economic policies that are the subject to binding regulations at the European level, social policies should be the subject of similar procedures. Economy and social must go hand in hand on an equal footing! In order for the historic character of this day to be more than just a piece of language uttered by Member States’ leaders, it will be necessary for the European Union to make of these social rights a program for all. Without such social cement that the European Union lacks so much, Pillar or not, it is a 67-year old construction that will inevitably continue to crumble. 