Ukraine : Ukrainian citizens must regain their freedom of decision – Press release 7th march 2014
7 March 2014
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French)  (Unofficial translation) Brussels, 7th March 2014 AEDH is worried about the dangerous situation Ukrainian citizens are facing in their own country, a substantial part of which is under military occupation of foreign troops. The troops are visibly supported or sent by the Russian government and president Putin. This violent intervention aims to put an end to months of Ukrainians fighting to create the conditions to exit arbitrariness and corruption hoping that this would lead to the establishment of genuine democratic institutions. While 2014 is the centenary of the beginning of the First World War and is an opportunity, throughout the world, to put into perspective a century of violence, war, power politics and domination, sabre-rattling is coming from Russia. While we are getting closer to the seventieth anniversary of the Capitulation of 1945, it should be reminded that the founding of the Council of Europe and the building of the European Union greatly contributed to open the way to a Europe of peace. For this is the primary condition for developing the principles of equality in rights and dignity based on fundamental rights everywhere and for everyone. AEDH stands up  against any military intervention and violence and condemns the temptation of escalating armed conflicts no one can predict the terrible  consequences of, for all residents of the European continent. Any external intervention would trigger such a process. It is up to the Ukrainian people alone to decide their own future while respecting democratic practices. AEDH calls on the citizens of the European Union, elected officials, and European institutions to raise their voices and take measures to ensure that Ukrainians remain master of their destiny and that they can build together a democratic society based on justice and peace, and respecting human rights. Download the press release in english and in french Contact: Rafael LARA, chairman AEDH, Association Européenne pour la défense des Droits de l’Homme 33, rue de la Caserne. B-1000 Bruxelles Tél : +32(0)25112100 Fax : +32(0)25113200  Email: info@aedh.eu The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (Association Européenne pour la défense des Droits de l’Homme – AEDH) consists of associations and leagues defending human rights in the countries of the European Union. AEDH is an associate member of the International Federation of Human Rights (Fédération internationale pour la défense des droits de l’Homme – FIDH).  For more information, visit www.aedh.eu 