International day for the eradication of poverty: AEDH invites you to join !
17 October 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) While we celebrate the 60th anniversary of ATD Quart Monde movement and the creation, 30 years ago, of the International day for the eradication of poverty, the European Association for the Defense of Human Rights (AEDH) considers that the fight against inequalities, and in particular against poverty, are disregarded by the EU and its Members States. 2.8 billion people are poor or threatened by poverty in the world, hence representing nearly a third of the world’s population. In Europe, the situation is not that good either with a quarter of its population endangered by poverty or social exclusion. Such concerns should have been considered a top priority on the EU political agenda. Unfortunately, they have not! The indicators released by Eurostat since the launch of the “2020 strategy” in 2008 leave no room for doubt: even though there were internal variations, the outcome remains the same and depicts a stable risk of poverty and social exclusion for 25% of the population. If the index is extremely worrying for countries such as Bulgaria, Latvia or Romania where 40% up to 50% of the population is affected, the social situation has significantly deteriorated in Greece or Spain. What is at stake is not the natural state of disqualified population but the outcomes of disastrous economic policies. AEDH reminds that austerity policies, supposed to cleanse and restart the economic machine, actually reinforced the vulnerability of the weakest individuals leading them to poverty to such an extent that, in the EU, 27% of children under the age of 18 are poor or threatened with poverty. In addition, the flexibility policies related to the labor market lead to an increase in working poors and particularly, because they are the first affected, in female working poors facing precarious work, either imposed or chosen under constraint. AEDH supports the fight against all forms of poverty. Whether monetary, material or social, poverty cannot be considered as secondary compared to economic policies. AEDH expects from the Göteborg summit organised on 17 November 2017 to discuss the European Pillar of Social Rights in order to set up, within the latter, safeguards against poverty and a will to fight destitution. To make this commitment public, AEDH invites to take part in the initiatives organised within the framework of the International day for Eradication of Poverty. 