Social Pillar and Directive on posted workers: the two sides of the EU social policy ?
25 October 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (AEDH) welcomes the unanimous decision of the EU Employment and Social Policy to give the green light to the text of the Proclamation of the European Pillar of Social Rights, the so-called Social Pillar. The Member States, therefore, authorise Donald Tusk, President of the European Council, to sign, on their behalf, the Declaration together with Jean-Claude Juncker, President of the European Commission, and Antonio Tajani, President of the European Parliament, during the Summit for fair jobs and growth in Gothenburg on 17 November. Thanks to the Social Pillar, the European Union should finally be able to build the social Europe that European citizens have been longing for so many years (see A Social Europe: a citizens’ will above all). Nevertheless, AEDH insists on the fact that the European Pillar of Social Rights shall not be a mere declaration of 20 principles existing on paper : it must be turned into concrete rights that European citizens can rely on in their daily life (see The European Social Pillar is not (yet) the one Europe needs). This is all the more important given that the following day, the Council finalised its position on the revision of the posted workers Directive, hence paving the way to the start of interinstitutional negotiations between the Council, the Parliament, and the Commission. The details on the Council’s position, and the internal negotiations that took place within the institution, remain unknown for the time-being but its outlines, as well as the balance of power between the Member States, reveal that the economic rationale has been barely inflected in favour of the social rationale. The fact that the main posted workers supplier Member States voted against the revision of the 1996 Directive is a sign that the fight is not over. Poland, true heavyweight in this area, together with Hungary, Czech Republic and Slovakia already give the tone of the controversy. The major element of the so-called compromise is the reduction of long-term posting to 12 months (with the possibility of a 6-month extension…). AEDH considers that the modification does not question the system enabling the “posted workers’engine”, i.e. the difference between the aggregate wage costs (wages and contributions) among local and posted workers. AEDH is surprised that EU Member States governments cry victory over the maintenance of a principle under which the posted workers’ salary calculation base remains the minimum wage of the hosting country while the social security contributions are those of the country of origin… no change since 1996! In the shadow of the social pillar lies the organised competition between workers. AEDH will carefully scrutinise the implementation of the European Pillar of Social Rights and ensure that the Member States abide to its principles because the European Union cannot afford another sacrifice of social Europe at the altar of the economic Europe. For further reading : 