AEDH addresses the Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs of EU member states, meeting on October 9 and 10 within the Council of the European Union in Luxembourg
9 October 2014
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Brussels, 8 October 2014 Deaths at sea concern Europe as a whole and they are the result of a harmful policy The situation of migrants and refugees in the Mediterranean Sea is dramatic and proven by the number of shipwrecked increasing every day. Do we need even more dreadful events to awaken people’s consciences while these dramas are so repetitive that they are not even worth making the headlines in the media anymore? A bad policy AEDH considers that the priority given to the protection of the borders rather than to the protection of the migrants is the reason for the deaths. Is it really necessary to remind that the only results of building walls and barbed wires are the increase in risks for migrants and an increase in prices of the smugglers? Because meanwhile thousands of people continue to suffer and die at the borders of a Europe that has become a real Fortress. Reasons for migration Few migrants leave their country and their family with joy. For the vast majority of them, only extreme, inhuman situations force them to leave and risk their lives at sea. Many of them will die on this journey. The European Union must create the political conditions and allocate the resources to put an end to this inhuman situation if it does not want to be judged an accomplice. European policy must change AEDH reminds the Ministers of member states and the European Commission meeting in Council in Luxembourg on October 9 and 10 that in view of this dramatic deterioration of the situation of migrants off the coasts of Europe, the absence of a concerted reception policy is blatant. Under article 2 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, “everyone has the right to life”. Accordingly, it is not enough anymore for the leaders to express repeatedly their regrets, to denounce the smugglers, to lean over hundreds of coffins and deplore this dramatic situation! Yes, we do have to act! Now! The Mediterranean Sea concerns the 28 member states! The improvement of living conditions for EU citizens has no valid future if it is to the detriment of migrants that come, live and work in host countries. It is a lie to pretend that the price to pay for our security is the exclusion of others.  Contact: Dominique Guibert, chairman AEDH, European Association for the Defence of Human Rights 33, rue de la Caserne. B-1000 Bruxelles Tél : +32(0)25112100 Fax : +32(0)25113200 Email : info(at)aedh.eu The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (Association Européenne pour la défense des Droits de l’Homme – AEDH) consists of associations and leagues defending human rights in the countries of the European Union. Download the press release here. 