AEDH and ADHR-BG condemn recent events in Bulgaria – Joint statement
10 January 2014
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Sofia/ Brussels, 10 January 2014 Abuse of power, crime against the rights and the freedoms of EU citizens and violation of law and public order is what passengers of commercial flight Sofia – Varna have witnessed on the 6 January 2014. It is more alarming as it was caused by MPs. Volen Siderov, president of a nationalist political party Ataka (Attack) was observed to harass a passenger because of her ethnic origin and later, when confronted, has engaged in a fight with another passenger, injuring him. Furthermore, disobeying police order, he assaulted a policeman who has also sustained injury. His entourage, some of whom also MPs, have attempted to confiscate passengers’ mobile devises that have recorded the events. MP Siderov is the chair of the standing committee on corruption of the National Assembly. Throughout the events, the MPs have attempted to impose control over the situation, displaying their National Assembly ID and access cards as grounds for that. On 6 January 2014 the passengers of the evening flight Sofia – Varna observed arrogant and excessively noisy behavior of what appeared to be intoxicated co-passengers, recognized as the leadership of political party Ataka. A lady passenger has eventually been rescued by the airhostess to business class. MP Siderov has insulted the lady passenger for her nationality and claimed that, as a MP, is entitled to check her documents.  Eventually, MP Siderov has taken by force the passport and boarding pass, using abusive language. The victim is the French citizen Ms. Stéphanie Dumortier, attaché for cooperation from the French Cultural Institute. While on the shuttle bus, another passenger, Mr. Dimitar Bahnev, has attempted to calm down the aggressors and eventually was assaulted (punched in the face) by the MP Siderov. Alerted, already inside the airport, police and border control engaged to control the situation. Police officer Kostadin Kolev was punched in the face by the MP Siderov.  The passenger and the officer have acquired documents for physical injuries after medical examination. Meanwhile, other Ataka members and MPs have attempted to destroy the evidences recorded on mobile phones by other passengers. One such phone is destroyed. 7 investigators and 3 prosecutors have been working since and earlier today the Prosecutor General Sotir Tsatsarov issued a request to strip Siderov of his immunity as an MP – prerequisite for legal action against politicians. So far the investigation has opened a case for a general crime against unknown perpetrator. The French embassy in Sofia worked on the incident and a formal statement is issued. On 8 January, organized through Facebook NGOs and citizens staged protest in front of the Justice Palace, requested fully fledged investigation against all involved. Instead of pleas for apologies, Siderov gathered his ranks – a group of around 40-50 activists to protest the legal action against him and his political party. In the evening of 8 January, two supporters of Ataka invaded one of the national TV stations, NovaTV as a response to a talk show which discussed the case. The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (AEDH) and its member, the European Association for the Defence of Human Rights – Bulgaria (ADHR-BG) condemn this outrageous abuse of political power and see alarming precedents from the past. In 2010, when MP Siderov preceded his ranks and burned the prayers’ carpets in front of Banya Bashi – the largest mosque in Bulgaria – the investigation against unknown perpetrator never came to a close. Throughout 2013 journalists from different media suffered from the undue anger of MP Siderov and no legal action has been initiated.  In the climax of refugees’ influx last September, MP Siderov and his ranks were regularly observed as accomplices of race crimes, hate speech while also were spreading fear. No legal action on those grounds was ever undertaken. Bulgaria is a member of the EU, thus guaranteeing all EU citizens and visitors their rights and freedoms. ADHR-BG will continue to closely monitor the raising xenophobia in the country and regularly report on it. We rely on our members, sympathizers from across the country and colleagues and friends from EU and beyond. As a member of AEDH, we will promote means and pathways for a strong EU community – one based on fundamental rights and solidarity, with full accountability of political leaders and ruling powers. So far, Bulgarian National Assembly has not condemned acts of abuse of power and crimes of general nature committed by MP Siderov and other MPs. Immunity against prosecution is granted to MPs to protect them against undue political pressure but has been abused used by some of them. Transparency and accountability of public affairs is always declared. When discussing every individual case, however, loyalty to a side within the bipolar political structure of the assembly takes over. The present case is a unique opportunity for the parliament to place the rights and the freedoms of the citizens above political interests and lobbies of interests. Although new to the political reality of Bulgaria, judgment of individual politicians within their political factions becomes a relevant. ADHR-BG will be following closely who are the ones for whom the rights of the citizens matter less. We also work for improved conditions for conduction of the elections in Bulgaria, including the forthcoming EP elections. We firmly believe that really free and fair elections, with real chance for expression of preferences for the political leaders will eventually lead for a more direct relation between citizens and their representatives. Having more options for the constructive political parties is one of the ways to delegitimize the ultranationalists’ rhetoric. AEDH and ADHR-BG call for the Bulgarian authorities to take the appropriate measures to guarantee all EU citizens, migrants and asylum-seekers their rights and freedoms as established by EU treaties and legislation. We call on civil society, human rights organizations, the European Parliament and the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe to react and condemn this behavior, to take a clear stand to protect the fundamental rights the European Union is based on and to closely monitor the developments in the member state. Download the joint statement in English and in French Contact: Tel: +359 2929 2227 Email : rumiana.decheva@adhr-bg.org AEDH – European Association for the Defense of Human Rights 33, rue de la Caserne. B-1000 Bruxelles Tel: +32(0)25112100 Fax: +32(0)25113200 Email: info@aedh.eu The European Association for the Defense of Human Rights (AEDH) regroups leagues and associations for the defense of human rights in the European Union. It is an associate member of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH).   