The Member States would rather “send” police than “relocate” refugees – Press release 8 april 2016
8 April 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Brussels, 8 April 2016 There is no doubt that, faced with the massive presence of migrants in its territory, Greece needs a helping hand from its European partners. The plan that the European Commission published in May 2015 was justified by the tragedies that had been playing out in the Greek islands for three years already. Yes, it lacked the great openness and humanity that one could have hoped to see from a region rich of almost 510 million inhabitants: the creation of “hotspots” had a whiff of detention centres about it that turned out to be premonitory, and the firm policy of returns supported by Frontex was practically refoulement, while the project to adopt a European list of “safe” countries of origin made no pretence of the EU being a land of hospitality… But this plan, by advocating a system to relocate the refugees present in Greece (and Italy), did all the same demonstrate the great need to not leave the country to face alone the bottleneck that its geographical position will force it to remain for a long time to come. It was obviously too much to ask European nations: of the 63,302 relocations envisaged by the Commission, 569 had been carried out by mid-March, by 13 States. The aim is clearly not to criticize countries like Germany, Austria, Sweden and Italy, that have done their best, over several months, to not leave migrants on their doorsteps. But there are others, all those others that held back, hiding behind their borders when they were needed. These countries are now shamelessly rushing to support Greece, in order to make the agreement with Turkey a success. These countries, which have shown themselves incapable of making a gesture and “relocating” a few thousand people, have now leapt into action to contribute to the EU Civil Protection Mechanism,  with some sending tents, some blankets, some pillows and some boots, for example. Perhaps they hope the refugees will be so comfortable in Greece that they will not want to cross further borders? Those countries that would hear nothing of “relocation” are now quick to answer Frontex’s appeal to reinforce its teams for the organization of returns to Turkey. By deciding that each migrant returned would be escorted by a police officer, Frontex was thinking big – and it has got its way: 21 Member States have already provided 702 escort officers (1500 expected), which is more than the number of refugees they had agreed to bring across from Greece! It would appear that, in this Europe of rights, it is much easier to send police than to relocate refugees! AEDH is calling for a little more decency on the part of Member States. Our Association is particularly concerned that the agreement with Turkey on 18 March should not be considered by the Member States as a signal encouraging them to develop a readmission policy towards so-called “safe” countries, without a care for the treatment reserved there for returned refugees. Contact: Dominique Guibert, President Catherine Teule, Vice-President AEDH, European Association for the Defense of Human Rights Email: info@aedh.eu Download the press release in french or english. 