AEDH fully supports the Hungarian Helsinki Committee against the Hungarian authorities
27 October 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Once again, the Hungarian authorities are targeting civil society organisations as they unilaterally terminated four long-standing cooperation agreements with the Helsinki Committee (HHC). Consequently, the HHC has no longer access to police detention facilities, penitentiary institutions, immigration prisons, asylum prisons, reception centres for asylum seekers and the Border Guards’ immigration detention facilities. The termination of these agreements annihilates the independent control of civil society in detention centres and impedes detainees from receiving free legal counselling. Since its creation, the HHC has paid particular attention to the protection of fundamental rights of detainees and asylum seekers. To this end, the HHC concluded several cooperation agreements with national authorities in 1997, 1998, 1999 and 2006. These agreements empowered the HHC to access detention centres and, inter alia, document the application of human rights in these centres and provide legal assistance to detainees. However, over the last four months, four essential agreements have been unilaterally terminated by the Hungarian authorities. According to the HHC the reasons invoked are in no way grounded. The authorities argue that there are “multiple violations and a lack of cooperation” and that the assessment of the respect of detainees’ fundamental rights in detention centres can be conducted by the National Preventive Mechanism at the Office of the Commissioner for Fundamental Rights. The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (AEDH) is deeply concerned about this new decision from the Hungarian authorities, which aims its member organisation in Hungary, further weakens the watchdog function of civil society associations and will, in the long run, adversely affect detainees’ living conditions and health. The inclusion of civil society organisations is a key feature of democratic societies. Within the remits of Article 7(1) of the Treaty on the European Union, AEDH and HHC call on the European Parliament and its Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs to urge the Hungarian authorities to restore access of detention centres to civil society organisations. Read more 