Open letter of European NGOs: Europe needs a humane asylum system!
6 May 2014
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Open letter of European NGOs: Europe needs a humane asylum system! Call upon the EU Commission, the EU Parliament and the EU Council of Justice and Home Affairs to take immediate action. Brussels, April 28, 2014 Today a broad alliance of NGOs from different EU Member States has sent an open letter to the President of the European Commission Manuel Barroso, the President of the European Parliament Martin Schultz as well as to the Justice and Home Affairs Council of the EU. It calls for immediate action to save lives and to create a decent European asylum system. More than 30 organizations are participating in the initiative. In the open letter, the human rights organizations warn against the disastrous consequences of the lack of solidarity in asylum issues in Europe. The appeal made to the responsible European and national politicians is about creating legal escape routes to Europe, about the necessity of saving human lives as a main priority and about the urgency of ensuring decent standards in the treatment of asylum seekers. The inhumane and absurd deportation of people across Europe – keyword: Dublin system – has to be stopped immediately and to be replaced with a cohesive asylum system, based on solidarity. "The treatment of refugees is the litmus test for Europe’s human maturity. The European and national policy has no right to look the other way when human life and human destinies are at stake. Finally, all of us benefit from increasing humanity and solidarity", emphasizes Alexander Pollak, spokesman for SOS Mitmensch. "We expect that the official bodies of the EU and the European Home Affairs Ministers take the open letter seriously and understand, that action must be taken now", says Pollak. Download the open letter.  For further inquiry please contact: Alexander Pollak + 43 664 512 09 25 apo@sosmitmensch.at www.sosmitmensch.at 