Data Privacy Day: new infringements on the horizon
27 January 2015
 Brussels, 27 January 2015  On 28 January 1981, the first binding international legal instrument on personal data was signed: the Council of Europe’s Convention 108 “for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data”. Since 2006, 28 January has become an international day to recognise personal data protection, known as “Data Privacy Day”.  In honour of the occasion, AEDH would like to reaffirm its high regard for the privacy and personal data protection guarantees as set out in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the European Convention on Human Rights as well as those stated in the EU Data Protection Directive 95/46/EC and the Council of Europe’s Convention 108.  In view of these texts which guarantee fundamental rights, AEDH condemns the abuses stemming from data collection by businesses and the creation of records by law enforcement in the name of security and fighting terrorism, which has been denounced by whistle-blowers. Not only are such records proliferating, but they are increasingly being used for reasons other than originally intended without any need being proven. As such, AEDH renews its disapproval of the development of “an explicitly repressive system applied to all citizens rather than only to those suspected of being involved in illegal activities”.[i]  The recent terrorist attacks in France on 7, 8 and 9 January 2015 are being used by the European Union and its Member States to justify their reinforced security practices regarding the use of personal data records in renewed projects that have been contested by the European Parliament, such as the European PNR[ii] and the implementation of new measures. Despite severe criticisms by the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) about existing projects, the following proposals will be made at the Informal EU Council Meeting of Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs on 29 January at Riga (Latvia)[iii]: reinforced internet control; disclosure of the encryption keys used by web and telecommunication companies; amendments to the Schengen code; improved processing of biometric data in the Schengen Information System (SIS), especially with regards to foreigners; the integration of national financial records into a single European system; and a more systematic and proactive use of criminal records (ECRIS) shared between Member States.  All of these measures, which fall under the responsibility of and are coordinated by Europol – which already has access to numerous records such as international financial transactions, asylum seekers (Eurodac) and visas (Visa Information System, or VIS) – will give Europol considerable additional power. However, no reference has been made to oversight by an independent authority, a user’s right (or not) to reject the interoperability of records and the use of sensitive data, or the respect of proportionality and necessity criteria of the use of records, especially in the fight against terrorism, which should be considered separately. This proposed “mega system” will complete existing border control systems, including the recent implementation of the EUROSUR[iv] system, or the future ‘Smart Borders’ package, directives that have been unanimously opposed by EDPS, the European Parliament, AEDH and numerous NGOs. These measures, which have no established system of guarantees and controls, come at a time when the “personal data protection” package meant to replace Directive 95, approved by the European Parliament in the spring of 2014, remains blocked by the Council.  The law and respect of fundamental rights must always triumph over draconian measures, including in the fight against terrorism. Focusing on security objectives does not automatically translate to effectiveness, and such objectives are unacceptable infringements on privacy and personal data protection. The crucial fight against terrorism must be carried out within a strict framework of rules with regards to the use of records. The institutions and organisations using such records should be subject to oversight by independent and even legal authorities. Implementing these regressive measures would in fact be a new victory for terrorists.  AEDH refuses to fall into the defeatism expressed by Harvard professors on 23 January 2015 at the Davos World Economic Forum. According to Margo Seltzer, “Privacy as we knew it in the past is no longer feasible… How we conventionally think of privacy is dead.” Current practices of capturing biometric data (particularly DNA) and their use by law enforcement and private companies led Sophia Roosth to claim that “we are at the dawn of the age of genetic McCarthyism[v]”. This type of discourse is disconnected from rights, rights which were not founded on our technological capabilities, especially when it is a question of regressive governmental or institutional practices such as those in the EU. The loss of rights should not be viewed as inevitable; instead, any democratic nation should consider maintaining rights to be a battle worth fighting.  Today on 28 January 2015, AEDH calls on all citizens and their representative organisations to reject the measures that challenge their privacy and data protection and for MPs to defend against these breaches of our rights. AEDH also calls on the EU’s decision-making bodies and Member States’ governments to re-evaluate their decisions and to understand that such ineffective measures are not only an infringement on fundamental rights but an attack on the principles of democracy and rule of law they are meant to defend.  Download the press release in English or French. [i] AEDH press release dated 16 November 2007 http://www.aedh.eu/Note-to-the-generalised-use-of-air.html?var_recherche=generalised%20use [ii] European PNR for Schengen area and intra-European flights [iii] Meeting document from “EU Counter-Terrorism Coordinator” dated 17 January 2015 (DS 1035/15) [iv] AEDH press release dated 20 June 2012 http://www.aedh.eu/Eurosur-When-border-control-takes.html?var_recherche=eurosur%2020%20june%202012 [v] AFP press release dated 23 January 2015; comments by Margo Seltzer and Sophia Roosth /* Style Definitions */
 table.MsoNormalTable
	<em>mso-style-name:"Tableau Normal";
	mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;
	mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;
	mso-style-noshow:yes;
	mso-style-priority:99;
	mso-style-parent:"";
	mso-padding-alt:0cm 5.4pt 0cm 5.4pt;
	mso-para-margin:0cm;
	mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:10.0pt;
	font-family:"Arial","sans-serif";   