Catalonia: the democratic demand to reach a political solution
28 September 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Regardless of the opinion on Catalonia ‘s possible independence, the European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (AEDH) and its member associations in Spain, the Institute of Human Rights of Catalonia (IDHC) and the Association for Human Rights in Andalusia (APDHA), protest and condemn the strategy pursued by the Spanish central government. AEDH fully endorses their political protests. On 22 September, the Human Rights Institute of Catalonia (IDHC) published a manifesto condemning “the repressive response of the Spanish state to prevent the referendum from taking place.” IDHC considers that “judicial and police actions against the democratically elected Catalan institutions represent a decline in the respect of human rights and individual and collective freedoms in Catalonia, as well as a damage to democracy and the rule of law”. IDHC considers that the Spanish Government measures are “disproportionate and constitute a violation of fundamental rights”. For these reasons, IDHC calls for solidarity as well as national and international support from civil society and calls on others to join the manifesto. In practice, IDHC set up a network of observers that follow the vote on 1 October and intends to take legal action against other possible police and judicial actions. On 27 September, the Association for Human Rights in Andalusia (APDHA) published a press release deploring the situation in Catalonia, which stemmed from the fact that the Spanish State has been ignoring, for many years, claims from a majority of the Catalan population for their right to self-determination. The Spanish State repressive response is an “infringement of the most basic rights and freedoms according to the rule of law”. For APDHA, the actions carried out by the Spanish government “recall those of the Franco dictatorship”. Given the situation, APDHA calls on the central government for dialogue and negotiations in line with the right of peoples’ self-determination and more generally with human rights. APDHA demands the end of the state of emergency which is being established in Catalonia and fears for the cohabitation between different communities which is put at jeopardy and might gradually lead to the establishment of two irreconcilable blocks. AEDH urges the Spanish government to respond to IDHC and APDHA demands for a political solution respectful of human rights and minorities. AEDH also draws the attention of the Catalan authorities to the importance of preserving the conditions for a political solution for living together in Catalonia and Spain, regardless of the referendum results. Read more 