Independence of justice: after Hungary and Poland, Romania is in danger
29 August 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French)  The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights and Asociaia Pro Democratia (APD) express their concerns with regards to the future of the rule of law and independence of justice in Romania. In addition, both organisations observe an authoritarian trend of the political regime in Romania and call on the European Commission to maintain the Cooperation and Verification Mechanism as it proved to be a key instrument to limit undemocratic tendencies contrary to the European Rule of law model. The latest proposals for a « judicial reform » made by the Romanian Minister of Justice with the support of the parliamentary majority follow to the letter the Hungarian and Polish models when it comes to the offensive against the Rule of law. We know all too well that such attempts lead inevitably to the strengthening in measures against Human Rights. This time, no law nor article decriminalising corruption and abuses of power as in January 2017, but new rules transforming the Romanian judicial system. “Magistrates, beware !” seems to be the message behind the proposed reform. The destabilisation in the relations between the powers of the State to the benefit of the power of “politics” as well as the cancellation of the progress made in the fight against corruption that would result from this indirect approach are extremely dangerous for the future of democracy in Romania. The proposals included in this judicial “reform” reveal the intent of the parliamentary majority to remove Justice from the powers of the State and limit its independence. Transferring the Judicial Inspection from the authority of the High Judiciary Council to the Public Ministry’s, hence under political power, the creation of a Directory within the Ministry in charge of prosecuting “offences” committed by judges and prosecutors, the idea of creating a legal framework for lawsuits against judges and prosecutors whose judicial errors would lead to financial damages to the State are proposals belonging to a wider strategy aiming at damping by fear the fight against corruption. In addition, excluding the President of the Republic from the general prosecutors’ nomination process fits in a larger attempt to transform the current semi-presidential political regime into a parliamentary regime under the excessive control of political parties’ leaders. In the absence of a structured and efficient reaction, this authoritarian strategy might harm Romania’s mid- and long-term interests as well as the whole European stability. 