Deaths in the Mediterranean – as the European Union and the member states refuse to act, civil society itself takes action
31 July 2015
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Basta ! How many times already civil society actors have repeated this appeal to the decision-makers in Europe to draw the consequences of the deaths in the Mediterranean – close to 2000 persons just in 2015 – and to react with the creation of a properly resourced maritime search and rescue operation and the opening of safe and legal immigration channels towards Europe to prevent multiple shipwrecks? Until now, the adopted measures have been insufficient, focusing too much on securing of borders and the pursuit of traffickers, and cannot prevent new tragedies. The announced increase in the budget of Frontex will not change the nature of the agency’s mission which is above all securing of borders and thus replace an operation with the sole objective of searching and rescuing. In this context, European citizens take things in their own hands and establish operations able to help persons in distress in the Mediterranean. The most recent initiative, SOS Mediterranee, European association for rescue in the Mediterranean, has been founded in May 2015 in Berlin. Under the commandment of Captain Klaus Vogel, the association, supported by numerous German and European associations, is getting ready to send a rescue-boat in the Mediterranean in autumn 2015. It will join 3 rescue-boats of Doctors without Borders (one of them is operated in cooperation with the Migrant Offshore Aid Station) navigating between Libya and Europe, a rescue-boat of Sea Watch going to Sea at Lampedusa and missions of Hellenic Rescue Team and of Watch the Med, all initiatives of assistance to persons in distress and of monitoring violations of rights in the Mediterranean. AEDH fully supports these initiatives that, given the lack of institutional action, are vital to saving lives in the Mediterranean Sea and deserve all possible help from European citizens. That is why you will find below the links of the websites of the mentioned associations, which explain how everyone can contribute to these rescue and assistance missions. Please feel free to promote these initiatives among your contacts. It is obvious that this action of citizens does not replace the responsibility of the European Union and of the member states to respect and guarantee Human Rights at the borders, especially the right to asylum. Along with other associations and European networks, AEDH will keep putting pressure on decision makers in order to change European policies.     HELLENIC RESCUE TEAM: http://www.hrt.org.gr/ MEDECINS SANS FRONTIERES: http://www.msf.ca/en/issue/migrant-crisis-in-the-mediterranean MIGRANT OFFSHORE AID STATION: http://www.moas.eu/ SEA WATCH : http://sea-watch.org/ SOS MEDITERRANNEE: http://sosmediterranee.org/ WATCH THE MED: http://www.watchthemed.net/ 