For free and peaceful elections in Catalonia
5 December 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) On Tuesday 5 December, the regional election campaign will officially start in Catalonia. Those elections are resulting from the will of the Spanish government of Mariano RAJOY (PP) to hold elections on the basis of Article 155 of the Spanish Constitution. It is this government’s responsibility to ensure that the elections take place in a free, democratic, regular and peaceful environment, in conformity with the provisions included in Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Article 3 of Protocol 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights. In this context of International and European rights, the electoral campaign as well as the voting day on 21 December 2017 must ensure the Catalans’ right of expression and its right to choose its representatives, without fear or intimidation. In this respect, the European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (AEDH) considers the detention for ‘sedition’ of Jordi SANCHEZ and Jordi CUIXART, Presidents respectively of the Catalan National Assembly and Omnium Cultural, decided by the Spanish National Court (Audiencia Nacional) on 16 October 2017 to be an unacceptable restriction of the freedom of peaceful assembly. As citizens and Presidents of citizens organisations, they had the right to express their disagreement with the decision of the Spanish Constitutional Court and to call for a peaceful demonstration in favour of a referendum on the independence of Catalonia. Since they have not called for using violent means, they cannot be held liable, neither directly nor indirectly, for the damages caused by certain persons on a few police cars. They must be released. Regarding the pre-trial detention of 8 of the 13 former Ministers of the Catalan government for acts of rebellion, sedition and wrongdoing, AEDH considers that, in the current electoral context in Catalonia, their maintenance in detention is unreasonable. Indeed, according to Article 472 of the Spanish Penal Code, rebellion is caracterised by the resort to violence in order to declare the independence of a part of the national territory. According to AEDH, the Ministers’ political action during and after the referendum campaign did not call for violence or violent acts. Hence, it would be legitimate for the Spanish courts to lift the Ministers’ pre-trial detention. In this respect, AEDH takes note of the court’s decision to release – on bail – of 6 of those Ministers while maintaining the other 2 in detention. Furthermore, AEDH takes note of the Spanish Supreme Court’s decision to lift the European Arrest Warrants issued against Carles Puigdemont and 4 other former Ministers that had decided to flee to Belgium. AEDH remains however concerned by the legal quibbling that seems to justify the decision. The latter appears to be a mere deescalation gesture in a judicial saga concealing the political outcomes to the institutional crisis in Spain. Finally, at the European Union level, AEDH does not ignore that European Treaties are signed between Member States and in this case with the State of Spain. Nevertheless, in the name of the values and democratic principles on which the EU is founded, AEDH considers the European Union legitimately entitled to ask and demand a Member State to refrain from the instrumentalisation of legal prosecutions in a political debate that divides public opinion in Spain. 