10 December: the flame flickers but does not fade out!
10 December 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) As we commemorate today the 69th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, signed on 10 December 1948, it is clear that human rights are undergoing attacks, from all sides, by more or less liberal regimes. Europe is not immune to this trend. This year again, the European Association for the Defense of Human Rights (AEDH) reminds that rights are never the problem, they are the solution. 2017 is coming to an end and time has come for a review. As in 2016, this year was marked by the suffering of those forgotten, imprisoned, abused, of those who simply do not know how to survive, eat, drink, sleep, in countries where misery, exploitation, discrimination, hunger and slow death that could be described as economic prevail. Quite a dismal image of the state of rights. And yet, the human rights’ flame continues to shine and brings hope to those who do not have much left. If the flame does not fade out, it is thanks to the action of men and women, associations that mobilise on a daily basis to ensure a more free, just, and inclusive society, and sometimes while risking their own safety. These persons are those who dare challenging the Polish and Hungarian governments and their illiberal drifts, those who demonstrate in the cold in Romania to maintain the independence of justice. They are the citizens of the Citizen Support Platform to Refugees (Plateforme citoyenne de soutien aux réfugiés) who open their home door every evening to the migrants staying in Brussels’ Maximilian Park so that they won’t have to sleep outside in the anxiety of being arrested, hence compensating for public authorities’ shortcomings. Similar solidarity movements exist everywhere in Europe, even though some Member States have chosen to criminalise the help provided to migrants. These men and women are also the investigative journalists risking their lives to undercover corruption, financial scandals, such as the recent Paradise Papers scandal, misappropriations which cut down investments in public services like hospitals. One cannot help but think of Daphne Caruana Galizia, a Maltese investigative journalist who was murdered just two months ago. These persons are also those mobilising daily in human rights associations, in more or less difficult contexts, because they are driven by the same ideal that presided 69 years ago, on 10 December 1948. This year, AEDH wishes to pay tribute to all these women, to all these men, to all these associations that engage in the field but also at the political level so that a true society of rights can finally emerge, a society where humanity, sharing and solidarity triumph. 