Let’s make of the 8 March a daily event
6 April 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Brussels, 8 March 2016 The struggle of women has led to the conquest of rights and progress towards gender equality. On the 8th of March, AEDH honours these struggles at the International Women’s Day for women’s achievements worldwide. Unlike what one can read and hear in the media, it is not the “day of the woman” that is being used for commercial purposes, undoubtedly, in order to better forget all the inequalities that still need to be fought for the rest of the year. In our societies, women are everywhere but equality still needs to be conquered! Women face inequalities in wages and pensions, forced part-time jobs, increased precarity, they mostly bear the weight of domestic duties and family responsibilities and they still are a minority in economic and political positions of responsibility. They are too often victims of multiple types of violence: rape, domestic violence, sexist and sexual violence at work, lesbophobia, prostitution, racist aggressions and violence against migrant women. Women are the first victims of war. AEDH takes part in this struggle, especially at a time when the defence of women’s rights is most needed such as it has been recently the case for example in Spain, in Poland and elsewhere. Since May 2015, the Working Group on Gender, based on previously done work, assesses the actions of our member organisations, the situation of women in different contexts and analyses the public policies in this area. The organisations that compose AEDH do understand the fight for women’s rights inherent to the fight for human rights. That is why AEDH mainstreams the gender perspective in its activities and projects. Our goal is to combine efforts and resources in order to achieve a world based on justice, equality, inclusiveness and diversity. On this 8 March, the International Women’s Day, AEDH recognises itself in the movements fighting for the rights of women, because these rights are currently suffering setbacks and are under threat. Because women’s rights are human rights.  Contact: Dominique Guibert, President AEDH, European Association for the Defense of Human Rights 33, rue de la Caserne. B-1000 Bruxelles Tel: +32(0)25112100 Fax: +32(0)25113200 Email: info@aedh.eu  The European Association for the Defense of Human Rights (AEDH) brings together the leagues and associations for the protection of human rights in the countries of the European Union. 