Transatlantic Free Trade Agreements: Bad weather for Rights!
7 April 2015
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Brussels, 7 April 2015 The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights joins in world citizen mobilisation of the 18th April, against the transatlantic free trade treaties TTIP and CETA. AEDH considers that on one hand the opacity surrounding the negotiations of these treaties does not allow democratic debate and, on the other hand the provisions it contains carry unacceptable limitations to economic and social rights, to environmental standards and to the protection of personal data. The opacity of the negotiations is a violation of the democratic debate. AEDH considers that the conditions on the information of the content of the negotiations of the CETA and TTIP treaties set up by the European Council and the European Commission, jeopardize the fundamental principles of democratic debate. While European integration must be based on a well-informed dialogue, involving civil society (in accordance with Article 11 of the Treaty of Lisbon), the negotiations of the CETA treaty were done in the dark and that of TTIP was only brought to the surface following European civil society’s massive intervention demanding that light be shed both in substance and in form. But whilst the mandate is now public, as well as the main orientations, the European Commission keeps the details secret and only gave access to the negotiation documents to MEPs, who have to keep secret all the information they receive. The mobilization of 18th April must reaffirm the right of citizens to know in real time the proposals made on behalf of the European Union. Unequal influences on the negotiations. The negotiating mandate illustrates the imbalance between the interests taken into account both on the European and American sides. The agreement focuses entirely on strengthening economic and financial actors that are most likely to win in a competition described by officials as “free and undistorted”. To convince that everyone has something to gain, “average” improvements to purchasing power are being anticipated, but remain very limited. Citizens’ aspirations on both sides of the Atlantic for an economic development that creates jobs and gives access to the right to health, education and to a decent salary are missing in the negotiating mandate. This is thus an unbalanced mandate that reflects each other’s unequal influence and power. Economic and social rights, environmental standards: victims of TTIP? Employment. TTIP is presented as a creator of millions of jobs in Europe and across the Atlantic. In reality, the jobs that will be created on one side will be destroyed on the other. Indeed the economic thought behind the treaties comes down to always fewer rights to protect workers in enterprise, especially those who are in difficulty. The treaty says nothing about support for victims of competition affected by free trade, as the right to employment is not at the centre of the negotiating mandate. Deregulation of workers’ rights and of environmental standards. TTIP provides for a Council for regulatory cooperation that will evaluate all the European and US regulations in view of their rapprochement. European officials say that our high level of protection will not diminish and equivalent protection will help in maintaining it. But no civil control is planned. Over the past decades, free-trade negotiations have shown that industry and financial lobbies impose their vision when civic engagement is not exceptionally powerful. This demonstrates that the process put in place could allow in future a systematic violation of fundamental rights. Protection of business interests To resolve conflicts between private investors’ interests and legislation, the treaty proposes the creation of private arbitration commissions, called “System for the settlement of disputes”. AEDH considers it is a formidable instrument for the privatisation of justice and a weapon against the right of a state to regulate in the public interest. Current denials by Commission representatives are not supported by any convincing proposal. AEDH, together with the CES, the CSI and other national trade union organisations, refuses this provision. Stop liberalisation! AEDH refuses the idea that the only source of wealth creation is through the development of competition and that regulations, standards and rights guaranteeing that wealth are obstacles to growth. Public services are attacked though they are in most countries the last guarantee against extreme poverty. The argument of economic crisis is frequently used to explain the existing challenges. Yet, one takes stock of a contradiction between recently adopted European regulations to protect these rights and the destruction of these very same protections by free trade treaties. AEDH calls on the Council and the Commission to note the extent of the citizens’ protest that is taking place through the multiple responses to the public consultation, through the organisation of a European citizens’ initiative, which although it was rejected by the Commission continues to engage citizens in many events throughout the European Union. AEDH expects from MEPs a firm opposition to both the undemocratic method and the risk of infringement of citizens’ rights. AEDH asks for a suspension of the negotiations to allow for a public debate that is more than necessary in view of what is at stake. AEDH calls on citizens and their organisations, and the whole of civil society, to intervene in the public debate, to demand the lifting of the secrecy of the negotiations, that should be limited to the strict minimum, and to defend their rights. AEDH calls for all to participate in national, European and international mobilisations which refuse the implementation of these treaties, starting with the World Day of Action against free trade treaties on 18 April.  Download the press release in English, in French or in Spanish.  