Europe Day: Do you want to fight hate and obscurantism? It is now!
9 May 2018
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) On 9 may, it is traditionally the Day of Europe. On this occasion, AEDH sends out its wishes of solidarity, freedom and equality to all the citizens and more especially to all the persons residing in the European Union’s countries. More than 60 years after its creation in Rome in 1957, AEDH is aware that the EU is not doing well. When Jean-Claude Juncker took up the position of President of the European Commission 3 years ago, he stated that his mandate would be “Last exit to Europe”. A year from now, the European elections will take place and the threats jeopardising the European construction cannot be ruled out. Following the Brexit that already paved the way to its potential tearing of its unity, the EU is also facing xenophobic and far right centrifugal forces. Hungarian and Polish governments only show contempt for the founding values of the EU. In Slovakia, the Prime Minister’s statements are frightening. Even in France, Lepen’s far right party did manage to organise an international meeting bringing together a large part of fascists from Sweden, Belgium, Italy, Germany, etc. They call themselves “Europe of nations”. Their Europe calls for the purity of the “white race”, it is filled with hatred towards foreigners, homosexuals, cosmopolitans, Jews…  So, let’s reaffirm that this is no coincidence that on the eve of the European Union’s Day, we commemorate the victory over Nazism.  Freedom and equality are the values we want Europe to be based on. Their Europe on the other hand is based on hate and negation of rights. They cannot stand our fight against discriminations on the grounds of origin, religion, sexual orientation? Then this is one more reason to repeat it over and over again… until they understand! Furthermore, and in the same worrying way, the only aspect Member States seem to retain from the EU is the competition possibilities among countries and citizens. The continuation of austerity policies as well as economic and budgetary controls introduced by instruments such as the European Semester cast dark clouds over the “social pillar” while its necessity is still been praised. Finally, security is brought forward without due respect to fundamental rights leading to the stacking of control measures over the people and their private life as well as of border controls in order to reject migrants and refugees. Hope lies in civil society and its associations – they are capable to avert the break-up. Everywhere in Europe, you can see a real will of solidarity and common support. Everywhere we need to help it grow. Everywhere in Europe, human rights activists stand up against the dark shadows that fascists of another age try to reignite.  They also stand up against politicians that distort the foundations of the European construction to feed their empty speeches. AEDH “job” is to defend and promote the rights of all – everywhere – at any time. We are those men and women fighting for more rights while others try to diminish them! Now is the time to join us in this fight. Now is the time to become a member and/or make a donation!  To donate and support AEDH activities, it is here!  