European Court of Human Rights : at the workplace, an employer does not have every right
15 September 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) AEDH is pleased of ECHR judgement on 5th of September 2017 in the case Bărbulescu v Romania on the conditions under which an employer is allowed to monitor an employee correspondence at the workplace. In July 2007, Mr Bărbulescu, a Romanian citizen, was dismissed for using his company e-mail services for personal purposes. He lodged a complaint with the Romanian court to challenge the dismissal on the ground that his employer violated his right to privacy by accessing the content of his private communications. The Romanian justice dismissed his complaint arguing that the employer did abide by the national Labour Code, which provides employers to determine the rules related to the use of the Internet for professional purposes. Mr Bărbulescu appealed against the decision to the Romanian Court of Appeal but the complaint was dismissed on the ground that the employer’s conduct was reasonable since he informed the employees that the use of company resources for personal purposes was prohibited, and that monitoring private communications was the only way to ensure the respect of the rule. Mr Bărbulescu subsequently lodged a complaint with the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which provides a right to respect for one’s “private and family life, his home and his correspondence”. In January 2016, ECHR concluded that there was no violation of Article 8. Mr Bărbulescu then requested the referral of his case to ECHR Grand Chamber, i.e. gathering all judges while the previous ruling was issued by a Chamber composed of seven judges only. The Grand Chamber decided by 11 votes to 6 that, in the case of Mr Bărbulescu, Article 8 is admissible as private life and correspondences are involved. The Court acknowledges that, even if Mr Bărbulescu had misused the Internet on his workplace for personal purposes, an employer cannot entirely deprive the employees from their social life. An employee is entitled to the respect of his/her privacy regarding his/her correspondence at the workplace. ECHR deemed the Romanian justice correctly identified the interest at stake but failed at verifying whether the applicant “had been notified in advance of the possibility that the employer might introduce monitoring measures, and of the scope and nature of such measures”. In addition, not only did the Romanian Court omitted to proceed to an evaluation of the legitimacy of such correspondences monitoring system, but it did not investigate the possibility of establishing a monitoring system based on less intrusive methods either. ECHR therefore found that there has been a violation of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and ruled in favour of Mr Bărbulescu. Through this judgement, ECHR stands in favour of the protection of both privacy and personal data, based on the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (1981, STE no 108 called Convention 108). A position that AEDH can only but welcome. 