Solidarity with refugees should not be a crime!
20 June 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Brussels, 20 June 2017 – A little over two years ago, at the outset of 2015, Europeans were stupefied to see hundreds of thousands of people making their way into Europe, by the most reckless and perilous of means, in order to seek asylum. In response to what is now considered the greatest population exodus since the Second World War, the first reaction was one of pity, and there was a scramble to organise the reception of these Syrians who, forced to flee their country, joined the flow of Iraqi and Afghan refugees who were also seeking the protection of Europe. In two years, European member states have granted protection to 1,043,750 people (333,350 in 2015, 710,400 in 2016), mostly Syrians. Meanwhile, these same member states have withheld protection from 655,280 asylum seekers from countries including Afghanistan, Sudan, Iraq, Somalia, Iran, Albania and Nigeria, marking the limits of their generosity and their perception of the tragedies affecting people in many countries. Exactly a year ago, on 20 June 2016, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (HCR), Filippo Grandi, shared his anxiety regarding “divisive political rhetoric on asylum and migration issues, and disturbing levels of xenophobia.” He observed that “instead of burden sharing, we see borders closing, instead of political will there is political paralysis.” Since then, rather than mending their ways, governments of European member states have underscored their desire to “seek refuge” behind their borders, protected by the armadas of Frontex and NATO. Tucked comfortably away from refugees, they set out to negotiate “partnerships” with third countries (Turkey, Tunisia, Afghanistan), so that the latter would take on the task of taking in migrants and keeping them far away from Europe. Their growing list of “safe countries of origin” also conveniently allows them to opt out more easily of their conventional obligations. On this day of 20 June 2017, a date meant to mark international solidarity with refugees, we, European citizens, members of the AEDH, intend to reaffirm that the right to asylum is non-negotiable. We demand a right to gain access to international protection that is not determined by the expediently shifting standards exhibited by our countries. Most of all, we are proud that European citizens, unlike their governments, are showing their solidarity with refugees in concrete ways, despite the charges they are facing. We support the NGOs that, shrugging off attacks comparing them to human smugglers, work together to rescue migrants in distress at sea. According to the HCR, 46,000 more people would have perished without them in 2016. In 2017, they have already carried out a third of such rescues. We call on all European citizens to support and join this solidarity effort and fight all political initiatives that would cause Europe to withdraw into itself.  Download the press release 