The AEDH calls on the new European Parliament to choose a Europe of human rights
2 June 2014
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Brussels, June 2nd, 2014 The results of the elections to the European Parliament have once more shown the extent to which the course taken by the European Union is increasingly disconnected from its voters’ concerns, daily life and problems. The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights must assess what this vote means for democracy. Not only did the rate of abstention remain very high, but the decision to elect candidates who openly declare to be in favour of exclusion and actively support discriminatory treatment of residents of third States can be seen as both a collective rejection of mainstream politics and strategies that are entirely opposed to any sort of a united Europe. On top of the fact that 6 out of 10 voters did not participate, victory appears to be for narrow-minded ideas such as immigrant hunting, exiting the Euro, returning to a simple market policy, closing borders, etc., as if competition among all at every level – local, national, European, even global – would create enough wealth that would naturally trickle down to the poor, on condition that they are white, Christian – or at least not Muslim! – and “pure-blood” European. In France, Hungary, Denmark, Sweden, Great Britain and elsewhere, xenophobic, racist, nationalist and even anti-Semitic political forces targeted the social groups suffering from the crisis, offering them worthless intellectual and political solutions to their troubles that many European countries have already experienced. Everywhere in Europe, there is a growing force that wants to exclude entire populations from equality and solidarity policies. Here there are immigrants taking advantage of social assistance, there it is the unemployed who are crooks, somewhere else the Romany gypsies are decried as natural-born thieves; the Flemish don’t want to share with the Walloons, the North Italians want no association with the poor Southerners… There is no limit to the imagination of those who think the solution is to be found in excluding the poorest, the weakest and those with the least stability. These forces target those who see their situation getting worse, and especially those who are afraid of being the next victims of an economy that does not help those in difficulty. These fears, whether real or imagined, turn those same voters against their closest citizens, those who are in the same situation as them but cannot benefit from the despicable policy proposed – preference for locals, nationals and Europeans. If this discourse that discredits universal access to economic, social, environmental, civil and political rights has managed to find a receptive ear among a growing number of our fellow citizens, it is because European and national public policies do not guarantee a future of solidarity. Despite this evident disenchantment with a united Europe, leaders within the realm of EU government continue to defend it somewhat feebly. One says that the serious parties, i.e. parties in government, remain in the majority and so there are no problems that a good coalition cannot handle. Another says that the lack of decision-making may be a good policy for the long-term. A third laments that this is a message, a warning, but the same policies need to be reinforced, with occasional concessions. A fourth mourns the rise of right- and left-wing “populists” – that is, those who don’t understand that there is no alternative. Finally, there are those who say that is obvious that policies cannot be based on rights, and the best we can do is return to the distribution of posts without changing anything in either the institutions or the policies. The AEDH is just as concerned by this blindness as by the disenchantment of the European citizens. If the European Union has been so widely rejected, it is above all due to the irresponsible behaviour of most governments, who make policies within the Council of the European Union, then blame “Brussels”, an unknown monster, for the austerity policies and economic, financial and regulatory constraints that they themselves have imposed, considering the social consequences as unavoidable collateral damage. Europe needs more democracy, more public policies that provide a solution to the social effects of the economy’s workings. Europe aspires to more equality and solidarity. The AEDH declares that the only way forward is through human rights. This is the cornerstone of its Manifesto shared by the 31 organisations that make it up, originating from 22 countries of the European Union and Switzerland. It calls on all to acknowledge and adhere to it. Download the Press release.  Contacts: Rafael LARA, Chairman   AEDH Association Européenne pour la défense des Droits de l’Homme 33, rue de la Caserne. B-1000 Bruxelles Tél : +32(0)25112100 Fax : +32(0)25113200  Email: info@aedh.eu The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (Association Européenne pour la défense des Droits de l’Homme – AEDH) consists of associations and leagues defending human rights in the countries of the European Union. 