17 August 2017, Barcelona and Cambrils, new capitals of grief and sorrow
17 August 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (AEDH) expresses all its compassion and solidarity to the victims struck by the Barcelona and Cambrils attacks as well as to their families. As usual, whenever such deadly acts occur, the AEDH wants to remind its unwavering political stance: no cause can ever justify such horror. The scale of the casualties – the provisional record amount to 13 killed and more than 100 injured from at least two dozen countries – is certainly unbearable. But it is the act itself that shall be condemned as a crime: let’s just not engage in macabre accountings between attacks based on their number of casualties or rank them depending on whether or not children are among the victims. Attacks such as those committed in Barcelona and Cambrils yesterday or Ouagadougou just a few days ago are mere crimes perpetuated by criminals. There is no excuse, no justification, and no motive: just bloodshed. If there was ever a need to remind the world about what ISIS truly is, the attacks in Barcelona and Cambrils reveal above all the gruesome nature of that entity. While ISIS is being eliminated from its principal territories, the organisation only sees the continuous exportation of its crimes abroad with poor means as a solution to keep existing. The sole purpose of those crimes is to provoke, as a response, such a strengthening in the repressive measures against all those populations supposed to be of the same origin of the perpetrators, allegedly or not, so as to ultimately provoke a start of rallying around ISIS. AEDH calls on all political actors to keep their senses. It is absolutely essential to lock up the perpetrators, the persons who ordered the attacks, the financial supporters and the instigators. But not at the expense of public liberties. AEDH reminds that the victory of terrorism does not lie in the accumulation of victims but in the abandonment of democracy in the name of security. 