Retention of electronic communications data: the European Court of Justice declares the 2006 Data Retention Directive to be invalid based on the Charter of Fundamental Rights
23 April 2014
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French)  Retention of electronic communications data: the European Court of Justice declares the 2006 Data Retention Directive to be invalid based on the Charter of Fundamental Rights Brussels, April 23rd 2014 Referring in particular to Articles 7, 8 and 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the European Court of Justice has declared invalid the Directive 2006/24/EC  on the retention of data generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic communications services. The Court considered that it “entail[ed] a wide-ranging and particularly serious interference with the fundamental rights to respect for private life and to the protection of personal data, without that interference being limited to what [was] strictly necessary.” It thus confirmed what civil society organizations advocating its repeal have been condemning since 2006. The AEDH, a stakeholder in this mobilization, can only welcome this judgment. Adopted following the terrorist attacks in Madrid (2004) and London (2005), this directive required telecommunications services providers to retain for 6 to 24 months all data needed notably to find and identify the source and destination of communications and determine their date, duration and type, as well as to locate the mobile communications equipment, with these data providing the name and address of the user, the telephone number of the caller and the recipient, and an IP address for Internet services. Those data, taken as a whole, may provide very precise information on the private lives of persons and, as the Court highlights, “it therefore entails an interference with the fundamental rights of practically the entire European population” with no guarantee of “irreversible destruction of the data at the end of the data retention period.” Whilst pursuing the general interest and seeking to contribute to the fight against terrorism and serious crime, the Directive “[did] not require any relationship between the data whose retention is provided for and a threat to public security.” It also “[did] not lay down any objective criterion by which the number of persons authorised to access and subsequently use the data retained is limited to what is strictly necessary in the light of the objective pursued.” Above all, “the access by the competent national authorities to the data retained is not made dependent on a prior review carried out by a court or by an independent administrative body whose decision seeks to limit access to the data and their use to what is strictly necessary for the purpose of attaining the objective pursued.” The Court thus by its judgment not only invalids the 2006 Directive and consequently the respective laws of the Member States on data retention concerning electronic communication services, but also fundamentally recalls the basic principles of implementation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the 1995 Directive, which is currently being reviewed. The Court therefore recalls the requirement to take into account proportionality, limiting retention to what is strictly necessary regarding serious threats to the general interest (terrorism, serious crime), not simply “[referring] in a general manner to serious crime, as defined by each Member State in its national law”, as well as the need for judicial review or review by an independent authority, including at European level. Furthermore, the AEDH considers that this judgment sets limits that European legislation must respect: strict compliance with the Charter of Fundamental Rights and particularly of these articles: 7, respect for private and family life; 8, protection of personal data; 11, freedom of expression and information. This should encourage European legislators to keep within the scope of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Treaties, including the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the European Human Rights Convention – to which the EU is a Party – and Council of Europe Convention 108, when drafting ongoing texts and particularly the Regulation and the Directive concerning the review of the 1995 Directive. The AEDH will be very attentive to compliance with this framework, particularly following the renewal of the European Parliament and the proposals that could be made by the new Commission. Download the press release.  Contacts: Rafael LARA, Chairman Maryse ARTIGUELONG, AEDH Executive Board Member AEDH, Association Européenne pour la défense des Droits de l’Homme 33, rue de la Caserne. B-1000 Bruxelles Tél : +32(0)25112100 Fax : +32(0)25113200  Email: info@aedh.eu The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (Association Européenne pour la défense des Droits de l’Homme – AEDH) consists of associations and leagues defending human rights in the countries of the European Union. 