Paris, Brussels, Nice, but also Beirut, Baghdad, Istanbul, Orlando and so many others…
18 July 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Brussels, 18 July 2016, The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights condemns what can only be considered as a horrific crime. AEDH expresses its solidarity and commiseration with the victims and their relatives. Violent offenses against fellow human beings are and remain unjustifiable, wherever and whenever they are committed. Such acts may have a goal: they sinisterly aim to divide and separate, install fear in people and create the illusion that a community of shared destinies and life can only be built upon rejection, warand the death of others. While the territorial basis of the ones who have claimed the attacks seems about to be annihilated, the danger remains: forced to retreat to a defensive strategy, Daesh is developing new methods using weapons designed to be used by attackers who are difficult to identify. AEDH thus denounces the ongoing discourse which creates the illusionary belief that security can be ensured at the expense of liberties and human rights. Lies, exaggeration and thriving on danger are its main features. Because it has been proven that weakening civil rights and liberties is not a solution and only fuels new sources of horrendous acts. Because inflammatory language and creating false `solutions` to fears that rise in people is the usual business of those politicians who use such fears as a way to (re)conquer power.  Because a strong and persistent danger is created by making people believe that the future will consist in separating groups in the name of an assigned origin or of an imposed religion. AEDH expresses its full support to its member organisation in France. It considers that the following sentences of the LDH’s press release can apply to everyone in Europe and in the world : “In the light of the violence and the strategy of tension that we are facing, [LDH] calls on to resist the temptation of addressing these by restricting democratic life and civil liberties. Civil society’s capacity to mobilize itself by relying on principles of law liberties is indeed the best guarantee we have to safeguard the very foundations of our choice for a collective society”which can only be based on human dignity and `freedom, equality and brotherhood´ amongst people.  Contact: Dominique Guibert, President AEDH, European Association for the Defense of Human Rights 33, rue de la Caserne. B-1000 Bruxelles Tel: +32(0)25112100 Fax: +32(0)25113200 Email: info@aedh.eu The European Association for the Defense of Human Rights (AEDH) brings together the leagues and associations for the protection of human rights in the countries of the European Union.  