Statement ahead of the European Council of 28 – 29 June 2016: After the Brexit, the European Union has to return to its founding values
28 June 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) 28 june 2016 – To leave or not to leave: the question will not be asked anymore. The United Kingdom is no longer part of the European Union. The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (AEDH) considers that beyond the outcome of the referendum – that has given necessarily a binary answer – the problems persist. To remember their scale, one has to only recall the negotiations between the European Council and the British government that preceded the vote and according to us, have led to a too generous compromise at the expense of a political integration of a Europe based on solidarity and democracy. Although the British government’s requests were satisfied, a heterogeneous and fragile majority considered that the British interests would be better protected outside the EU, particularly regarding currency, competition in the free market, direct control over immigration. The harshest words were pronounced on this last point. Without having to take a position on the outcome itself, AEDH considers that the referendum sends an extremely dangerous message regarding the rights of citizens: •	each Member State has the possibility to do exactly as it wishes to preserve its purported national interests, which are momentarily considered primordial ; •	Instead of setting shared goals, the EU is regressing into a number of governments negotiating the lowest common denominator ; •	The only remaining common policy areas are economic, financial and budgetary, to the detriment of all others, and more specifically of social rights ; •	Thus transformed into a competitive environment, the EU will collapse under the pressure of a free-for-all of members seeking to improve their own competitiveness; •	The permanent threat to leave will be used as a way to impose particular solutions on everyone, in other words, the end of the EU. AEDH is publicly calling on the president of the European Council, as well as the heads of state and of governments, to seriously consider the ways in which rights will be harmed if the EU is pushed into a situation of a generalised competition between national interests. One requests them to forego false solutions and petty intergovernmental arrangements. It is impossible to give European citizens a sense of community if European policy is reduced to intolerable haggling, where each Member State can pick and choose what it wants to do – for example, refusing migrants, accepting only certain migrants, refusing expenses, reducing women’s rights, or destroying democratic rights. The European project now needs to return to its founding values: only a democratic, social, inclusive Union granting the same rights to everyone and respecting its international obligations could be considered as legitimate by its citizens. Download the press release in french or in english. 