Common AEDH and APDHA position on the situation in Ceuta.
18 June 2014
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Common AEDH and APDHA position on the situation in Ceuta after a field visit by an APDHA delegation. Concrete proposals for Spanish European election candidates and for all MEPs once elected. During a visit by a European Green Party (EGP) delegation led by a German candidate in the European elections, Fransiska Keller, delegations from a variety of Spanish associations in the Migreurop network travelled to Ceuta on 7 April. The APDHA, which is also an AEDH member, was a participant. This was far more than a mere campaign visit for the European elections.  The visit was an opportunity to measure on the ground the immigration situation in the Spanish enclave of Ceuta, particularly in the light of the recent tragic events of February. A first key event was the visit to the Temporary Centre for Immigrants (CETI). The Centre currently houses more than 800 people, yet the Centre’s official capacity is of only 520 people. Because of the Syrian conflict, the number of Syrians in Ceuta’s CETI has increased considerably. These include whole families (23, with 54 children in total) who, stuck at the Ceuta CETI, live in unsuitable conditions, especially for the children, some of whom are only a few months old. These families meet the conditions that should allow them to receive international protection, but they are unable to apply for asylum or to reach the Spain for their application to be examined. Moreover, while the Centre has established activities, Spanish classes and medical care, no psychological assistance or personal support has been envisaged, even though we are aware of the ordeals that these immigrants have had to overcome to reach the CETI. Also, while the average stay time in the Centre is of 6-8 months, this period is governed by no limit and varies from immigrant to immigrant. Certain people therefore spend several years in the Centre with no hope of travelling to Spain. They also observed, once more, the prevailing conditions at the border between Ceuta and Morocco. These are as much an illustration of human stupidity as of Spanish and European migratory policy that violates the fundamental rights of migrants. The latest tragedy, which led to the death of 15 people on El Tarajal Beach because they were seeking to cross this border, is but one example of the violence these migrants are exposed to. The border is made up of parallel barriers constructed of barbed and razor wire, and supervised around the clock by the Spanish and Moroccan police, creating a heavy, oppressive atmosphere. The interception by a Guardia Civil officer saying "you can’t look here" shows clearly that law and freedom have no place here. The climate is the same in Tarajal’s commercial centre, a forum for daily trade of merchandise between people who bring goods from one side and the other of the border. Within this space, the APDHA delegation witnessed the violence of Spanish police against foreign women who cross the border to sell their goods. The police have no respect for them and use threats and batons with no second thoughts in order to “ensure order”. This field visit, like the previous ones, has strengthened our determination to denounce the human rights violations which continue to mark our society, particularly at our borders where suffering and death are part of everyday life. Too long have national authorities and European institutions buried their heads in the sand! The APDHA and the AEDH denounce: –	The increasingly closed borders, which lead to suffering and death; –	The impossibility for migrants present in the CETI – in the Spanish territory, it must be recalled – to reach mainland Spain; –	The illegal deportations from Spain to Morocco which take place often at the Ceuta border, in violation of Spanish law as well as international law and the international treaties ratified by Spain; –	The systematic violence used against migrants on both sides of the border; –	Failure to respect migrants and their rights (right to life, right to human dignity and right to apply for asylum in particular); –	Failure to comply with international conventions and law, particularly those governing the right to asylum but also those on the conditions and duration of migrant detention. The APDHA and the AEDH consider that the current methods for managing migrations brings to bear serious human rights violations and generates multiple forms of suffering. This is an inhumane, immoral and cruel policy that ignores and denies the reality of migrations. This is why we are calling for a radical change to these migratory policies. Our two associations support the recommendations and tangible proposals of the Spanish associations in the European Migreurop network in order to put an end to the hell experienced at the EU’s southern boundary.  These recommendations are aimed at the Spanish authorities and to the European institutions, as the borders at Ceuta and Melilla are not merely national borders: they are also key borders at the south of the EU and a bridge linking Europe to Africa. The AEDH supports these proposals, and calls for: 1)	Facilitated regularization for immigrants. 2)	Facilitated and guaranteed access to EU territory as an asylum seeker for those who meet the conditions required to apply for international protection. 3)	Application of suitable criteria for the reunification of families, so as to allow those who have close family members living in the EU can enter it, by granting them residency permits. 4)	Grant a significant number of visas to nationals of African countries. Our associations consider that these steps, governed by pre-existing administrative procedures, can be implemented straight away without causing excessive difficulties for the EU or for Spain. We know that they will not suffice to bring an end to all the problems linked to Europe’s migratory policy, but they will at least address an emergency situation. We also call for the organization of a round table bringing together representative institutions and entities, with the aim of dialoguing with national, EU and international bodies that play a role in migratory policy. The AEDH and the APDHA support this proposal by Migreurop-Spain and consider that the construction of a Europe that claims to be democratic and respectful of its citizen’s rights cannot be done at the expense of the rights and freedoms of its neighbours. They Europe whose construction we supported, promoting human progress, is not compatible with this "fortress" Europe that closes itself away behind borders and "walls" that are ever more numerous and impossible to cross. Contacts: Rafael LARA, Chairman AEDH, Association Européenne pour la défense des Droits de l’Homme 33, rue de la Caserne. B-1000 Bruxelles Tél : +32(0)25112100 Fax : +32(0)25113200 Email: info@aedh.eu The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (Association Européenne pour la défense des Droits de l’Homme – AEDH) consists of associations and leagues defending human rights in the countries of the European Union. Read the press release in English, French and Spanish 