Gaza: after the ceasefire,  the EU will pay for not having to make a decision
3 September 2014
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French)  Brussels, 3 September 2014 The European Association for the defence of Human Rights (AEDH) regrets deeply that the EU settled for a wait-and-see statement during the Council’s meeting on August 30th, 2014 even though more than 2000 Palestinians died and more than 10000 have been wounded, and a sustainable and directly negotiated settlement remains unpredictable. The international organizations who believe to represent the “international community” – of which the EU prides itself on being a part of – must assess the extent of the danger that a further Israeli policy implies. If the security of the state of Israel comes at the price of such a lethal offensive, as proven by the disparity in victims, it is because the rights of the peoples of the region are not considered as carrying the same value. To achieve a long-term peace, an attempt for resolution must be conducted with the respect of international law and the UN resolutions, a mutual respect of recognition between the two sovereign states, the end of colonisation and the withdrawal of all Israeli settlements that make illusory the viability of a Palestinian state. On 22th July 2014, the Council of Foreign Affairs of the European Union had settled for an avoidance strategy based on the central tenet that “all the terrorist groups in the Gaza Strip must disarm” while admitting that “the operation of the Israeli army must be commensurate and in compliance with international humanitarian law”. The 30 August Council evolves but keeps being careful and urges “both parties to fully respect it and to continue negotiations leading to a fundamental improvement of the living conditions for the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip through the lifting of the Gaza closure regime, and to ending the threat to Israel posed by Hamas and other militant groups in Gaza”. The Council asks “the Palestinian consensus government” to exercise its full responsibilities in both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip" and "calls for immediate and unimpeded humanitarian access”. The European Council “reiterates the readiness of the European Union to contribute to a comprehensive and sustainable solution enhancing the security, welfare and prosperity of Palestinians and Israelis alike” and claims that “only a final agreement based on the two State solution will bring durable peace and stability.” The Council reminds that “the Gaza strip shall be part of a future State of Palestine”. AEDH considers that this analysis, even though it shows a positive evolution, does not reflect reality, but justifies European Union caution. Although it is justified to condemn Hamas’s violence, it only makes sense to do so if the resort to a destructive military invasion is denounced. Otherwise, this declaration is only an opportunistic text which sole purpose is to avoid contradicting the principles of democracy, the rule of law, universality and indivisibility of rights that have guided the construction of the European Union  and the continuation of the Association Agreement with the state of Israel, signed in 1995, of which article 2 specifies that the relations between the two parties must be based on the respect of human rights and on the principles of democracy governing their domestic and international policies. AEDH considers that the association agreement that binds the EU to Israel should have been immediately suspended, as allowed by its Article 2, at the very beginning of the military offensive towards Gaza. In 2002, the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling rightly for the suspension of this Agreement, even providing for the sending of an “international interposition and observation force” in the Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations. Twelve years later, Human Rights are even less observed by the Israeli government. Twelve years later, the respect of rights for all still needs to be imposed. AEDH considers that the European Council meeting of August 30th should have been the time for European Union to stop its balancing act which is in fact favouring power politics at the expense of seeking justice. AEDH expects the European Union to make use of all the means it has available to pressure the Israeli government to adopt a policy observing international law that will bring an end to oppression, colonisation, military occupation and war and to the blockage of Gaza that denies the Palestinian population any means of living. Contact: Dominique Guibert, chairman AEDH, European Association for the Defence of Human Rights rue de la Caserne, 33. B-1000 Bruxelles Tél : +32(0)25112100 Fax : +32(0)25113200 Email : info(at)aedh.eu  