In EU Member States, from year to year, danger grows for migrant workers and their rights
18 December 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) On this International Migrants Day, the European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (AEDH) reiterates its call on Member States and the European Union to ratify the International Convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant workers and members of their families[1], adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 18 December 1990. While the question of migratory movements was at the heart of the debates of the African Union – European Union Summit held on 29 and 30 November 2017 in Abidjan, it could be observed that out of the 55 African countries and the 28 European countries, only 20 States have ratified the Convention… and among them, not a single Member State of the European Union ! The European Union and its Member States, which do indeed measure the economic utility of immigration, refuse to oblige themselves to recognize the rights that should be guaranteed to all migrants as enacted by this Convention. We can not better testify that the principle of equal treatment is not a concern for European leaders when workers are from outside the EU! To this date, the International Convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant workers and members of their families has been ratified by the majority of emigration countries. These ratifications are seen by these countries as a means of protecting their nationals… abroad, even if some are gradually moving towards a status of transit and destination countries. To those who, in Europe, try to justify the refusal to ratify this Convention by invoking the existence of other equivalent (national or European) protection instruments, we reply that nothing prevents the ratification of an additional instrument, since the recognized rights are in the same line. The Convention has the advantage of clarifying the rights of migrant workers (whether in a regular situation or not) by recalling the fundamental rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and elaborated by the international treaties adopted by most Member States. In some areas, it provides higher protection against detention, deportation and discrimination in access to rights. Moreover, it has the intelligence to associate the protection of the worker with that of the family unity[2], which the European texts are far from guaranteeing… When we know how the EU hastens to denounce the lack of ratification of human rights treaties by some third countries, we wonder why the discussions in this area remain so discreet. Why not ratifying this instrument of protection? Is this refusal to recognize the essential rights of migrants a way to avoid highlighting the deficiencies of States? The reasons are probably multiple and the AEDH regrets that for twenty-seven years no progress has been made in this regard. AEDH calls on the European Union to act as a defender of migrants’ rights by actively promoting and demanding its Member States to ratify this International Convention. [1] International Convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant workers and members of their families, New York, 18 December 1990- http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CMW.aspx [2] Article 44 (1) of the International Convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant workers and members of their families : “States Parties, recognizing that the family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State, shall take appropriate measures to ensure the protection of the unity of the families of migrant workers”. 