Thailand: Implementing the UN Convention Against Torture
April 22 2010
On the 5 and 6 September, the APT conducted its second training for lawyers on their role in the prevention of torture in Thailand, jointly with the International Commission of Jurists and the Cross Cultural Foundation of Thailand. This event brought together around 30 lawyers from the Northern Provinces, many of whom represent minority groups in the area. The purpose of the training was to contribute to a better implementation of the UN Convention Against Torture, which Thailand ratified in 2007, and related international instruments. On 7 September, a session was also held for civil society organizations in the area, in which the organizers as well as OHCHR and ICRC shared information on how they work against torture.On the 5 and 6 September 2009, the APT conducted its second training for lawyers on their role in the prevention of torture in Thailand, jointly with the International Commission of Jurists and the Cross Cultural Foundation of Thailand. The first training in May of this year involved lawyers mainly working in the conflict-affected Southern Provinces of Thailand. This second event brought together around 30 lawyers from the Northern Provinces, many of whom represent minority groups in the area.The purpose of the training was to contribute to a better implementation of the UN Convention Against Torture, which Thailand ratified in 2007, and related international instruments by enhancing the participants' knowledge of these standards and how to use them in their work.On 7 September, a session was also held for civil society organizations in the area, in which the organizers as well as OHCHR and ICRC shared information on how they work against torture.International Commission of JuristsCross Cultural FoundationUN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights Bangkok OfficeSwiss Embassy in BangkokAs part of the projects, the following publications were translated into Thai and disseminated at the training for lawyers:'Bringing the International Prohibition of Torture Home. National Implementation Guide for the UN Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment'. A Redress publication which has been translated and published into Thai by the APT and the ICJ. PDF Version'Combating Torture: A Manual for Judges and Prosecutors', by Conor Foley. A publication by the Human Rights Centre, University of Essex which has been translated and published into Thai by the APT and the ICJ. PDF VersionJem Stevens, APT Asia-Pacific Programme OfficerSébastien Ramu, APT Legal Adviser