Evaluation of APT’s torture prevention work 2011-2012
June 2 2014
“It is clear that APT’s work is as relevant and necessary today as when it was founded”. This is the conclusion of a comprehensive evaluation of APT’s Strategic Plan 2011-2012, commissioned by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, Sida.The evaluation, undertaken by independent consultants from Intrac, found almost universal agreement amongst a wide range of stakeholders that APT has made “a very important contribution over the years to the prevention of torture”. “Working narrowly around OPCAT has enabled APT to have a clear, focused, deliverable mandate, which is highly relevant for seeking to prevent torture.”The report is based on an extensive document review and interviews with APT staff and partners and stakeholders in Kyrgyzstan, Philippines, Tunisia and Senegal. It also includes a case study on Latin America, which draws on another evaluation of the regional programme.The evaluation report highlights APT’s consultative and facilitative approach to bringing diverse groups together, leaving our partners the clear owners of the process and of the achieved results. This “often results in well-coordinated and constructive civil society input where previous groups were unable to put differences aside and work together”.The evaluators acknowledge that human rights work generally is inherently difficult to measure in terms of outcomes and impact and that progress tends to be slow. The report includes some concrete recommendations on areas where the APT might consider adapting its strategy, such as in increasing its work with the judiciary."The ability to bring together diverse groups... often results in constructive civil society inputs" Photo from workshop in the Philippines in October 2011."APT has achieved a lot with relatively modest resources, including a small staff."
Photo from seminar with the new NPM in Senegal December 2012."Given the generally strong political and civil society buy-in, it is likely to last".
Photo from Tunisia 2012."The training materials were praised for their practicality, accessibility and usefulness".
Photo from Kyrgyzstan 2010.