APT welcomes new members of the SPT
November 2 2012
Every two years, the composition of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture (SPT) is renewed and elections are held to fill the vacant seats. With its 25 members, the SPT is the largest treaty body within the United Nations. In the latest elections, held on 25 October 2012, 19 experts from different regions and fields of expertise had been nominated for the 12 available seats.After long campaigns for certain candidates, involving social media campaigns, direct meetings between States Parties’ representatives and candidates in Geneva, flyers and other promotional materials, the day of the elections finally arrived. Almost all States Parties (59 out of 63) were present to vote and, in spite of the high number of candidates, all seats were filled during the first round of election.Elections represent a unique opportunity to strengthen the composition and expertise of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture. The APT looks forward to working closely with the newly elected members and congratulates all of them for joining this innovative and operational treaty body.Half of the SPT seats were filled by new candidates, the rest were re-elected. All candidates from the so called Western Europe and Other Group were successful, including current Chairperson Malcolm Evans (UK), the candidates from Germany (Christian Pross) and New Zealand (Lowell Goddard), who were running for re-election, and a new candidate from Switzerland (Hans Jorg Bannwart). All candidates from the Latin America and Caribbean Group were also elected: new members from Argentina (Enrique Andrés Font) and Costa Rica (Victor Madrigal-Borloz) along with the re-elected Brazilian member Margarida Pressburger.The representation of the Asia-Pacific group increased with the re-election of the Lebanese member Suzanne Jabbour and the addition of a new member, June Pagaduan Lopez, from the Philippines - one of the most recent State Parties to the OPCAT. The Philippines deference of its obligations to receive visits by the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture for the next three years clearly had no negative impact on the vote for their candidate.Two of the three Eastern European candidates were elected – Viktor Zaharia from Moldova and Milos Jankovic from Serbia. Africa on the other hand did not get any wider representation within the SPT. While three other experts were standing for election, the only successful candidate was Paul Lam Shang Leen, Mauritius, who was running for re-election. The APT regrets such a situation, as Africa gathers 10 States Parties on the continent but is only represented by two members within the SPT.For the first time a State Party presented two candidates (Kazakhstan) but neither of them was elected.A few lessons can be drawn from these elections:Next SPT elections are due to take place in October 2014, when 13 seats will be available.Full list of SPT members (effective in February 2013)