APT launches key publication for Russian-speaking world
December 10 2013
To mark United Nations Human Rights Day 2013 the APT is launching the Russian version of its recent publication, Monitoring Police Custody: a practical guide, in Dushanbe, Tajikistan. In doing so, we are also seeking to further engage with Tajik law enforcement officials to combat torture in the country.The launch takes place at a time when there is a move in Tajikistan to finally open up places of detention to external scrutiny and to consider the ratification of the OPCAT. By making this key publication available in Russian, we hope that national actors will be better equipped to undertake this critically important task of monitoring police detention facilities in future.   

The launch of Monitoring Police Custody: a practical guide will take place on 11 December at an event being co-sponsored by the APT, Ombudsperson’s Office, Federal Department of Foreign Affairs, OSCE Office in Tajikistan, OHCHR’s Central Asia Regional Office, Open Society Foundations and the UK FCO.

The much anticipated monitoring of places of detention in Tajikistan is set to commence in the very near future, a development positively encouraged by various UN human rights mechanisms in recent years. Representatives of the Ombudsperson’s Office and civil society are expected to jointly visit the country’s detention settings with this aim in mind.On 13 December, through the support of the OSCE office in Tajikistan, the APT will present the Guide to an audience of more than 250 police officers at the Ministry of Interior. As a tool, the Guide is potentially as useful for police as any other actor committed to combatting torture and other ill-treatment. It is therefore hoped that the publication will be quickly used in practice in the country.While the launch of the Guide is taking place in Dushanbe, the publication is potentially of great use to a range of actors in the Russian-speaking world, including NPMs. To date, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan have all ratified the OPCAT, for example.

The Russian version of the publication has been made possible through the support of the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland. To date, the APT has launched English, French and Arabic versions of this key publication, while Spanish and Portuguese translations will be available in the coming months.Download this article in RussianIn this short video (with Russian subtitles) Lowell Goddard, UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture, and General Charbel Mattar, adviser on human rights and torture to the Lebanese government, discuss critical moments of police detention and why independent monitoring prevents abuse.