Moldova - Enhancing the capacity of NPMs
May 5 2008
The APT visited Moldova at the end of April to meet with relevant national actors and organize a one-day introduction to detention monitoring for members of the newly established National Preventive Mechanism, unique in that it combines one of the three Ombudsman with a new Consultative Council composed of representatives of civil society. The introduction to detention monitoring aimed to provide all members with a common background on the concept of preventive visits and the methodology of detention monitoring. The first official meeting of the Council was held on 29 April 2008.OSCE Mission to MoldovaMoldova ratified the OPCAT on 24 July 2006. The designated NPM is unique in that it combines one of the 3 Ombudsman (called Parliamentary Advocate) with a newly established Consultative Council. This body is chaired by one of the 3 Ombudsman acts and is composed of 11 representatives of civil society. They were selected by a mixed panel of 5 members (2 Parliamentary Advocates, 2 NGOs and 1 academic). The final composition was approved by the Parliamentary Human Rights Committee at the beginning of April.From 21-24 April, the APT traveled to Moldova in order to meet with relevant national actors and organize a one-day introduction to detention monitoring for members of the NPM. With assistance from the OSCE Mission, meetings were held with the Parliamentary Advocate / Chair of the Consultative Council, with the General Prosecutor, with the Director of the Penitentiary Department, with the Head of the Human Rights Parliamentary Committee and with representatives of human rights NGOs.On 23 April, the APT organized (under the auspices of the OSCE Mission), a one day introduction to detention monitoring for the members of the Consultative Council and staff of the Human Rights Center. As this was the first encounter of members of the Consultative Council, this introduction aimed at providing all members with a common background on the concept of preventive visits and the methodology of detention monitoring. The first official meeting of the Council was held on Tuesday 29 April 2008, during which the organisation of work, the programme and modalities of visits will be discussed.This project is a mid-term project and the APT is planning to establish an ongoing cooperation with the Moldovan Consultative Council. The next step will be the organisation, in cooperation with the OSCE Mission, of a proper training session for members of the Consultative Council and NPM staff in autumn 2008. It will include a 'training visit' to places of detention. Meanwhile, follow-up will take place by distance, especially on the reporting and drafting of recommendations.The expected impact of APT's activities in Moldova is a fully OPCAT compliant NPM, through a consistent monitoring methodology and effective reporting system.The pilot project on coaching emerging NPMs in Modlova constitutes a shift of approach for the APT, from one-off standard training sessions to more ongoing activity specifically adapted to the needs of the NPM. Based on this pilot phase, coaching could be developed for use in other countries.