Criteria for candidates to the mandate of UN Special Rapporteur on human rights while countering terrorism
February 16 2011
Call for candidates for the mandate of the UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorismIn June 2011 at the 17th session of the United Nations Human Rights Council, the President of the Council is to appoint an independent human rights expert to serve as the next Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.The following checklist (English - Français - Español - ???????) is intended as an interpretive aid for the requirements set out in Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 and decision 6/102.Amnesty International (AI), the Association for the Prevention of Torture (APT), Human Rights Watch (HRW), the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) call on Governments, NGOs and others, including relevant professional networks, to use this checklist to identify eligible candidates for consideration for the upcoming vacancy for the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.Our organizations urge Governments to call publicly for candidates, e.g. through media advertisement, and consult civil society nationally before nominating candidates. NGOs and others wishing to nominate candidates should, after checking with the person(s) concerned, send the names of eligible candidates to the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) by Friday 25 March 2011 for inclusion in the list used as a basis for the appointment. Further information on vacancies for Special Procedures mandate-holders to be filled in June 2011 can be found here: http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/chr/special/nominations.htm While the organisations proposing these criteria consider commitment to universal human rights, relevant experience and competence, and personal integrity to be obligatory requirements for any individual to become an eligible candidate for this mandate, the organizations do not consider that a mandate holder must meet each and every specification in the checklists.  However, the strongest candidates should meet a substantial number of them. These checklists are not intended to be exhaustive. Prospective mandate holders should be aware that this is a voluntary, unpaid role. Reasonable expenses for mandate related work will be paid, but no salary is available. It will require a substantial time commitment from the individual, including readiness to travel and respond to urgent situations, as explained in the checklist.