2015 Commonwealth Businesswomen Awards launched
 11 September 2015
Women entrepreneurs and business leaders from across the Commonwealth are to be recognised in the 2nd Commonwealth Businesswomen Awards. The awards celebrate the achievements and the beneficial impact of Commonwealth businesswomen worldwide. Arif Zaman, Executive Director of the Commonwealth Businesswomen’s Network, said: “The Commonwealth is home to a billion women and we are delighted to celebrate businesswomen with these awards. While women in business is an area of increased policy focus which we welcome, the awards will also highlight the innovation, initiative and inspiration from businesswomen in varied contexts. We expect that entrants will be role models for everyone from schoolchildren to business people and policy-makers in the Commonwealth and beyond.” The awards will be launched exactly 70 days before the first Women’s Forum at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Malta. The awards are being expanded to include the categories of Commonwealth Media of the Year, Women on Boards and Women in Procurement. The Commonwealth Women Entrepreneur of the Year Award recognises women who have made a real difference in any area of business. In addition, the judging criteria will consider an entrant’s journey overcoming adversity, inspiring others, making a difference to their community, social impact and international reach. The Commonwealth Women Entrepreneur of the Year Award will be announced during the CHOGM Women’s Forum on 23 November. Winners in all other categories will be announced at a reception in London on 12 November 2015. Online nominations are open from 10 September to 25 October for the Commonwealth Women Entrepreneur of the Year and Commonwealth Media of the Year categories at awards.cwbusinesswomen.org The judges include: Oliver Everett, CEO, Commonwealth Enterprise and Investment Council; Deb Leary OBE, President of the British Association of Women Entrepreneurs and Co-Chair, Commonwealth Businesswomen’s Network; Freda Miriklis, Past President of the International Federation of Business and Professional Women and Co-Chair, Commonwealth Businesswomen’s Network; Phyllis Muscat, Chair of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2015 Task Force Malta and the Commonwealth Businesswomen’s Network’s Regional Partners across five continents. Media enquiriesErum MasoodTel: +44 7502 270635erum.masood@cwbusinesswomen.orgwww.cwbusinesswomen.org@CWealthBizWomen Related linksLaunch of Commonwealth Fashion AwardsCommonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in MaltaCommonwealth Enterprise and Investment Council (CWEIC) 