Commonwealth Day 2016
UnknownDate
This year Commonwealth Day will be celebrated on Monday 14 March. It provides the opportunity to promote understanding on global issues, international co-operation and the work of Commonwealth organisations, which aim to improve the lives of citizens. The day will be marked across the Commonwealth by a range of activities, including the Commonwealth Day Service on Monday 14 March at Westminster Abbey in London. The theme for 2016 is #inclusivecommonwealth, which celebrates the diversity of the Commonwealth's 53 member countries, and its people. Find out more about the theme for 2016: 'An Inclusive Commonwealth'. Achieving an Inclusive Commonwealth - What role for education?
			Monday, 14 March 2016, 9:45 - 12:30 GMT The annual Commonwealth Day Westminster Seminar, 'Achieving an Inclusive Commonwealth - what role for education' takes its objective from this year's Commonwealth theme of 'An Inclusive Commonwealth' and seeks to explore the dynamic inter-relationship between education, inclusion and equity. The keynote speaker for this year's seminar is Commonwealth Secretary-General Designate, The Right Honourable Baroness Patricia Scotland of Asthal QC. More information Commonwealth Class
			Monday, 14 March 2016, 10:00 GMT A school assembly will be broadcast live around the Commonwealth by the British Council in London. Commonwealth Class is a dynamic and exciting programme of activities, learning resources, and events for schools. The aim of Commonwealth Class is to encourage students to collaborate and learn together, and consider how they can be more active and responsible global citizens as part of the Commonwealth family. More information Fly a Flag for the Commonwealth
			Monday, 14 March 2016, 10:00 (local time) This year over 1,000 individual flag-flying ceremonies are predicted to take place on Commonwealth Day. More information Commonwealth Day Commemoration at the Memorial Gates
			Monday, 14 March 2016, 11:00 GMT A service of remembrance and the laying of wreaths at the Memorial Gates on Constitution Hill in London. The Commonwealth Day Service: A Celebration of the CommonwealthMonday, 14 March 2016, 15:15 - 16:15 GMT The Service is the biggest multi-faith celebration in the United Kingdom and takes the form of an hour-long service at Westminster Abbey, London, featuring a mixture of testimonies, readings, hymns and musical performances. It is attended by HM Queen Elizabeth II, Head of the Commonwealth, and senior politicians, High Commissioners, Commonwealth dignitaries and up to 200 other VIPs. It is also attended by over 1,000 schoolchildren, with 2,000 people present in total. The Service is by invitation only. More information Commonwealth Day Reception 
			Monday, 14 March 2016, 18:00 GMT The Commonwealth Secretary-General hosts a reception attended by The Queen and representatives of the 53 members countries of the Commonwealth at the Commonwealth Secretariat's headquarters, Marlborough House in London. The evening will commemorate the Commonwealth Theme of 'An Inclusive Commonwealth'. The Reception is by invitation only. Commonwealth Photography Competition
			Monday, 14 March - 25 April 2016 A Commonwealth-wide photography competition to showcase and celebrate the beauty and individuality exhibted by each person living in the Commonwealth. We hope this competition inspires people throughout the Commonwealth's 53 member countries to use their photography skills to engage with this year's theme of 'An Inclusive Commonwealth'. More information Annual Commonwealth Gala Performance and Presentation by the Commonwealth Youth Orchestra & Choirs at Marlborough House
			Tuesday, 15 March 2016, 18:00 - 20:30 GMT The Commonwealth Youth Orchestra and Choir brings together communities across the Commonwealth through music, transcending cultural, political, social and economic boundaries. More information High Commissioners' Banquet
			Wednesday, 16 March 2016, 18:00 GMT Hosted at Guildhall, London, attendees at the dinner will include High Commissioners from the 53 Commonwealth nations, senior figures from the Commonwealth family, and key individuals from the worlds of politics, civil society, business and sport. The Banquet is by invitation only. Commonwealth Youth Awards
			Thursday 17 March 2016, 11:00 - 12:30 GMT The awards recognise outstanding young people under the age of 30 from Commonwealth countries whose work has significantly contributed to local, national, regional and global development. Over 300 nominations were received this year. More information Join the conversation online and tell us how you're planning to celebrate Commonwealth Day: #commonwealthday #inclusivecommonwealth Follow us on TwitterLike us on Facebook 