Secretary-General’s message, Commonwealth Day 2014
 10 March 2014
What happens on the other side of the world from where any of us calls ‘home’ can have as much impact on our lives as the actions of neighbours next door. We see that the sustainability and resilience of our communities – our very survival – depends on the safety and wellbeing of all, and of this fragile planet. It is more important than ever for all to work and act together – as is the spirit in the Commonwealth – with mutual respect and understanding. The Commonwealth stands out globally both for the remarkable diversity of our membership, and for the way in which we co-operate on the basis of our shared values and goals, advancing democracy and development for all. There is a shared conviction that we belong together and want the best for each other. Multiple levels of connection exist, and an exceptional sense of being bound together as individuals, as communities, and as countries. The essence of a team is that – like the Commonwealth – its members know the advantage of working together and the strength of mutual support. The essence of a team also is that – like the Commonwealth – it has shared aspirations and a sense of common purpose, and relies on the range of contributions and different strengths of each of its members. The essence of a successful team – such as the Commonwealth – is that together it achieves more than the sum of its parts. We connect, communicate, and are committed to supporting one another. Spread across six continents and five oceans, the populations of our member states range from 10,000 to over a billion. As with the best of sports teams, there are lively discussions about tactics, and the occasional difference, but always shared goodwill and the prospect of collective progress. Commonwealth Day offers time for each of us to reflect on how, as members of ‘Team Commonwealth’, we can turn its goodwill and potential for practical action to positive effect. By making connections from our workplace, or home community, and adding our own contributions to those of the worldwide Commonwealth web, we can multiply our opportunities and work to build a safer, fairer, and more inclusive Commonwealth and world community. 