Statement: International Day in Support of Victims of Torture
24 June 2015
Torture and other cruel, degrading treatment and punishment are abhorrent, unacceptable in any circumstances, and an affront to humanity. International Day in Support of Victims of Torture 2015 focuses on the Right to Rehabilitation, a right guaranteed by Article 14 of the Convention against Torture. Human rights are a core value for the governments and peoples of the Commonwealth family worldwide. Our Commonwealth Charter states a shared and solemn commitment “…to equality and respect for the protection and promotion of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development, for all without discrimination on any grounds as the foundations of peaceful, just and stable societies.” There can be no true enjoyment of human rights, which are so fundamental to what it means to be a Commonwealth citizen, where torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment are condoned or permitted. The prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment is absolute; the use of torture is illegal under any circumstances, without exception. The prohibition entails the obligation to investigate and prosecute allegations of ill-treatment, and to punish those responsible. States must also provide victims with rights to reparation and rehabilitation, as reflected in Article 14 of the Convention against Torture. Victims of torture are too often denied opportunities to secure physical and mental rehabilitation, and the justice and compensation to which they are entitled. International Day in Support of Victims of Torture is an opportunity to reinforce our Commonwealth understanding that torture is an assault on humanity and human dignity. It is a time to recognise the trauma and suffering of victims and their families and honour their courage. In practical terms, it is an opportunity for all states that are yet to ratify the Convention against Torture to consider doing so, and in view of this year’s theme, an opportunity in particular to implement effectively and durably the right to rehabilitation. 