Strengthening the capacity of the Judiciary in Seychelles
UnknownDate
In doing so, this will reduce the backlog of criminal and civil cases and allow the current complement of locally appointed judges to focus on dealing with the current case load. A more efficient and effective court system will strengthen the constitution and support the democratic development of Seychelles. It will also provide the people of Seychelles with greater access to justice, thereby improving perceptions of the judiciary. This will also extend to domestic and foreign investors whose increased confidence in an effective legal framework for trade will encourage the greater investment required to boost employment and economic growth. The CFTC experts’ have so far dealt with over 100 Civil and Criminal cases with judgement on over 50 cases.   Simplified appeal procedure has been established and instituted with acceptance by defence counsel, respondent and appellant.  The movement of cases in court has improved with the introduction of electronic system supported by a short-term CFTC exert.  Improvements on Sentencing Policy recommendations have commenced. The introduction of the legal aid scheme is having a positive impact on the system in reducing backlog of cases.  Court sitting activities are now computerised providing more accurate, reliable and up to date statistics on caseload of judges, year, case type and court for workload management and information reporting. Seychelles - 12/4/2014 Linda Dalton (Court Administrator).  The expected goal (from the TOR) is to “reduce the backlog of criminal and civil cases and allow the current complement of lally appointed judges to focus on dealing with the current caseload.  A more efficient and effective court system will strengthen the constitution and support the democratic development of Seychelles.  It will also provide the people of Seychelles with greater access to justice, thereby improving perceptions of the judiciary.  This will also extend to domestic and foreign investors whose increased confidence in an effective legal framework for trade will encourage the greater investment required to boost employment and economic growth”. Main achievements - Recommended changes to the Civil Procedure Code; Establishment of CCASS (Computer Case Management System) User Committee; Identification of non-judicial workload areas for management information reporting;  Changes and improvements to database reports recommended by Advisor and implemented by programmer; Standard templates and associated fields identified and referred to programmer for “test” documents to be produced from the CCASS database; Some progress on drafting registry processes; Court sitting activity data entry and analysis streamlined and improved using Excel and to be integrated into CCASS; Table reference data for CCASS identified and corrected for the SC Civil; Backlog of court reporting transcriptions identified; Presentation to Judges and Registry staff on case management overview and principles for success;  General input into various issues raised by Legal Executive Assistant and EU-Cap Nestor (Criminal) Court Administration Advisor, including input into development of judgment templates. Two judges (Justice Crawford McKee-Jul13 and Justice Akiiki Kizza- April 14) has been assigned to the Supreme Court of Seychelles for a period of three years.  Reduction of backlog Criminal cases numbers 30%, Recommendations on sentencing guidlines to be submitted to new Chief Justice (Apt in Sept 14); Simplified case management processes implemented. 