Commonwealth helping Jamaica set up human rights body
22 July 2014
Human rights experts from the Commonwealth are meeting with officials of Jamaica’s Ministry of Justice as well as parliamentarians and representatives from other government ministries and institutions in Kingston this week to discuss the establishment of a national human rights institution for Jamaica. The human rights team of the Commonwealth Secretariat, together with the Ministry of Justice, is co-hosting a Dialogue with government ministries, institutions and parliamentarians in Kingston this week to discuss the establishment of a national human rights institution for Jamaica. The move will help Jamaica set up a human rights body that is compliant with the  Paris Principles, a set of international standards which frame and guide the work of national human rights institutions. The discussions in Kingston this week are expected to garner support from key ministries and institutions to participate in the process for establishing a national human rights institution. Justice Minister Mark Golding said today: “I am grateful to the Commonwealth for responding positively and rapidly to our request for technical assistance. The Government of Jamaica has received several recommendations under the United Nations Universal Periodic Review in regard to establishing a national human rights institution. We are embarking on this process as we believe that it will be beneficial to rights promotion and protection in Jamaica, in the interest of the nation as a whole.” Karen McKenzie, Acting Head of Human Rights at the Commonwealth, said: “We are pleased to be taking forward technical assistance on the human rights front. A national human rights institution which is compliant with the Paris Principles is integral to the effective and sustainable protection and promotion of the human rights of all the citizens in the country.” The Commonwealth has an expansive programme of work focussed on the establishment, operationalisation and strengthening of national human rights institutions in the Commonwealth. 