Development and finalisation of new St Kitts and Nevis National Youth Policy and Strategic Action Plan
UnknownDate
Country: Saint Christopher (St. Kitts) and NevisHost: Department of Youth, Ministry of Education, Youth, Sports and Culture (MEYSC), St. Kitts and NevisStart Date: 6 October 2016End Date: 5 April 2016Policy Area: YouthPolicy Expert: Abhik SenProject Manager: Oluwatoyin Job The current National Youth Policy of St. Kitts and Nevis was produced in 2010. It requires updating to take into account changes in the socio-economic landscape of the country and recent developments at the international level on issues such as globalisation, human rights, freedom of expression, gender equality, climate change, universal secondary education and the advancement of information and communications technology (ICT). In order to meet the aspirations of young people in St Kitts and Nevis the updating will take into consideration their full contribution to national development; new, innovative and holistic approaches in youth policy are required. A draft policy has been developed by the Government of St Kitts and Nevis. They have requested Commonwealth Secretariat Technical Assistance to facilitate the finalisation of the draft National Youth Policy and support the development of a time-bound strategic Action Plan for implementation of the Policy. A youth policy expert, placed by the Secretariat, will play a key role in providing technical input, and in taking the responsibility, in conjunction with the Special Advisor to the Minister of Youth, and UNESCO - a partner institution, for coordinating, facilitating and conducting the review of the existing draft youth policy leading to its finalisation. The Expert will also be instrumental in identifying appropriate strategies and action plan that will be necessary to implement the policy over the policy period. The aims of the project are firstly to facilitate the review of the draft policy and finalise it into a new National Youth Policy. Secondly, to prepare a cross-sectoral strategic Action Plan that will translate the policy into time-bound youth development programmes and activities across St Kitts & Nevis. The successful implementation of the project will create a strategic environment that enables the Department of Youth in the Ministry of Education, Youth, Sport and Culture to effectively mainstream youth policy across the entire spectrum of the government’s policies, programmes and initiatives, have clear strategies in place for implementation of the youth policy and have meaningful targets and measures in place to track progress. The main outcome will therefore be an improved environment that allows young people to reach their full potential and contribute meaningfully to the development of the country. The expected outputs will be: 