Rule of law essential to sustainable development
9 November 2016
Senior officials from across the Commonwealth have outlined their rule of law priorities for 2017. Meeting in London, representatives from 22 countries set the agenda for next year’s law ministers meeting to be held in the Bahamas. They discussed global issues from disaster response to judicial independence and laid the foundations for the progression of legal matters in all member countries. As Hurricane Matthew tore through the Caribbean, officials explored ways to advance disaster response laws, with a particular focus on extreme weather related to climate change. The Attorney General of Jamaica, Marlene Malahoo Forte chaired the meeting.  She said: “We have delegates here from countries that are in the midst of an emergency response, after Hurricane Matthew’s devastating blow. There is a clear need for more effective frameworks so that countries have improved legal accountability throughout disaster relief. Our members, and especially small states, are increasingly suffering climate change related disasters, with increasingly adverse impact.” Delegates called for a review of how existing national laws intersect with climate change. The Commonwealth Secretariat has undertaken comparative legal work on national developments in disaster response, with a view to harmonise legal responses at the regional and sub-regional levels. It committed support including the production of a toolkit of national law good practice, and offered technical assistance to coordinate legal reform and facilitate collaborative working so Commonwealth expertise can be shared. Rule of law plays a vital role in advancing the global goals on sustainable development. Delegates explored the targets of Sustainable Development Goal 16 to create peaceful societies by providing access to justice for all and building accountable, inclusive institutions. Josephine Ojiambo, Deputy Secretary-General at the Commonwealth, opened the meeting.  She stated: “Most Commonwealth countries share a unique legal heritage - this provides a distinct advantage. As we take steps towards our shared goals, collaborative legal reform will enable us to advance in unison. Even though not all our challenges are the same, we are a stronger Commonwealth if we all face them together.” Senior officials also requested practical measures to implement laws on computer-related crime and new forms of cyber threats. A number of member countries reported on the challenges posed by virtual currencies including criminal misuse and the fast pace of technology, and raised concerns around members’ capacity to deal with white collar and financial crimes.  The officials commended the delivery of Commonwealth technical assistance in this area, especially its provision of practical resources that impact those who are most in need. Also tabled for debate at the Law Ministers Meeting next year were taxation, ratification and implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty and legal responses and strategies to address child marriage. The Commonwealth Charter states that rule of law is an essential protection for the people of the Commonwealth and an assurance of limited and accountable government. It upholds that an impartial and competent judiciary within an independent legal system is integral to engendering public confidence and dispensing justice. For Deputy Secretary-General Ojiambo, the Commonwealth’s emphasis on the rule of law is essential: “Law officials have a pivotal role to play. Their horizontal authority enables them to have impact across all Government departments and sectors. They can achieve real progression – towards which the Commonwealth Secretariat gives its ongoing and active support in the formulation of rule of law aspects and the realisation of the Sustainable Development Goals.” 