High level delegation from Lesotho in New Zealand for parliamentary study tour
 30 June 2014
The delegation, led by the Deputy Prime Minister of Lesotho, Mothetjoa Metsing, is in New Zealand from 30 June to 4 July 2014. The week-long visit is organised by the Commonwealth Secretariat together with the New Zealand Parliament. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) in Lesotho has also supported the participation of some delegates. Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma commended the initiative and described it as one of the ways through which the membership shares and distils best practice. “The Commonwealth is promoting the development of effective government and public administration under a Mixed Member Proportional electoral system in Lesotho. New Zealand adopted the MMP electoral system 20 years ago, and so the purpose of the study tour is to learn from the New Zealand experience, and to assist a cross-section of Lesotho’s Parliamentarians and civil servants to build their knowledge and ability to work together for the good of the citizens of their country,” Mr Sharma said. The Secretary-General added: “The Commonwealth promotes practical exchanges of knowledge and experience between countries that share the same goals of democracy and development. We have been fortunate to have Dr Rajendra Prasad, a New Zealand Member of Parliament, as our long-term Commonwealth expert assisting with practical visits to Lesotho and on-the-ground advice. We are also indebted to the New Zealand Parliament for its active support of this Commonwealth initiative.” The Commonwealth's Expert Adviser to Lesotho, Dr Prasad, said: “Parliamentarians and officials from Lesotho today take a critical step in the reform of their public service and parliamentary processes with their study visit to New Zealand. They will have an opportunity to see at close hand the workings of New Zealand's politically neutral, independent and permanent public service, as well as parliamentary process under an MMP system that has prevailed in New Zealand for the last 20 years.” The mission will examine four thematic governance areas: the transition period after an election; sustaining effective coalition governments; developing an independent public service; and, positioning parliament for a MMP environment. The mission is also expected to develop reform proposals for each thematic area. Media contact in New Zealand
Dr Tres-Ann KremerTel: +64(0)21 0813 5928Mobile: +44(0)7894 593 514Email: t.kremer@commonwealth.int 