Scholars represent ‘heritage and future of Commonwealth’
23 November 2017
Graduates of a scholarship programme build Commonwealth connection and advance development by deepening understanding of the principles of the Commonwealth Charter. They "represent its heritage and are its future", said Secretary-General Patricia Scotland. Speaking to more than 400 post-graduates studying at UK universities under the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission (CSC) programme, she stated that the students have a responsibility to inspire others and continue to raise standards across member states. Her speech was made at an event to welcome the CSC programme’s 2017 intake. Secretary-General Scotland said, “Being a Commonwealth scholar brings with it a responsibility, in particular to help us remake our world. So I hope you all understand the job that is now in your hands. Commonwealth scholars represent both the Commonwealth’s heritage and future. Each one of you can be the catalyst for wider development, raising standards and opening up new opportunities for thousands of others by teaching and by creating jobs through innovation and connection.” Funded by the UK’s Department for International Development (for developing Commonwealth countries) and its Department for Education (for developed Commonwealth countries), the CSC awards more than 800 scholarships and fellowships for postgraduate study and professional development to Commonwealth citizens each year. The Secretary-General concluded by calling on the scholars to work collaboratively to progress the work of the Commonwealth. She said, “Work alongside me and all our member governments to ensure our young people have the opportunities they need for the future. “Your task as Commonwealth Scholars is to draw in and include colleagues, counterparts and friends. That is how Commonwealth advantages multiply, connections strengthen and opportunities increase.” You can read more about the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission in the UK’s programme here: http://cscuk.dfid.gov.uk. 