The Commonwealth is ‘a greater global good’ says Sharma in farewell lecture
30 March 2016
In a farewell lecture delivered less than 48 hours before he steps down as Secretary-General of the Commonwealth, Kamalesh Sharma described the organisation as a ‘greater global good’. He highlighted achievements in the areas of human rights, trade, democracy and youth, and said he had tried to push the Commonwealth on all frontiers. Mr Sharma, who is from India, was appointed the fifth Secretary-General - and the first person from Asia to hold the office - by Heads of Government at their meeting in Uganda in 2007, and completed two terms of four years. He joined the Indian Foreign Service in 1965 and served at ambassadorial level in five missions, including as India’s High Commissioner to the United Kingdom, where he was closely involved in Commonwealth affairs. Opening his valedictory lecture at King’s College London, Mr Sharma described how, in recent years, the Commonwealth has continued to grow as a values-based and versatile organisation, well respected for its advocacy of global and national inclusiveness. He noted how the association has strengthened strategic relationships and developed extensive networks. On initiatives to promote and protect human rights, Mr Sharma said the focus must be on sustainability and durability. “We must get away from the idea of someone parachuting in”, he urged.  He described the network of Commonwealth National Human Rights Institutions as “globally impressive” and highlighted the Commonwealth’s efforts to end child marriage through interventions such as the Kigali Declaration and Commonwealth Champions Against Child Marriage. Regarding LGBTI rights, Mr Sharma said Commonwealth citizens continue to be persecuted in many communities. “I have said many times that discrimination has no place in the modern Commonwealth,” he insisted. “It leads to social estrangement, ostracism and isolation, and economic marginalisation, which flies in the face of our core Commonwealth values of equality and non-discrimination.” Speaking about gender equality, he said gender mainstreaming must be built into all areas of work. He talked about important partnerships with global organisations to create gender-sensitive programming, advance women’s participation in all spheres and increase the number of women in decision-making roles. "Creating #Commonwealth gold standard in all that we do and taking ownership is key," says @commonwealthsec #SecretaryGeneral — The Commonwealth (@commonwealthsec) March 30, 2016 Mr Sharma commented on the advocacy carried out by the Commonwealth Secretariat to ensure the inclusion of small states in decision-making. He referred to the Small States Centre of Excellence, which came out of the leaders’ summit in Malta in November 2015, as an important intervention to help tackle debt and climate change and boost trade. He also talked about a Commonwealth-led initiative to help small states swap debt in exchange for investment in climate change projects. "Quality of global outcomes is in bloodstream of #Commonwealth" @commonwealthsec #SecretaryGeneral Kamalesh Sharma pic.twitter.com/WjvtDmhC6D — The Commonwealth (@commonwealthsec) March 30, 2016 Mr Sharma praised the Commonwealth’s progress in the area of trade, which, he said, had been focused on promoting trade and development for small and emerging economies in global negotiations. He noted that trade between Commonwealth members is estimated to be more than US$680 billion and is expected to surpass US$1trillion by 2020. He said the Commonwealth Trade Financing Facility – a guarantee fund and commercial venture - will provide members with the finance they need to increase their trade capacity. Noting the youth population of many member countries standing at around 70%, Mr Sharma highlighted the Commonwealth’s commitment to supporting young people through its long-standing Commonwealth Youth Programme. “We have the largest global group of Commonwealth youth networks,” he commented, adding that the Commonwealth Secretariat had introduced the idea of youth work professionalisation to recognise youth workers as critical and supportive agents of change. In conclusion, he said he hoped his successor, Rt Hon Patricia Scotland QC, would find “a ship in full sail and a course ahead that is very clear”. He added that the Commonwealth is known for its convening power but that it must be contemporary and embrace new technology. It was wonderful to hear the Sec_Gen Sharma on his ending notes @sarifzaman @CWealthBizWomen @rita_payne https://t.co/E82RggYAL2 — Erum Masood (@e_masood) March 31, 2016 Joining him in a panel discussion, Malta’s Foreign Minister, George Vella, said the Commonwealth would continue to be “a compelling force for global good and an effective network for co-operation”. He commended the Secretary-General for his contribution to making the Commonwealth “vibrant and action-oriented”. Mr Vella applauded the success of last year’s Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting hosted by Malta, with outcomes such as the Small States Centre for Excellence, the Trade Financing Facility and Climate Finance Access Hub. “I am confident the Commonwealth can play a bigger role internationally and create better opportunities for its citizens,” he added. Delivering the closing remarks, Navtej Sarna, India’s High Commissioner to the United Kingdom, thanked the Secretary-General for “guiding the Commonwealth with tremendous energy and enthusiasm”. “Each of his achievements has been a major contest. He has helped the Commonwealth adapt and evolve to be able to represent its members on an equal plane,” he concluded. Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma steps down on 31 March. On 1 April, Rt Hon Patricia Scotland QC, who was born in Dominica, will take office as the second person from the Caribbean and the first woman to hold the post. Appointed by leaders at their meeting in Malta in November 2015, she will be the sixth Secretary-General. "I hope my successor will find a ship in full sail with a clear course ahead" says @commonwealthsec #SecretaryGeneral @KingsCollegeLon — The Commonwealth (@commonwealthsec) March 30, 2016 The #Commonwealth is ‘a greater global good’ says Kamalesh Sharma in farewell lecture https://t.co/edYqjUFhim @CommonwealthSec — Will Henley (@will_henley) March 30, 2016 