Civil society and activists express their ambitions for the Commonwealth
14 March 2016
As Commonwealth Day celebrations get into full swing, we capture the voices of activists and those who work at the grassroots in Commonwealth countries. Their tributes, dreams, aspirations and vision paint a vivid picture of a dynamic, diverse and inclusive Commonwealth. My vision of an inclusive Commonwealth came a step closer with the appointment of a Woman Secretary-General from the Caribbean. The Speaker of Parliament of Malta demonstrated how civil society could be included in the process of hearing the candidates for Secretary-General. The Commonwealth led the way among inter-government agencies on implementation of the Beijing Plan of Action because it helped to include the perspective of women and girls The diversity of the Commonwealth is one of its strongest characteristics, the voice of civil society must be reflected in the Secretariat’s work plan and policies. The Commonwealth Association of Planners (CAP) strongly supports this year's theme for Commonwealth Day of 'An Inclusive Commonwealth', as the concept of inclusivity is crucial in planning for the future of successful communities. CAP seeks to help our members meet the challenges of urbanisation and the sustainable development of human settlements. Communities which are diverse, tolerant, fair and cognisant of the need for broad involvement in day to day life as well as governance are communities which will grow and prosper. The process of planning is often described as a process of creating great places for people to live, work and play and acknowledging the richness of diversity is a fundamental step in the creation of those places. We dream of a Commonwealth where women are treated with dignity and respect; where young people have the opportunities to achieving their highest aspirations; where no family goes to bed without a square meal; where in spite of our religious, cultural and ethnic differences we understand and support each other. Our inclusive Commonwealth will be a place where ‘the mind is without fear and the head is held high, where knowledge is free’. We at the Commonwealth of Learning believe that this is no utopian fantasy but a realizable goal through education and lifelong learning for all. The Commonwealth is very diverse, some countries are richer than others, and there are so many different cultures. We need to celebrate the fact that we are different, but we also need recognise that there are more things that bind us than separate us. Our language, our history is connected and our cultures also merge. I am an African but when I speak to some of my friends from the Caribbean, we discover that we have so much in common. We also share values such as human rights, democracy, the rule of law, equality, fairness and respect for each other. It is important, it is crucial to act together when countries do not respect these values. These are independent countries and we can’t meddle in their politics, but if we say that the Commonwealth is about democracy, we need to speak up when our principles are abused. An inclusive Commonwealth focuses on the needs of every individual and ensuring right conditions are in place for each person to achieve their full potential; women and girls included. It knows no barriers to economic growth and job creation. To me, it means a Commonwealth where women and girls can pursue their dreams to the heights of their creativity, ideas and ambitions, and marked by innovation and results in prosperity.  An Inclusive Commonwealth is our future. It begins here. It begins with us. The Commonwealth Countries' League (CCL) is one of the oldest organisations in the Commonwealth, which has specialised in developing a multicultural membership dedicated to eradicating the lack of education and opportunities which have characterised the lives of millions of women in member states. As a well-established charitable organisation, its outreach has embraced a diversity of races and religions and the values of respect and understanding which underpin the Commonwealth itself. In its 90 years of existence, the CCL has established networks which are now creating wider learning opportunities for women and girls and it fosters development by encouraging and supporting, financially and otherwise, the establishment of women-owned enterprises, access to information as well as support services. The Commonwealth network epitomises the value of being inclusive of diversity. It is made up of the world’s largest and smallest, richest and poorest countries and is home to 2.3 billion people of whom 60% are under 30. Being inclusive of all races, religions, genders, faiths, ethnicities, ages, nationalities, and sexual orientations has clear economic and social advantages for all. The Commonwealth still has challenges to meet in this respect, but by building effectively on its diverse membership, the network has the potential to add global value by becoming a fully inclusive Commonwealth. An inclusive Commonwealth is one that is open to fresh perspectives grounded in the values of the Commonwealth Charter. It includes women working in non-traditional occupations, men championing women, the poor and marginalised having voice and volume and governments involving citizens in decisions that affect their daily lives. It means diversity of gender and race especially at senior levels of corporate decision-making, which remains the exception than the rule. It means thinking of entrepreneurship, not just about youth, with older women, for example, being able to pursue entrepreneurial aspirations when free childcare policies open opportunities for them as in Malta. “An Inclusive Commonwealth is all about the Commonwealth working together to enable the rights of people with disabilities to ensure equal opportunities for all. People with disabilities not only face physical barriers, they face social, economic and attitudinal barriers. In spite of being a minority group, people with disabilities and their important issues have remained largely invisible in mainstream development frameworks processes. The Commonwealth helps to remedy this. The Commonwealth can be more inclusive through greater inclusion of the needs of people with disabilities within mainstream development work. This helps to overcome barriers and has the power to promote wider inclusion and accessibility. I believe inclusion of disabled people in society helps to shape a better future of equal opportunity for all.” More on Commonwealth Day 2016 