Nominate an outstanding young person for development awards
17 July 2012
Do you know a young person making a positive difference to the lives of other people in a Commonwealth country? The deadline for nominations for the Commonwealth Youth Awards for Excellence in Development Work is 31 July 2012. Designed to help celebrate the role of young people as nation builders and partners in development, the Awards offer young people aged between 15 and 29 an opportunity to share their contribution and inspire others to get involved. Nominees win international recognition and support for their development project. Five awards will be presented regionally, with the top entrant from each region receiving a pan-Commonwealth award. The regional award winners will receive a £1,000 grant each and the pan-Commonwealth award winners £3,000 each. Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma said: “More than any generation in history, the youth of today are shaping our social, economic and political landscape. These awards recognise their contribution in our 54 Commonwealth member states.” The Awards are run by the Commonwealth Youth Programme at the Commonwealth Secretariat and are given to outstanding young people working to: •    promote youth participation in decision-making; •    promote the economic empowerment of young people; •    take action for equality between young men and women; •    promote peaceful and democratic environments in which human rights flourish; •    provide quality education for all; •    improve access to information and communication technology; •    promote health, development and values through sports and culture; and •    engage young people to protect the environment. Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General Mmasekgoa Masire-Mwamba, who oversees youth development across the 54 member countries, said: “Young people represent more than 50 per cent of Commonwealth citizens. I have seen the excellent contribution they are making at community and national levels all across our countries. I welcome these Awards as an opportunity to tell their positive stories that often go unnoticed.” Further information on the Awards and how to nominate a young person can be found on the Commonwealth Youth Awards brochure. Nominees must be citizens of a Commonwealth country and working in a Commonwealth country. 