Experts call on governments to protect the rights of women and girls
12 December 2014
To mark Human Rights Day on 10 December, the Commonwealth Secretariat hosted a panel discussion with leading human rights experts with the theme of ‘Why Rights?’ to emphasise that the protection and security of women and girls is a human rights issue and needs to be tackled with a rights-based approach. The three panellists joined Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma to discuss the issues of early and forced marriage, sexual violence in conflict and the right to education. The general consensus was that while progress has been made in these areas, a long road still lies ahead to eradicate discrimination, inequality, abuse and violence faced by millions of women and girls across the globe. In his opening statement, the Secretary-General reinforced the fact that a society that does not afford its citizens equal rights is a society that cannot move forward. He said: “Inexcusably there remains in our world today many examples of discriminatory treatment and its tragic consequences. "Unequal treatment results in political, economic and social exclusion, disproportionately burdening the poor and marginalised. It is also a driver of civil unrest and communal conflict.” Speaking from her personal experience as a girl growing up in Sierra Leone and extensive knowledge gained gathering the testimonies of survivors of sexual violence in conflict, Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, called on international organisations and governments to do more to protect women and girls in situations where sexual violence in conflict is still rife: “…freedom of movement, freedom from violence, the right to an education, to equal opportunity, and participation in public life – are obligations, not just aspirations. Every Commonwealth citizen and country can contribute to a world safe for women and girls. In this way, the Commonwealth will remain a beacon and standard-bearer for human rights, inclusive democracy and development, in the 21st Century and beyond.” The right to education was another key area addressed by the panel. Education is regarded as a protective factor against early pregnancy, violence, and early and forced marriage. Ann Cotton, Founder and President of the Campaign for Female Education (Camfed) presented the case that education is often the only path for girls to realise their rights and escape a cycle of endemic poverty and abuse. Two young women from Zambia, alumnae of Camfed, gave moving accounts of how access to education had transformed their lives and enabled them to champion the rights of women and girls in their local communities. Phydes Samazaka, who graduated from college with a teacher’s diploma last year, described what having an education has meant to her: “If not for support to be in school I would have found myself in the same situation. "I would have been married with 3 or 4 children because in my community having many children is a symbol of honour and fertility. Instead, I now make informed decisions concerning my life. I know my rights. I am economically independent.” Penelope Machipi, now a filmmaker said: ‘’Education has given me an opportunity to speak on behalf of vulnerable women who can’t speak for themselves. I am able to read and write because of education. I am able to speak fluent English because of education. I am able to collect stories, direct a film crew, and speak at international platforms, all because of education.’’ The Commonwealth Secretariat is putting into action the commitments made by Heads of Government at their meeting in Colombo in 2013, by working in partnership with governments; national human rights institutions; parliaments; judiciaries; and law enforcement agencies. The panellists included: Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict; Hina Jilani, member of The Elders and former Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General on Human Rights Defenders; and Ann Cotton, Founder and President of the Campaign for Female Education (Camfed). 