Positioning small states’ challenges on the global agenda
16 September 2016
Small states need to unite on getting their priorities on the global agenda, members of a Commonwealth working group agreed this week. High Commissioners and representatives, who make up the open-ended working group on small states, met in London on 13 September 2016 to discuss next steps to get the issues most affecting their countries onto the global agenda. Facing a unique myriad of challenges, from limited exports to susceptibility to natural disasters, the countries’ representatives agreed upon a collaborative approach to strengthen their voice and ensure that small states do not get left behind. Presenting a shared advocacy strategy, delegates agreed on new approaches to advance small states’ development objectives in the international and regional forums. They built upon progress at a previous meeting in the Seychelles in May 2016 and agreed a follow up meeting at the end of a year in a bid to build momentum and speed up progress. “Small states issues continue to be a priority for the Commonwealth, and we have been supporting their sustainable development and advocating for international recognition of their vulnerability to external factors such as the effects of climates change, by the international community,” said Commonwealth expert Motselisi Matsela. She added: “It is important that these countries are speaking with one voice, and that this voice is propelled onto the global agenda.” Chairing the meeting, Rebecca Loustau Lalanne, Principal Secretary at the Government of Seychelles Ministry of Finance, Trade and the Blue Economy, said: “This meeting was particularly timely, and is an important opportunity for small states to take stock of developments since the adoption of Agenda 2030 and COP21. Small states need to continue speaking with one voice, and this is a unique opportunity to agree a joint advocacy strategy to ensure consistent messaging at international forums” Prioritising resource mobilisation and engendering strengthened partnerships with international organisations were outlined as key next steps, with a focus on moving from discussion to action remaining paramount throughout. Consistent and targeted messaging from all members and across all platforms was also agreed, with consideration to the geographical location and different international groupings of small states. But as Guy Hewitt, High Commissioner of Barbados noted: “As we go round the Commonwealth, we see there are more similarities than differences”. 