Youth forum delegates to vote for new council leadership
11 November 2013
Commonwealth Youth Forum delegates meeting in Hambantota, Sri Lanka, today ratified the constitution of the new Commonwealth Youth Council, the official genesis of the largest and most diverse youth body in the world. On 12 November the Forum delegates - representing young people from all 53 Commonwealth countries - will vote for the nine-person Council Executive, which will guide and build the fledgling organisation over the next two years. The Council is a youth-led body, collectively representing national youth organisations from each of the 53 Commonwealth countries. It will provide a framework for youth-led development initiatives. The Council was mandated by Commonwealth Heads of Government at their last meeting in Perth, Australia, in 2011. On Monday, 10 November, the second day of the Commonwealth Youth Forum closed with presentations from candidates vying for the chair and vice chair positions on the Council Executive. The day’s deliberations also focused on the professionalisation of youth work and its contribution to strong youth development and enabling environments for youth empowerment. Panellist Dr Bernice Hlagala, Youth Director in the Presidency of the Government of South Africa, said: “After young people themselves, youth workers are the best advocates for young people.  They have the evidence base and the skills to make sure that young people are effectively empowered and supported, and able to participate in key decision-making and development processes.” Delegates also heard from experts and participated in policy workshops focused on Commonwealth Youth Forum sub-themes:  education fit for purpose, wellbeing and economic growth, and sexual and reproductive health and rights. Panellist Monicah Amoding, Youth Member of Parliament, Government of Uganda, highlighted the importance of fit for purpose education: “Governments should move away from an emphasis on only getting young people into school to acquire knowledge, but also work on issues of improving quality and relevance to the context and needs of young people.” Outcomes of the young people’s deliberations during the policy working sessions will inform their recommendations to Heads of Government later this week.  