Improving functional administration within Grenada's Cabinet Office
UnknownDate
The Government of Grenada has established a Policy, Monitoring and Evaluation Unit within the Cabinet Secretariat. The aims of this Unit among others, are to ensure forward planning for Cabinet through the development and implementation of a system of rigorous data driven analysis to inform policy formulation and implementation. Secondly, to ensure ongoing monitoring and then evaluation of implemented policy.  Thirdly, to build appropriate capacity at the institutional and individual levels within the Cabinet Office. Against this background the Government of Grenada requested the services of a Senior Policy Adviser with the requisite capabilities so as to guide and assist with the achievement of the aforementioned aims. The purpose of the project is to enhance the role and efficiency of the Office of Prime Minister especially the Cabinet Secretariat, particularly in the area of policy formulation, implementation and quality control while building the institutional and functional capacity of staff.  The project will assist in creating a more effective "center of government" as the nucleus of policy formulation and advice. The goal of the project will be achieved through the placement of a Senior Policy Adviser, within the Cabinet Secretariat. This Adviser,  will lead on improvements in coordinating general policy formulation and implementation among the various government ministries, providing the necessary guidance in establishing and executing improved functional administration and, strengthening the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit within the Cabinet Office. Whole-of-Government Planning Framework has been designed and approved by the Cabinet. With the use of this framework as a guiding document, the Cabinet Office ensures that Ministry Corporate Plans and programs are aligned to national development outcomes by regular review and consultations with ministries and departments. Results-Based Strategic Planning Guide has been developed and adopted by Cabinet. It is applied during formulation of Corporate Plans by ministries and departments. The Cabinet Office has responsibility for quality assurance of Corporate Plans as well as reviews of Annual Work Plans of the Ministries for compliance and alignment to national outcomes. A mandatory results-based strategic planning workshop has been delivered across the government. To institutionalize the approach throughout the government and build a necessary cadre of trained planners in strategic planning, it has been approved that such workshops will be delivered during the first quarter of each year. Annual, Quarterly and Whole-of-Government Performance Report templates have been created and will soon be utilized by Ministries and departments. Anticipated long-term outcomes to include: 