Commonwealth Youth Council launches website
12 December 2013
The digital face of the Commonwealth Youth Council was launched yesterday at www.commonwealthyouthcouncil.org The website is a hub of information and the first point of contact for the Council, which represents youth bodies from across the Commonwealth, making it the largest and most diverse youth body in the world. “We welcome more organisations to join us as members so please register your interest with us through the website,” said the Council’s Chair, Ahmad Adamu, who was voted into office at the Commonwealth Youth Forum in Sri Lanka in November 2013. He added: “The Council is the recognised voice of young people in the Commonwealth. We want young people to contribute to the discussions through their national and regional youth organisations and youth-led NGOs.” The Council will act as a vehicle for young people to share their views and take action on the global development agenda; advocate for governments to meaningfully engage young people in representation internationally; and act as a centre for information on youth development and empowerment. Youth bodies which are members of the Council will be able to partner with the Council to build knowledge on youth issues and deliver projects; receive endorsement; determine their country delegation to the Council’s General Assembly; and access financial support from the Council. The Government of Pakistan pledged US$100,000 to the Council at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in November 2013, to be used for youth-led development projects. The Council’s leaders are now developing its strategic plan. In the next year its Executive will visit Commonwealth countries to meet with young people and governments, to help forge ways for young people to have a stronger voice and contribute meaningfully to national development. Members of a Canadian youth body MYCommonwealth met with Mr Adamu yesterday at the Commonwealth Secretariat’s headquarters in London to discuss their mutual organisations and how they will work together. 