Commonwealth Secretary-General calls for due process in Seychelles elections
22 December 2015
Following a request from the Government of Seychelles, a Commonwealth election observation group was deployed to observe the presidential elections, which ran over two rounds and ended on 19 December. After the first round, which took place earlier in the month, none of the six candidates secured the necessary 50 per cent of the votes to win. After the second round, the Seychelles Electoral Commission declared incumbent President James Michel the winner with 50.2 per cent of the votes cast. The opposition, however, has challenged the results and demanded a recount, claiming irregularities including vote buying. In a statement, Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma said: “The Commonwealth election observation group has taken a comprehensive and independent view on the elections. They have commented publicly at various points during and after the two rounds, and are completing a report which I expect to receive shortly and which will be shared transparently with all key political leaders in Seychelles and made public as soon as possible. “I am conscious that the margin of electoral victory in the second round was narrow, and that the result is now the subject of a legal challenge. It is of the utmost priority to the Commonwealth at this critical and sensitive juncture that due processes are pursued where questions have arisen about the electoral process and outcome. The public calls by political leaders for calm and respect for the rule of law are valuable and welcome at this time, and the Commonwealth joins in these sentiments. “I am particularly aware that the Commonwealth observers, with regard to the second round, have commended the Electoral Commission and its Chairman for the conduct of the election, but have also expressed concern about widespread allegations of vote buying, which could have affected the election outcome. “The Commonwealth therefore looks forward to the independent national institutions and processes that are in place in Seychelles successfully addressing the challenges to the election outcome as soon as possible, so that the country can move forward with political clarity and certainty.” The Commonwealth election observers’ report will be made available online as soon as it is issued. 