International Day of Peace: statement by Secretary-General
18 September 2015
Peace building is fundamental to the work of the Commonwealth. In its opening words, our Commonwealth Charter recalls that as a voluntary association of independent and equal sovereign states, we consult and cooperate ‘in the common interests of our peoples and in the promotion of international understanding and world peace’. For there to be peace, building mutual understanding, respect, and tolerance between individuals, communities and nations needs to be a global priority. At a time when the world is confronted with increasingly complex challenges to peace, with agents of violence are not easily identified nor limited by boundaries, it is ever more necessary to strengthen our partnerships to address the root causes giving rise to such conflict—including systematic discrimination, marginalisation, unequal development, injustice, abuse of power and the violation of human rights. The theme for 2015 International Day of Peace, ‘Partnerships for Peace – Dignity for All’, pays homage to collaborative efforts of the international community, governments and civil society organisations in working towards a prosperous and stable future for humanity. As a diverse community of nations, built on inclusiveness, equity, justice and international law, the Commonwealth aims to lead by example in fostering partnerships and pathways for peace. Working with a variety of partners, including national governments, regional organisations, and civil society, we seek to encourage adherence to our Commonwealth values through dialogue and the peaceful resolution of conflict. We try to engage early to open doors, remove obstacles, and promote dialogue that can help ease tensions before they turn into conflict. The 2007 Report of the Commonwealth Commission on Respect and Understanding, ‘Civil Paths to Peace’ made a seminal contribution towards defining our Commonwealth approach to building peaceful societies. It recommends strategies including civil and social initiatives for advancing mutual understanding and respect throughout the Commonwealth. Indeed, civil or societal mechanisms for driving peace have always been—and undoubtedly remain today—the simplest ways for successfully confronting violence and terrorism. The inspiring work of youth workers across our 53 Commonwealth countries is one such mechanism. I commend their work in supporting young people to deal constructively with social exclusion, ethnic or religious prejudice and related violence or tensions. In recognition of their enduring positive impact on young people for peace building and social cohesion, the 2015 Commonwealth Youth Work Week theme is ‘Youth Workers Creating Paths to Peace’. Sport can also be a valuable dialogue facilitation tool and plays a role in promoting cooperation and the sharing of experience that transcends political, social and economic boundaries. Young practitioners in the Commonwealth’s Sport for Development and Peace working group are great advocates in this regard. Sustainable peace needs to be founded on durable and robust partnerships, particularly between those committed to working with respect and understanding to enrich democracy and development. I commend all those in our member states and our partners in civil society throughout the wider Commonwealth family for their contributions towards peace building. 