Sharma, Australian PM launch CHOGM 2011
24 October 2011
Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma and Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard launched events on 24 October 2011 leading to this week’s Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Perth. They planted a tree at a venue where Commonwealth leaders will make landmark decisions later this week which could radically alter the way the association works. The River Red Gum tree was planted at Kings Park, the picturesque site overlooking Perth where Commonwealth leaders will meet in a retreat setting on 29 and 30 October, to commemorate CHOGM 2011. The shrub was grown from the seedling of a tree planted by HM Queen Elizabeth II during her visit to Perth in 1954. The River Red Gum (Eucalyptus Camaldulensis) is an iconic Australian tree which can grow to 45 metres, and when mature, has a smooth bark ranging in colour from white and grey to red-brown, which is shed in long ribbons. The Secretary-General and the Australian Prime Minister planted the tree after addressing the Eighth Commonwealth Youth Forum, a gathering of young leaders from the 54-member association, in the Western Australian city of Fremantle. They stressed the importance the Commonwealth places on young people as the future of our world. The Youth Forum aims to develop young people’s understanding of the Commonwealth and its values, creating a platform for young people to contribute to the Commonwealth and CHOGM agendas, and to promote networking and interchange of ideas between young people and their organisations. A group of young people will meet Commonwealth leaders later in the week to share their optimism and concerns. The Youth Forum is one of three partner events held alongside the biennial CHOGM summit. The others are the Business Forum – which brings together captains of industry – and the People’s Forum which involves civil society. Several thousand delegates are expected to participate in these events. At the start of the intergovernmental CHOGM process, senior officials from Commonwealth member states began talks today focusing on the agenda and expected outcomes of the summit meeting. They will report to foreign ministers, who in turn will report to Heads of Government on 28 October at the start of the three-day summit. Mr Sharma said this year’s CHOGM is particularly unique because of the key items on the agenda which are aimed at reforming and renewing the Commonwealth to build greater resilience among member countries in dealing with external economic shocks. “The ambition levels for the CHOGM are very high for everyone participating in it – to make sure that the Commonwealth is improved, re-tooled and enhanced to make it fitter for purpose in the 21st century, ensuring that it is adding global value at all times,” said Mr Sharma. 