Tributes to Nelson Mandela
5 December 2013
On behalf of the Commonwealth, as its Chair in Office, I convey our heartfelt sympathies to His Excellency President Jacob Zuma, the Government and the people of South Africa, and in particular, family members on the sad passing of the founding father of modern South Africa, His Excellency Nelson Mandela. He was an iconic figure who has left an indelible mark on all of us globally. The Commonwealth was enriched with the return of South Africa to its fold in 1994, under the leadership of the late Nelson Mandela, who represented the highest values of human dignity and statesmanship in contemporary history. Having sacrificed a major part of his illustrious life in prison to end the abhorrent practice of apartheid, he brought new life, dignity and freedom to the people of South Africa, and indeed to the whole of the African continent, which has the largest regional representation in the Commonwealth. The legacy he leaves behind will indeed be hard to surpass. The highest tribute we in the Commonwealth can pay to this great son of South Africa and Statesman is to preserve the values of democracy, diversity and unity that he so cherished. Tomorrow’s children will not be able to say, as we can with pride and a deep sense of privilege, that we lived in the time of Nelson Mandela, a unique and memorable human being. ‘Madiba’ has gone from us; but he is part of eternity and will always belong to the entire world. His indomitable spirit will forever inspire people in pursuit of freedom and justice; his humanity will be a beacon for all who are wronged. He made our troubled age less shameful by his own nobility. He enriched my own life by the small part I played, as Commonwealth Secretary-General, in restoring him to freedom - even though he showed that truly “Stone walls do not a prison make, nor iron bars a cage”. That my official Commonwealth residence was the one he came to when first he came to London, after his release from prison, to meet those who fought with him against apartheid and the injustices of the apartheid regime, will forever be a badge of honour for the Commonwealth. A rare statesman, a rare human being In the gallery of world statesmen of the 20th century, Nelson Mandela occupies an exceptional position. His name will be forever linked with the struggle of the South African people to end apartheid, the coping stone of the racism and the injustices to which they had been subjected for so long. However, this is not the heart of the matter. What sets Mandela apart in world history is the charity with which he led the struggle against apartheid and successfully barred the way to any form of recrimination or racial vainglory on the part of the victorious majority. It was the end to which every step in his long and eventful journey had been directed. "Nelson Mandela was a rare human being. What an honour and privilege it is to have been associated with him." The full article is in the UK’s The Independent newspaper on page 7. Nelson Mandela’s passing is a loss to the world, especially his family. I send them my sincere condolences and also to all South Africans who have lost the father of their nation. Nelson Mandela was a great man in every sense of the word. As well as the sense of loss at the news of his death, I think all of us all over the world are grateful that Nelson Mandela showed us that forgiveness and love can triumph over evil. He endured 27 years of imprisonment and yet held no bitterness towards his captors. He embraced them as brothers and sisters and it is due to this extraordinary example that South Africa averted a bloodbath as it transitioned from apartheid to democracy. I had the privilege of meeting Mr Mandela several times. He had an intense presence and his smile lit up the room. He focussed solely on the individual he was meeting even if it was for just a few seconds, and he made them feel special. Mr Mandela told me he was grateful for the constant support of the Commonwealth through the freedom struggle and his years in prison. He has left the world a far better place than he found it and we have to be thankful for his life and his legacy. President Nelson Mandela was a man who lived to his highest values. His commitment and consistency allowed all of us to experience him and appreciate what he stood for. He gave of himself for humanity, harnessing the power of individuals for the greater good. He compelled each of us to be so much better, to do so much more to improve the world we live in. As a leader, he lived and espoused values of reconciliation, of true understanding, appreciation and celebration of diversity. He was a true champion of the Commonwealth, a true champion of the people. On a personal level, I reflect on and cherish the few and privileged occasions I directly experienced the impact of this great leader. When you met him, what struck you vividly was his dignity and humility, as he hastily and readily put you at ease and made you feel special. My thoughts and prayers are with his wife Mme Graca Machel and the family as they bid farewell to Madiba; as they celebrate his remarkable life and embrace the genuine outpouring of warmth and heartfelt expressions of love from all over the world. Generations to come will continue to learn from Madiba’s life and draw inspiration from his journey and his legacy.  May his soul rest in perfect peace. 