Lesotho Election 2015: Commonwealth Observer Group Arrival Statement
24 February 2015
I am greatly honoured and privileged to be leading the Commonwealth Observer Group to Lesotho’s National Assembly Elections scheduled for 28 February 2015. The Commonwealth Secretary-General constituted the Group following an invitation by the Independent Electoral Commission of Lesotho. The Group comprises seven eminent persons drawn from across the different regions of the Commonwealth from multidisciplinary backgrounds in politics, elections, media, conflict prevention and youth development.  They are supported by five professional staff members of the Commonwealth Secretariat in London. Commonwealth Observer Groups have observed previous national elections in Lesotho, the most recent being the May 2012 National Assembly elections. This week’s elections are significant for Lesotho’s political future. They present an opportunity for the country’s political parties to demonstrate their commitment to democracy and development in a peaceful and credible manner, following a challenging political period. The Group has already met with the Independent Electoral Commission, political parties and civil society organisations. Later today and tomorrow we will be meeting other stakeholders, including the diplomatic community, and other international and local observer groups. During our time in Lesotho, we will assess the pre-election environment, polling day activities and the post-election period, against the backdrop of Lesotho’s national legislation, in addition to its regional and international commitments. We will perform our observation role with impartiality, independence and transparency. On Thursday 26 February, members of the Group will deploy to various provinces across the country to observe preparations ahead of polling day. On election day, they will observe opening, voting, closing, counting and the results management process. We will issue an Interim Statement on our preliminary findings shortly after the elections. A final report will be prepared in Lesotho. It will be submitted to the Secretary-General, and subsequently shared with relevant stakeholders and the public. The Group is scheduled to depart Lesotho on 6 March. We hope that our Group’s presence will demonstrate the Commonwealth’s solidarity with the people of Lesotho as they take this important step towards a peaceful resolution of the recent political challenges and the achievement of a sustainable democratic society. The success of these elections depends on every stakeholder playing their part in a peaceful, inclusive and transparent manner. We have every confidence in the people of Lesotho to achieve that. We wish the people of Lesotho - the beautiful Mountain Kingdom - well, as they go out on Saturday to exercise their franchise. HE Festus Mogae (Chair)
Former PresidentRepublic of Botswana Dr Rosemary Husbands-Mathurin
Head of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Commission Services Unit & former Speaker of the House of AssemblySaint Lucia Bob Patterson
Former Chief Electoral Officer -British ColumbiaCanada Dr Samuel Kale Ewusi
Director, Africa Programme, United Nations University for PeaceCameroon Maryan Street
Former Minister of Housing & Member of ParliamentNew Zealand Puja Bajad
Youth ExpertIndia Crystal Orderson
JournalistSouth Africa 