The Commonwealth gears up to celebrate team spirit
 14 February 2014
Young people, schools, communities and civil society organisations across the globe will celebrate Commonwealth Day with the theme, #TeamCommonwealth. ‘#TeamCommonwealth’ reflects the spirit of friendship and the drive towards achieving shared goals and values that exist between the Commonwealth’s member countries. Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma said: “The Commonwealth, in its unmatched diversity, shows the power and potential in acting together. Team spirit brings the enormous strength of solidarity, unity and of collective striving for greater achievement. We draw inspiration and understanding from one another, and our combined efforts build resilience. Working together, we win. “Between 23 July and 3 August, some of the world’s finest athletes will be in Glasgow for the 20th Commonwealth Games. As we admire the perseverance and competitiveness of these men and women, we will doubtless also witness great team spirit and be inspired.” Since 1977, the Commonwealth family has celebrated Commonwealth Day every year on the second Monday in March. It is a day marked by activities around the Commonwealth, including a multi-faith Observance at Westminster Abbey in London attended by the Head of the Commonwealth, HM Queen Elizabeth II. Member governments, schools and communities use the opportunity to promote understanding of Commonwealth values and celebrate the strength and diversity that exists between its peoples. For more information: Visit the websites www.thecommonwealth.org/team and www.commonwealththeme.org Share your ideas and stories on the Commonwealth Day theme on social media: on Twitter use the hashtag #TeamCommonwealth, or visit our Facebook page at www.facebook.com/commonwealthsec Posters celebrating the theme and featuring the flags of the 53 Commonwealth member states will be available to download from www.thecommonwealth.org/team. To receive hard copies, please email info@commonwealth.int Learn more about the values of The Commonwealth by reading the Commonwealth Charter. Follow our Twitter account @commonwealthsec 