Sports Minister: Health and sport are best mates in Australia
4 August 2016
As we gather in Rio for the Games of the 31st Olympiad, watching the world’s finest athletes compete in the spirit of humanity and friendship, it is timely to recognise the great friendship between inclusive, affordable and sustainable sport and a healthy, happy and engaged population. We, the Australian Government, recognise the considerable burden that physical inactivity and poor lifestyle choices can place on the community. In Australia, we have identified a trend whereby we are more and more becoming sport watchers as opposed to participants.  We are becoming increasingly time-poor, household budgets are limited and other forms of entertainment (i.e. video game, social media and smart devices) are being chosen, particularly by young people, at the expense of more traditional active leisure.  A decline in physical activity has been linked to increases in non-communicable diseases, including obesity-related illnesses, such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The Australian Government firmly believes in the role sport can play in reducing both physical and mental health risks.  Physical activity is a demonstrated effective method for reducing an individual’s risk of developing these non-communicable and chronic conditions.  Physical activity is also linked to improving a population’s mental health through managing stress, alleviating depression and anxiety, strengthening self-esteem and enhancing mood and mental alertness.  In response, we are placing a strong emphasis on getting all Australians more active, and in particular teaching young Australians healthy habits they can take with them through life. It is these causal links, among others, and their relationship with healthy behaviours that have compelled the Australian Government to position the sport portfolio within the Health Department.  This reinvigorated mateship has already produced two excellent examples of collaboration between Health and Sport: the Play.Sport.Australia program, launched in 2015; and the Girls Make Your Move Campaign, launched in early 2016. Play.Sport.Australia, managed by the Australian Sports Commission, charts the opportunities the sports sector must embrace in the years ahead to increase activity and participation, particularly in organised sport.  It outlines clear ambitions for the wellbeing of Australians through sport - To achieve these ambitious outcomes, a unified approach that actively engages all levels of Australian government, sporting organisations, sporting clubs and schools has been adopted. In February 2016, we launched our new initiative to get Australian girls and young women active and healthy.  The ‘Girls Make Your Move’ campaign aims to encourage this demographic to be more active and play sport. The campaign approach is inspired by Sport England’s very successful ‘This Girl Can’ campaign, which has already encouraged nearly three million women to be more active.  The development of the Australian campaign has been thoroughly informed through comprehensive market research, with the target audience of girls aged 12-19 years. The campaign aims to encourage young women to increase their participation in sport and physical activity by generating positive perceptions, reducing perceived barriers to participation, and generating intentions to be more active. The campaign also seeks to involve parents of young women to provide support, be active themselves and encourage family activity. The campaign has its own Instagram account @girlsmakeyourmove and the target audience is encouraged to show support for the campaign by sharing content using #girlsmove or #girlsmakeyourmove Health benefits aside, economic benefits are generated from having a physically active population.  In Australia, sport creates $11 billion in net health benefits each year though reduced healthcare costs and reduced early mortality.  Further evidence has shown that for every dollar expended in the sporting sector, there is at least $7 returned in this way. Inclusive, affordable and sustainable sport is intrinsically linked with a healthy, happy and engaged population. Subsequently we, the Australian Government, champion Australian’s living healthy and active lives.  We will continue to evaluate and innovate with programs and campaigns like the ones mentioned to ensure Australians have access to the tools to help them be active. For more information, please visit: http://www.ausport.gov.au/participating/playsportaustralia https://www.facebook.com/playsportaustralia http://www.health.gov.au/internet/girlsmove/publishing.nsf/Content/home Instagram@girlsmakeyourmove #girlsmakeyourmove and #girlsmove The Hon Sussan Ley MP is Minister for Health and Aged Care and Minister for Sport 