Commonwealth renews commitment to young people in the Pacific
10 February 2014
Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General Mmasekgoa Masire-Mwamba has thanked the government and people of Solomon Islands for hosting the Commonwealth Youth Programme’s Pacific Regional Centre since 1995. The Deputy Secretary-General was on a recent two-day visit to the Commonwealth Youth Programme’s Pacific Centre in Honiara. She consulted with staff and senior government officials on the future of the Commonwealth Youth Programme. “As the Commonwealth Youth Programme transitions to a new, more centralised model, and ceases operations at its Centre in Honiara, we hope that the government will redeploy the centre’s facilities to serve the interests of young people in Solomon Islands and the sub-region,” the Deputy Secretary-General said. Mrs Masire-Mwamba assured officials that the Commonwealth would be pleased to offer the necessary technical assistance to support the government as it redeployed these facilities. Mrs Masire-Mwamba held meetings with Governor General Sir Frank Kabui, Prime Minister Gordon Darcy Lilo as well as Foreign Affairs Minister Clay Forau Soalaoi and Youth Minister Peter Tom. In various briefings, Mrs Masire-Mwamba gave reassurances that although the Commonwealth would no longer deliver its Pacific Youth Programme from Honiara, as it centralises operations in London, it would continue to roll out its youth programmes, such as youth entrepreneurship training, to the Pacific and the other three regions. The foreign affairs minister acknowledged that last November’s Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting had highlighted issues relating to restructuring and re-prioritising at the Commonwealth Secretariat. In this context, he indicated that the rationale for restructuring the youth programme was understandable, and he expressed appreciation for the ongoing collaboration with and support from the Commonwealth. Before visiting Solomon Islands, the Deputy Secretary-General visited Zambia, which hosted the Commonwealth Youth Programme Africa Regional Centre. From 8 to 11 February, Mrs Masire-Mwamba is visiting Fiji, where she will also hold talks with senior government officials and other stakeholders. As part of the soft closure of the Commonwealth Youth Programme Pacific Centre, senior officials will convene in Honiara in March to discuss the future of the Commonwealth Youth Programme and options for maintaining a regional coordination mechanism. A commemoration event will take place at the end of the meeting, where participants will reflect on the achievements of the Commonwealth Youth Programme. Similar events have been held for the Asia and Caribbean youth centres. 