Kenya polls come at a critical time, say Commonwealth observers
28 February 2013
Addressing journalists in the country’s capital, Nairobi, the Chair of the Commonwealth Observer Group, former Botswana President Festus Mogae, said: “For Kenya, the 2013 elections represent a critical moment. It is a moment when the eyes of Africa, the Commonwealth and the world are upon you. It is important to everyone that these elections are credible and conducted in a peaceful atmosphere.” He added: “As everybody is aware, and nobody more than the people of Kenya, the 2007 elections led to a tragic crisis, resulting in large scale loss of life, displacement of people, destruction of property and a loss of confidence in the country’s democratic processes and institutions.” He however noted that, to the country’s credit, “in subsequent years, some of this confidence has been regained, notably with regard to the judiciary and management of the electoral process”. Mr Mogae said that the elections are a next step in continuing to build confidence in the country’s institutions, and called on all stakeholders to engage in all phases of the process in a responsible manner. “Political contestants should continue to abide by the Code of Conduct they have signed to ensure a peaceful election that Kenya can be proud of. Media also has the responsibility to ensure that its coverage is balanced and measured and does not incite any unrest.” He added that the Group hopes that the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (IEBC) can manage the process in a credible and transparent manner, thereby ensuring that Kenyan voters have the opportunity to express their will and electoral stakeholders maintain confidence in the process. “Of particular note is the need for the IEBC to ensure the timely opening of the polls, the effective management of the complex voting process and the efficient and transparent management of the results process.” The Commonwealth Observer Group will consider all factors impinging on the credibility of the electoral process as a whole, and assess whether the elections have been conducted according to the standards for democratic elections to which Kenya has committed itself. 