Commonwealth Youth Ministers Meeting
UnknownDate
Resourcing and Financing Youth Development: Empowering Young People The Commonwealth brings together government ministers, senior officials, young leaders, and youth workers from across the globe for the 9th Commonwealth Youth Ministers Meeting (9CYMM) in Kampala, Uganda, from 31 July to 4 August 2017. The high-level summit, held every four years, comes as the world’s youth population reaches a record 1.8 billion people aged 15 to 29. Today the youth sector stands at a crossroads, with pressure on governments to do more for their young citizens with fewer resources, and growing aspirations by young people to contribute to their societies. The theme of the meeting is 'Resourcing and Financing Youth Development: Empowering Young People'. It will enable government ministers and senior officials to share good practices, forge new partnerships and agree shared priorities for resourcing youth development. Day 1: Watch the highlights   Youth Leaders Forum The Youth Leaders Forum, between 31 July and 1 August, offers a platform for young leaders from Commonwealth member countries to influence and shape the global debate on youth development. Find out more. Stakeholders Forum The Stakeholders Forum, between 31 July and 1 August, provides a space for youth sector stakeholders to influence policy-making across the Commonwealth. Youth sector stakeholders may apply to attend and respond to the Call for Papers. Find out more. Ministerial Meeting The first plenary session of the Ministers' Meeting, which is preceded by a Senior Officials Meeting, is held on 2 August. The final session on 4 August will bring 9CYMM to a close. Learn more about Commonwealth Youth Ministers Meetings. The organisers The meeting is convened by the Commonwealth Secretariat and hosted by the Government of Uganda, with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development the lead agency. The Commonwealth Secretariat has been supporting youth development in its member countries for over 40 years. Learn more: thecommonwealth.org/our-work/youth  Day 2: Watch the highlights   Day 3: Watch the highlights   Day 4: Watch the highlights   Day 5: Watch the highlights   Media Contact: Will Henley
​Senior Communications Officer
Commonwealth Secretariat
Email: w.henley@commonwealth.int 