Commonwealth leaders agree to strengthen Ministerial Action Group (CMAG)
28 October 2011
Leaders meeting in Perth, Australia for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) have agreed to a series of reforms to strengthen the role of CMAG in its dealings with serious or persistent violations of Commonwealth political values. Outcomes from the report, entitled Strengthening the Role of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group were released today. It follows two years of deliberations by CMAG, which was mandated in 2009 by Heads of Government in Trinidad and Tobago to consider ways of more effectively addressing the full range of violations. “CMAG noted the widely shared view that it had hitherto been too reactive, and not sufficiently proactive,” it said. Core changes include clearer guidelines and timeframes for engagement with agreed indicators as to the types of situations and developments that might be regarded as constituting a serious or persistent violation of Commonwealth values. Leaders also agreed that the Secretary-General will speak out publicly in expression of collective disapproval of serious or persistent violations and that CMAG will be the custodian of the 2009 Affirmation of Commonwealth Values and Principles. Salient points from CMAG’s Report to Heads of Government are: The following developments could also be taken into account: Background The Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group (CMAG) was established by Heads of Government in 1995 as a mechanism to deal with serious or persistent violations of Commonwealth political values. CMAG’s role is to assess the nature of such infringements, and to make use of a series of measures in response to serious or persistent violations that were identified by Commonwealth leaders in 1995 in their Millbrook Action Programme. At CHOGM 2009 in Trinidad and Tobago, “Heads of Government agreed that consideration be given to strengthening the role of CMAG, in order to enable the Group to deal with the full range of serious or persistent violations of the Harare Principles”. In considering that 2009 mandate, CMAG noted the widely shared view that it had hitherto been too reactive, and not sufficiently proactive. Thus, it had dealt decisively with situations where constitutionally elected governments had been overthrown, but had not always been able to address other situations where Commonwealth values and principles were being seriously or persistently violated. CMAG was conscious of the prevalent perception of the Group as a punitive body and that member governments felt a stigma associated with being placed on its agenda; they believed this made it difficult at times for CMAG to engage with members constructively. In their 2011 report entitled Strengthening the Role of the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group, CMAG put forward recommendations to Heads of ways in which the work of the Group could be made more effective. 