Meet the Commonwealth Games Glasgow 2014 mascot
20 September 2012
The mascot for the Commonwealth Games Glasgow 2014 - Clyde - was unveiled today in Glasgow, Scotland, on the banks of the river that inspired his name. The adventurous thistle was created by 12-year-old Beth Gilmour from Cumbernauld, Scotland, whose design was chosen from over 4,000 entries following a UK-wide competition for young people aged 5-16. Today’s launch at BBC Scotland's headquarters saw Beth, London 2012 Olympic swimming medallists Rebecca Adlington and Michael Jamieson and 150 Glasgow school children hear the story of Clyde. The 20th Commonwealth Games will be held in Glasgow from 23 July to 3 August 2014 and features 17 sports, including the biggest-ever number of Para-Sports medals in Commonwealth Games history - 22 in total. The Commonwealth Games Federation is responsible for the direction and control of the Commonwealth Games. Beth said: “I still can’t believe that my entry is now the Glasgow 2014 mascot – it’s amazing to see Clyde come to life and I’m so happy that my design and idea will now be seen by everyone across the world. “To know that I have played a part in Glasgow 2014 is incredible and I hope everyone across Scotland and the Commonwealth loves Clyde as much as I do!” Glasgow 2014 Chair Lord Smith added: “Clyde is the cheeky but friendly face of Glasgow 2014 and will take the Commonwealth Games message to the people of Scotland. He will help bring the personality of the Games to life and he will welcome spectators and athletes from all over the world to the Games.” Actor, comedian and Glasgow 2014 Ambassador Billy Connolly, who narrated a special film which premiered at the launch, said the thistle was the perfect choice for the design because of its history and meaning in Scotland. The prickly-leaved, pink or purple-flowered ‘Scotch’ thistle is the emblem of the Scottish nation. Mr Connolly is joined by Ms Adlington and the UK’s most celebrated Olympian Sir Chris Hoy as Glasgow 2014 Ambassadors. They will work with the Glasgow 2014 Organising Committee over the next two years to promote the Games. Ms Adlington, who won two gold medals at the 2010 Commonwealth Games, said: “It’s fantastic to be a part of the Glasgow 2014 Mascot launch as an Ambassador, the huge success of London 2012 will only increase the excitement and interest towards the Games and I can’t wait to be a part of the journey to 2014.” Mr Jamieson added: “Clyde is great fun and the perfect mascot to spread the Glasgow 2014 message across Scotland, the UK and the Commonwealth. He’s a true Glaswegian and you can’t help but smile when you’re in his company – I’m sure everyone who meets Clyde will feel the same.” Clyde now embarks on a national tour of Scotland, motivating young people in particular to make the most of Scotland’s largest ever sporting and cultural event. 