‘Women as Agents of Change’ is 2011 Commonwealth Day theme
12 January 2011
The Commonwealth has announced its theme for Commonwealth Day 2011, which will highlight ‘Women as Agents of Change’. The Commonwealth will celebrate women whose work has made a positive difference to the lives of others, and will emphasise the Commonwealth message that by investing in women and girls we can accelerate social, economic and political progress in our member states. Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago and the Commonwealth’s first woman Chairperson-in-Office, Kamla Persad-Bissessar, said: “From birth, to their first day in school, having a successful career – and everything in between – women and girls must be given the chance to succeed and become the agents of change we need. Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma was in agreement with Ms Persad-Bissessar. “Women and girls hold the key to sustained development and improving the lives of others. To change a woman’s life for the better is to unlock the potential to change and lift a whole society,” he said. Mr Sharma continued: “The Commonwealth understands the crucial role that women play in their families, communities and in society at large. For nearly 40 years the Commonwealth has run programmes looking at women’s access to health, education, enterprise, leadership, and the impact of conflict on them. “In the same year that International Women’s Day celebrates its centenary, the Commonwealth will celebrate and highlight those women who are making a difference to the lives of others, as well as highlight the areas that are preventing women and girls from reaching their goals and fulfilling their potential. Together the people, societies and organisations of the Commonwealth can change the fortunes of women for the benefit of all. It is a right, not a gift.” The Commonwealth Day theme will be celebrated throughout the year around the 54-nation Commonwealth, with special events taking place during the week of Commonwealth Day (14-20 March). The website http://www.commonwealthday.org includes information on the 2011 theme, news, events, competitions and a resource area, including posters and logos. 