The 2018 Commonwealth Roadshow begins
14 March 2018
During March and April, the Commonwealth kicks off a series of roadshows to support more young people into work. They are being produced in partnership with Elevation Networks, a youth employment charity that focuses on social action and community engagement initiatives. The roadshows will take place in four cities across the UK in the run-up to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and the Commonwealth Youth Forum in April. They will then continue across other cities throughout 2018. The events are an opportunity for young people to come together to engage in meaningful debate about the challenges and opportunities facing their Commonwealth, and provide a space for them to develop and share their ideas for contributing to a fairer, more prosperous, sustainable and more secure Commonwealth future for all young people. The roadshows will feature exhibitions, talks, panel discussions and opportunities for young people to interact, debate and network with each other. Layne Robinson, Head of Social Policy Development Section at the Commonwealth Secretariat says “Young people have a proven capability to lead change, and they should be empowered to realise their potential. These roadshows are not only an opportunity for young people to come together, and have productive discussions about the unique issues and strengths of their communities, they are an opportunity for young people to demonstrate and plan their commitment to social action in the Commonwealth and collaborate on innovative, sustainable solutions for the future.” Former world champion athlete Geoff Thompson MBE, who will be speaking at the London and Glasgow roadshows, adds that he will be calling on young people “to harness their passion and their ability to galvanise their communities and be the driving force that turns the theme for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in April into a reality.” The roadshows are taking place in London, Glasgow, Leicester, Cardiff and Manchester, and all young people from across the Commonwealth are encouraged to be involved online using #CommonwealthYouth and following @ComSecYouth on social media for insights and live streams from the events. To indicate your interest in attending, please visit: https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/commonwealth-roadshow-2018-tickets-43885030307 Find out more about the Commonwealth Youth Programme Key dates: Further dates to be announced. The roadshows are in partnership with: 