Cameroon Presidential Election 2011: Interim Statement
13 October 2011
 A peaceful election: some benchmarks for democratic elections have 
been met, although the playing field needs to be levelled to increase 
confidence in the electoral process KEY FINDINGS: ELECAM must affirm its independence and must be supported to do 
so We laud the establishment of ELECAM as a significant first step.
This election is the first one organised by an independent election management body.
We commend ELECAM’s efforts in establishing key structures at the local level in a 
relatively short period of time; in collaborating with political parties and other 
stakeholders; and, in the organisation of Diaspora Voting, for the first time in the 
country’s history. It was, however, our impression that public confidence in ELECAM was limited. We 
noted serious concerns raised that ELECAM was not wholly independent of the 
government. We felt that this was due, in part, to the past political affiliations of some of 
the Electoral Board Members. ELECAM needs to do more to demonstrate its neutrality 
and inspire the confidence of the electorate in future elections. In this connection, it 
would be helpful if steps are taken in earnest to enhance the institutional autonomy of 
ELECAM. ELECAM was constrained in its performance by the prevailing legal framework: we had 
the opportunity to discuss some of these constraints - such as the use of multiple ballot 
papers rather than a single ballot - with some of its board members. In this technical 
matter, as in others we will highlight in our final report, we are of the view that as the 
body mandated to manage and supervise elections, ELECAM must influence and drive 
the process of reform through the legislature and other relevant institutions. It must be 
supported and encouraged to do so. The Voter register needs to be refined In the polling stations we visited, we observed that some voters had their voter 
identification cards, or receipts evidencing their application for voter cards, and in some 
cases, their National identification cards. However, their names were absent from the 
register and therefore they were unable to vote. We also observed that while at some polling stations, provision was made for the 
collection of voter cards, many remained unclaimed. In our assessment, the current voter register requires substantial refinement. We 
recognize the efforts made by ELECAM to this end, but would strongly encourage 
ELECAM to consider measures to significantly improve the voter register ahead of the 
2012 legislative elections. The election campaign: separating the role of party and state
We commend the provision of state funding for political parties’ activities during 
elections. However, we noted repeated complaints from some stakeholders and members of the 
opposition about the lack of distinction between the state and the ruling party when it 
came to the use of state resources for campaigning. An example highlighted was the 
disproportionate coverage accorded to the ruling party’s campaign by the state media 
as compared to that of the Opposition. We appreciate the natural advantages that accrue to an incumbent government. 
However, the magnitude of resources that appeared to us to have been deployed by the 
ruling CPDM party and its overwhelming advantage of incumbency challenged the 
notion of a level playing field in the entire process. It is therefore important that the existing laws on election campaign financing, and 
media coverage during the campaign period be reviewed with the aim of strengthening 
accountability and transparency. In the Commonwealth’s election observation reports of 2004 and 2007 the pervasive 
influence of the ruling party in all aspects of the electoral process was highlighted as a 
major area of concern. If Cameroon is to further progress in the consolidation of its 
democracy, reforms in this area should be of top priority. We also heard allegations from the main Opposition leader of the SDF, Mr John Fru Ndi 
at a political rally on Saturday 8th October, that he was prevented on two occasions from 
moving about the country to campaign because the ruling party’s candidate had already 
been granted precedence to campaign in those particular areas. The campaign of the ruling party’s candidate should not be conducted to the detriment 
of other candidates. For future elections equitable arrangements should be put in place 
for election campaigns. Polling Day On the whole, the election was peaceful. We note an improvement to preparations for 
these elections, as compared to previous ones. Voters who could vote expressed their 
will freely. The process was generally transparent. We commend the inclusion of large 
numbers of women in the local polling commissions. We regret, however, that turnout appears to have been low in the areas that we 
observed. This, in our view, reinforces the repeated complaints about a pervasive 4
sense of public apathy. We wish to highlight the following observations which will be 
further elaborated upon in our Final Report. Generally polls opened on time, though we received some reports that in a number of 
areas there were delays. In some instances, this was attributed to a lack of 
preparedness on the part of election officials. In another case, the delay was caused by 
preparations being made for senior government officials and other personalities to vote.
The use of multiple ballots interfered with the smooth flow of the voting process and led 
to different procedures from station to station on how voters collected the ballot and 
disposed of them. There were complaints about the ink and the inconsistent manner of its application. We 
also observed instances where the ink was washed off soon after its application. We 
would encourage the use of, and consistent application of indelible ink for future 
elections to safeguard the integrity of the process. We also wish to underscore that it is considered best practice to apply the ink 
immediately upon issuance of a ballot paper to a voter. The Commonwealth’s partnership with Cameroon In some cases, ordinary citizens approached the Team to express various concerns 
regarding the overall management of the electoral process, the campaign period and 
seemed to suggest that the Commonwealth and other international organisations could 
resolve these issues. The Commonwealth has engaged with Cameroon to deepen its democracy since it 
joined the organisation in 1995. We will continue to engage by making constructive 
recommendations and assisting the people and government of Cameroon to implement 
them. However, the people of Cameroon must play a central role in this process. 
We believe that this country has to examine in the future how the issues that were 
brought to our attention, and those we have highlighted can be addressed to enhance 
the democratic credentials of Cameroon. It is our hope that improvements will be effected in time for the next elections.
In the meantime, it is our fervent hope that the results process will be managed in a 
transparent manner and without undue delay. Yaoundé, 12 October 2011 