New Chair of Commonwealth Youth Council to ‘translate ideas to action’
12 January 2016
The newly elected Chairperson of the Commonwealth Youth Council, Kishva Ambigapathy, has pledged to play an active role in promoting youth development by “translating ideas to action”. Mr Ambigapathy was elected to the post at the 10th Commonwealth Youth Forum in Malta, held on the eve of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. A long-time youth leader in his native Malaysia, he is currently pursuing an MSc in Global Politics at Durham University in the UK. “Whenever a new generation rises up, it is tasked with the challenges of shaping a world that protects our rights and identities,” he says. “Our work will focus on young people being more integrated, valued and enabled to contribute to all facets of development, thus delivering the strategic outcomes of the Commonwealth Youth Forum.” The Commonwealth Youth Council is a coalition of national youth councils and other youth-led bodies from the 53 Commonwealth member countries. Its executive advocates on behalf of young people aged 15 to 29 on issues such as employment, equality and climate change, and encourages youth-led action on development challenges throughout the Commonwealth. Mr Ambigapathy notes that although to some observers the global forecast may appear gloomy, the Commonwealth Youth Council promotes an optimistic vision for global development and the role of young people. “The next two years are expected to be challenging with continued uncertainties in the global economy, societal change and political shifts. We hear people talk about youth unemployment, unstable economies, the failure of leadership, inequality in education and a world that faces climate risks,” he says. Mr Ambigapathy is supported by a team of eight elected youth leaders, representing the Commonwealth regions of Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and Pacific. During its two-year term in office, the new executive is expected to focus on issues such as combatting violent extremism, promoting climate change mitigation strategies, and fostering a culture of youth entrepreneurship. “We strongly believe that the future holds far more opportunities than threats if we exercise creative and confident leadership. We envision a Commonwealth in which young people will benefit from progressive economies, inclusive development and transformative societies within a sustainable environment,” he says. He continues: “We want to lead this change, this movement, this coming together of hands that will achieve this new order. We must be brave, we must be fair and we must be just, so that, come what may, we shall be ready as a united Commonwealth. If we do this, we can guarantee liberty, security, prosperity and happiness for the future.” The Commonwealth Youth Council was established in 2013 with the support of the Commonwealth Secretariat. It was endorsed by Commonwealth Heads of Government at their biennial summit in Sri Lanka that year as an autonomous, youth-led organisation. Find out more by visiting the Commonwealth Youth Council’s website: www.commonwealthyouthcouncil.com 