International Women’s Day 2015: ‘Equality for Women is Progress for All’
6 March 2015
On behalf of the Secretary-General, Deputy-Secretary General Josephine Ojiambo addressed a  high-level panel discussion today to mark International Women’s Day under the theme, ‘Equality for Women is Progress for All’. Sir William Cash, MP and Sponsor UK Gender Equality Act, 2014, gave the keynote address: ‘Achieving Meaningful Progress in the Commonwealth for Women and Girls’ Other speakers included: His Excellency Dr Ernest Hilaire, High Commissioner for St Lucia; Her Excellency Winnie Anna Kiap, High Commissioner of PNG; Her Excellency Ms FOO Chi Hsia, High Commissioner of Singapore; Ms Eleanor Laing, Deputy Speaker UK House of Commons; Diana Atungire from the Commonwealth Foundation; and Nolana Lynch, Commonwealth Youth Leader. Full transcript of the message: The Commonwealth observes International Women’s Day each year to acknowledge the achievements, determination, and courage of women in their struggles for development, democracy, and peace. Throughout history women have been marginalised; and frequently they have been oppressed. In many places women and girls continue to be subjected to oppression and cruelty. This includes trafficking, slavery, early and forced marriage, female genital mutilation, and sexual violence. Eliminating violence against women and girls, and eradicating prejudice and discrimination based on gender are imperatives to which Commonwealth member states collectively give high priority. Progress towards these objectives also brings wider and far-reaching benefits – as we are reminded by the Commonwealth theme for today: ‘Equality for Women is Progress for All’. Our Commonwealth Charter recognises that: “Gender equality and women’s empowerment are essential components of human development and basic human rights. The advancement of women’s rights and the education of girls are critical preconditions for effective and sustainable development.” Today we renew our Commonwealth commitment to removing the obstacles that still impede full and equal participation by women in so many spheres of economic and social activity. Countries with higher levels of gender equality have higher economic growth. Companies with more women on their Boards have higher returns. Peace agreements that include women are more successful. Parliaments with more women members make progress across a wider range of issues – including health, education, anti-discrimination, law reform and child support. This year we reach the target date for achieving the Millennium Development Goals, and we move towards agreement on the post-2015 agenda and new global framework for sustainable development. There is progress we can celebrate, including that fewer women in Commonwealth countries now die in pregnancy and childbirth. More than a third of Commonwealth countries have exceeded the global target of 30% women at all levels of decision-making. Women now hold leading ministerial posts in areas such as defence, finance, foreign affairs, environment, and justice. Commonwealth countries have recorded high representation of women in parliaments. To accelerate the rate of progress for women and girls, Commonwealth Heads of Government and Ministerial groupings are supporting a dual track approach to gender equality in the post-2015 development agenda, with gender equality both as a stand-alone goal and also mainstreamed across all other goals. The Commonwealth Plan of Action for Gender Equality sets the framework within which our member states collaborate to address emerging challenges and to respond to global changes. Priorities are: In this vitally important work with the Governments and peoples of our member states, we value the collaboration and partnership of many Commonwealth organisations. These include the Commonwealth Foundation, Commonwealth of Learning, Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, and Commonwealth Youth Council. Let us mark International Women’s Day 2015 by celebrating the achievements of women, and by recommitting ourselves to working individually and collectively to advance equality, and respect for the rights of women. It is through innovative approaches inspired by thought leadership - for which the Commonwealth is renowned, and the unique convening power of our worldwide family, that we add value at global, national and community levels and move ahead towards equality for women and progress for all. 