The Bahamas Election 2017: Arrival Statement by Commonwealth Observer Group
6 May 2017
Nassau, The Bahamas I am greatly honoured to have been asked by Commonwealth Secretary-General The Right Honourable Patricia Scotland QC, to lead the Commonwealth Observer Group to the May 2017 General Election of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas. This Group was constituted following an invitation extended by the Governor General of The Bahamas to the Commonwealth Secretary-General to send an observer group and comprises experts from multidisciplinary backgrounds in politics, the administration of elections, gender studies and the media. We are supported by two officials from the Secretariat. We arrived in The Bahamas on 3 May and will be in the country until 13 May 2017. The Group expresses sincere gratitude for the warm welcome we have received, the hospitality shown to us, and the readiness of the different stakeholders to meet with us and assist as we undertake our task to observe the elections. Our task as the Commonwealth Observer Group is to consider all the factors, to our knowledge, that would impact the credibility of the electoral process as a whole. The Group will assess whether the elections have been conducted according to the standards for democratic elections to which The Bahamas has committed itself, with reference to its own election-related legislation as well as relevant regional, Commonwealth and other international commitments the country has taken upon itself. The Group will act impartially and independently as we undertake our mandate. We will consider, among other things, the general preparedness of the country’s electoral systems and processes – including whether there is a level playing field that allows all political parties and all candidates to take their campaigns to The Bahamian people; whether the voter register was compiled in such a way that all eligible voters who chose to register to vote had the ability to do so; and whether sufficiently robust mechanisms exist to ensure the integrity of the register. Additionally, we will consider whether the state apparatus and public media are impartial; whether freedom of expression is provided for; whether voters are free to express their will; and whether the results process is transparent and timely. The Group observed the advanced poll on the 3 May and began its briefings with a broad range of stakeholders on 4 May. Our briefings are wide ranging, encompassing the Parliamentary Registration Department, political parties and local stakeholders including representatives from civil society. On Monday 8 May, members of the group will deploy to various constituencies to observe preparations ahead of polling day. On Election day, we will observe opening, voting, closing, counting and the results management process. We will issue an interim statement on our preliminary findings shortly after the elections. A final and more detailed report will be prepared as soon as practically possible. It will be submitted to the Secretary-General, and subsequently shared with relevant stakeholders and the public. The group is scheduled to depart The Bahamas on 13 May. We hope that our group’s presence will confirm the Commonwealth’s solidarity with the people of The Bahamas. On behalf of the group, I wish the people of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas well, as they go out on Wednesday 10 May to exercise their franchise.  Note to Editors: Composition of the Group: Hanna Tetteh (Chairperson)
Former Minister of Foreign Affairs and former Minister of Industry and Trade The Republic of Ghana Elvin Bailey
Supervisor of Elections
St Kitts and Nevis Lebrechtta Hesse-Bayne
Gender specialist
Antigua and Barbuda Enrico Woolford
Chairman of the National Communications Network
Guyana The Commonwealth Observer Group is supported by Dr Tres-Ann Kremer and Clara Cole from the Commonwealth Secretariat. Media Contact: Staff Team Leader, Dr Tres-Ann Kremer, +1242 4466-582; t.kremer@commonwealth.int  