Sri Lanka’s Northern Provincial Council Elections 2013: Preliminary Findings
23 September 2013
The Commonwealth Observer Mission has been present in Sri Lanka since 14 September 2013. The mission’s mandate is to observe and consider all aspects of the electoral process and assess compliance with the standards for democratic elections to which Sri Lanka has committed itself. Where appropriate, the mission may also make recommendations for the future strengthening of the electoral framework. Since our arrival, we have met with the Commissioner of Elections and senior officials of the Department of Elections; representatives of political parties, civil society, media, police and military, Commonwealth High Commissioners, representatives of the United Nations and domestic and international observers, both in Colombo and the Northern Province. We deployed to the five districts of the Northern Province, met with electoral and other officials at the District level and observed voting, counting and the results process. These were landmark elections in Sri Lanka’s Northern Province. They were the first Northern Provincial Council Elections held since the end of the civil conflict in May 2009, and since the Provincial Council system was established. We are conscious that the Northern Province is emerging from nearly three decades of civil conflict which claimed many thousands of lives and resulted in widespread damage to infrastructure, livelihoods and displacement of the population. This Statement outlines our preliminary findings. A Final Report will be issued at a later stage, which will contain our detailed conclusions and recommendations. Polling and Counting Constitutional and Legal Framework Electoral Environment Any election is a process, not an event. Despite the several positive features of the process enumerated above, we noted issues of concern with regard to the electoral environment and the pre-election period. Key among these are: Over the next four days, we will complete our Final Report and submit it to the Commonwealth Secretary-General. He will send it to the Government of Sri Lanka, the Office of the Commissioner of Elections, political parties and relevant stakeholders, and eventually to all Commonwealth governments. Our Final Report will, in due course, be made available to the public. Overall we are impressed by the determination and resilience of voters to exercise their franchise in the context of a compromised electoral environment. It is our sincere hope that this election will mark a forward step in the post-conflict development of the Northern Province. We feel privileged to have been part of this historic election in Sri Lanka. 