Commonwealth Secretary-General backs flagship trade initiative
5 March 2012
Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma has signalled full support for a second phase of the 'Hub and Spokes' project, an initiative aimed at building the trade policy capacity of countries from Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific (ACP). Mr Sharma was speaking ahead of a high-level meeting of trade policy experts from the ACP Group of States that will take place in Yaoundé, Cameroon, from 5 to 8 March 2012. He said that an objective would be to extend the project to include countries that desire support but that have not yet been able to benefit. “The Commonwealth Secretariat remains ready to participate in a second phase in partnership with the European Commission, the ACP Secretariat and regional economic bodies in Africa, Caribbean and the Pacific," declared Mr Sharma. Participants at the meeting in Cameroon will discuss ways of continuing to broaden and deepen the capacity of member countries in formulating and implementing trade policies as the programme moves towards the next phase which is expected to be finalised by partners shortly. Effective participation in international and regional trade negotiations has become imperative for all ACP countries. Convened by the European Commission and the ACP Secretariat, the meeting aims to review the experiences of the First Phase of the ‘Hub and Spokes’ project – which places trade policy analysts and advisers in capitals and regional bodies in ACP countries – and map out a clear cut plan of action for future operations. Since its establishment in 2004, the Hub and Spokes programme has supported countries in the Regional Economic Communities within the ACP grouping to develop trade policies; provided analysts to advise on negotiations for the Economic Partnership Agreements between ACP countries and the European Union; and enhanced the capacity of ministries of trade to design and implement trade policies. Over 13,000 stakeholders, more than a third of whom are women, have been trained under the first phase of this programme. However, the work is far from complete, and as such, the need to continue building trade policy capacity in many ACP countries is yet to be fully met. “We have made progress in filling the capacity gaps," said Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General Ransford Smith. Mr Smith, however, added: “Countries have told us, and experience shows that building trade capacity requires sustained efforts. The need for Hub and Spokes is still huge and not all ACP countries have yet been able to participate fully.” The Secretariat is fully committed to continuing to work with its partners in building the capacity of member countries so as to enable them to formulate sound trade policies and participate effectively in trade negotiations. Mr Smith added that the first phase of the programme had been an overwhelming success. It has raised levels of awareness and refined the negotiating skills of those who have so far taken part. But much more needed to be done however and the Secretariat was committed to continuing to assist. 