Commonwealth 2017 Year in Review
21 December 2017
 The Commonwealth supports development, democracy & peace. We are a voice for small & vulnerable states and a champion for young people. The Commonwealth theme for 2017 was 'A peace-building Commonwealth'  10th March: Commonwealth trade and investment ministers concluded their historic two-day meeting in London with a commitment to make full use of the ‘Commonwealth advantage’ to boost trade within the 52-member bloc. Read the full article  13th March: 2017 marked 40 years since Commonwealth Day became a global celebration marked on the same day every year: on the second Monday in March. Commonwealth Day 2017 highlights  15th March: Krystle Reid, co-founder of Enable Lanka Foundation, was named Commonwealth Young Person of the Year. Three other winners in the Commonwealth Youth Awards were recognised for spearheading projects that will contribute to the Sustainable Development Goals. Read the full article  22nd May: The Commonwealth Health Ministers Meeting (CHMM) concluded with agreements on universal health coverage, global security and violence prevention. Read the full article  4th August: Governments pledged to put young people at centre of national development at the 9th Commonwealth Youth Ministers Meeting in Kampala, Uganda. 9CYMM highlights  10th September: The theme for next year's Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) was announced as 'Towards a common future'. 52 Member countries, 2.4 billion citizens all working for the same common goals: http://www.chogm2018.org.uk  21st September: The Commonwealth strengthens links with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development after signing a cooperation agreement at the United Nations General Assembly in New York. Read the full article  16th October: Finance ministers at the Commonwealth Finance Ministers Meeting (CFMM) in Washington DC are urged to change rules to make it easier to access funds after devastating hurricanes. Read the full article  23rd October: The Commonwealth Law Ministers Meeting ends with pledge to pursue key law reforms in a number of areas. Read the full article  30th October: Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland attended the opening of the Gahanga Cricket Stadium in late October. It's launch marked the culmination of six years of post-genocide reconciliation work by the Rwanda Cricket Stadium Foundation. Read the full article  7th November: A new online resource that supports climate change law-making was unveiled at COP23 in Bonn, Germany. The Commonwealth at COP23 highlights  20th November: Commonweatlh for kids: promoting diversity, equality, friendship. youngcommonwealth.org/  20th December: Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland said the Government of Cameroon must continue its efforts to engage in peaceful dialogue and include all cultures and communities during a five-day visit to the country. Read the full article  21st December: Leading political figures from across the spectrum have united in calling on Cameroonians to engage in dialogue to resolve the ongoing challenges within the country. Read the full article 