Secretary-General concludes his official visit to Bangladesh
13 September 2015
Today, I concluded my visit to Bangladesh. The people of Bangladesh have collectively made an important and vibrant contribution to the Commonwealth family over the years. I am pleased to have had this opportunity to visit Bangladesh for the fourth time as Commonwealth Secretary-General. During my visit, we reviewed the scope of the partnership between the Commonwealth and Bangladesh in various areas. The visit also provided the opportunity to convey an update on preparations for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), which takes place in Malta from 27 to 29 November this year, and to discuss other Commonwealth priorities. I called on the Prime Minister, Hon Sheikh Hasina, and the Foreign Minister, Hon Abdul Hassan Mahmood Ali. I also called on the Leader of the Opposition, Begum Rowshan Ershad, and the Chairperson of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party, Begum Khaleda Zia. Commonwealth Values and PrinciplesThe Commonwealth Charter includes a commitment by all member governments to the inalienable right of individuals to participate in democratic processes, in particular through free and fair elections, to shape the societies in which their citizens live, as well as the rule of law. The Charter also underlines the importance of the core Commonwealth principle of inclusiveness, so that all citizens are able to participate in national life and to benefit from national growth and prosperity. It was therefore important for me to be able to convey the Commonwealth’s collective encouragement for elections in Bangladesh at all levels in future in which all citizens and political parties participate actively; an electoral climate that is conducive to those ends; sufficient political space to enable parties to engage effectively in the political process; and, the importance of the vibrant working of a representative parliament and the mutually supportive but independent role of the three branches of government, and effective national institutions that support democracy, the Election Commission and the Human Rights Commission. The Commonwealth remains determined to support and strengthen constitutional democratic governance in all our member states. The Commonwealth Charter commits member governments to freedom of expression as part of the bedrock of all Commonwealth societies, as well as the freedoms of association and assembly of our citizens. The Commonwealth Charter underlines the importance of human rights. We applaud Bangladesh as one of only nine Commonwealth member states to have ratified at least eight of the nine core international human rights treaties. Through our discussions we have agreed to work in partnership with Bangladesh in the following areas. Oceans Management, Maritime Boundaries and the Blue EconomyThe Commonwealth has an ongoing programme of assistance to Bangladesh in the area of maritime boundary delimitation. Previous work in this area has included assistance in developing a submission to the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf.  The Commonwealth would be pleased to partner Bangladesh through further technical assistance in the areas of Oceans Management and the Blue Economy through the Secretariat’s newly created division on Oceans and Natural Resources. Debt ManagementThe Commonwealth’s globally recognised debt management software, the Commonwealth Secretariat Debt Recording and Management System (CS-DRMS), benefits over 100 agencies including Ministries of Finance, Treasuries and Central Banks, and is in operation in 60 countries, including many outside the Commonwealth. CS-DRMS manages a global portfolio of over $2.5 trillion of public debt and is part of the debt management programme which also includes advocacy, policy advice, support with formulating debt management strategies and capacity building initiatives. We are committed to assisting Bangladesh with the implementation of this system to manage public debt. Following our previous work together in the area of trade facilitation systems and processes, the Commonwealth will be pleased to partner with Bangladesh in enhancing its trade competitiveness. Elections Management and Human RightsWe look forward to working with Bangladesh in strengthening their independent institutions, the Election Commission and the National Human Rights Commission. We stand ready to assist Bangladesh with its work on the implementation of accepted recommendations under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism, and with working towards an ‘A’ classification of the National Human Rights Commission. Governance and Rule of LawWe will be collaborating with Bangladesh in developing a programme of work on the Commonwealth Latimer House Principles on the separation of powers, including through developing model legislation. Climate ChangeThe Commonwealth has made a distinctive contribution in advancing the cause of its membership in responding to the challenges of climate change, including through the envisaged Commonwealth Climate Change Finance Access Hub. We look forward to partnering with Bangladesh in this area to unlock potential climate finance opportunities through this Hub. Gender and Women’s AffairsBangladesh hosted the tenth Commonwealth Women’s Affairs Ministers Meeting in 2013. Bangladesh is an active participant in the Commonwealth initiative against Early and Forced Marriage of girls. The Commonwealth has had a successful partnership with the Bangladesh Women Chamber of Commerce and Industry (BWCCI), including developing robust models on women’s entrepreneurship. We were pleased in our discussion with Ms Selima Ahmad, President of BWCCI, to be able to agree on further Commonwealth engagement in this area. With over 60 per cent of Commonwealth citizens under the age of 30, inclusion of youth in all aspects of nation building, particularly employment and entrepreneurship opportunities, remains a focus for the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth Alliance of Young Entrepreneurs (CAYE), which works to strengthen and support the ambitions of young business owners, has been operating successfully in Asia since 2011, and Bangladesh has played a vital role in its success. Our partnership has included a project on supporting disenfranchised rural young people of Bangladesh. We are pleased to be able to continue our robust engagement with the Department of Youth Development in this important area. CHOGMThe CHOGM will unveil a range of fresh practical Commonwealth initiatives aimed at supporting developing and small states, and will have a special focus on climate change. A Women’s Forum is being held for the first time. I was able to give a briefing on these elements. I look forward to the participation of Bangladesh at this month’s Commonwealth Foreign Affairs Ministers Meeting in New York and also to welcoming the Hon Prime Minister at CHOGM in November in Malta.Dhaka, 13 September 2015. Dhaka, 13 September 2015 