The Commonwealth can support parliaments across the world, says Secretary-General
14 December 2016
The Commonwealth is a pioneer which offers innovative solutions to global challenges, Secretary-General Patricia Scotland told legislators at the 2016 Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. In her keynote speech to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association’s 62nd conference in London today, she urged the parliamentarians to “harvest the spirit of goodwill” that exists in the Commonwealth and “capitalise” on its inbuilt advantages. The Secretary-General drew attention to the economic case for cooperation, such as the reported 19 per cent trade advantage of doing business in member countries, and confirmed plans to establish a new Commonwealth Office of Criminal and Civil Justice Reform. “It will share templates for legislative reform and implementation of best practice to strengthen public safety, and help show what has or has not worked in our Commonwealth jurisdictions,” she said. At #2016CPC & most inspired by @PScotlandCSG. What a refreshing change to see women in the forefront of Commonwealth leadership pic.twitter.com/qN6oDHLSiY — Hannah Yeoh (@hannahyeoh) December 14, 2016 “In terms of value for money, benefit for our citizens and improvement of business environment and efficiency, this is a distinctive contribution that only the Commonwealth can make. Yet what we achieve in the Commonwealth can be applied more widely.” Speaking to a packed audience of more than two hundred parliamentarians, the Secretary-General urged them to promote the Charter of the Commonwealth and its sixteen articles, ranging from promoting democracy, tolerance, respect and understanding to gender equality and young people’s empowerment. In her speech on Wednesday 14 December, Secretary-General Scotland acknowledged that the burden on parliamentarians “has never been greater” as she urged those at the conference to help strengthen awareness of the Commonwealth’s work. “We need to foster and cultivate a stronger sense of Commonwealth identity and awareness so that others can draw the same inspiration and encouragement that we all feel when we come together about belonging to this remarkable global family,” she added. "I see reflected in all your faces a mirror of our Commonwealth family" - @PScotlandCSG to #2016CPC parliamentarians pic.twitter.com/hxutzvuH0w — The Commonwealth (@commonwealthsec) December 14, 2016 The conference from 11-17 December brings together Speakers and Members of Parliament and parliamentary staff from Africa, Asia, Europe, the Caribbean and Americas, and the Pacific. The theme is 'A Collaborative Commonwealth: Unity, Diversity and Common Challenges'. “Parliamentarians need to come together and join hands in charting out a bright future,” said Dr Shirin Sharmin Chaudhury, MP and Speaker of the Parliament of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, who spoke before the Secretary-General. “Critical challenges such as the eradication of poverty, the elimination of inequality, ensuring food security, adapting to climate change and disaster risk reduction - and many more - need to be addressed by parliamentarians of Commonwealth nations,” she said. South African Member of Parliament Lindiwe Maseko added: “This conference provides an important opportunity for parliamentarians to convene to discuss key issues of mutual concern and to network with each other, building last relationships and sharing experience.” 