Commonwealth Big Lunch at Marlborough House
16 March 2018
The Commonwealth’s staff association hosted a delightful Commonwealth Big Lunch at Marlborough House yesterday. It gave staff at the Commonwealth’s headquarters an opportunity to come together under one roof and celebrate their Commonwealth connections over a shared meal. Food from across the Commonwealth, such as jerk-marinated chicken, spiced salmon kedgeree, vegetable pakora, passion fruit and white chocolate cupcakes, was served at the lunch to reflect the rich diversity of the Commonwealth. Staff from partner organisations joined their colleagues from the Secretariat for the meal, including the Commonwealth Foundation, Commonwealth Enterprise and Investment Council, the Commonwealth Games Federation, the Royal Commonwealth Society, and the Commonwealth Association, amongst others. Ahead of the 2018 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in London, the UK Government, in partnership with the Eden Project, launched Commonwealth Big Lunches to encourage people from the Commonwealth to connect and celebrate their Commonwealth identity and shared values. The UK Summit team intends to host at least one lunch in every Commonwealth country between Commonwealth Day and CHOGM. Welcoming the participants at the lunch, Secretary-General Scotland said, “Commonwealth Big Lunches remind us of the range and diversity of our connections and counterparts in countries and communities far away, and bring us together with those who live alongside us locally. They offer wonderful opportunities for people of all ages to bring our great Commonwealth family alive in new ways as we work towards a common future. “Just to demonstrate our diversity – everyone who is in the Africa region? Hands up! Asia region? I know the Caribbean is going to be loud – Caribbean and Americas! The Pacific! And of course Europe. So we represent one-third of the world, I’m really proud that we’re representing one-third of the world, and that we’re delivering a really exciting programme for CHOGM.” 