Maldives Presidential Elections 2013: Arrival Statement
2 September 2013
Following an invitation from the Elections Commission, the Commonwealth Secretary-General has constituted an Observer Group to the 2013 Presidential Elections in Maldives. It is my honour and privilege to have been asked to lead the Group, and to be here in the country for these important elections. Our Group has been drawn from across the Commonwealth, and includes politicians, members of election commissions, former diplomats, and representatives of civil society, media and youth. The Commonwealth has a tradition of support for elections and democratic processes in Maldives, including observing the first multi-party elections in 2008 and 2009. We are pleased to be in the country to contribute to the further consolidation of democracy. Our task is to consider all the factors impinging on the credibility of the electoral process as a whole, and to assess whether the election is conducted according to the standards for democratic elections to which Maldives has committed itself, with reference to its own election legislation as well as relevant regional, Commonwealth and other international commitments. We will consider, among other things, whether conditions exist for free and competitive elections; whether the Elections Commission is independent and effective; the transparency of the process; whether candidates have been free to campaign; whether public media has been impartial; whether voters are free to express their will; and whether the results process is transparent. In conducting our duties and undertaking our assessment, we will be neutral, impartial, objective and independent. We are here in our individual capacities as eminent and experienced Commonwealth citizens. The assessment by the Group will be its own and not that of any member government. Our intent is to offer constructive support to help strengthen the democratic process in the future. We have already met with the Elections Commission, NGOs and international partners. Over the coming days we will be meeting with representatives of the candidates, independent institutions and other relevant stakeholders. We will then deploy across the atolls to observe the conclusion of the campaign and thereafter the voting, counting and results process. We will issue an Interim Statement after the election and a final report thereafter. On behalf of the Commonwealth Observer Group I wish the people of Maldives well as they embark upon this important step in strengthening the democratic culture of their country. We encourage all Maldivians to do their part to ensure that a peaceful and credible election takes place on 7 September. 