Powerful partnerships will transform the Caribbean
3 July 2015
The Commonwealth will help to unlock the potential of Caribbean countries to withstand natural disasters and economic challenges through powerful partnerships and meaningful assistance, Kamalesh Sharma, Commonwealth Secretary-General, has said. Mr Sharma was addressing delegates at a High Level Strategic Dialogue at the 36th Regular Meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) in Bridgetown Barbados. The Secretary-General spoke about the importance of inclusiveness, equity and equal outcomes for all, and stressed the need for a multidimensional and a globally coherent approach to addressing the challenges facing the region. He said: “The world has too long conducted its business as if it is divided between decision makers and decision takers. This is not sustainable any more. “We cannot move forward without partnerships. No country can be left behind, no organisation can be left behind and the private sector has to be involved.” Mr Sharma urged leaders to consider the potential of the oceans to offer economic solutions such as fish farming, renewable energy, ocean-related tourism and marine biotechnology. He also made a stirring appeal on behalf of the youth, insisting that the desired social, political and economic outcomes will not be achieved without embracing young people as participants and drivers in the change process. Mr Sharma outlined specific Commonwealth measures that have been benefiting the Caribbean. These include high-level advocacy with the G20 and preparing countries to make meaningful contributions at the Third International Conference on Financing for Development (FfD) in Addis Ababa later this month - which will affect access to funding for development initiatives. He also highlighted the Commonwealth’s role in improving access to justice and tackling corruption and money laundering. Heads of state at the CARICOM meeting are expected to focus on sustainable development in the region, the United Nations Post 2015 development agenda, FfD and climate change. The conference attracted delegates from around the globe, including UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. At the opening ceremony, incoming CARICOM chairman, Barbados Prime Minister the Rt Hon Freundel Stuart, praised Mr Sharma for his contributions to the Commonwealth He said: “For the full duration of his incumbency, he (Mr Sharma) both embodied and promoted the values of the Commonwealth and now leaves it an institution of which we can all, with justification, continue to feel proud.” During his time at the Conference the Secretary-General had a special dialogue with leaders about the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting agenda. The summit, themed 'The Commonwealth - Adding Global Value', will be held from 25 to 27 November in Malta. The Secretary-General is expected to send a draft agenda to heads of government later this month. 