World Oceans Day 2015
8 June 2015
‘Healthy Oceans, Healthy Planet’, the theme for World Oceans Day 2015, conveys important Commonwealth messages. As a diverse and worldwide family of nations, we are acutely aware of the impact that both wise and unwise stewardship of marine resources can have on the future well-being of our shared planet. We are also conscious of the contribution well-ordered ocean governance can make towards building environmentally safe, economically resilient and prosperous communities. Coastal states, in particular Small Island Developing States, depend on the wealth of resources provided by oceans. Commonwealth members have jurisdiction over vast ocean areas, with many having rights and responsibilities for marine areas that are vastly larger than their land areas. Oceans provide a multitude of essential goods and services that support environmental and economic well-being and human health for everyone. Our dependence on the oceans as a source of resources and services can only continue to grow as human activity and populations increase. However, the oceans, which give us life, are under mounting strain from a variety of uncontrolled uses, including fisheries, shipping, mineral and petroleum activities, tourism, and recreation. These create multiple environmental threats, such as destructive fishing practices, poorly planned or unregulated coastal development, the dumping of waste, and unsustainable extraction of natural resources. Climate change and extreme environmental episodes adds to these pressures. Rational use of marine resources in terms of economic growth, environmental protection, and community development are vital to our future. Change requires leadership, particularly collective thought leadership. This is especially the case with oceans, where exploitation of resources has too often been seen as everyone’s right yet nobody’s responsibility. For Small Island Developing States, the structure of their economies often presents challenges to exploiting ocean resources and services for sustainable development more fully. The Commonwealth has therefore been working with them to formulate national strategies to harness opportunities presented by a more diversified ocean-based economy. This includes practical assistance with the delimitation of national maritime boundaries, as well as sustainable management of marine and coastal resources and activities. It is through fresh thinking, mutual support and practical assistance that innovative Commonwealth contributions become a reality, and will help to deliver healthier oceans and a healthier planet for all our citizens and the wider world. 