Commonwealth and Caribbean experts to meet on resolving maritime boundary disputes
 31 January 2014
Commonwealth and Eastern Caribbean maritime officials will meet in St Lucia from 4 to 6 February to discuss ways of resolving outstanding maritime boundary issues in the region. The meeting, organised by the Commonwealth and the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States will provide participants with the opportunity to share best practice in current trends in managing seabed resources. Senior maritime experts from the two organisations will speak about trends in ocean governance and maritime boundary delimitation. Joshua Brien, Head of the Economic and Legal Section at the Commonwealth Secretariat, said: “The absence of clearly defined maritime boundaries has prevented countries in the region from effectively managing their ocean space and realising the potentially significant benefits of an ocean-based economy.” Officials from both organisations agree that the negotiation of agreed maritime boundaries provides the foundation for the exercise of important rights under international law, including the exploration, development and conservation of marine living and non-living resources, and for the establishment of ocean governance regimes. For the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the meeting is particularly welcome, as the region is in need of legal and technical expertise as part of a renewed effort to settle long-standing maritime boundary issues. The Commonwealth Secretariat helps Commonwealth member countries develop and benefit substantially from marine resources through the integration of economic development and effective ecosystem management. Building on over 25 years of advice to member countries on the delimitation of maritime boundaries and related law of the sea and natural resource management issues, the Secretariat now provides advice on broader aspects of ocean governance in recognition of the increasing importance of the oceans to the sustainable development of many small island countries. Journalists are welcome to cover the opening session of the meeting, which will be held at The Bay Gardens Resort, Rodney Bay, St. Lucia from 4-6 February 2014. 