Princess Royal meets young Zambians during visit to Commonwealth youth centre
28 September 2012
Anne, the Princess Royal, underscored the need to advance work in creating sustainable livelihoods for young people during a tour of the Commonwealth Youth Programme (CYP) Regional Centre for Africa on 27 September 2012. Her Royal Highness paid a special visit to the centre in Lusaka during her four-day tour of Zambia to mark the Diamond Jubilee of HM Queen Elizabeth II, Head of the Commonwealth. The Princess Royal said sustainable livelihoods were not just about skills and jobs, but the long-term ability for people to take care of their communities and continue to regenerate employment. CYP Regional Director for Africa, James Odit, said: “The Commonwealth Youth Programme helps to create enabling environments so that young people can influence, shape and participate fully in the development of their communities. As Africa’s population is very youthful, we believe young people are critical in promoting sustainable development in the continent. To achieve this, we advocate for significant investments in the youth development sector in Commonwealth Africa.” Princess Anne was received at the centre by the Dean of the Commonwealth group of high commissioners in Zambia (also Botswana’s High Commissioner and Dean of the Diplomatic Corps), Dithlabi Tuelonyana Oliphant; Commonwealth high commissioners; the Dean of Students at the University of Zambia, Lastone T Ziyambo; and senior government officials from the Zambian Ministries of Youth and Sport. During her visit, Princess Anne presented Gold and Silver Duke of Edinburgh International Awards and met with CYP staff, young people supported by the centre, the Scouts and Girl Guides, and student leaders from the University of Zambia. The programme included a special royal welcome dance performed by Nomakanjani, a youth cultural group that uses theatre, dance and music to teach Zambian youth about the issues that affect their lives and communities. The group is Zambia’s most celebrated traditional dance troupe, and has performed on local and international stages. Princess Anne is the second child and only daughter of Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh. There are four CYP Regional Centres located in Zambia, India, Guyana and Solomon Islands. 