Support in the Caribbean for climate change adaptation
UnknownDate
Region: CaribbeanHost: Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC)Start date: 08/10/2012End date: 08/10/2014Policy area: Economic PolicyPolicy expert: Janet StrachanProject manager: Joel Burman In view of the devastating effect of natural hazards and climate change on small states, the Commonwealth Secretariat has been working with the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) to implement the 'Regional Plan for Achieving Resilience to Climate Change'. To build regional capacity in facilitating climate change adaptation and mitigation. The CCCCC will benefit from this project, which aims to strengthen their regional role in supporting Caribbean member countries. The CCCCC and Caribbean member counties will benefit from greater technical knowledge, resource mobilisation, project management and evaluation tools, and the capacity to learn from and plan for climate change and adaptation priorities. Ultimately, the Caribbean will benefit from the effective protection and management of their (ecological, economic and social) environments as it faces the diverse impacts of climate change. The capacities of the Centre and the Caribbean region are being enhanced to provide critical economic and social impact analyses of climate variability, and change on sectors and national economies in the Caribbean, while simultaneously identifying the most cost effective means of mitigating and/or adapting to these impacts. Through the establishment of the Programme Development and Management Unit (PDMU) headed by the Senior Environmental and Resource Economist (SERE), the Centre’s capacity in project design and preparation is being strengthened. This better positions the Centre and region to access climate financing for its short, medium and long term climate related programmes. Combined with other improvements to its financial and administrative systems, the Centre is now better positioned to achieve its long-term objective of receiving accreditation as an Implementing Entity (IE) to climate financing mechanisms such as the Adaptation Fund and the proposed Green Climate Fund. It is expected that the collaboration being fostered with the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP) will encourage the greater exchange of information and experiences which will be beneficial to all entities. The following key achievements have been delivered: 