Commonwealth education policy framework takes shape in Kenya
6 May 2016
Nairobi has been at the centre of a global debate about education this week as senior officials from 13 national education ministries met to determine an education policy framework for the Commonwealth’s 53-member countries. The Commonwealth Education Policy Framework will ensure that education delivery focuses on equity, lifelong learning, workforce planning and relevance to the skills and jobs of the 21st century. The consultations in the East African capital, convened by the Commonwealth Secretariat between 3 and 5 May 2016, aimed to identify policy gaps, and ensure countries planning processes are on track to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals on education. “These deliberations are about developing an overarching education policy framework for the Commonwealth that is based on principles of quality, equity, relevance and sustainability, covering the full spectrum of education from early childhood care and development to adult education,” said Commonwealth education expert Nasir Kazmi. Officials will present the framework at the Commonwealth Secretariat’s headquarters in London between 8-9 June at a technical working group meeting, involving senior officials from ten commonwealth countries and international partners. Mr John Kimotho, Deputy Chief Executive at the Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development, said: “At the moment Kenya is undergoing a transformation of its education system. As such, the Commonwealth Education Policy Framework comes at an opportune moment that will allow Kenya to measure its progress against the sustainable development goals. “Moreover the framework emphasises lifelong learning which fits well with the Kenyan education system. The framework will help Kenya to synchronise its thinking with the Commonwealth family.” Fiji’s Permanent Secretary for Education Iowane Ponipate Tiko added: “This pan-Commonwealth consultation has really enlightened and strengthened my skills to allow me to develop links and proper regulations to support and enhance policy development in education.” The consultation was attended by senior officers from The Bahamas, Jamaica, Malta, Bangladesh, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Mauritius, Cameroon, Nigeria, Botswana, South Africa, Uganda and Kenya. Barbara Allen, Senior Director Planning and Development in Jamaica’s Ministry of Education, added: “The policy framework will support the policy development process by ensuring that relevant concerns are addressed, including at the implementation stage as we consider meeting the sustainable development goals.” 