Bankers on bikes in Vanuatu
UnknownDate
The National Bank of Vanuatu wanted to extend its banking services to villagers living in inaccessible rural areas across the Pacific nation’s 80 plus islands – the country as a whole has a population of just over 250,000 people. John Aruhuri, the bank’s Head of Rural Banking Services, proposed the idea of using radio to teach financial literacy. Together with colleagues, he drew up a manual which included topics such as how to develop a savings culture, simple household budgeting, keeping accounts, managing loans and calculating interest rates. In 2009 Mr Aruhuri submitted a proposal to the Commonwealth Secretariat’s financial literacy programme seeking support for a 12-month training and outreach programme using the national radio broadcaster, Radio Vanuatu. With funding from the Secretariat: Within one year of commencing the training and radio programmes, 9,000 new bank accounts were opened for rural customers, raising an additional US$3 million in savings. Mr Aruhuri said in 2013: The popularity of the radio and training programmes attracted other agencies to partner with the bank to service other needs. After hearing about the progress of the programme, the New Zealand Government offered to help fund it. “The initial support we received from the Commonwealth Secretariat is unlocking many other opportunities. It is like sowing a mustard seed that has led to the blossoming of a financial literacy tree,” Mr Aruhuri said. “We very soon found that by providing information over the radio, we had created an additional demand - for the bank to go out there and start serving the people.” The bank gave field banking staff motorcycles and bicycles, so they could scale the mountains and valleys to reach the new clients. In some cases, banking officers travel by minibus or public transport to villages, and set up banking sites at community centres such as churches or schools. Where bikes can’t travel, staff carry their books and bags on their heads, and walk deep into the hills to help people open bank accounts. The bank has regular travel schedules and also uses radio to make announcements to alert people about the dates and times. According to National Bank of Vanuatu employee Mark Solomon, the majority of people who come to open bank accounts or make savings are women - almost 80 percent. National Bank of Vanuatu £34,400 