Commonwealth small states conference affords opportunity to map out a better future
 9 May 2016
Trade, debt and accessing financing to help small states achieve Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development are a few of the priority issues small states and development partners will tackle this week in Seychelles. The 4th Global Biennial Conference on Small States provides an opportunity for the most vulnerable member countries to take stock of global developments and map out a more resilient future. The current global outlook on small states - countries at the sharp end of development challenges - has largely been influenced by recent international agreements such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Agenda on Development Finance and the Paris Climate Agreement (COP21). The conference aims to analyse the impact of these agreements and unearth the realities facing small states that hamper social and economic growth. Participants will look at concrete mechanisms to build resilience and secure financing to achieve their development goals. #SmallStates conf to look at many issues affecting devel. of small states. https://t.co/UmAQkZ7BbT #cwsmallstates pic.twitter.com/rZjuaEZRtN — The Commonwealth (@commonwealthsec) April 16, 2016 Thirty-one of 53 Commonwealth countries are classified as small states, each facing unique challenges specific to their size and location. Low-lying, landlocked and sometimes remote, these countries are often overlooked and left to contend with economic and climate shocks that can wipe out entire economies overnight. Devastation wrought by Tropical Storm Erika in Dominica in 2015 and Cyclone Winston in Fiji this year are recent chilling reminders. “We have seen a gear change on action to tackle global problems with a series of landmark international agreements. But signing up is not enough since the journey now begins. We need urgent and innovative financing solutions to provide much needed resources for mitigation and adaptation,” said Deodat Maharaj, Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General. “This is an important event in the Commonwealth calendar because it is one of the few opportunities for small states to meet and find solutions to common challenges. It is our hope outcomes from these deliberations will go some way to influencing policy and also provide practical and concrete support for our member states,” he continued. Bringing together key regional & int'l development partners, the #smallstates conf is this week! https://t.co/bz4wkmH47H #cwsmallstates — The Commonwealth (@commonwealthsec) May 9, 2016 In addition to small states from across the Commonwealth, a wide range of stakeholders will take part in the conference, which will run from 12 to 13 May, from government, business, civil society and academia, as well as major development partners: the IMF, World Bank, OECD and United Nations. Under the theme ‘Achieving a Resilient Future for Small States', participants will share the latest research, explore new opportunities and gain a better understanding of small states’ priorities and vulnerabilities. Discussions are expected to generate important policy recommendations and inform national, regional and global development programmes. An outcome statement will be issued at the end of the conference with recommendations and practical actions to support this most vulnerable group of countries. The Commonwealth has long been a champion of small states, undertaking policy research on building resilience, alleviating debt burdens, improving access to finance, enhancing trade terms and responding to climate change and other disasters. At last year’s leaders’ summit in Malta, the Commonwealth announced the Climate Finance Access Hub. Hosted by Mauritius, the initiative will help vulnerable small states access funds to tackle climate change. #SmallStates conf. in #Seychelles takes place 12-13 May. Will you be attending? Use #cwsmallstates to join the convo https://t.co/UP4JdWgxOt — The Commonwealth (@commonwealthsec) May 9, 2016 