Commonwealth Class: Schoolchildren read aloud their winning short stories
6 February 2017
Schoolchildren named as winners in the Commonwealth Class Writing Competition have recorded their short stories in audio form. The students aged between 7 and 14 authored tales inspired by the theme of ‘belonging’. James Balston, from Waitakere Primary School in New Zealand, who wrote about the native animals of his home country, said it was “thrilling” to receive first prize in the 7–10 age category. “I had no expectations of winning anything. It was a complete surprise,” he said. “I was inspired by the fact that I love to swim. I also love animals, especially water dwelling creatures. I would like my best friend to read my story because he knows how much I love the water and he is interested in animals as well.” Read James's story Priyadarshini Nag from Modern High School for Girls in Kolkata, India, was awarded an Outstanding Achievement Award for her story which reflected on the value a street community brings to a neighbourhood. “My short story was born out of something that I saw and the feelings that I had on my way to school every morning. I was curious about that life and my curiosity inspired me to write my story,” she said. “I would want children of all ages to read my story and learn about a part of life that also belongs to us.” Read Priyadarshini's story Second prize winner in the 7–10 age category was Eva Bennet from Churchfields Junior School in the UK. “To be a winner in a contest is exciting, but to come second in a story competition out of the whole of the Commonwealth is exhilarating,” she said. “The inspiration for my short story was when I was younger I owned a little box filled with conkers and feathers and to me it was my treasure. Also I wanted my story to be based on something precious, I got the idea of a gem from the expression: diamond in the rough.” “I would like everyone to read my short story so it can help them understand how it is no use owning something if you don't love and treasure it.” Read Eva's story Himayath Nuzraan, from The British School in Colombo, Sri Lanka, won third place in the 7-10 age category for a story described as a classic tale of rebellion and belonging, which was inspired by the “unique and vibrant wilderness of Sri Lanka”. “I would want my friends and my family to read it,” Himayath said. Read Himayath's story Hamsa Madhira, from Chirec International School, India, won second prize in the 11-14 age category, for a short story based on a tragic tale of family and relationships. “As a child, I have grown up around family relations and emotions which inspires my definition of belonging. My life in Hyderabad was always amazing but circled around memories of Chennai.” Read Hamsa's story All of the winning stories and illustrations, as well as those that were highly commended, can be seen on the British Council’s Commonwealth Class website Commonwealth Class is a joint project between the Commonwealth Secretariat and the British Council. It has been running since 2013 and has already reached over 120,000 schools. The project aims to educate children aged seven to fourteen about the values and principles of the Commonwealth and to increase understanding about the lives of young people in other countries. It encourages students to collaborate and learn together, and consider how they can be more active and responsible global citizens. 