Cooperation between parliaments and human rights institutions emphasised
26 November 2018
The Commonwealth, in partnership with the Permanent Missions of Australia and Fiji to the UN, has conducted a side event on the relationship between parliaments and national human rights institutions (NHRIs). It was held in the margins of the UN Forum on Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law in Geneva. Ambassador Nazhat Khan of Fiji chaired the panel and led a wide-ranging discussion that explored the positive impacts of effective cooperation between parliaments and NHRIs.  “This is a conversation which has great relevance to developing countries, particularly in the Pacific,” she said.  “We are all supposed to be in the same boat when it comes to promoting values. Parliaments and national human rights institutions have a significant role to play in the recognition and enforcement of human rights.” Fellow panellists included Kenneth Okoth, a member of parliament from Kenya and George Morara Monyoncho, Vice Chairperson of the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights. Both parliaments and national human rights institutions have crucial roles to play in the protection and promotion of human rights. The side event highlighted these roles and created space for discussion by Commonwealth member states to identify challenges.  Discussion focussed on the impact of the Commonwealth’s work in Kenya, while also sharing good practice examples from Kenya on how parliaments can better interact with other State institutions. Representatives from the Australia, Vanuatu, Namibia, Cyprus, and United Kingdom missions took part in the event. Speaking about the Kenya Parliamentary Human Rights Association, Mr Okoth said “One of our biggest successes has been to partner with the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights.  There is a lot to be done and there is a lot to be learnt, but through partnership, I think we can ensure that our parliamentarians become effective advocates and champions on a consistent basis for human rights.”  Commissioner Morara said that NHRIs can help ensure that parliaments take human rights into account when they draft laws, stressing that Kenya’s human rights institution has “worked closely with parliament, helping it be proactive in enacting legislation. We really discussed how NHRIs and parliaments can work together in line with (human rights) principles.” “I found that this discussion was absolutely useful. We have actually been able to reintegrate NHRIs and parliaments working together, especially in ensuring Kenya respects human rights and Kenya meets its international human rights obligations,” he concluded.  