Foreign affairs ministers praise Commonwealth reforms
22 September 2017
Commonwealth foreign ministers have commended Secretary-General Patricia Scotland and her team for reforms to the Secretariat. They met for the 17th Commonwealth Foreign Affairs Ministers Meeting (CFAMM) on the margins of the United Nations in New York. The Secretary-General was elected on a reform agenda by Commonwealth heads of government in Malta in November 2015. Her vision was to rejuvenate and reshape the organisation to ensure it serves member states more efficiently, effectively and economically, ensuring a sustainable future. Ministers expressed support for the Secretary-General’s endeavours, which served to make the Commonwealth more responsive and relevant to its members. Speaking after the meeting, the foreign affairs minister for Belize, Wilfred Elrington said, “We welcome the reforms. Anything that makes the Commonwealth more accessible, more transparent, more accountable is to be welcomed. We’re certainly fully supportive of all of those initiatives. “She’s moving very swiftly indeed. As a matter of fact, she seems to be spending most of her time thinking about new innovative ways to do things efficiently, effectively and, most importantly, cost effectively. We’re very impressed actually with what she is doing so far.” Among the achievements since the Secretary-General took office on 1 April 2016 have been the: The reforms have resulted in raising the profile and visibility of the Secretariat on the world stage. “I was truly delighted because the warmth of the applause for what the Commonwealth Secretariat, and all the people who work within it, and in such a dedicated way, was really heartening,” said Secretary-General Scotland. “I think it can be very difficult at times, when you’re trying to change things around, when you’re trying to reform things and that’s challenging and difficult. “So, to hear that a year after we started these reforms, trenchant support, around the Commonwealth, all the countries saying we are going in the right direction, the reforms were needed, and that they give me personally as Secretary-General their full support, it was humbling. Both my team and I are totally committed to delivering everything we can to make sure the Commonwealth is as best as it can be.” Ministers made clear that since 60 per cent of the Commonwealth are aged under 30, young people are the key to a more vibrant and rejuvenated family sharing a common history, a common language and a common culture. “If the Commonwealth is going to have a future, if we’re going achieve the sustainable development goals which are embedded in our Charter, that was signed by all of us in 2013,” continued the Secretary-General, “if we’re going to deliver on the Paris agenda, it will take all of us working together. It was so wonderful to hear the commitment, the drive and the determination that this Commonwealth should thrive for the future and be a vibrant, dynamic and centre of innovation and shared learning in terms of democracy, the rule of law, women, girls and climate change.” Ministers also expressed their sadness for the lives lost in mudslides in Sierra Leone, floods in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and the hurricanes hitting the Caribbean. Secretary-General Scotland said, “Foreign ministers came together at a very sombre moment and the need for coordination, the acceptance that we, as a Commonwealth, have to unite in not only expressing sympathy, but also to try to identify those things we can do to collaborate, to communicate and to make sure that those who are in danger as a result of the dramatic, climactic episodes that are happening now are made to feel a little less insecure, was clear. “I was very warmed and supported by the comments made right the way across our Commonwealth.” 