Ministers meet in Botswana to discuss law and human rights
 10 April 2014
Law ministers and attorneys-general from the 53-member Commonwealth will meet in Gaborone, Botswana early next month to discuss law and justice issues affecting Commonwealth citizens, and continue regional and international advocacy on issues of common concern. The meeting’s theme is: ‘Consolidating the Rule of Law and Human Rights in the Commonwealth.’ The meeting, which runs from 5 to 8 May, and which is held every three years, is the first since the Commonwealth Charter was signed last year. Botswana’s Minister of Defence, Justice and Security, Dikgakgamatso Ndelu Seretse will chair it. Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma, who will be accompanied at the meeting by Deputy Secretary-General Mmasekgoa Masire-Mwamba, said: “Common law and other shared legal traditions are among the links which give such a strong sense of affinity within the Commonwealth community, helping us to find consensus and to collaborate in many ways towards strengthening the shared values of the rule of law. “The Commonwealth Charter now embodies the fundamental principles and values which draw our member states together in their collective commitment, including the rule of law and human rights. With Commonwealth Law Ministers assembling for their first meeting since the Charter was signed in March 2013, this will be an opportunity to consider practical ways in which we can advance pan-Commonwealth and international cooperation and advance our core goals and aspirations for the benefit of citizens in all member states. I convey my great appreciation to Botswana for generously hosting the meeting.” Katalaina Sapolu, Director of Rule of Law at the Commonwealth Secretariat, explains that the 2014 Commonwealth Law Ministers Meeting will enable countries to reflect on the incremental but steadfast progress made on strengthening the rule of law and the protection of human rights and further strengthen collaboration to mutual benefit. The ministers will also consider the link between the rule of law and sustainable development in the post-2015 development agenda. Tangible meeting outcomes are expected to include consensus on enhanced international cooperation on such issues as cybercrime and corruption. Ministers and senior officials will also discuss international judicial development, climate change-related forced migration, and strengthening the legislative framework for dealing with violence against women. The Commonwealth Law Ministers Meeting is unique in the legal calendar. It is the only high-level event that brings together law ministers and attorneys-general from both developing and developed countries from every continent. This is the first time Botswana has hosted the meeting. 