Two year countdown begins for Commonwealth Games in Scotland
23 July 2012
To mark two years to go until the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games in Scotland, Scottish athletes were given a special preview of where they will be staying alongside 6,500 athletes and officials coming for the Games. Designed with input from athletes, the Athletes’ Village in Glasgow’s East End is on the doorstep of Celtic Park, venue for the Opening Ceremony of the Games. The Commonwealth Games is a unique, world class, multi-sports event which is held once every four years. It is often referred to as the ‘Friendly Games’. The Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) is the organisation that is responsible for the direction and control of the Commonwealth Games. As a means of improving society and the general well-being of the people of the Commonwealth, the CGF also encourages and assists education via sport development and physical recreation. Former Scottish hockey player Rhona Simpson, the athlete representative on the Glasgow 2014 Board, was invited to see how the village was taking shape. She was joined by swimmer Ross Muir and long-jumper Jade Nimmo, who aim to experience the atmosphere of an Athletes' Village for the first time in 2014. Ms Simpson said: "With the eyes of the sporting world firmly on London 2012, I'm incredibly proud to be marking this particular milestone at Glasgow 2014’s Athletes' Village. The excitement being generated by the Olympic Games will only increase the anticipation and desire the people of Glasgow and Scotland have to welcome the athletes of the Commonwealth back to the UK in two years' time.” The Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games Opening Ceremony on 23 July 2014 will celebrate the start of 11 days of world-class sporting competition between 71 Commonwealth nations and territories. Lord Smith, Glasgow 2014 Chair said: “Athletes are at the heart of the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games and our commitment to delivering an athlete-centred and sports focused Games is springing to life as we mark the ‘two years to go’ milestone. It’s great to see the living accommodation for 6,500 athletes and officials starting to take shape and to see the world-class venues that are starting to emerge from building sites across Glasgow and Scotland. On 25 July 2012, Commonwealth sports ministers are gathering in London on the eve of the Olympics to discuss how sport can contribute to advancing development goals More on Sport for Development and Peace “Across the country thousands of people of all ages are starting to engage with the Games in so many different ways. The pace is quickening and we look forward to sharing the next stage of a journey towards delivering an outstanding Games of which Glasgow and Scotland can be proud.” After the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games, the Athletes’ Village will be transformed into a new residential community with houses and apartments for social and private housing, the latter of which will be offered at affordable levels. 