Implementation of Industrial Property Rights Act 2014 in compliance with WTO TRIPS Agreement
UnknownDate
Country: SeychellesHost: Ministry of Finance, Trade and The Blue Economy (Registrar General’s Office)Start Date: 1 May 2016End Date: 1 May 2017Policy Area: TradePolicy Expert: Teddy SoobramanienProject Manager: Pauline Campbell Legislation governing industrial property in Seychelles has undergone substantial overhaul in order to ensure Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) compliance for World Trade Organisation (WTO) Accession. This overhaul has presented significant challenges to the Office of the Registrar General and practitioners especially in terms of new concepts being introduced within the legal and regulatory framework of the industrial property arena. Among these are Patents, Trade Secrets and undisclosed information including access to Medicine issues and Biotechnology, industrial designs, geographical indications, and Layout Designs of Integrated Circuits. The goal of this project is to ensure full implementation of the Industrial Property legislations and compliance with the standards of the TRIPS Agreement.  Outputs will include a comprehensive Industrial Property policy which captures all the different actors, and consolidate the relationships and interlink to be able to identify and maximise the potential benefits which the new legal framework has presented to Seychelles. Important to the goal is the empowerment and capacity enhancement of the officers within the Registrar’s Division to better understand and implement the new legislations and by extension, trained practitioners who need to work with the new legislation. The purpose of the project is to provide the Registrar’s Division with the necessary skills to implement the new legislation, strengthened capacity, and develop a comprehensive policy for the development of the Industrial Property Industry. This project is likely to improve the Seychelles business environment. Seychelles will be able to attract a greater amount of investing, including Foreign Direct Investment and develop new sectors / industries which are IP Centred. Additionally, innovation and technological development in the Seychelles will improve. The beneficiaries of this assignment will cover a broad area as most ministries will be directly linked to aspects of industrial property. Notably however, would be the Registrar General’s Office; Ministry of Finance, Trade Division and, the Prime Minister’s Office. In addition, a range of government agencies/ministries associated with:  patents, trade secrets, medicines, Biotechnology designs, geographical indications etc. will form part of the large stakeholder groups. Varied stakeholders and the country in general will gain by being able to understand, appreciate, participate and therefore better able to identify the benefits and also the exposures in all the positive aspects which the new legislation can and should bring for the country, especially given the recent accession of the Seychelles to the WTO. The outputs of this project are likely to include:  