CommonTies Spring 2017 Event
UnknownDate
CommonTies is a programme for talented young Commonwealth citizens who are temporarily studying or working in the UK. Find out more about the network: thecommonwealth.org/commonties The Spring 2017 CommonTies event will be held on the same day as the Commonwealth Youth Awards ceremony. It offers an opportunity to network with the distinguished guests who will also be in attendance at the awards. Part 1: 1100 – 12.30 The Commonwealth Youth Awards for Excellence in Development Work
Venue:  Marlborough House, SW1Y 5HX The Commonwealth Youth Awards for Excellence in Development Work showcase the contribution that young people make to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals across the Commonwealth. It aims to motivate, encourage and challenge young people (age 15-29) to set high standards for their work/service at community, national, regional or international levels. The 2017 awards ceremony will reveal the four Regional Winners and the Commonwealth Young Person of the Year 2017. The Awards ceremony will be attended by Commonwealth High Commissioners, partner organisations and youth leaders and the ceremony will include music and dance performances showing the rich culture and heritage of the Commonwealth. Networking Lunch 12.30- 13.30 Part 2: 13.30 - 15.00 CommonTies Spring Event
Venue: Marlborough House, SW1Y 5HX The theme of the Spring event is Wisdom Meets Passion: Commonwealth Intergenerational Mentoring. The focus will be on the significance, challenges and opportunities of intergenerational mentoring. The event will commence with a keynote address in which a distinguished leader will share their experience as a mentor and mentee. Thereafter, a panel of the 2017 Commonwealth Youth Awards winners will share their experiences of intergenerational mentoring and discuss the impact it has had on their respective initiatives. Finally, there will be an open plenary for CommonTies participants to ask questions and engage with the awardees and the distinguished leader. An integral part of this event will be the launch of the Commonwealth Women’s Mentorship Scheme. In conversation with: Register for our Spring event Find out more about CommonTies Youth Network 