Human rights and trade support set to expand for small states
18 June 2018
Human rights and trade work for Commonwealth small states is set to be expanded following the funding of new experts. The UK government has signed a memorandum of understanding with the Commonwealth Secretariat, which will see two trade advisers and two human rights experts join the Commonwealth Small States Office in Geneva. During the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in London this April, the UK Government announced its support to the Commonwealth Small States Office (CSSO) to build its trade capacity, ensure the meaningful participation of small states in international trade, as well as facilitating their integration into the multilateral trading system. The support will be delivered by two new trade advisers, who will be based at the office in Geneva. The UK Government also announced its commitment to support Commonwealth Small States to effectively and constructively participate in Geneva-based international human rights mechanisms. This work will be carried out by two new human rights experts, who will also be based at the CSSO. Speaking at the signing ceremony, Ambassador for the UK Mission in Geneva, Julian Braithwaite, said, “I’m pleased that we (the UK government) have been able to join so many other countries in putting money into the Commonwealth Small States Office and providing a shared platform and resource in the form of four new advisers. “The Commonwealth Small States Office is a brilliant practical solution to a real problem that delegations face here, because it’s a shared management platform that shares the costs of operating in one of the world’s most expensive cities. More than half of the Commonwealth membership are small states who find operating in these cities prohibitively expensive. And so, for those states, their voices are not heard in the multilateral system. “The Commonwealth Small States Office provides a platform for addressing that particular problem, which is how can those small states have their voice heard in the multilateral system, and their voice can be just as loud as that of any other state.”  Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland added, “Without the money that the UK government has given us we would not be able to have two new trade advisers and two human rights advisers. The added addition of those four posts will increase the Commonwealth’s effectiveness and delivery. So I’m really thankful to the UK government and I look forward to signing this memorandum of understanding.”  Speaking after the signing, Noah Patrick Kouback, Chargé D'affaires at the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Vanuatu, talked about the important role that the Commonwealth Small States Office plays for countries such as his own. He said, “This is a step forward for us as small and developing states. It’s difficult for us to be present in all these expensive cities, and this initiative shows the willingness of the Commonwealth to work better for the small ones. And that’s the spirit of the Commonwealth; to continue helping others. From Vanuatu’s perspective this initiative is a very important one and one that can also help others who are not present here in Geneva. They can use this platform to expose themselves and share practices.”  