International Day of Zero Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation – 6 February
6 February 2015
Female Genital Mutilation and Cutting are shameful to humanity, and bring untold suffering and harm to those upon whom they are inflicted. The Commonwealth joins in observing International Day of Zero Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation, and adds its voice in calling for renewed efforts by governments, civil society organisations, human rights defenders, and intergovernmental organisations collectively to end these practices. The practices violate rights to health, to security, and to physical integrity; the right to be free from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment; and the right to life when the procedure results in death. We take encouragement that in some Commonwealth member states, the incidence of Female Genital Mutilation and Cutting has shown a significant decline over the past 30 years. However, the numbers of girls still at risk compels us to renew our determination and efforts to eradicate this extreme form of discrimination against women. When Commonwealth Heads of Government met in Sri Lanka in 2013, they underscored the urgent need to tackle violence against women. They also urged the Governments of Commonwealth member states to consider the health of children and women and of sexual and reproductive health, in government policies and in discussions on the Post-2015 Global Development Agenda. In order to be effective in hastening the end of  Female Genital Mutilation and Cutting, efforts towards elimination need to be focussed on multi-sectoral and rights-based approaches inclusive of the voices of girls, young women, boys, young men, parents, schools, traditional leaders and local authorities. To be durable and comprehensive, solutions must be embedded in local communities and be driven by ever deeper respect for the needs and dignity of girls and women. The Commonwealth Secretariat stands ready to work in partnership and alongside all who are committed to hastening the end of Female Genital Mutilation and Cutting, and to extending the protections to which every girl and woman is entitled. 