Senior officials set agenda for next law ministers’ meeting
1 October 2018
Senior officials from law ministries across the Commonwealth are gathering from 1 to 3 October in London, to agree on priority areas for the forthcoming Commonwealth Law Ministers’ Meeting. The biennial gathering of ministers and attorneys-general, scheduled for autumn 2019, is a key platform for collaboration and exchange amongst Commonwealth countries, which share a common legal tradition. Opening the event this morning at Marlborough House, the Chairperson, David Meyer, Head of International at the United Kingdom’s Ministry of Justice, welcomed delegations and presented a packed three-day agenda. Topical legal issues to be covered include the overrepresentation of vulnerable persons in the justice system, reforms of civil procedure, international commercial arbitration, and diversity in judicial appointments, amongst others. Conference secretary and Director of Governance and Peace at the Commonwealth Ms. Katalaina Sapolu said: “In keeping with the Commonwealth Charter, the Secretariat has been a long-standing partner and recognised authority on issues relating to rule of law and good governance in member countries. This week’s meeting represents an opportunity for senior officials to discuss ways in which they can support each other to strengthen their legal systems and enhance access to justice for all citizens, with the Secretariat’s support as needed.” Delegates will examine the latest developments in areas such as data protection, electronic evidence, and international cooperation in criminal matters. Best practices on child, early and forced marriages, and how to improve access to justice, including through legal representation and the use of mobile courts, will also be discussed. In addition, officials will consider a proposed Commonwealth pro-bono placement and mentoring programme. This key technical assistance aims to build capacity in member countries, by offering tailor-made support in diverse areas of rule of law and governance, delivered by hands-on pro-bono experts of member countries. The 2019 Commonwealth Law Ministers Meeting will be the first to be held on a biennial basis. The last meeting was held in October 2017 in Nassau, the Bahamas, under the theme ‘Strengthening the rule of law through technology’. For more information, visit http://www.thecommonwealth.org/media/event/commonwealth-senior-officials-law-ministries-meeting-2018  