Hold governments to account say young people at small states conference
13 May 2016
Abuzz with impassioned conversations, a breakfast session this morning at the Fourth Global Biennial Conference on Small States heard from young people about their perspectives on development challenges. Young representatives from Seychelles, Samoa, Mauritius, Namibia and Jamaica shared their ideas with ministers and other officials on tackling issues such as climate change. Hold governments to their promises was the resounding call to action. “We’re aware of the international climate change indicators. Young people need to monitor governments and hold them to their commitments,” said Angelique Pouponneau, Vice Chair of the Commonwealth Youth Council and organiser of today’s dialogue. Addressing the young audience, Jean-Paul Adam, Seychelles Minister of Finance, Trade and the Blue Economy said: “Leadership needs to come from the young people who make a difference every day. We need energy to move our economy forward and a sense of purpose to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.” The dialogue afforded an opportunity for young people to share their recommendations at the Commonwealth’s Fourth Global Biennial Conference on Small States. Adolf Nourrice from Seychelles proposed better use of technology in small states to boost social and economic growth. “Small island developing states do not have much capital. We have done well on health and education but we have overlooked technology. Young people can take a leading role in making better use of technology to build resilience,” he said. All the way from Samoa, Tahere Siisiialafia, a member of the Commonwealth Youth Health Network and university lecturer, urged officials to invest more in young people and emphasised the important role youth bodies play in bringing about change. “You need to invest more in youth entities, youth councils and other bodies because these are the networks mobilising young people to make positive changes in their communities,” she said. Reiterating the extensive work of the Commonwealth to include young people in decision-making, Deodat Maharaj, Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General warned: “We cannot afford to squander any of our assets.” He called on young people to pick a key issue and make a concrete proposal. Karuna Rana, a member of the Commonwealth Youth Climate Network, highlighted the work of young people in Mauritius to support a sustainable ocean economy. She said: “We have committed to creating a regional youth platform. We have developed a partnership with the Indian Ocean Commission and trained 200 people about COP21. We’re helping government achieve development goals.” Concluding the session, Ms Pouponneau left the audience with a final thought, “Only 2% of parliamentarians globally are under the age of 30. How can 2% represent the 60% youth population?” 