Commonwealth Asia MPs join forces on human rights
4 February 2016
Parliamentarians from Commonwealth countries in Asia have adopted a declaration to safeguard and promote human rights, concluding a three-day seminar in Sri Lanka in which they agreed to form a regional grouping with a specific human rights mandate. In the Kotte Declaration, parliamentarians from Commonwealth Asia set out a series of commitments including advocating for human rights principles to be reflected in new laws and addressing gaps in existing legislation. They also pledge to increase co-operation among parliamentarians, national human rights institutions, civil society, community leaders and young people. The new Asian Commonwealth Parliamentary Human Rights Group, a regional mechanism responsible for safeguarding and improving human rights, will take forward these commitments. The seminar, which took place in Colombo from 1 to 3 February, provided an opportunity for members of parliament from the region to share experiences and good practice on promoting and protecting human rights by passing laws and holding the executive to account. It was organised by the Commonwealth Secretariat in partnership with the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Parliament of Sri Lanka. “The country which overcame the brutal terrorism that prevailed for three decades is now engaged in a journey to achieve peace and prosperity,” said Sri Lanka’s Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe in his speech to the seminar, in support of its outcomes. Participants explored international and national human rights norms and mechanisms, and the role and responsibilities of parliamentarians in engaging with them. They discussed specific thematic issues relevant to the region such as freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly and association, freedom of religion, violent extremism and child, early and forced marriage. “Parliament is the branch of government best placed to give effect to human rights, take practical measures to prevent abuses and ensure that the law provides practical means through which remedies may be sought for alleged violations of rights,” said Sumedha Ekanayake, Human Rights Adviser at the Commonwealth Secretariat. Mr Ekanayake added: “The Commonwealth Secretariat has been adding its voice to the global advocacy and discourse in regard to the role of parliaments and parliamentarians in the work of the Human Rights Council including in the Universal Periodic Review and their concomitant roles in rights protection and promotion.” Asma Jahangir, member of the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group and former United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief, supported setting up a platform to strengthen parliamentarians’ role in protecting human rights. Ms Jahangir said: “I think that this [seminar] has double value: First of all, deepening of knowledge on human rights issues is important; and secondly, to form networks across the region so that they [parliamentarians] can act together. It is this collective thinking that goes into each of the parliaments in this region, which I believe at some point or another will bear fruit.” Dr Abdullah Khaleel, a parliamentarian from the Maldives and one of the participants, welcomed the opportunity to focus on issues specific to the region. He said: “One of the important things we have come across in this seminar is issues like freedom of expression and also what are the rights of children, women and other vulnerable groups, and what we need to do in order to protect their rights.” Mahinda Samarasinghe, Member of the Sri Lanka Parliament and Minister of Skills Development and Vocational Training, said the seminar highlighted legislators’ unique role. “Human rights protection is not only vital for generating positive external perceptions and concomitant economic benefits but is also absolutely necessary for the well-being of people in every country. Parliamentarians have a special role to play in this respect,” he added. The seminar is the fourth in a series of Commonwealth regional seminars for parliamentarians on human rights. The Caribbean seminar in Trinidad and Tobago took place in 2013. The Africa seminar in 2014 resulted in the adoption of the Mahé Declaration and the establishment of the Commonwealth Africa Parliamentary Human Rights Group. The Pacific seminar in New Zealand in August 2015 saw the adoption of the Pipitea Declaration and agreement to support the establishment of the Commonwealth Pacific Parliamentary Human Rights Group. Speakers at the Asia seminar included: Wijeyadasa Rajapaksa, Member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka and Minister of Justice and Buddhasasana; Mahinda Samarasinghe, Member of the Sri Lanka Parliament and Minister of Skills Development and Vocational Training; Naseema Hafeez Panezai from the Pakistan National Assembly; Israfil Alam, of the Bangladesh Parliament;  Kasthuri Patto, of the Malaysia Parliament; Venkatesh Nayak from the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative; Agostinho Neto of the Kenya Parliament; and John Dawkins of the South Australia Parliament. 