Support for system-wide educational reform and the development of a regulatory framework for higher education
UnknownDate
Country: MauritiusHost: Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative ReformsStart Date: 11 June 2016End Date: 31 October 2016Policy Area: EducationPolicy Expert: Amina OsmanProject Manager: Joel Burman The Government of Mauritius is presently engaged in a process to align the Mauritian education system to the new UN SDGs, specifically the stand-alone Education 2030 Goal. Mauritius has embarked on a major transformation of its education and training system, from pre-primary through to the post-secondary and tertiary levels. The Nine Year Continuous Basic Education Reform programme sits within the Education and Human Resource Strategy Plan 2008 – 2020, which translates Government's commitment to bring about fundamental reforms in education. The tertiary education landscape in Mauritius has witnessed significant transformations since the country's accession to its independence in 1968 when only one institution, namely the University of Mauritius (UoM) was in existence. Today, the Sector is quite diversified and encompasses some 65 institutions, public and private and regional, each with its own specificity. Thus, the Higher Education sector faces a number of growingly complex challenges as a result of its expansion over the years. This includes the necessity for the sector to: develop high value added knowledge to enhance its competitive advantage; build its capacity to operate in an internationalised higher education environment; as well as widening access, ensuring equity and improving quality both of service and delivery. The present regulatory system, that comprises different Acts for different entities set up at different times but with some overlaps, does not adequately support the further development of the sector nor to the achievement of Mauritius’ educational goals as expressed above. A new robust framework with clearly defined institutional mandates has thus become a pre-requisite to attain these objectives. This project aims to address strategic gaps in the current system-wide educational reform effort including in the: The primary beneficiary of the project will be the Government of Mauritius through the Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research as well as the stakeholders in the tertiary sector. Educational practitioners, such as teachers, will also benefit from engagement and support in the implementation of Nine Year Continuous Basic Education and the attendant curriculum. Ultimately students and learners (current and prospective) will benefit from a more equitable and effective education system. The expected outputs will be: 