Finance Access Hub ‘remarkable’
15 November 2017
Delegates to a side event on the Commonwealth Climate Finance Access Hub at COP23 in Bonn, Germany, have described the initiative as ‘remarkable’. The Hub is the Commonwealth’s response to the continuing and future threats of climate change to member states. Its primary aim is to assist small and vulnerable countries access international sources of climate finance. That way member states can make sure they meet adaptation and mitigation needs as well as realise the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The Hub is supported by a AUS $1 million grant from the Australian government and almost GBP £900,000 grant from the Commonwealth Secretariat, plus in-kind support from the Mauritius government, which hosts it “It’s filling a very important gap in this work area,” said Russell Miles, director for the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade for the Australian government. “There’s money being mobilised from donors, the private sector and multi-laterals and what we’re looking for the Hub to do is fill that gap in helping countries to better access that money. It’s not just about access.  It’s can you design the work to actually be effective, to reach the right people at the right time?” So far seven national advisers have been deployed in least developed countries (LDC) and small island developing states (SIDs), including in some of the most climatically vulnerable countries. These are Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Jamaica, Mauritius, Namibia, Swaziland and Vanuatu. Speaking at the side event, Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland spoke about her visit to the Caribbean last week. Delegates were shown a short film of islands devastated by category 5 storms and the Secretary-General reinforced the need for urgent help.   “Access to such funding helps fill gaps and overcome impediments that hinder countries in attaining their developmental goals and objectives,” she said. “The value of the Climate Finance Access Hub lies in the flexible, long-term deployment of climate finance experts who are linked to capacity development programmes. National advisers are involved in a range of technical support and capacity building activities, depending on the national priorities of the countries to which they are deployed.” In Mauritius, for example, the Hub's national climate finance adviser developed a proposal on “Enhancing national food security and resilience to climate change”. The project involves the development of germplasm improvement strategies to address the vulnerability of agriculture to climate change. This project will improve resilience through the introduction and screening of improved crops. It includes the development of crops that can tolerate heat, drought and pests. The project can be replicated at scale in other SIDs. Secretary-General Scotland added, “Deployment of additional national advisers will soon be accomplished, to expand yet further the operational scope of the Climate Finance Access Hub. We are immensely grateful to a range of partners and other supporters for enabling us to reach the present stage of delivery. “Generous financial support from the government of Australia has enabled the hub to become operational. Similarly, in-kind support from the Government of Mauritius has been instrumental in setting-up the central office for the Hub in Port Louis. There has also been institutional support from many other developmental partners and regional organisations, and this considerably enhances the impact and results of the Hub support functions.” Secretary-General Scotland said that further resources were needed to ensure the viability of the Hub and establish regional spokes. Demand for services, she concluded, already exceeded the programme’s resources.   She invited development partners to join in helping more countries access funds to ensure the implementation of national climate change action is possible. The Secretary-General of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (ACP Group), Dr Patrick Gomes, said the Hub was truly helping Commonwealth citizens. “It’s absolutely important that we have at this COP23 genuine commitment pledges to financing because that really is the main constraint.  People have grasped the importance of this programme. People have appreciated the threats they are facing, they need finance. What the Commonwealth is doing is remarkable. It’s targeted, it’s results-orientated, and it’s mobilising the skills and expertise that is there, but it has to be backed up with financial resources.” 