Unlocking the door to women’s political leadership
29 March 2017
The Caribbean and Africa will be the first to benefit from action to get more women into political leadership, the Commonwealth Secretariat has announced. Political Adviser, Dr Tres-Ann Kremer, presented a new Commonwealth initiative to increase women’s political participation, to delegates at a women’s forum held by the Ministry of Social Development in Nevis in the Caribbean. The Commonwealth programme includes enhanced research into the status of women’s leadership, advocacy by the Commonwealth Secretariat, and tailored support to help countries get more women into politics. It is being piloted in Africa and the Caribbean before being rolled out to the rest of the Commonwealth. The mandate for action, Dr Kremer said, is the persistent concern raised by Commonwealth election observers about the under-representation of women in electoral processes. Referencing the Sustainable Development Goals and the Commonwealth Charter, she said, “The Commonwealth is committed to being bold about reinforcing its values and supporting the Sustainable Development Goals. We are absolutely resolved to assist our member states to achieve these goals in a holistic manner.  “We truly believe that gender equality is not only a fundamental human right, but a necessary foundation for a peaceful, prosperous and sustainable world. This compels us to take action.” According to a 2016 Commonwealth report on women’s political development, only 17 Commonwealth countries have achieved the 30% global target for women’s representation in lower and upper houses of parliaments. At the forum, Dr Kremer revealed the initial findings of the new Commonwealth research, done in collaboration with Electoral Management Bodies and political parties. It shows that, while more women in the Caribbean are getting into decision-making positions in the public sector, there is still a concerning lack of representation in parliaments. The study also highlights the need to address other factors affecting women’s political participation, including legislative reforms, campaign financing policies and violence against women. Minister for Social Development in the Nevis Island Administration, Hazel Brandy-Williams, who organised the forum and a rally on women’s rights, welcomed the Commonwealth’s ongoing efforts to assist political parties in opening their doors to more women. She expressed her “profound thanks to the Commonwealth for being so timely in bringing this research to fruition.” The Secretariat will share the results of its research with member countries in the region, and continue to work with political parties and electoral commissions on a framework for Commonwealth support. 