Formulation of a civil service strategy for Mauritius
UnknownDate
Country: Republic of MauritiusHost: The Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative ReformsStart date: 04 April 2016End date: 31 March 2017Policy area: Public AdministrationPolicy expert:  Omar MowlanaProject manager: Joel Burman The Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms (MCSAR), Mauritius is responsible for spearheading administrative reforms within the civil service to bring about excellence in the delivery of high quality and customer-focused public services. Over the past decade, significant progress has been achieved through the implementation of a series of reform initiatives. These have been centred on five main themes, including: performance management; human resource management and development; promotion of good governance and ethical behaviour; total quality management; and customer care and improved service delivery. MCSAR introduced the Performance Management System (PMS) in the Civil Service in 2006 as a strategic reform initiative, the aim of which was to improve the overall management of public organisations, in particular human resource management to enhance delivery of public services. As of 2013 the PMS was fully implemented across the civil service in replacement of the former Annual Confidential Reporting System. In Government Programme (2015-2019), it is noted that “Government is committed to building a responsible and responsive Civil Service. In this context, a series of cutting-edge measures will be implemented to bring about a transformational change in the Civil Service with focus on Human Capital Development, Streamlining of Processes and Optimisation of Information and Communication Technologies.” In spite of the initiatives being taken forward, certain challenges remain and include: Given the limited national experience and capacity constraints in developing a modern civil service, the assistance of the Commonwealth Secretariat was sought to provide expert inputs and strategic guidance to ensure the Government could undertake civil service reform. This project will provide technical assistance to formulate a Civil Service Reform Strategy (incorporating a Human Resource Strategy and a Capacity Building Strategy) with a view to enable the Government of Mauritius to undertake strategic Civil Service Reform. This project will ensure that the Government of Mauritius can achieve its vision of “A professional Public Service committed to excellence”. The project is expected to benefit the whole of the civil service represented by MCSAR, which has already constituted a local team comprising of senior officials from Government, to collaborate as counterparts and support to any CFTC expertise. Further to this, an essential part of conducting the study and developing the strategy will be consultations with stakeholders including Heads of MDAs, representatives of the private sector, civil society and representatives of staff unions of the public sector. These stakeholders are expected to benefit from the external and independent expertise of CFTC assistance in engaging, understanding and integrating their views into the wider reform process. Ultimately in the long-run, this project is intended to benefit the entire population of Mauritius though improved public sector governance and service delivery. The expected outputs are: 