Secretary-General's statement on International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women
24 November 2014
As we mark International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women we recall that one year ago, when Commonwealth Heads of Government met in Colombo they reaffirmed their conviction that gender equality and empowerment of women are at the core of human development. The leaders of Commonwealth member states collectively agreed on the urgent need for policy attention on violence against women, which remains shamefully widespread. Our Heads of Government also denounced the dehumanising and cowardly use of sexual violence in armed conflict and as a weapon of war. They noted that, in addition to the long term physical and psychological trauma suffered by survivors, it undermines the social and economic wellbeing, development, peace and stability of communities and countries. The Commonwealth is committed to supporting conflict affected states in strengthening their capacity to prevent and respond to sexual violence in armed conflict. We seek to ensure that all relevant programmes in the fields of international peace and security, rule of law, gender equality, human rights, and the role of civil society address these issues and take into full consideration the needs and rights of women and children. We continue to encourage strengthening partnerships with governments, parliaments, national human rights institutions, ombudspersons and judiciaries. In Bangkok this week, the Secretariat is convening a regional consultation with UN Women and Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development Canada to end impunity for violence against women and girls. This meeting will seek ways to strengthen equality laws and improve coordination between national human rights institutions, ombudspersons, prosecutors and police investigators. The Commonwealth challenges the issue of child, early and forced marriage through the sharing of best practices, strengthened advocacy and by addressing gaps in the implementation of strategies to eliminate this violation against girls. Today we renew our commitment to eliminating the scourge of violence against women and girls, and to creating environments in which women and girls can live, learn, work and play in safety, and fulfil their potential free from the fear of violence. 