Protect spaces for sport and promote physical activity, says report on global goals
 5 April 2017
Governments and local authorities that invest in sport can help to reduce spiralling health costs and promote education, social cohesion and gender equality, according to a new report from the Commonwealth. Protecting green spaces in towns and cities, ring-fencing school budgets for physical education, and empowering women and girls through sport, are among a set of policy prescriptions in the report published today, on International Day of Sport for Development and Peace. The Commonwealth Secretariat guidebook, Enhancing the Contribution of Sport to the Sustainable Development Goals, proposes a raft of interventions to help countries achieve global targets in health, education, social inclusivity and gender equality by using sport as a tool. One of the areas identified where sport can make a big impact is in improving public health. Physical inactivity causes more than three million deaths per year globally, and accounts for between 1-4 percent of all healthcare costs. But despite the benefits of adopting an active lifestyle, a fifth of men and a quarter of women do not meet World Health Organization minimum guidelines for physical activity, which say adults should do 75 to 150 minutes of exercise a week. The publication provides a framework for using sport to help achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) – a set of global targets agreed by 194 governments at the United Nations in September 2015. The 17 SDGs include targets on health, education, gender equality, economic growth and employment, human settlements, justice and inclusivity. The Commonwealth Secretariat’s recommendations include: The report offers a stark warning that the benefits of investing in sport can be eroded if corruption and exploitation in sport is allowed to persist. It recommends that sports organisations are compelled to meet international standards on good governance and child safeguarding as a requirement of receiving any public funds. The guidebook was developed with researchers from Durham University in the UK, Dr Iain Lindsey and Professor Tony Chapman, along with sports experts and organisations, and policy-makers from government ministries in Australia, Botswana, Sierra Leone and Zambia. It follows the historic commitment made by more than 30 governments at the Commonwealth Sports Ministers Meeting in August 2016 to ensure that national sports policies are aligned to deliver the SDGs. Head of Sport for Development and Peace at the Commonwealth Secretariat, Oliver Dudfield, said: “By increasing access to and participation in quality and inclusive sport we can improve people’s health and education, break down social barriers and ultimately save public money. “This guidebook presents wide-ranging policy options for governments where there is evidence that sport and physical activity can help to deliver sustainable development. The recommendations we are putting forward aim to deliver on the promise of sport as a potential development tool.” The publication will be formally launched on International Day of Sport for Development and Peace on 6 April 2017 by Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland, at a panel debate at Australia House in London. Panellists for the 2nd Commonwealth Debate on Sport and Sustainable Development included UK Minister of State for International Development Lord Bates, Commonwealth Games Federation Vice President for the Americas K.A. Juman-Yassin, Director of the University of Johannesburg’s Olympic Studies Centre Professor Cora Burnett, and Ugandan Netball Team Captain Peace Proscovia. Notes to Editors: The Commonwealth Secretariat is an intergovernmental agency supporting Commonwealth member countries. We have provided policy assistance to government ministries – including Botswana, Mauritius, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka and Zambia in recent years - on promoting sport as a tool for development. We also convene Sports Ministers Meetings ahead of the Olympic Games and Commonwealth Games. Find out more: thecommonwealth.org/sport-development-and-peace or contact media@commonwealth.int. Follow us on Twitter: @CommonwealthSec #Commonwealth #IDSDP Enhancing the Contribution of Sport to the Sustainable Development Goals 