Promoting rule of law for development in small states
27 March 2015
Senior officials and legal experts attended a meeting yesterday to consider rule of law and the post-2015 development agenda from the perspective of small Commonwealth states. The meeting took place on the margins of the UN’s post-2015 negotiations in New York. It provided an opportunity for a panel of Commonwealth experts from Tonga, Jamaica, Belize, and Botswana to address the practical aspects of rule of law and development. Opening the event, H.E. Robert Guba Aisi, Permanent Representative of Papua New Guinea to the United Nations, said the event provided an important platform to reflect the views of small states. “Sharing of practical experience gave voice to the particular needs, perspectives and contexts of small states, as well as enriched our understanding of the links between the rule of law and development, and supported the creation of justice systems that could most effectively contribute to sustainable growth and development,” he said. Participants drew attention to the fact that in today’s interconnected world, rule of law is no longer to be seen solely as a national issue. Dr Kathy-Ann Brown, Deputy Solicitor General for Jamaica, noted the complexity of rights and obligations under international investment treaties. Keborapele Moesi, Deputy Attorney General of Botswana, reported that an increasing number of cross-border legal cases in southern Africa created a need for international civil legal aid. It was agreed that these examples underlined the need for states to develop legal frameworks and institutional capacity in line with regional and international legal trends. Together with national priorities, this could, in turn, provide a solid foundation for sustainable growth and development. Panellists referred to the importance of an effective criminal justice system and core rule of law concepts, such as the Commonwealth Latimer House Principles. They also discussed approaches to measuring the rule of law, and considered ways to track progress towards achieving Goal 16 of the Sustainable Development Goals. Goal 16, which is under discussion in the UN General Assembly, includes targets on promoting the rule of law and ensuring access to justice for all. Small states shared the outcomes of the discussions at the post-2015 intergovernmental negotiations. They highlighted the necessity of investing in legal frameworks to achieve sustainable development. Post-2015 intergovernmental negotiations, held in New York from 23-27 March 2015, focussed on sustainable development goals and targets in preparation for the UN summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, which will take place in September 2015. 