Trade experts steer new course for developing Commonwealth countries
27 March 2015
Commonwealth trade experts and senior government officials have issued a set of recommendations to advance the trade interests of least developed countries, small states and sub-Saharan Africa. The newly-established Commonwealth Expert Group on Trade met for the first time in Malta from 25 to 26 March to consider the trade challenges faced by these countries. Participants reviewed recent developments in global trade, including the changing dynamics of trade as a result of the rise of emerging economies; the increasing share of South-South trade; and the growing prominence of mega-trading blocs. Presenting research on trade growth in small states in particular, Dr Mohammad Razzaque, the Commonwealth Head of International Trade Policy, noted the weakening relationship between growth of GDP and growth of trade. Dr Razzaque said this raised serious concerns about the external competitiveness and effective participation in global trade for the 31 small states of the Commonwealth. Participants recommended mobilising more aid for trade and exploring opportunities for value-added exportables to improve the trading position of small states. They also agreed to promote inclusive negotiations at the World Trade Organisation (WTO) to ensure capacity-constrained countries are included. Janet Strachan, Interim Director of the Economic Policy Division, emphasised that the new forum provided an important platform to consider the trade interests of developing Commonwealth countries in the post-2015 agenda. She said: “This Commonwealth Expert Group on Trade meeting is a timely event to identify priorities for our members, and for the global community to take cognisance of promoting the role of trade in an inclusive development process.” Experts agreed trade could be a significant driver in achieving post-2015 goals, but for this to happen the current development framework would have to undergo reform. They called for greater assistance to help developing countries identify the links between trade and the Sustainable Development Goals to enable them to articulate their needs. The group heard a presentation on the current status and emerging trends in the Doha Development Agenda and WTO negotiations. Participants agreed to take forward a number actions, such as advocating for adequate resources for aid for trade and identifying offensive and defensive interests in trade negotiations. Case studies, presented by member states, detailed regional and country-specific trade experiences across the Commonwealth. One participant observed that assistance provided by the Commonwealth Secretariat had facilitated a successful trade policy review by the WTO, and had allowed a better understanding of the potential benefits of a multilateral trading system. 