Vanuatu welcomes Commonwealth election observers
17 January 2016
The 24-hour market in Vanuatu’s capital city Port Vila tells a story of the country’s vibrant and diverse culture. The tempting array of fruits and vegetables and festive atmosphere are magnets for both locals and tourists. The market is also a popular venue for ceremonies and public meetings. But in the last two weeks it has become a key campaigning ground for contesting parties in the upcoming snap general election, which was called after bribery convictions against 14 MPs plunged the country into political turmoil. As Vanuatu prepares to go the polls on 22 January, politics is definitely one of the hot topics among locals in the capital. First time voter, 21 year old Joanna Kampai, a student at the University of the South Pacific, said she welcomed the presence of Commonwealth election observers.  “I really hope this election will address the instability in the government, and I think it is good for the observers to come in and examine the election process and offer some good ideas about how to improve things.” Arriving in Vanuatu today Hubert Ingraham, Chair of the Commonwealth Observer Group and former Prime Minister of The Bahamas, spoke about the importance of the Commonwealth’s work in election observation.  “The Commonwealth has observed more than 130 elections in 36 countries since it first offered the service in 1980. This work has been instrumental in setting global standards for election observation and promoting and strengthening democratic values in its member countries.” Mr Ingraham, along with four other Commonwealth observers, will begin their observations of the campaign period today as 37 political parties and 265 candidates court a 260,000 strong population. They will be working alongside other international observer groups, including the Pacific Island Forum and the Melanesian Spearhead Group. Speaking outside the busy Port Vila Market, 38-year-old Barrister, James Tari, said he was reassured by the Commonwealth’s support: “Having observers in a general election like this is a good watchdog for the people contesting. I believe it will help to ensure that things are done according to the law. Observers will assist us by saying ‘this is how we conduct a good election in a transparent and accountable way’ . “The Commonwealth should be acknowledged for doing election observation because it is something that has had a lot of positive effects on Commonwealth countries.” Chair: Rt Hon Hubert Ingraham
Former Prime Minister of The Bahamas Before entering front line politics Mr Ingraham was a senior partner at a private law firm in the Bahamas. He began his first term as Prime Minister of The Bahamas in 1992. He was in office between 1992 and 2002 and 2007-2012. After resigning in 2012 Mr Ingraham returned to his private law practice at Ingram law Chambers. This is Mr Ingraham’s second Commonwealth Observer Group mission. In 2014 he was chair of the Observer Group to Mozambique. Jane Prentice MP
Federal Member for Ryan, Australia Before entering public life, Mrs Prentice owned and managed a successful convention and event management firm. Prior to her election to Federal Parliament, she served for 10 years as Councillor for the Brisbane City Council ward. Mrs Prentice was elected to the House of Representatives for the Federal Seat of Ryan as the Liberal National Party Candidate on 21 August 2010. She is also Chairman of the Joint Standing Committee on electoral matters. She has previously observed elections in Timor-Leste and Bougainville as part of a UN-led Australian Observer Group. Enrico Woolford
Editor-in-Chief Capitol News, Guyana Enrico Woolford is the Editor in Chief of Capitol News, a television broadcast channel in Guyana. He was previously Head of Current Affairs (Radio) at the Guyana Broadcasting Corporation and helped to develop Guyana’s National Communication Network. In 1993, he founded Capitol News. Mr Woolford has extensively covered the Guyanese and Caribbean narcotics operations. He was President of the Guyana Press Association and continues to serve on the Executive Council of that body. Walter Rigamoto
Former Ombudsman and Supervisor of Elections, Fiji A lawyer by training, Mr Rigamoto was Head of the Elections Office in Fiji and was subsequently Ombudsman. He was appointed UN International Electoral Commissioner for the East Timor Presidential Elections in 2002, and has been an Election Observer for the UN, Commonwealth Secretariat and the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat since 2001. Mr Rigamoto is currently working as an Adviser with the Electoral Systems Strengthening Project in the Solomon Islands. Jessica Nkuuhe
Gender, Peace and Security Expert Uganda Ms Nkuuhe works with Civil Society Organisations on women’s human rights, peace-building and human security issues. She has participated in civil society election observation missions in three West African countries, and was a gender, peace and security expert during the 2014 elections in the Solomon Islands. She is currently working on a process to involve women and the youth in ensuring peaceful elections in Uganda. 