Departure statement by the Commonwealth Special Envoy to Lesotho, Dr Rajen Prasad
27 June 2015
The Commonwealth Special Envoy Dr Rajen Prasad completed his recent visit to Lesotho today. The purpose of his visit was to support the efforts of the Coalition Government to address the reforms contained in the coalition agreement, and to discuss how the Commonwealth might be able to assist in specific areas. The visit also provided an opportunity for the Special Envoy to engage with all the Coalition partners. Dr Prasad noted that since the 2012 elections the Commonwealth had provided Lesotho with consistent and significant support to strengthen its governance arrangements.  He was pleased to see that the Commonwealth’s investment in deepening the understanding of coalition systems had contributed substantially to the reform programme adopted by the coalition government in its coalition agreement. Dr Prasad conveyed the Secretary-General’s goodwill and support to the Coalition government and the people of Lesotho as they embark on the implementation of these critical reforms. He further conveyed the Commonwealth’s commitment to provide the relevant assistance Lesotho might require in urgently advancing this reform agenda. “I am encouraged by the widespread expression of commitment by the Coalition partners to ensure a functional coalition arrangement,” said Dr Prasad. In his meetings with His Majesty the King, government ministers, the Honourable Chief Justice, the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, senior government officials and other stakeholders, Dr Prasad focused on the five major reforms contained in the coalition agreement: Reform of the Public Service, Reform of Parliament, Constitutional Review, Review of the Judicial System and Security Reform. He noted that when these pieces of work are completed, they would significantly change Lesotho’s governance architecture. He observed that while some Ministries had commenced the process of designing how they would carry out the reforms, others had more work to do.  He encouraged each Ministry affected to develop a plan for the reform under its remit, and take specific steps to achieving them, bearing in mind possible linkages with the constitutional review process envisaged in the coalition agreement. “I am looking forward to see detailed plans emerge before too long, on how the reforms will be implemented and to hearing about the technical resources that might be required,” said Dr Prasad. In his meetings with church leaders and representatives of civil society, Dr Prasad expressed the Commonwealth’s belief in their important roles and contribution to supporting much needed reforms that will ensure sustained peace, stability and development in Lesotho. Dr Prasad’s visit coincided with the tragic shooting and subsequent death of the former Lesotho Defence Force Commander Lt. Gen. Maaparankoe Mahao on Thursday 25 June. Dr Prasad conveyed the Commonwealth’s condolences to the family of the late Lt. Gen. Mahao. Dr Prasad was briefed by the Prime Minister, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Defence on this incident. He condemned the tragic incident and expressed the Commonwealth Secretary-General’s deep concern that it had taken place. He also conveyed the Secretary-General’s appeal that the Government and responsible officials will uphold and demonstrate the principles of transparency, the rule of law and accountability in bringing those responsible to justice as quickly as possible. Dr Prasad expressed the hope that previous such incidents, which have contributed to a mistrust in Lesotho’s security architecture, would also be investigated. 