Commonwealth Observer Group: Ghana readies itself for 2016 General Elections
5 December 2016
We arrived in the beautiful city of Accra last week to observe the 2016 Ghanaian General Elections as part of The Commonwealth Observer Group. Some of our colleagues had arrived earlier on November the 16th. The Commonwealth Observers are now deployed in all the 10 regions of Ghana and are keeping us constantly briefed about the situation as the country readies herself for Wednesday’s important elections. We take this opportunity, two days before the December 7 General Elections, to convey our best wishes to the sister people of Ghana for credible, transparent, inclusive, peaceful and democratic elections. We say this very mindful of the historic place of honour Ghana has occupied in the context of Africa’s deeply held aspirations since its independence in 1957. Since then Ghana has also served in the ranks of the Commonwealth as a valued member. Accordingly the entire Commonwealth, including its many African members, has experienced great pride and encouragement at all times when Ghana has made progress in terms of meeting the aspirations of her people, knowing that this would also serve to inspire all other Member States of the Commonwealth. It is in this context that the Commonwealth shares the fervent hope that on December 7, Ghana will once more serve to inspire our entire Community of Nations by holding truly credible, transparent, inclusive, peaceful and democratic elections. The esteemed seven Presidential Candidates provided a clear demonstration of the resolve of the sister people of Ghana to ensure that this country remains true to its commitment to democracy and peace when they signed the seminal Accra Declaration on Thursday, December 1st. Thus did Ghana, once again, set a noble example which all our countries should emulate. Consistent with the commitments made by the Presidential Candidates when they spoke after signing the Accra Declaration, with great humility we appeal to the sister people of this great country to respect the undertakings that have been made by the respected political and other leaders of Ghana as reflected in the Accra Declaration. In this context we urge that if any disputes should arise concerning the elections, these should be settled peacefully through the Courts of the land. In this regard we are fully in agreement with the political and other leaders of the people of Ghana that no other option exists for the resolution of any electoral dispute except the peaceful route. Otherwise all of us, and first of all and principally the Political Parties of Ghana, including their leaders, members and supporters must respect the outcome of the elections once the electoral process has determined that the people have spoken. Thus will Ghana continue to teach all our nations that ‘the voice of the people is the voice of God’! As we reiterate our best wishes to the people of Ghana for credible, transparent, inclusive, peaceful and democratic elections, we remain convinced that this admirable sister people will live up to the expectations of the peoples of Africa and the Commonwealth in this regard.  Note to Editors The Commonwealth Observer Group will function impartially and independently and will conduct itself according to the standards expressed in the International Declaration of Principles for Election Observation. The 17 Commonwealth Observers will be in Ghana from 29 November to 13 December 2016. An Advance Observer Team was deployed to Ghana on 16 December 2016. The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 52 independent and equal sovereign states. It is home to 2.2 billion citizens, of which over 60% are under the age of 30. The Commonwealth includes some of the world’s largest, smallest, richest and poorest countries, spanning five regions. Thirty-one of its members are small states, many of them island nations. Commonwealth countries are supported by an active network of more than 80 intergovernmental, civil society, cultural and professional organisations. 