Voting in Zambia’s general elections and referendum has closed and counting begins
13 August 2016
The Electoral Commission of Zambia has 48 hours from the close of polling stations to declare the winner of the country’s 2016 General Elections and Referendum. Long queues were reported in many of the polling stations on Thursday as voters began arriving to cast their vote as early as 3am, three hours before the polls opened. Commonwealth observer teams were posted to all 10 provinces of Zambia to observe every stage of the process. One of the observers, former Cabinet Minister of Ghana Elizabeth Ohene, travelled as far as Chirundu in order to see how voting was unfolding. “It is important for the Commonwealth to get out to as many areas as possible. Zambia is a huge country. The observer teams have been reporting back to us regularly throughout the day. We shall spend the post election period gathering information from the other Observers so we can see what the trends have been, not only on Election Day but the process before and after election as well.” On the eve of election day, many staff of the Electoral Commission of Zambia made preparations to stay the night at polling stations. Twenty-six year-old Clinebell, a college graduate in human resources was posted to a polling station in the Chikankata district. “It’s a good opportunity,” she told Ohene, as she arrived with a rucksack and parcels of food in preparation to stay the night. She explained that she would wake up at 3am on election day in order to begin setting up the polling station.  Zambia election: 26 year-old Clinebell, a college graduate, was posted to a polling station in Chikankata district pic.twitter.com/A1wf7VnUX2 — The Commonwealth (@commonwealthsec) August 13, 2016  On election day, Ohene met with other young people who had signed up to be part of the election process. At the Shikoswe polling station, she met with two young people who had volunteered to work with the Red Cross assisting voters who may feel unwell as they waited to cast their vote. “I want to study medicine when I finish school so this will help me,” explained 17 year-old Lindunda Kalaluka. Gift Njovu, also has ambitions to become a doctor. “This is also a good experience for me,” she said. Note to Editors Since 1980, the Commonwealth has observed more than 130 elections in 36 countries. Commonwealth observers have contributed to the entrenchment of democratic practices globally by offering recommendations for practical action and giving voters confidence that an independent, impartial and public view will be taken on the integrity of an electoral process. Learn more at: www.thecommonwealth.org/elections Find out more about the mandate and composition of the Commonwealth Observer Group, and download photos, at: www.thecommonwealth.org/zambiaelection2016 