Strengthening local governance for national development in Sri Lanka
UnknownDate
Sri Lanka underwent a period of momentous change and transition. This change brought significant opportunities for local government to enhance its contribution to national sustainable development and sustainable peace, and to deliver better services for the people, consistent with the national policy framework of Mahinda Chinthana, Idiri Dakma. Against this backdrop, the Federation of Sri Lankan Local Government Authorities (FSLGA) and Commonwealth Local Government Forum (CLGF), in partnership with the Ministry of Local Government and Provincial Councils (MLGPC) and the Commonwealth Secretariat developed a project that aimed at strengthening local government systems and to encourage an inclusive developmental approach in planning and delivery of local services. The project acknowledged the enabling environment created through the National Policy on Local Government (NPLG) of 2009 and whereby all communities can now engage fully in the local authority democratic processes. The NPLG is a milestone document to guide future local government system in Sri Lanka and underpins most of the activities in the project. The project also took into account the outcomes of a regional local government symposium organised by the Commonwealth Secretariat and CLGF and hosted by the Government of Sri Lanka, held in April 2012. The Commonwealth Local Government Forum (CLGF), with support from the Commonwealth Secretariat, engaged since July 2013 in a project aimed at Strengthening Local Governance for National Development in Sri Lanka. In so doing, it worked with the Federation of Sri Lanka Local Government Authorities (FSLGA) and the Ministry of Local Government and Provincial Councils. The project was aimed at strengthening local government systems and encouraging an inclusive developmental approach in planning and delivery of local services, consistent with the national policy framework of Mahinda Chinthana, Idiri Dekma. The project brought improvements to people’s living standards and wellbeing, through strengthening the local government system to contribute to national development. The project worked to encourage inclusive developmental approach to the planning and delivery of services, improve revenue flows, build local capacity, promote participatory practices, and build supportive institutional structures. The project focused on substantive local government and democracy capacity building to further strengthen the local government system throughout Sri Lanka and to support processes of enhanced participatory development, inter-community reconciliation and fulfilling peoples’ aspirations. It is intended that public institutions in Sri Lanka are able to deliver a more effective, efficient and equitable public governance. The project will: 