Sri Lanka's 2015 parliamentary elections: interim statement
19 August 2015
An independent Commonwealth Observer Group was invited by the Office of the Commissioner of Elections of Sri Lanka to observe the country’s parliamentary elections on 17 August 2015. The nine-person observer team, selected by Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma, was led by former President of Malta Dr George Abela as Chairperson. At a press conference in Colombo on 19 August, Dr Abela issued the following statement: Members of the Commonwealth Observer Group have been in Sri Lanka since 2 August 2015. Our mandate has been to observe all aspects of the electoral process pertaining to the 17 August 2015 Parliamentary Elections, in order to assess compliance with the standards for democratic elections to which Sri Lanka has committed itself. The Statement that I make today sets out our preliminary observations in this regard. Our Final Report will be issued at a later stage, which will contain our detailed findings and recommendations for future elections. Since the full Commonwealth Observer Group arrived in Sri Lanka on 10 August, we have met with the President of the Republic, the Commissioner of Elections, the main political parties and alliances, the police, citizen observer groups, civil society, legal experts, media practitioners and monitors, other international observers, the United Nations Resident Coordinator and Commonwealth High Commissioners. Prior to election day, observers witnessed campaign activities in the Western, Eastern and Southern provinces. On election day, we had observers present in the Western, North Western, Northern, North Central and Central provinces. In these areas we witnessed the opening of polls, voting, the closing of polls and the counting process. These have been pivotal elections in Sri Lanka, coming less than eight months after a Presidential election in January, which saw a change of President and the formation of a minority-led national government. These elections also followed shortly after the passage of the 19th Amendment to the Constitution, which, among other things, reduced some of the powers of the Executive President; strengthened those of the Prime Minister; reduced the term of Parliament from six to five years; and set up the Constitutional Council which will strengthen the independence of the Elections Commission, the National Police Commission, the Human Rights Commission and other institutions. This revived Constitutional Council has had one meeting since the 19th Amendment to the Constitution was passed in April 2015. At this meeting the Council did not appoint members to independent institutions, including members of the envisaged Election Commission. Accordingly the Commissioner of Elections, in office before the 19th Amendment, continued to perform the functions of Commissioner of Elections for the purposes of these Parliamentary Elections. In view of the overall fairness of the campaign environment, the robust and even-handed approach of key institutions and the transparency with which voting, the count and results process took place, the Group concludes that this election was credible, met the key criteria for democratic elections, and that the outcome reflected the will of the people of Sri Lanka. Over the next three days, we will complete our Final Report for onward transmittal to the Commonwealth Secretary-General. The Secretary-General will in turn submit it to the Government of Sri Lanka, the Office of the Commissioner of Elections, and political parties. Eventually it will be sent to all Commonwealth governments, and then made public via the Commonwealth website. It has been a special honour and privilege to have been invited to Sri Lanka to observe this election and, on behalf of the Group, I wish all Sri Lankans well. 