World Humanitarian Day, Wednesday 19 August
18 August 2015
World Humanitarian Day is both a celebration and a call to action. It reminds us that while the demands of humanitarian service can be great, the rewards are also immense, and the spirit that moves us to help those most in need has never been more necessary than in today’s compacting world. Within the Commonwealth family, we recognise and honour all those individuals who work tirelessly to advance the Commonwealth Charter principles of democracy, human rights, international peace and security, tolerance and understanding, and sustainable development. Compassion towards others, and a humanitarian approach, motivates much that the Commonwealth seeks to achieve, and practical action undertaken by our network of 80 Commonwealth societies and organisations. Collectively we strive to be an influence for good, helping to mobilise the relief efforts of our member states following natural disasters, advancing universal access to quality healthcare provision, providing inclusive and equitable opportunities for youth engagement and education, and promoting adherence to international humanitarian law. The new Sustainable Development Goals offer fresh opportunities to recognise the key role that governments must play, alongside humanitarian and international development actors, in promoting peaceful and inclusive societies, reducing all forms of violence, promoting the rule of law, and developing effective, accountable and transparent governments. Safety and security are important conditions, not only for humanitarian action to be effective and to reach those most in need, but also for the development of strong, cohesive, and stable communities. The 2007 Report of the Commonwealth Commission on Respect and Understanding, ‘Civil Paths to Peace,’ continues to guide Commonwealth approaches aimed at preventing violence, dismantling grievances and building safer and more inclusive societies. The Commonwealth Secretariat will continue to support member states towards achieving peace and sustainable development in a spirit of humanitarianism, consensus, mutual respect, and transparency. I applaud all those who work to this end. 