Australia youth development index shines a spotlight on nation’s young people
 11 August 2016
To mark International Youth Day 2016, on 12 August, the first-ever Australian National Youth Development Index report has been launched with support from the Commonwealth Secretariat. The index measures the situation for 6.3 million young people aged 10 to 29 in Australia, and examines changes between 2006 and 2015 across five domains: education, health and well-being, employment, civic participation and political participation. According to the index, all Australian federal states and territories have seen an improvement in overall youth development since 2006, with the one exception of Tasmania. Political participation has seen the largest improvements nationwide, with increases in the numbers of young people taking part in democratic processes. Overall national youth health and wellbeing has however deteriorated, with illicit drug use, mental health, suicides and growing rates of sexually transmitted diseases key drivers of this decline. The report highlights a large developmental gap between urban and rural areas, with the percentage of young people not engaged in education, employment or training significantly higher for rural youths than for urban youths. In addition, the index registered a large developmental gap for young people with Indigenous heritage, who experience much higher suicide rates than for non-Indigenous young people. The Australian National Youth Development was commissioned by the Commonwealth Secretariat, with the input of youth experts from the Institute for Economics and Peace, the University of Canberra, the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the Australian Institute for Health and Welfare, the University of Victoria and Youth Action. The index complements the global Youth Development Index (YDI), an initiative of the Commonwealth Secretariat’s Youth Programme that measures the status of young people in 185 countries. Australia came top in the 2013 index. Ms Katie Acheson, the chief executive of Youth Action, an Australian NGO focused on youth development, described the new index as a “milestone” achievement. “The YDI is the first ever national holistic framework to measure youth development in Australia. This is important because it shows us where we have been, where we are now, and where we can go. “But this first report is just the start -  a demonstration of the power and knowledge we can have if we continue to own and grow this index. So while we have this moment in time, we must solidify the next steps for this important measure for Australian young people and the people who support them,” she said. The index will be formally launched at a ceremony in Canberra on 12 August attended by senior officials in the Australian government, youth workers, young people, as well as youth sector stakeholders and development practitioners from across the country. Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General Deodat Maharaj expressed delight that Australia’s national index is being launched on International Youth Day, a moment when the focus of the international community is focused on youth empowerment. Mr Maharaj stated: “When the YDI was first launched , we hoped that it would inspire a global debate on the importance of gathering youth-specific data. I commend those involved in this project for their commitment to advancing youth empowerment throughout Australia and the wider Commonwealth. The Commonwealth Secretariat stands ready to assist any other countries that seek to follow Australia’s example.” The second edition of the Commonwealth Secretariat’s global Youth Development Index will be launched in late September 2016. Download the report  Youth Action Media Contact Tim Vollmer
Tel: +61 404 273 313 www.youthaction.org.au Media Contact: Will Henley
​Senior Communications Officer
Commonwealth Secretariat
Email: w.henley@commonwealth.int 