Call for contributors to YourCommonwealth - a website for youth empowerment
 13 July 2015
Young writers and youth leaders are being urged to apply to become contributors to YourCommonwealth.org, a website launched by the Commonwealth to promote the empowerment of young people. In just four months, in late November 2015, the Government of Malta will play host to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), as well as a Commonwealth Youth Forum, which will see leaders from 53 member countries, from Australia to Zambia, join forces. Ahead of the international summit, the Commonwealth Secretariat is calling for young writers and youth leaders to consider joining the ranks of the Commonwealth Correspondents – inspiring young people aged 15 to 29 who contribute news reports and blog articles to YourCommonwealth.org. More than 100 Commonwealth Correspondents currently contribute to the website - which was officially re-launched this week following a major redesign - to exchange ideas and perspectives on events happening in their community or issues that affect young people around the world. Deputy Secretary-General of the Commonwealth, Deodat Maharaj, said: “Over 60% of the Commonwealth’s population is aged under 29 or under – that’s around 1.3 billion people. Young people have a lot to say - whether it is about global efforts to eliminate poverty or action to halt damaging climate change - and we want to hear their voices. “Recognising that each youth has his or her own unique perspective, we have created YourCommonwealth as a platform for young people from all our member countries, in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and Americas, Europe and the Pacific. It is a global online community for young people to get involved and address issues in national and international development today. We want to listen to their views, values, ideas and solutions.” The YourCommonwealth.org website, which first launched in 2010, has been redesigned to better showcase the contributions of young people. Content is refocused around the following core subjects: Commonwealth Correspondents from around the globe say: “YourCommonwealth provides a global platform to engage in important youth-related issues. It has given me a great opportunity to connect with other writers, learn about different experiences and participate in a network of young people changing the world.” - Keresa Arnold, 29, from Jamaica. “What does YourCommonwealth mean to me? YourCommonwealth is a sincere effort to raise young voices, youth participation and perspectives on global issues. It has given me a firm voice.” - Mridul Upadhyay, 23, from India. “It's a glorious opportunity to interact with young, intelligent people from around the world. I learn from other Correspondents and share their experiences with my pupils, peers, and professors to facilitate better global understanding.” - Alvin Ma, 23, from Canada. “YourCommonwealth is an educative space that allows young aspiring leaders to pitch their ideas on an international platform and hence help in shaping opinions. It is a tool used in developing suitable policies for sustainable economic, social and political development.” - Akoth Judith, 23, from Kenya. “It's the best way to let the whole world hear my voice. A very strong platform for the young generation.” - Abdullah Al Hasan, 23, from Bangladesh. If you would like to become a Commonwealth Correspondent, please visit www.yourcommonwealth.org/contribute/ Notes to Editors: The Commonwealth Secretariat’s youth development work is delivered through the Commonwealth Youth Programme, which has been supporting member countries for over 40 years. Find out more: http://thecommonwealth.org/our-work/youth The Commonwealth Youth Forum is organised as part of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) by the Commonwealth Youth Council (CYC), the Commonwealth Secretariat and the Government of Malta. Find out more: https://chogm2015.mt/fora/youthforum 