27 Commonwealth posts come together to produce unique stamp sheet
26 November 2015
For the first time in postal history, 27 postal administrations within the Commonwealth have come together to produce a unique stamp sheet to mark the 50th anniversary of the Commonwealth Secretariat and the role of Her Majesty The Queen as Head of the Commonwealth. A framed set of the sheet of stamps was presented by Maxine Cannon of the Isle of Man Post Office to Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma at the Commonwealth summit in Malta, on 25 November. On receiving the stamp sheet, Mr Sharma stated: “I am delighted to receive these stamps from the Isle of Man Post Office on behalf of the participating countries which are spread throughout the Commonwealth. “The stamp sheet clearly demonstrates the affection they all have for HM The Queen Head of the Commonwealth. These countries are to be congratulated in their efforts to bring this project to fruition in the year we are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Commonwealth Secretariat. In the year HM The Queen became the longest reigning monarch, Her Majesty remains well respected and long may she remain the Head of the Commonwealth.” Maxine Cannon, General Manager of Isle of Man Stamps & Coins, Isle of Man Post Office was the brainchild behind the project. She said: “It is unprecedented for 27 independent postal administrations to come together and produce a sheet of stamps. The principle of the sheet is that, like the Commonwealth, each participating nation is equal. “Participating postal administrations include Kenya, New Zealand, Antigua, Barbados, Tanzania, St Kitts, Tokelau, Turks and Caicos, Ghana, Grenada, Zambia, Tuvalu, Sierra Leone, Falkland Islands, Cook Islands and Tristan de Cunha.” “It’s been a delight to work with our colleagues in all corners of the Commonwealth to bring the stamp sheet, the first of its kind in postal history, to life. It is also an honour that it has been endorsed by the Commonwealth Secretariat” she added. The Commonwealth stamp sheet will be launched on Friday 27 November at the opening of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. Find out more about the Commonwealth stamp sheet  