New export strategy spells more prosperous future for Jamaica
18 August 2015
The Commonwealth congratulates Jamaica for taking an important step to boost economic growth by committing to a second National Export Strategy. Distilling lessons learnt from the design and implementation of its roadmap has led to the creation of an upgraded national export plan, which supports sustainable development and improved international competitiveness. This strategy has been carefully crafted to include cross-cutting issues and address the needs of prioritised sectors to increase Jamaica’s export potential. The strategy defines activities and interventions at a granular level in order to empower the implementing agencies to drive forward the changes required. Importantly, the new framework is grounded in national goals articulated in Vision 2030 Jamaica –National Development Plan. Vision 2030 has defined the transformative sectors key to the country’s national development. The new export strategy is aligned to these objectives. This bodes well for the delivery of the strategy because it demonstrates that stakeholders from the export sectors have reaffirmed the country’s development objectives. The design process has been a challenging, invigorating, all-consuming exercise. Officials, practitioners and businesses have come together to hammer out priorities to expand Jamaica’s exports and improve economic growth. In so doing, Jamaica draws on its many strengths: a strong national brand, a strategic geographical location and the authenticity of products and services. The process has resulted in a well-defined, measurable and realistic action plan that can deliver the anticipated goals. Jamaica has set out important economic goals which are yet to be fully realised. But with well-articulated initiatives such as the new export strategy, the country moves closer to achieving its full potential. The Commonwealth Secretariat takes pride in assisting Jamaica with this important initiative.  We will remain a steadfast partner to the government and the people. 