The contribution of sport to the Sustainable Development Goals: Reality or rhetoric?
UnknownDate
In the declaration adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and new global Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) sport is referred to as ‘an important enabler of sustainable development’. The declaration explicitly recognises the growing contribution of sport to the realisation of development and peace. At the same time, sports governance issues, doping, corruption and abuse scandals, and a growing disconnect between elite and community sport would seem to belie this positive impact. In this Policy Matters Seminar hosted by the University of Edinburgh’s Moray House School of Education, Oliver Dudfield, Head of Sport for Development and Peace at the Commonwealth Secretariat will reflect on whether assertions that sport is an enabler of sustainable development are a reality or mere rhetoric. He will draw on the Commonwealth Secretariat’s analysis of sport and the SDGs, the organisation’s work supporting policy development across the Commonwealth’s 52 member countries, and the Commonwealth's involvement in the development of international sport policy frameworks working with United Nations bodies, intergovernmental agencies and leading sporting organisations. The seminar is relevant for researchers, policy officials and practitioners from across social policy, international development and sport. Oliver Dudfield is the Head of Sport for Development and Peace at the Commonwealth Secretariat, the intergovernmental agency that provides policy guidance, technical assistance and advisory services to Commonwealth member countries. The Sport for Development and Peace Section supports Commonwealth countries to strengthen policy and strategy aimed at promoting and protecting the contribution of sport to sustainable development. Over his career Oliver has worked with multiple UN and intergovernmental agencies, national governments, NGOs and sporting organisations on Sport for Development and Peace policy design, strategy and partnership projects. Prior to joining the Commonwealth Secretariat, he was the General Manager at Vicsport, the leading body for sport and active recreation in Victoria, Australia and was previously the International Development Manager at UK Sport. He started his career as a basketball coach, working in the national systems in Australia and New Zealand. 