Queen’s Young Leaders to inspire solutions to Commonwealth development challenges
23 June 2016
Exceptional young people from across the Commonwealth will meet High Commissioners at the Commonwealth headquarters in London on 24 June to share their ideas on actions countries can take to achieve the internationally agreed Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). More than fifty Commonwealth High Commissioners will listen to the proposals of the 64 young people from Africa, Asia, the Pacific, Europe, The Caribbean and the Americas, who have been given the prestigious Queen’s Young Leaders award. The annual award recognises young people aged 18-29, who have taken a lead in transforming their communities through innovation, advocacy and social and economic empowerment. This year, winners include young people who are combating the spread of HIV through education, who are promoting renewable energy to protect the environment, and who are using innovative mobile technology to improve maternal health. Commonwealth Secretary-General, Patricia Scotland, who is hosting the event, has set the young people the immense challenge of identifying how the Commonwealth can support the SDGs- which include aspirations to end poverty and hunger and save the planet from the effects of climate change. “Sixty per cent of the citizens of the Commonwealth are below the age of 30,” Secretary-General Scotland said. “They are the powerhouse for the Commonwealth’s future. I have no doubt that our young people will embrace their challenges and opportunities if they have the education, the skills, the chances and choices they need to succeed. “We need young leaders with drive, creativity and selflessness to find fresh solutions to the problems our societies face. The Queen’s Young Leaders are doing just that: improving the lives of others, and dreaming big dreams of an inclusive world where everyone can fulfil their potential”. She added: “What is so inspiring about the Queen’s Young Leaders is that they are not just waiting to see what comes along, they are already pressing ahead and carving out new paths to peace, prosperity and progress for themselves and their communities. The Queen’s Young Leaders are the optimists, the builders, the writers of the next chapter of the Commonwealth story which is why when I look at our young people I still have such great hope our future.” Photo caption: Queen's Young Leaders at Marlborough House, London. 