Showcase your education project to the world at Commonwealth awards
30 September 2011
Educators from around the Commonwealth are encouraged to submit entries for the third Commonwealth Education Good Practice Awards, ahead of the competition’s 30 November 2011 deadline. The Commonwealth Education Good Practice Awards recognise and celebrate new and innovative education practices, and provide a platform for these to be shared globally. Shortlisted entrants will be invited to Mauritius in August 2012 to present their project at the Conference of Commonwealth Education Ministers, where the winner will be announced. Launched in 2006, the awards are held every three years with the intention of highlighting good practices and to encourage, reward and generate enthusiasm within the education sector. “The good practice could be a programme, a policy, a strategy or a project, but it must be able to show a real difference to primary or secondary school students, their teachers, or even an entire country’s education system,” said the Commonwealth Secretariat’s Education Programme Officer, Hipolina Joseph. Submissions must be received by 30 November 2011. Applications should be sent by e-mail to educationawards@commonwealth.int and/or posted to: The Co-ordinator, Education Good Practice Awards, STPD Education Section, Commonwealth Secretariat, Marlborough House, Pall Mall, London SW1Y 5HX, United Kingdom. Click here for more information about the awards and for the application form or contact the Co-ordinator, at educationawards@commonwealth.int or +44 207 747 6553 The practices must address at least one of eight action areas: achieving universal primary education; eliminating gender disparities in education; improving quality in education; using distance learning to overcome barriers; supporting education in difficult circumstances; mitigating the impact of HIV on education systems; using education to promote sustainable development; and promoting civil paths to peace. The action areas are aligned with the Millennium Development Goals and Education for All goals, and the Commonwealth’s education priorities. Submissions will be evaluated by a panel of experts according to relevance to the local context, measurable impact, sustainability, efficiency and effectiveness, community involvement, and ability to be replicated. The second Commonwealth Education Good Practice Awards in 2009 attracted 49 entries from more than a quarter of Commonwealth countries, including six small states. Two schools from Malaysia were crowned joint winners: the Ba Kelalan Primary School in Sarawak on community participation in achieving quality education in difficult circumstances; and the Ulu Labai Primary School on the total involvement of the community in improving school performance. 