Commonwealth High Level Meeting on Climate Finance Wiston House, United Kingdom, 23-25 January 2011
26 January 2011
a) Options and Experiences with Financing Mechanisms Participants recommended a series of steps to share members’ experiences with different climate finance mechanisms. A specific project could be implemented through studies, seminars and on‑line facilities, such as the Commonwealth’s online portal, CP3. Participants suggested three areas of immediate focus for collaboration: i. Current issues in climate financing for highly vulnerable member states: ii. Helping to strengthen sector climate finance and investment: iii. Building awareness of the scale and breadth of the international response to climate finance: b) Strengthening Climate Finance Planning Participants encouraged the review of the underfunding of completed National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs), National Communications and other relevant plans of member states. This would be with a view to understanding why full funding had not been secured; and to help identify the necessary funding to complete actions under these plans. The experiences and conclusions drawn from this process will be captured and disseminated more widely. The Commonwealth should offer technical expertise to strengthen national capacities for priority setting, as well as the national climate change strategies and action plans that are currently being prepared. The meeting recommended that these actions be developed in consultation with other relevant institutions and partners. c) Aligning Climate Finance and National Sustainable Development Plans Participants discussed the need for a better understanding of the meaning and scope of climate finance and the opportunities presented by it; and they noted the pressing need to align climate finance with national sustainable development frameworks through practical, carefully sequenced and structured steps. Determining the design of programmatic support for climate finance is an urgent, yet un-met, task which the Commonwealth would be well placed to address. They recognised that climate finance spending should be incorporated in national budgets and be subject to the full rigours of national accountability and effective public expenditure management. This will require a further strengthening of national monitoring systems, which the Commonwealth could support. Participants agreed that mutual Commonwealth support could be provided in, where appropriate, the development of national implementing entities as a vehicle to secure direct access from international funds. They also recommended that a pilot project would be established to explore the value to national governments of, and practical approaches to ensuring the coherence of international investments in national development strategies from a range of sources, including climate finance. d) Institutional Development Participants discussed institutional constraints to effective use of climate finance and noted the need for knowledge of practical solutions and best practices to be shared across the Commonwealth. Areas for action include technical support and exchanges to help vulnerable countries with accreditation of National Implementing Entities; and an initiative to clarify the climate financing architecture to ministries of planning and finance. They also suggested the Commonwealth Secretariat develop a practical workbook on institution building. This would draw on generic analytical work and a series of case studies to draw out lessons learned on key drivers in un-locking climate finance, examining aspects such as the expertise used; skill requirements; the role of national and regional institutions; the role of legislation; and communications. This activity could be progressed in consultation with relevant partners. e) Approaches at the Regional Level Participants recognised the role of regional organisations and regional development banks in sharing best practice, pooling expertise and facilitating access to climate finance by member states. It was recommended that a conference should be convened to explore how to help strengthen regional organisations and regional development banks in: The conference could also explore the development of nationally appropriate mitigation actions and share experience on design lessons from existing funding mechanisms. The meeting encouraged the development of this practical initiative in consultation with regional organisations in the Pacific, Caribbean, Indian Ocean and Africa, as well as Development Banks, other development partners and La Francophonie. Immediate Next Steps Participants recommended the consideration and endorsement of these recommendations by the Commonwealth Consultative Group on the Environment at its next meeting. Wiston House, January 2011 