Commonwealth welcomes new diplomats to London
18 September 2018
One of the biggest challenges for diplomats when settling into a new posting is understanding the workings of institutions with which they will interact. To support their landing in London, participants in the Commonwealth Diplomats Induction Programme taking place this week will have the benefit of a broad range of perspectives offered by a distinguished line-up of presenters. The induction programme, which is in its 35th year, has helped over 600 participants. Referring to this impressive record in her welcoming remarks, Commonwealth Secretary-General, Patricia Scotland, observed: “As a result of this programme, participants from throughout the Commonwealth, including high commissioners, who have gone on to occupy positions elsewhere, have taken with them valuable understanding and knowledge of the way in which the rich layers of Commonwealth collaboration and people-to-people connection is mobilised.” This year, for the first time, the Commonwealth of Learning which is based in Vancouver, Canada, joins the other two intergovernmental organs of the Commonwealth, the Commonwealth Secretariat and the Commonwealth Foundation as a joint organiser for the programme. The diplomats will spend the next three days participating in intensive sessions designed to prepare them for their new posting and help them leverage Commonwealth resources and connections. High Commissioner Joseph Cole of Malta, who shared his experience as a former participant in the induction programme, said: “Strangers became friends and we kept that bond throughout our tour of duty in the UK seeking each other in official and social events.” “One can never ignore the people to people relations irrespective of what the international relations dictate,” he added. The aim of the induction programme is to introduce participants to the many intergovernmental and civil society institutions which link the governments and 2.4 billion people of Commonwealth member countries, giving the 53-nation family its distinctive character. Lord Ahmad of Wimbledon, UK Minister of State for the Commonwealth and the United Nations, emphasised the importance of the Commonwealth Diplomats Induction Programme, saying: “I have heard plaudits from UK diplomats who have attended in previous years. There are few better opportunities to learn about the Commonwealth than to hear about its strengths from those who have been living and breathing it for so many years.” The programme will also include talks from NATO Deputy Secretary-General Rose Gottemoeller, the UN Secretary General’s Senior Adviser on Policy Ana Maria Menendez, the Director-General of the Commonwealth Foundation Vijay Krishnarayan, and President of the Commonwealth of Learning Professor Asha Kanwar. 