Solomon Islands elections: Commonwealth Observer Group interim statement
22 November 2014
Conditions existed for the people to vote freely and decide their representatives in the next Parliament. We congratulate the citizens of Solomon Islands for participating peacefully in their 2014 national election. I am privileged to have been asked by the Commonwealth Secretary-General to lead this group of experienced citizens of the Commonwealth to observe your national election at the request of Solomon Islands Electoral Commission. We were invited by the Secretary-General in our individual capacities to undertake this mission as representatives of the wider Commonwealth family. Members of the Group have been in the country since 9 November. We have been warmly welcomed by the people of Solomon Islands and have met with the Electoral Commission, Political Parties Commission, representatives of the political parties and independent candidates, civil society groups, women and youth groups, media, the Commissioner of Police, the leadership of the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands, and diplomats. Group members were deployed to Western Province, Isabel, Central Province, Malaita, Guadalcanal and Honiara City. The Group has interacted with other regional and international observers during the polling and the ongoing count. Our final report will be submitted to the Commonwealth Secretary- General for transmission to the Solomon Islands Electoral Commission, the Government, and key stakeholders. This is the Group’s Interim Statement, providing an outline of our key observations up to this point, and in recognition that the count is still ongoing, and the results for all 50 constituencies are to be declared.  Initial Observations: We will finalise our report over the coming days and this will include the Group’s conclusion and set of recommendations to further improve the country’s electoral processes. The Commonwealth’s long-standing commitment to democracy and development in Solomon Islands will continue. The full declaration of results will be known shortly. The Group encourages all the citizens and the elected leaders from this election to continue working together in ensuring your country’s democracy and development continues with the full active participation of the citizens. Read the Observer Group's arrival statement 