Commonwealth gears up for Youth Work Week 2014
 31 October 2014
Around the globe, national governments, young people and civil society organisations are gearing up for Youth Work Week, which takes place from 3-9 November. The week celebrates the positive contribution of youth workers to society and will be marked by community events, youth forums, employment workshops, conferences and award ceremonies, under the theme Youth Empowerment though Soft Skills. Soft skills are the competences which enable young people to interact effectively and think creatively, and include team-work, adaptability, self-confidence and resilience. Youth Work Week was established in the United Kingdom by the National Youth Agency more than two decades ago. In 2012, the Commonwealth joined in to expand its reach across its 53 member nations. The winners of the 2014 Commonwealth Youth Worker Awards, which celebrate inspiring and cutting-edge youth work, will be announced during Youth Work Week on 5 November in London. Katherine Ellis, Director of Youth at the Commonwealth Secretariat, paid tribute to youth work practitioners at all levels, for their service and commitment to young people and society. She said: “The commitment and dedication of youth workers is essential to progress across the Commonwealth. In Youth Work Week we encourage, recognise and support them to engage and empower young people. We encourage you to plan activities and events to celebrate their contribution and to tell us about it. Ms Ellis added that it was important that the youth work profession receives appropriate recognition and investment. “Now is the time to invest in the development of youth workers all levels - in the village and in national offices setting the policies and strategies that will make a difference for young people.” How do you plan to celebrate Youth Work Week? Send us your news, messages and photos via Twitter using the hashtag #YWW14 to @CommonwealthSec and @CmmnwlthYouth or via Facebook facebook.com/CommonwealthSec and facebook.com/CommonwealthYouthProgramme To learn more about Youth Work Week please visit: thecommonwealth.org/youthworkweek. For more information on celebrating Youth Work Week in the United Kingdom, visit the National Youth Agency (UK) website at nya.org.uk/supporting-youth-work/youth-work-week/  Note for Editors Find out more about the shortlisted finalists for the Commonwealth Youth Worker Awards: http://thecommonwealth.org/media/news/finalists-commonwealth-youth-worker-awards-announced 