The Commonwealth at the United Nations
17 September 2016
Climate change, human rights, migration and gender equality are high on the agenda as Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland takes forward the mandate given to her by Commonwealth Heads of Government, on her first official visit to the UN General Assembly in New York. Secretary-General Patricia Scotland today urged Commonwealth citizens to hold their governments to commitments made on the internationally ratified Sustainable Development Goals (SDGS). READ MORE >> Commonwealth members have welcomed the launch of a flagship centre dedicated to boosting support to small states. READ MORE >> Vulnerable small island states and developing countries stand to gain access to billions of dollars of climate finance with the aid of a new Commonwealth initiative. READ MORE >>   Vulnerable small island states and developing countries stand to gain access to billions of dollars of climate finance with the aid of a new Commonwealth initiative. READ MORE >> The president of Mozambique has invited the Secretary-General to visit his country to assist in strengthening political and other institutions.READ MORE >> The Secretary-General Patricia Scotland has welcomed plans to try to end the irregular migration of people across the world.READ MORE >> The Commonwealth highlights the challenges and opportunities faced by the irregular mass movement of people across the world.READ MORE >> Notes to Editors The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 53 independent and equal sovereign states. It is home to 2.2 billion citizens, of which over 60% are under the age of 30. The Commonwealth includes some of the world’s largest, smallest, richest and poorest countries, spanning five regions. Thirty-one of its members are small states, many of them island nations. The Commonwealth Secretariat provides guidance on policy making, technical assistance and advisory services to Commonwealth member countries. We support governments to help achieve sustainable, inclusive and equitable development. Our work promotes democracy, rule of law, human rights, good governance and social and economic development. We are a voice for small states and a champion for youth empowerment. 