Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General meets Guyana President
 11 July 2014
Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General Deodat Maharaj yesterday concluded a two-day visit to Guyana, where he met President Donald Ramotar and other key stakeholders. Mr Maharaj briefed the President about current Commonwealth priorities, including the Post-2015 Development Agenda and the Commonwealth’s support to the Caribbean region on issues associated with vulnerability and resilience to economic shocks and natural disasters. Mr Maharaj spoke with President Ramotar about the Commonwealth's planned participation at the United Nations Summit on Small Island Developing States, to be held in Samoa this September. At this summit, the Commonwealth plans to raise issues of special interest to Caribbean countries, including vulnerability and resilience. Mr Maharaj said: “Per capita income classification is an important issue for countries of the Caribbean. Given their vulnerability to economic shocks and natural disasters, per capita income classification cannot be the only variable in determining the region’s access to concessional financing. The Commonwealth is doing a lot of work on building financial and economic resilience and financing for development, including climate financing, and the President and I talked about this.” The Deputy Secretary-General had discussions with Opposition Leader David Granger and this team, Culture, Youth and Sport Minister Frank Anthony, and representatives of Guyana's Private Sector Commission. He also met with the Caribbean Community Secretary-General Irwin LaRoque and representatives of the United Nations Development Programme as well as Commonwealth high commissions in Georgetown. Issues discussed during the mission also included anti-money laundering legislation and local government elections. ‪The Commonwealth will continue to provide further support in such areas as youth development and technical support to marine zone legislation. Mr. Maharaj reaffirmed the organisation's continued commitment to the strong partnership with Guyana. 