Sport integral to sustainable development, says sports body
20 July 2014
The Commonwealth Advisory Body on Sport (CABOS), a group of sports policy experts drawn from around the 53-nation Commonwealth community, has called for greater adoption of sport as a tool for advancing development and peace. The 14-member body, appointed by Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma, is chaired by Louise Martin CBE, Chair of Sportscotland. Its role is to advise Commonwealth governments and the Commonwealth Secretariat. Following its meeting in Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom, between 18 and 19 July 2014, the advisory body urged member countries to recognise sport as a key vehicle for improving the lives of citizens. The group also discussed ways to ensure integrity in sport. “CABOS believes that sport can play an integral role in the achievement of the post-2015 development agenda, in areas such as health, education, youth empowerment and employment, gender equity, equality, strengthening of communities and peace-building,” reads the Chair’s statement. The meeting comes as policy makers around the globe look to agree new development priorities to replace the Millennium Development Goals, which expire at the end of 2015. “CABOS intends to be in a position to respond quickly to the agreement of the post-2015 development framework, by working with the Commonwealth Secretariat and CYSDP [Commonwealth Youth Sport for Development and Peace working group] to produce an evidence-based analysis of how sport can be used as a tool,” the Chair’s statement continues. Convening two days before the 7th Commonwealth Sports Ministers Meeting, the advisory body re-affirmed its commitment to develop a Commonwealth consensus framework on integrity in sport by 2016, covering issues such as governance, safeguarding of participants, and illegal betting and match fixing. This framework will include high-level principles that all member countries can endorse and adopt.  The advisory body further backed a call by the Commonwealth Youth Sport for Development and Peace working group, composed of youth leaders, created by the Commonwealth Secretariat, for mechanisms to be established to involve young people in decision-making processes in the field of sport for development and peace. The meeting took place as Glasgow city began welcoming visitors for the 20th Commonwealth Games. The major sporting event sees approximately 6,500 athletes from 71 countries and territories compete in 17 sports over 11 days from 23 July to 3 August. “The Commonwealth Games are unique in what they are able to bring to sport in the Commonwealth, and CABOS recognises the unique profile, geographic reach, and impact the Games deliver for sport,” added the Chair in her statement. The statement continues: "CABOS emphasised that the Commonwealth can be a sector leader on sports related issues.  The Commonwealth has a strong sporting identity, in part linked to the continuing success of the Commonwealth Games. "The diverse nature of the countries making up the Commonwealth’s membership means that it is able to recognise and support the differing contexts in which sport operates in these countries, whilst remaining cohesive enough to reach meaningful consensus." Additional experts invited to present at the meeting included representatives of the host Scottish and UK Governments, UNESCO, UNICEF, the Commonwealth Games Association of Canada, the International University Sports Federation and Quest Global. 