ICT Ministers endorse new Commonwealth telecommunications plan
15 June 2016
Ministers from across the Commonwealth have endorsed a new strategic plan from the Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation, giving it a mandate to promote universal access to broadband internet and strengthen cybersecurity. The government representatives made their joint declaration, which sees information and communications technologies (ICTs) as tools for national development, at the biennial Commonwealth ICT Ministers Meeting at Marlborough House on 14 June 2016. This year’s meeting comes after the adoption of the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in September 2015. Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland, in her address to the conference, underscored the importance of recognising the value of ICTs to delivering the SDGs, urging greater “interaction and interoperability” between governments. “The proliferation of technology and increasing access to the internet have developed new digital pathways to address the Sustainable Development Goals,” she said. “It is estimated that by 2017 every person in this world will have a mobile device – we need to fully exploit this phenomenon to improve health, education, commerce and provide government services to citizens. The Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation (CTO) is an international treaty organisation established in 1967 which supports the development and use of ICTs for social and economic development. The CTO’s strategic plan, which was approved by members of the CTO Council in March, was presented at the biennial ministerial meeting by the CTO’s Secretary-General Shola Taylor. One of the participants, Dr Emmanuel Mallia, Malta’s Minister for Competitiveness and Digital, Maritime and Services Economy, and Chairman of this year’s Commonwealth ICT Ministers Forum, said: “Of the many government functions in our respective countries, expectations on using information and communication technology to improve the lives of our citizens are particularly high. Minette Libom Li Likeng, Minister of Post and Telecommunications of Cameroon, said: “Because of its membership across regions and the driving ethos of the Commonwealth, holding such an event is one important role the CTO plays in securing understanding and goodwill across regions on key issues. This, added to recent developments like India’s return, makes a significant difference. Ministers from across the Commonwealth have endorsed a new strategic plan for the Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation, giving it a mandate to promote universal access to broadband internet and strengthen cybersecurity. The government representatives made their joint declaration which sees information and communications technologies (ICTs) as tools for national development, at the biennial Commonwealth ICT Ministers Meeting at Marlborough House on 14 June 2016. This year’s meeting comes after the adoption of the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in September 2015. Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland, in her address to the conference, underscored the importance of recognising the value of ICTs to delivering the SDGs, urging greater “interaction and interoperability” between governments. “The proliferation of technology and increasing access to the internet have developed new digital pathways to address the Sustainable Development Goals,” she said. “It is estimated that by 2017 every person in this world will have a mobile device – we need to fully exploit this phenomenon to improve health, education, commerce and provide government services to citizens. The Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation (CTO) is an international treaty organisation established in 1967 which supports the development and use of ICTs for social and economic development. The CTO’s strategic plan, which was approved by members of the CTO Council in March, was presented at the biennial ministerial meeting by the CTO’s Secretary-General Shola Taylor. One of the participants, Dr Emmanuel Mallia, Malta’s Minister for Competitiveness and Digital, Maritime and Services Economy, and Chairman of this year’s Commonwealth ICT Ministers Forum, said: “Of the many government functions in our respective countries, expectations on using information and communication technology to improve the lives of our citizens are particularly high. Minette Libom Li Likeng, Minister of Post and Telecommunications of Cameroon, said: “Because of its membership across regions and the driving ethos of the Commonwealth, holding such an event is one important role the CTO plays in securing understanding and goodwill across regions on key issues. This, added to recent developments like India’s return, makes a significant difference. Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation website 