SDGs and Inclusive Trade: Commonwealth high level panel at WTO Public Forum
4 October 2016
Recent developments in the global trading landscape have the potential to adversely affect the least developed countries and undermine the aspirations of the sustainable development goals (SDGs). That’s the conclusion of experts who took part in a panel session organised by the Commonwealth Secretariat at the World Trade Organisation’s Public Forum in Geneva this week. ‘Inclusive Trade’ was the theme of this year’s conference – echoing the Commonwealth Secretariat’s approach promoting trade equality. “Not only has global trade slowed but so too has the potency of growth to drive trade, which is a worrying development”, said Dr Jodie Keane, Commonwealth expert on trade issues and co-author of recent major report. Achieving the Istanbul programme of Action by 2020, provides an independent assessment of a UN-led global action programme for the world’s poorest countries. A global slowdown will invariably comprise the majority of businesses within Commonwealth countries. So the integration of small and medium enterprises into a better coordinated and monitored marketplace is key, says the report. This could help to avoid trade measures that damage the interests of least developed countries and small states. In view of the urgent need to translate the aspirations of the SDGs into action, the Commonwealth Secretariat convened a high-level panel at this year’s public forum. The World Trade Organisation’s former chief economist, Patrick Low said, “There is an urgent need to incorporate social and environmental development into global trade policy. Trade is integral to progress towards the sustainable development goals. Ensuring all producers have fair access to opportunity requires improved trade surveillance and examinations of the national laws and regulations that influence trade patterns. National governments need to take control of the implementation agenda of the SDGs.” Dr Mohammad Razzaque, head of international trade policy at the Commonwealth Secretariat, concluded that the recently adopted SDGs provide the international community with an important opportunity to address more effectively the challenges faced by least developed countries. 