Implementation of Anguilla's Sustainable Tourism Master Plan
UnknownDate
Anguilla is heavily dependent on tourism, which is the mainstay of the economy. In 2010, visitors to the country spent an estimated US$99.4 million which supported 3,000 jobs directly in hotels, restaurants, car rental companies, guesthouses, and villas, representing just over two fifths (41%) of total employment. When jobs indirectly dependent on tourism, such as in shops and construction, are also taken into account, it is estimated that just over 60% of all jobs on Anguilla are dependent on tourism. The Government of Anguilla (GoA) consequently, considers the tourism sector key to reviving the economy, and recognises that the future development of the tourism sector must be strategically targeted. Therefore, in response to the downturn in tourism, the GoA commissioned the preparation of a Sustainable Tourism Master Plan (STMP) to 'provide the policy framework for development, management, monitoring and long-term sustainability of the tourism sector for a ten year period'. This project aimed to provide the leadership and expertise to the Project Management Unit (PMU) -STMP in order to provide the necessary coordination, strategic oversight and advice to the STMP implementation process under the direction of the cross-Governmental STMP Steering Committee. The successful completion of this project has supported the implementation of the Sustainable Tourism Master Plan (STMP). The immediate beneficiaries include the Ministry of Finance, Economic Development, Investment, Commerce and Tourism (Min FEDICT) which has benefited from a streamlined and operational PMU to drive the implementation of the STMP. Stakeholders across the public and private tourism sectors, as well as civil society are benefiting from the coordinating and directional role of this project. Ultimately, the people of Anguilla will benefit from sustainable gains in the tourism sector, though increased public revenues, employment, income, foreign exchange and investment. 