African officials to pursue commitment to youth development
 25 February 2014
Senior government officials from Commonwealth countries in Africa will meet in Lusaka, Zambia, on 26 and 27 February to review priorities for youth development. The meeting, convened by the Commonwealth Youth Programme, follows last year’s Commonwealth Summit in Sri Lanka, at which leaders vowed to put young people at the heart of policy-making for sustainable development. The resulting Magampura Commitment to Young People focused on renewing efforts to develop and empower young people to participate meaningfully in issues affecting their future. Katherine Ellis, Director of Youth Affairs at the Commonwealth, said the meeting in Zambia is taking place at a critical moment when the organisation is renewing its model in order to deliver greater value to young people across the 53 member countries of the Commonwealth. “The new model for the Commonwealth Youth Programme is informed by the desire to achieve the greatest positive impact for the largest possible number of young people across the entire membership,” Ms Ellis said. She added that the Commonwealth Youth Programme will continue to be a driving force in the youth development sector, and to support governments and youth-led organisations in policy-making and programming. Under the renewal of the Commonwealth Youth Programme, there will also be consolidation of work with a strategic focus on policy leadership, advocacy, research and analysis, and provision of distilled good practices to member governments. At the senior officials meeting in Lusaka, participants will also assess progress on the outcomes of the 8th Commonwealth Youth Ministers Meeting in Papua New Guinea last April, as well as the 9th Commonwealth Youth Forum in Sri Lanka last November. At the forum, young delegates called on governments to focus on youth employment, fit-for-purpose education, sexual and reproductive health and rights, gender equality, and the professionalisation of youth work. The meeting in Lusaka will end with an event on 27 February 2014. Participants will reflect on and celebrate the achievements of the Commonwealth Youth Programme in Africa over the last 40 years. Similar events have been held for the Asia and Caribbean Commonwealth Youth Programme Centres. Notes to Editors: 