Commonwealth to observe Seychelles Second-Round Presidential Election
 14 December 2015
Commonwealth observers are to remain in Seychelles for the Second-Round of the Presidential Election scheduled for 16-18 December 2015. The Group’s existing mandate is being extended to consider the pre-election, election days, and the immediate post-election day environments of the second round of the Presidential Election. On election days, the Group will observe the voting process, vote-counting procedures and the announcement of results, and assess these processes against the backdrop of international standards for democratic elections to which Seychelles has committed. As with all Commonwealth Observer Groups, this mission will function with impartiality and independence, and will be guided by the standards enunciated in the International Declaration of Principles for Election Observation, to which the Commonwealth is a signatory. Composition of the Observer Group The Commonwealth Observer Group will consist of three eminent persons supported by two Commonwealth Secretariat staff members. The members of the Group are: The Commonwealth Secretariat staff support team will be led by Mr Albert Mariner, Head, Caribbean and Pacific Section, Political Division. Note to Editors: Mr Alvin Smith and Ms Susana Faletau were both part of the Commonwealth Observer Group that arrived in Seychelles for the Presidential Election on 3-5 December 2015. Mr Kenneth Abotsi, was part of an advance Commonwealth Observer team that was present in Seychelles from 15 November - 2 December 2015 On 7 December, Lord Sevele, Chair of the Commonwealth Observer Group, issued an Interim Statement on the preliminary findings of the first-round. The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of 53 independent and equal sovereign states. It is home to 2.2 billion citizens, of which over 60% are under the age of 30. The Commonwealth includes some of the world’s largest, smallest, richest and poorest countries, spanning five regions. Thirty-one of its members are small states, many of them island nations. Commonwealth countries are supported by an active network of more than 80 intergovernmental, civil society, cultural and professional organisations. For more on the work of the Commonwealth visit our website at www.thecommonwealth.org 