Pacific Parliamentarians adopt the Pipitea Declaration
3 August 2015
Wellington, New Zealand, 1 August, 2015 Commonwealth Parliamentarians from the Pacific region adopted the Pipitea Declaration to protect and promote human rights and agreed to support the establishment of the Commonwealth Pacific Parliamentary Human Rights Group at a seminar that concluded today. The Commonwealth Secretariat, in partnership with the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the New Zealand Parliament, organised the regional seminar. It sought to raise awareness of international and national human rights norms and mechanisms, and the role and responsibilities of parliamentarians in engaging with them. Hon Samiu K. Vaipulu, member of the Legislative Assembly of the Kingdom of Tonga said: "I found this seminar very useful. Although I have been a Parliamentarian for quite some time this seminar has shone the light on means and ways for me to protect the rights of others in my community and see how their rights are being affected, as a community and as individuals. We do have legislation in place but our problem is to implement it for the benefit of all people of Tonga and at the same time take into consideration our culture and beliefs. I can see that there is great need for better and closer communication within and between countries." The seminar provided an opportunity for Parliamentarians from across the Commonwealth Pacific region to share experiences and good practices about promoting and protecting human rights by passing laws and holding the executive to account. Speakers included Lord Fusitu’a of the Legislative Assembly of Tonga and Hon Ioteba Redfern of the Parliament of Kiribati. Both shared case study examples of their own Parliaments’ practice in addressing contemporary rights challenges. John Dawkins, Opposition Whip of the Parliament of South Australia said: "I have appreciated the opportunity to participate in this seminar. Many of my fellow delegates have expressed that the presentations and discussions have significantly broadened their outlook on human rights issues across the Pacific and beyond. I was pleased to participate in the formulation of the Pipitea Declaration and look forward to the establishment of the Commonwealth Pacific Parliamentary Human Rights Group." The Commonwealth Pacific Parliamentary Human Rights Group will be key in popularising and operationalising the Pipitea Declaration with parliaments and parliamentarians across the Pacific. Simon Corbell, Australia Central Territory Deputy Chief Minister and Attorney-General said: “The seminar reinforced my appreciation for and deepened my understanding of international human rights mechanisms. I developed a close connection with parliamentarians from across the Pacific and have gained a common resolve to work towards stronger human rights mechanisms at home and in the region.” Other resource persons included Commissioner Kagwiria Mbogori, Chairperson of the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights; Professor Rashida Manjoo, UN Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences; and Dame Carol Kidu, former Member of Parliament in Papua New Guinea. Amongst other topics they explored was how Parliamentarians ought to engage with national human rights institutions and international and regional human rights mechanisms, such as the Universal Periodic Review process. Parliamentarians also discussed violence against women, as well as climate change, both salient regional rights issues. It was the third in a series of Commonwealth regional seminars with this focus, following on from the Caribbean seminar in Trinidad and Tobago in 2013, which resulted in the creation of the Commonwealth Caribbean Parliamentary Human Rights Group, and the Africa seminar in 2014, which resulted in the adoption of the Mahé Declaration and the establishment of the Commonwealth Africa Parliamentary Human Rights Group. 