Amplifying the voices of women
2 November 2015
What is holding women back from political leadership and senior management positions in public and private organisations? Ministers and women’s rights advocates will tackle this and other issues affecting women at the first ever Commonwealth Women’s Forum in Malta later this month. Jointly organised by the Commonwealth Secretariat and the Government of Malta, the Forum will take place from 22 to 24 November, just ahead of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM). Participants will agree on policies and targets for leaders to consider at CHOGM. The theme of the forum is Women Ahead Be All That You Can Be. Amelia Kinahoi Siamomua, Head of Gender at the Secretariat, said the Forum will amplify the voices of women and address a range of issues, including education, technology, violence against women, health and the institutionalised exclusion of women in public bodies and private companies. “Women are asking ‘why do we only have two female Prime Ministers in the Commonwealth? Why is it harder for us to start our own businesses or become managers?’ They are saying it is time for decisive action to ensure women are equally represented in leadership roles in politics, commerce and in justice systems. “If women’s voices are not heard it impacts their access to resources, to finance, to employment and to health services.” The meeting comes on the heels of the UN conference to ratify the Sustainable Development Goals, where world leaders reaffirmed their commitment to gender equality and the empowerment of women. Getting more women into decision-making positions was one of the 17 goals agreed upon in New York. According to the 2015 Status of Women in Leadership Across the Commonwealth report, more women are taking up leadership positions in government and to some degree in public sector management. They make up 43 per cent of cabinet ministers in South Africa, and in some regions, particularly in the Caribbean, more than 50 per cent of permanent secretaries. In Rwanda 32 per cent of the executives on private sector boards are female. But despite encouraging progress, only a handful of countries are meeting the Commonwealth target of 30 per cent representation in senior leadership positions. The number of women on boards within the private sector remains below 25 per cent in many Commonwealth countries. Delegates at the Forum will explore the underlying barriers to women’s leadership. They will discuss Commonwealth Secretariat programmes that help governments to choose and implement strategies such as regulated and self-regulated quotas, targets and reserved seats. “Studies show that diverse boards with more equal representation of women and men are more likely to be financially successful and less likely to be involved in corruption or unethical practices. Our aim is to make a strong business case for women leaders and to gain a commitment from heads of governments to take action,” said Ms Kinahoi Siamomua. Malta’s President, Marie-Louise Coleiro Preca, speaking at the launch of the Women’s Forum in Malta in March, stressed the importance of highlighting the “suffering” and “harsh realities” of women across the globe, and urges governments to move from “rhetoric to action”. “Women and Girls are still being denied education, abducted from their families for sexual exploitation, made to suffer the horrific practice of female genital mutilation and (are) victims of violence and cruelty,” she states, as she encourages women to be “agents of change”. “This Forum is an important platform for discussion on the various levels of maturity across the Commonwealth when it comes to equal opportunities for all,” said Dr Clair Cassar, Chair of the Commonwealth Women’s Forum organising committee. She added: “It will also showcase women’s success stories of empowerment and contributions to society across all spheres, from social development to enterprise. I am honoured that Malta is hosting the inaugural forum and we trust that this will be impactful and a catalyst for the positive change that we would like to see transcend the Commonwealth.” Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General, Dr Josephine Ojiambo said: “Women have the potential to improve their own economic status, as well as that of the communities and countries in which they live. Yet they are often hampered by systems that do not recognise their contributions or provide equal access to opportunities. “Our aim is for every Commonwealth country to create societies where equality for all is not just a notion but a reality, and the human rights of the more than one billion women in the Commonwealth are respected and protected.” @commonwealthsec #CWF2015 #WomenAhead 