Young activists urge ministers to advance the role of young people in sport
19 August 2016
The Commonwealth Youth Sport for Development and Peace working group (CYSDP) was pleased to contribute to the 8th Commonwealth Sports Ministers Meeting (8CSMM). The meeting took place on the eve of one of the greatest celebrations of human achievement, the Olympic Games in Rio. The meeting was notable for constructive and engaging discussions in three key areas: CYSDP believes that integrity in sport needs to grow from the grassroots level. Now is the time to create a culture shift so young people inspire others to uphold the positive values and principles which are fundamental to sport. Concerns about the rise in sport integrity, such as the use of banned substances, have had a negative impact at all levels of sport. The recent adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development meant the discussions between ministers and heads of delegation were both timely and insightful. More so, because they could bring their own experiences and expertise to the table. It’s important young people lead the way. Today’s children and youth represent the single largest cohort of young people in history. There are approximately 1 .8 billion young people between the ages 10 and 24. CYSDP was pleased to have ministers recognise the significant role of young people as contributors to sustainable development and as key players in maximising Commonwealth cooperation in sport. Ministers were urged to endorse the role of young people this area. That’s because advocacy forms a major part of the mission of the CYSDP to campaign, educate and demonstrate best practices in SDP throughout the Commonwealth. CYSDP asked Ministers to commit to: Ministers’ endorsement of these recommendations,  detailed in the meeting communique, represents  a step forward in realising the Commonwealth’s commitment to involve young people in decision making in key areas. It is hoped that this collaborative engagement of young people in decision making processes in and through sport will contribute to positive change in society and maximise Commonwealth cooperation in sport. The endorsement and support of Ministers have given CYSDP the impetus to begin developing strategies and start to implement them in Commonwealth countries. CYSDP greatly appreciates the recognition of its work. It will continue to advocate using the CYSDP Toolkit, and various other resources, to promote the value of sport as a catalyst for development for both policy makers and young people. CYSDP Caribbean Representative - Janine Thornhill and CYSDP co-ordinator Tikwiza Silubonde 