Commonwealth Education Good Practice Awards 2018
31 October 2016
The Commonwealth Secretariat is pleased to invite nominations and submissions for the Commonwealth Education Good Practice Awards 2018. The Awards recognise the outstanding contribution and achievements of education professionals and bodies that have made a difference to learners’ lives through innovative education and learning for development initiatives and practices. The Fifth Commonwealth Education Good Practice Awards were launched at the Secretariat’s headquarters to invite applicants from Commonwealth countries to highlight their good practices in education and to encourage, reward and generate enthusiasm within the education sector. Any organisation, whether public or private, including Commonwealth ministries of education, educational institutions and civil society organisations advising in or delivering education and learning in Commonwealth countries can nominate themselves or be nominated. The formal and non-formal education sectors span from early childhood education to adult education, including primary, secondary and tertiary education, technical and vocational education and training, and skills development. A good practice submission must be a policy, programme, project or strategy that has made a positive difference to learners, whether children, young people or adults, or to the education system of a Commonwealth member country in respect of one or more of the five categories for 2018. Reminder: Entries should be clear and comprehensive, and should clearly describe how good educational and learning policies or practices have been implemented and what has been achieved. Winners will be awarded at the 20th Conference of Commonwealth Education Ministers (20CCEM) in Fiji in 2018. There will be five regional awards across the designated categories including an award for the finalist with the strongest teacher professional development component in honour of the late Steve Sinnott, former General Secretary of the United Kingdom National Union of Teachers, known as the Steve Sinnott Award. Submissions must be received by 15 March 2017 and should be sent by e-mail to educationawards@commonwealth.int and/or posted to: The Co-ordinator, Commonwealth Education Good Practice Awards, Health and Education Unit, Commonwealth Secretariat, Marlborough House, Pall Mall, London SW1Y 5HX, United Kingdom. More information is available in the Commonwealth Education Good Practice Awards 2018 information brochure which can be found on this page, or by contacting the Co-ordinator, at educationawards@commonwealth.int. 