Commonwealth shares best practices on fighting corruption with Francophone Africa
10 October 2018
The heads of anti-corruption agencies from French-speaking African nations have attended a training programme in Abidjan, Cote D’Ivoire to learn about the Commonwealth’s anti-corruption initiatives on the continent. The Commonwealth joined forces with the African Development Bank (AfDB) to deliver the anti-corruption initiative.  The Commonwealth has a well-established programme on the continent.  It has established an anti-corruption centre in Botswana and a regional association of anti-corruption agencies for Commonwealth countries in Africa. The AfDB hopes to extend Commonwealth best practices, skills and expertise to countries outside the group, including French-speaking African nations. "There is a need for Anti-Corruption leaders who are transformational, ethical and strategic to lead the change," said Roger Koranteng, who delivered the training and heads the Commonwealth’s programme on public sector governance. "Due to the complex nature of working in the area of anti-corruption, such leaders should have the ability to envisage and plan, commitment and courage to implement, and responding effectively to corruption risks and vulnerabilities," he added. Mr. Bubacarr Sankareh, AfDB’s Director of Integrity and Anti-Corruption, thanked the Commonwealth Secretariat for lending its expertise:  "This is the first time the bank has been able to bring Heads of Francophone Anti-Corruption Agencies together using the Commonwealth Secretariat model,” he said.  “It was a real achievement as we worked to strengthen the fight against corruption on the continent. “The programme cements the collaboration between the Commonwealth Secretariat and the AfDB in the areas of good governance, and in particular to build effective anti-corruption institutions in Africa.  We look forward to further collaboration and hope we are able to bring the Anglophone and Francophone together in future engagements for cross learning,” he concluded. 