New diplomats hail “Commonwealth camaraderie” at London induction
24 September 2018
Recently–arrived diplomats have reaffirmed the Commonwealth’s reputation as a platform through which officials from diverse countries can engage with each other in a spirit of comradeship and collaboration.  Delegates at the 35th Commonwealth Diplomats Induction Programme highlighted the “Commonwealth camaraderie” as a key takeaway, which transformed their orientation into a friendly space to share opinions and ideas, as well as strengthen networks. The three-day event took place from 18-20 September.  It enhanced understanding in the diplomatic community about how the Commonwealth operates, and the role of the 53-member bloc in promoting the values enshrined in its Charter to the wider world.  The 25 officials who attended the programme came from 17 Commonwealth countries as well as the Royal Household, and were either newly-posted to the United Kingdom or assigned to the Commonwealth desk in their capitals. Wilfred T. Adderley II, Second Secretary/Vice-Consul at the Bahamas High Commission, said the opportunity was invaluable: “This training provided a greater understanding of the Commonwealth’s history, its challenges and the opportunities it has to offer. It prepared us to better provide accurate advice to our capital that upholds the commitments made at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) [in April 2018].” Discussions were led by a diverse line-up of speakers, who offered insights and perspectives to intra-Commonwealth and global issues. Speaking during a session, the former Prime Minister of Pakistan, Shaukat Aziz, said the initiative supports diplomats to become wiser and be more effective: “The Commonwealth has experienced individuals it can tap into and to bring them into this period of training and transition so that the diplomats can discuss various issues with world leaders, foreign policy experts and members of parliament,” he said. “We need to develop the expertise in diplomacy, understanding issues and communicating points of view, especially when young diplomats from different countries sit together and learn from each other.” Participants also had an opportunity to hear from the Deputy Secretary-General of NATO, Rose Gottemoeller, as well as the Ambassador of China to the UK, Liu Xiaoming, who encouraged the diplomats to seize opportunities for collaboration in a wider global context: “Let us join hands to promote peace and achieve development. Together we will contribute to the building of a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind,” he said. At the end of the programme, delegates said they appreciated the practical knowledge they gained, which they could apply to their work as diplomats in London and beyond. 