Commonwealth and Mo Ibrahim Foundation join forces to promote good governance
17 May 2016
The Commonwealth and the Mo Ibrahim Foundation have announced a partnership to collaborate on promoting good governance in Commonwealth member countries. Under the agreement, the two organisations will explore ways to build stronger public institutions across four main areas - safety and rule of law, participation and human rights, sustainable economic opportunity, and human development. The partnership will result in bilateral support to Commonwealth member countries on good governance as well as an annual review of how countries perform in the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, among other initiatives. Commenting on the new partnership, Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland said: “Our agreement today with the Mo Ibrahim Foundation is a strong commitment to support Commonwealth countries in our shared goal of achieving world class governance standards that underpin an inclusive development agenda. “Like the Mo Ibrahim Foundation, the Commonwealth believes that democracy and development are mutually reinforcing: as a values-based institution, we place emphasis on supporting our member states strengthen their democratic processes and institutions in order to create a conducive and sustainable environment for economic development to thrive,” she said. Delegates at a launch event at the Commonwealth’s headquarters at Marlborough House in London on 17 March included High Commissioners from several Commonwealth countries. Abdoulie Janneh, Executive Director at Mo Ibrahim Foundation, said: “This partnership with the institution with whom we share a common objective of promoting development based on principles of sound governance is very important. We look forward to a continuous and meaningful collaboration between the Mo Ibrahim Foundation and the Commonwealth Secretariat”. The Mo Ibrahim Foundation was founded by entrepreneur and philanthropist Mo Ibrahim to enhance governance and leadership in Africa. It has established the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, the Ibrahim Prize for Achievement in African Leadership, the Ibrahim Forum and the Ibrahim Fellowships. The Commonwealth Secretariat provides policy and technical assistance to 53 Commonwealth member countries, including 18 African countries, to help support democracy, rule of law, human rights, good governance and social and economic development. Good governance is a core area of expertise which the Commonwealth Secretariat promotes to all member countries as it seeks to instil the 2013 agenda for sustainable development. Last week, the Commonwealth Secretariat organised an international anti-corruption conference that brought together government, civil society and business leaders from around the world to promote good governance. 