Seychelles Presidential Election 2015: Observer Group Interim Statement
7 December 2015
I am honoured to have chaired the Commonwealth Observer Group during such a significant election for the people of Seychelles. Our presence here reaffirms the Commonwealth’s support to the country and its democratic processes. Our group assessed the pre-election environment and divided into four teams, which visited all 25 electoral areas to observe polling and the results process. The following is an interim statement outlining our key observations of the election process and the electoral environment, bearing in mind that there is a second-round election within the next two weeks. The Commonwealth Secretariat is considering the deployment of observers for the second-round. Key Observations The participation of five political parties and an independent candidate in these elections led to a highly competitive campaign environment. We were, therefore, pleased to observe that the campaign period was overall calm and peaceful and that the fundamental rights of candidates, political parties and the electorate to freely assemble and campaign were respected.. Most polling stations opened on time and polling procedures were generally followed and appeared transparent. Polling stations were well sign-posted, and the polling process was smooth, though slower than had been anticipated in some stations. In those polling stations where voters were still in the queue at the close of polls, they were allowed to exercise their franchise as stipulated in the electoral law. We believe that the polling process could be improved by increasing the number of polling stations. Polling staff appeared conversant with the electoral processes, procedures and their respective responsibilities. Given the long day and demand to   adhere to the process, the staff, were observed as being competent and professional. Voters appeared to be familiar with the process and were orderly and patient. We commend the arrangement for fast-tracking the elderly, pregnant women and other vulnerable voters. The special voting arrangement for elderly and disabled voters and the introduction of special voting for persons on remand are positive steps. We were encouraged by the large numbers of women and youth who participated in the electoral process, not only as voters, but also as polling staff, citizen observers and party agents. We wish to use this opportunity to commend the growing efforts of civil society organisations in providing support and oversight in the electoral process. We are of the view that the input of these civil society groups can contribute positively to the conduct of the polls. We would like to commend the staff of the Electoral Commission of Seychelles, polling officials, political parties, the Police, citizen and other international observers, as well as the wider population for their dedication and collective support to the election. Based on our observation and exchanges with a broad range of stakeholders since our arrival in Seychelles, our preliminary conclusion is that the election was peaceful, generally well conducted and transparent. We offer the highest commendation to the people of Seychelles for the peaceful and orderly manner in which they exercised their right to vote on 3-5 December. As they prepare for the second round vote on the 16th to 18th December, we encourage the candidates, parties and voters to continue in this spirit of democratic engagement. 