“The Hub” helps vulnerable countries tap crucial climate funds
4 July 2018
The Commonwealth’s hub for climate finance celebrated key milestones this week, including the mobilisation of £3.7 million for climate-vulnerable countries, with another £135 million in the pipeline. The Secretary-General, Patricia Scotland, joined government officials, international partners, and the media in Port Louis, Mauritius on Tuesday, for a special event organised by the Commonwealth’s Climate Finance Access Hub, simply known as “The Hub”. “The Hub has got off to a remarkable start. It is already being recognised by our own member countries and by other stakeholders as a leading entity in the global climate finance space,” Secretary-General Scotland told stakeholders.  Locating the Hub in Mauritius conveys a powerful message that its principal focus is to provide technical assistance and unlock the potential for climate finance to small island developing states.” Since it began operations 18 months ago, the Hub has placed long-term advisers in eight countries across Africa, the Pacific and the Caribbean. All are small island developing states (SIDS) or least developed countries (LDCs) that are vulnerable to climate change. The experts work with local ministries to prepare bankable climate change projects that meet the technical requirements of international funders.  The £3.7 million raised so far supports the development of Jamaica’s forest policy, climate-smart agricultural training in Barbados and establishment of a weather monitoring system in Mauritius. Meanwhile, more than 30 other initiatives are being prepared for submission to international climate finance institutions, worth £135 million altogether. Secretary-General Scotland thanked the Government of Mauritius for hosting The Hub in its capital, Port Louis, and for supporting its work at regional and international forums. She also recognised key financial support from the Governments of Australia and the United Kingdom. “The Commonwealth Climate Finance Access Hub plays an important role in continuing to advocate for climate vulnerable states. I would like to add my voice in encouraging to others to continue to support the hub’s operations,” said Australia’s High Commissioner to Mauritius, Jenny Dee. The British High Commissioner in Mauritius, Keith Allan, urged other member states to join in supporting the programme. The General Manager of The Hub, Bilal Anwar, says he plans to expand the number of countries receiving assistance, as well as the scope of the Hub’s services, over the next year.  The Hub is part of a range of Commonwealth initiatives to address the negative impacts of climate change. 