Building partnerships to improve management of public finances in Africa
 16 November 2015
Improving transparency, accountability and efficiency of public financial management institutions and systems will be the focus of discussions at a three-day conference for public sector officials from Africa. The Regional Internal Audit and Public Procurement Meeting for Commonwealth Africa, organised by the Commonwealth Secretariat, will take place from 17 to 19 November at Marlborough House, in London. Participants will have the opportunity to consider ways to improve internal audit and public procurement systems by creating more efficient processes through partnerships. The Commonwealth has long recognised the importance of strengthening democratic oversight of public financial management standards as crucial to improving  social and economic prospects for all citizens. This is also outlined in Goal 16 of the new Sustainable Development Goals adopted last September, which states the need to “promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels”. Commenting ahead of the meeting, Augustus Cole, Adviser in Public Financial Management at the Commonwealth Secretariat said: “In times of austerity, ensuring public funds are spent transparently and judiciously to deliver better public services is even more of a priority. Many developing countries, however, continue to face challenges because of a lack of institutional capacity and limited resources. The probability of corruption increases where there are gaps in these systems. “The Africa regional meeting of Internal Auditors and Public Procurement Regulatory Bodies is the first step in bringing these two important structures together. This will allow for a more streamlined, joined-up and accountable way of providing oversight of public spending to improve value for money. We hope to replicate this model in other Commonwealth regions, such as the Caribbean and Pacific.” A recent Commonwealth survey showed that some Commonwealth countries do not have the necessary components in place, such as functioning audit committees, to aid the oversight of public spending. In many developing countries, internal audit systems are still in their infancy. Weak processes governing the way public money is spent have led to wasted funds and corruption. Transparency in public procurement, including making public the award of contracts, is vital to instilling trust and confidence in the way government budgets are spent. Strengthening technology, such as the use of e-procurement, will play an important role in improving government procurement systems overall. This conference is part of an ongoing Commonwealth programme of work to actively support improved public administration and governance through regional engagement with heads and directors of internal audit in ministries of finance and public procurement regulatory authorities. 