Trade Express: Strategies for Success
17 November 2015
The Commonwealth Secretariat hosted a meeting of trade officials, high commissioners, development partners and industry experts which coincided with the launch of the publication 'Trade Express: Strategies for Success'. It is the first accessible publication to be developed with the key objectives of driving knowledge sharing and south-south collaboration opportunities in trade competitiveness. In his keynote address, Deputy Secretary-General, Deodat Maharaj, said:" Many Commonwealth small states and several landlocked African Commonwealth countries suffer from certain inherent characteristics which impacts on their trading capacity. In this regard, we are keen that member countries will benefit from timely, relevant, and high quality economic research, analysis and technical support to frame national economic goals and trade strategy." During 2003-2013, trade in goods and services between Commonwealth countries expanded from US$266 billion to US$592 billion, an average annual growth of 10 per cent. Intra-Commonwealth trade in goods and services is projected to surpass US$1 trillion by 2020. In 2013, Commonwealth member countries combined total exports of goods and services to all countries stood at US$3.4 trillion, an estimated 14.8 per cent of world exports. At the same time, the share of intra-Commonwealth trade rose from 15.2 per cent to 17.6 per cent. "I am keen that we continue to find ways to strengthen our partnership with our member countries, particularly with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ascribing a much stronger role to trade, and in a time where the Commonwealth provides tremendous trade and investment opportunities, added Mr. Maharaj. The Secretariat’s Trade Competitiveness Section is currently working with 15 member states on projects related to aspects of trade competitiveness, targeted policies and providing strategies to overcome supply constraints. Notable achievements include the Seychelles successful accession in 2015 to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) which was aided by an in-country trade adviser, provided through the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation. 