Commonwealth Spokesperson Clarification on Media Accreditation for CHOGM 2013
11 July 2013
The Commonwealth Secretariat in London welcomes applications from all journalists seeking media accreditation to the 2013 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) scheduled to be held in Sri Lanka this November. The following are part of the Commonwealth Secretariat’s standard guidelines for media accreditation at all CHOGMs. All media participating in CHOGM 2013 must be accredited in order to access and use the media facilities within the Media Centre, located at the Bandaranaike Memorial International Conference Hall (BMICH) complex. The Commonwealth Secretariat is working with the CHOGM 2013 Taskforce in Sri Lanka to address concerns raised in the media about accreditation. As is customary, the Commonwealth Secretariat is the final authority for all international media accreditation for CHOGM. The accreditation process will be carried out in collaboration with the host country authorities, who are responsible for processing and approving visa applications by accredited media. Media accreditation is open to all bona fide journalists, including online media practitioners, broadcasters, photographers, film and television camera crews and technicians. Every effort will be made to facilitate attendance and coverage of CHOGM by the media. Media who wish to obtain CHOGM 2013 accreditation can register electronically through the CHOGM 2013 website at http://www.chogm2013.lk/. Please see the CHOGM 2013 Note on Media Arrangements. Applicants that need to apply for a Sri Lankan visa to attend CHOGM 2013 will be provided with an Accreditation Certificate via email which, they must include as part of their application for an ‘electronic’ or ‘paper based’ Visitor Visa. Journalists are encouraged to submit applications for accreditation no later than 25 October 2013. Media accreditation passes can be collected on arrival in Colombo from the Accreditation Desk at Bandaranaike International Airport or at the Media Centre at BMICH, upon presentation of a valid ID and accreditation certificate. Applications for accreditation will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Accreditation can be denied or withdrawn if it is established that an applicant does not have bona fide media credentials. International media accreditation enquiries should be directed to: Ms Victoria Holdsworth
CHOGM 2013 Media Accreditation (International)
Communications and Public Affairs Division
Commonwealth Secretariat
Marlborough House, Pall Mall
London SW1Y 5HX
United Kingdom Telephone: +44 (0) 20 7747 6383
Email: chogm@commonwealth.int Accreditation enquiries from media organisations based in Sri Lanka should be directed to: Mr Ali Hassan
CHOGM 2013 Media Accreditation Officer (Local)
Assistant Director
Department of Government Information
No. 163, Kirulapone Avenue
Polhengoda, Colombo 05
Sri Lanka Telephone: +94 11 5335101
Mobile: +94 773184272
Email: chogm2013media@mea.gov.lk 