Inspiring global change, one Bright Idea at a time
 12 August 2015
Young people across the Commonwealth are being invited to share their ‘Bright Ideas’ online and compete to win a trip to Malta to present at the Commonwealth Youth Forum in November. Bright Ideas from a Young Commonwealth was launched today (12 August) to mark International Youth Day under the 2015 theme ‘Youth Civic Engagement.’ The initiative showcases the ideas and activities of people under 30 who are leading positive change in their community, country or region. “We are encouraging young people or organisations to host and record a Bright Ideas event where young leaders talk about their vision, solutions and ideas. Participants are encouraged to send a recording of the talk to the Commonwealth who will promote it online, in video or as a podcast, to a global audience,” said Katherine Ellis, Director of Youth at the Commonwealth Secretariat. The Bright Ideas talks will be hosted on YourCommonwealth.org, the website created and crafted by young people, students and emerging youth leaders. For information about hosting a Bright Ideas event and filming or recording the talk, read the Bright Ideas how-to guide “Youth engagement and participation are essential for sustainable development, and a key priority for the Commonwealth. Bright Ideas from a Young Commonwealth will inspire and motivate young people to see how they can put their own development ideas into action,” said Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General, Deodat Maharaj. By submitting a Bright Ideas video or podcast to the Commonwealth by 30 September 2015, participants will be in the running to secure free attendance to the Commonwealth Youth Forum in Malta and have an opportunity to present their idea to youth leaders from across the Commonwealth. Refer to YourCommonwealth.org for full terms and conditions of the competition. Watch some inspiring Bright Ideas talks. Join the conversation through social media using these hashtags: #CWBrightIdeas #YoungCommonwealth 