Kenya General Elections 2013: Interim Statement
6 March 2013
The Commonwealth Observer Group has been present in Kenya since 25 February 2013. During this period we have met with the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (IEBC), representatives of political parties, civil society, media, Commonwealth High Commissions as well as other international and national observers. Commonwealth teams were based in seven of the Provinces. Our teams observed the voting, counting and results aggregation and also met with electoral officials, observers and other stakeholders at the County level to build up a larger picture on the conduct of the process. This is the interim statement of the Commonwealth Observer Group, and it is issued with the process yet to be completed as the critical tabulation and results processes are on-going. We will issue a Final Report at a later stage, containing our conclusions on the entire process. The outgoing parliament passed the new electoral legislation, but they did so in some cases quite late resulting in a contracting of the electoral calendar or with various amendments which were not always helpful to the effective administration and management of the process. For instance, the voter registration period was reduced from 90 days before elections to 60 days; and, the requirement for a minimum period a candidate had to have been a member of a party in order to qualify for nomination was reduced from three months until the day of nominations, thereby facilitating party hopping up to the last moment. The IEBC set a figure of 18 million as the potential eligible electorate. During the 30 day registration period which was eventually provided for, the IEBC registered some 14.3 million persons. While the registering of 14.3 million persons in just 30 days is an impressive figure, such a truncated period of registration for such crucial elections is unfortunate. The start of registration had been delayed following delays in the decision regarding the system of registration to be used and problems with the procurement process. There were also some delays in the finalisation and certification of the lists due to the time required for the cleaning and correcting of data. Final figures indicate that some 13,000 people were double registered and therefore excluded from voting. There is a higher level of confidence and trust in the independence of the judiciary following reforms and new appointments among judges at various levels. This is very positive in the context of the elections and more broadly. It was also positive that Courts sought to fast track electoral matters and that informal mechanisms existed, such as the Political Party Liaison Committees, to resolve conflicts between parties. The election campaign was reportedly generally peaceful. There were some local incidents and also tensions in some areas where there had been pre-existing problems, such as in the Tana River. But overall candidates and parties held numerous rallies and meetings throughout the country and were able to freely assemble and express their views. The numerous calls for peace by leading figures helped foster this conducive climate, as did the high profile peace rallies, such as the large one in Nairobi the week before the election. The presidential debates also helped focus attention on the issues and candidates engaged in them in a constructive manner. Further, the absence of hate speech in media and a more balanced coverage by media generally also contributed to the positive assessment of the election campaign. The level of women’s representation in elective institutions under the current dispensation is improved compared to previously when just 10% of the members of parliament were female. Now there are 47 special seats for women in the National Assembly, 16 seats allocated in the Senate from party lists and women members for County Assemblies. However, Article 27(8) of the Constitution states that the “State shall take legislative and other measures to implement the principle that not more than two-thirds of the members of elective or appointive bodies shall be of the same gender”. But following a decision of the Supreme Court, the implementation of this provision was postponed. It is hoped that for future elections the positive provision in the Constitution for more balanced gender representation is implemented. The turnout of voters was high, with long queues at many polling places prior to the opening of polls at 06.00. In some voting centres there were thousands of registered voters which meant that there was a wait of several hours. Security was present and was on the whole effective in helping IEBC officers to manage crowds. Polling staff worked hard and diligently and while some places experienced problems with the biometric voter identification devices the provision of printed registers as a back-up meant that people were not disenfranchised. The holding of six elections at the same time meant that voting was sometimes slow. Further, the different colours used for the ballots were not sufficiently distinctive and many voters had a problem identifying the correct ballot box for the respective ballots.
The vote count in polling stations was transparent, with officials conducting the process in a deliberate and careful manner and party agents were present and able to scrutinize the process, ensuring transparency and accountability at that level. It is noted that the number of invalid votes is quite high. This is unfortunate but not unforeseeable given the complexity of the voting process and the relatively late effort of the IEBC’s voter education campaign. The tabulation process is on-going and the IEBC must retain its transparency in completing this and that any complaints are dealt with effectively to ensure accountability. Nairobi, 6 March 2013 