Sierra Leone launches web portal to enhance transparency and accountability of governance
26 January 2012
Sierra Leone President Ernest Bai Koroma has launched a web portal known as Transparency Sierra Leone Portal - www.transparencysierraleone.gov.sl - aimed at enhancing the transparency and accountability of his government. The portal, established by the Commonwealth Secretariat for the Government of Sierra Leone, was unveiled in Freetown, Sierra Leone, on 24 January 2012. It aims to build on the Open Government Initiative in promoting good governance and democracy. President Koroma commended the Commonwealth for its support of the project, saying it was important for the government to effectively communicate its programmes to all citizens. "We advocate an open and transparent government in which we are accountable for the delivery of service,” said Mr Koroma. “This portal is a gigantic step in ensuring that our people have adequate information about all government projects across the country." He added that real progress can be achieved only through innovative solutions borne of open collaboration and dialogue with citizens. The portal provides a gateway to information on government development projects and data that will be made public. It is managed by the Strategy and Policy Unit (SPU) in the Office of the President. Anthony Ming, Informatics Adviser at the Commonwealth Secretariat, expressed confidence in the portal’s success. “Democracy and transparency are key elements in the core values of the Commonwealth, and this web portal is an initiative that embodies those values. The Government of Sierra Leone should be applauded for its efforts at greater openness by promoting interactive communications between the citizens and the government as their opinions are valued in the formulation of public policy,” said Mr Ming. The portal offers access to three key sites: Government Project Registry for data on poverty reduction projects; Development Partner Registry for information on funding and disbursements for various sectors; and Join the Transformation which is an interactive platform for debate on the government’s poverty reduction strategy. The President’s Chief of Staff, Dr Kaifala Marah said: “Transformation requires the aggressive collaboration and co-operation of many individuals, so as citizens, we all share the duty to transform Sierra Leone. This web portal will help foster public trust while establishing a system of accountability, engagement and collaboration.” 