How one girl’s longing for change started a revolution to empower girls and end FGM
24 November 2016
In recent years, much has been achieved to raise awareness of female genital mutilation (FGM) as one of the most extreme forms of violence against women and the life-long harm it does to girls and women across the world. Kenya is one country that has seen a significant reduction in the practice with the estimated national prevalence dropping from 37% in 1998 to 21% in 2014 (UNICEF). As we mark the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women on 25th November, it is right that we recognise this progress but we must also remember that millions of girls are still at risk of FGM. Despite laws against FGM, many persist with the practice and more effort is needed to fully eradicate it. A new documentary film, “Nancy: A One Girl Revolution” highlights this issue through the story of Nancy, a Kenyan Pokot girl. Nancy resisted FGM and is now leading a movement to empower girls and women and end FGM and child marriage. For six years, film maker Sara Nason has followed her progression from rebellious school girl, resisting FGM and early marriage, to accomplished campaigner and role model for her generation. She now works to inspire other girls and families to have the courage to change. This all began because she wanted to avoid the abuses she had seen her mother suffer, as well as avoid being owned by an older man. She had watched women who were cut give birth and decided she would resist. She also saw the best route to her own empowerment was through education. It is a remarkable story as FGM remains a deeply entrenched practice in the region Nancy is from. Many girls do not go to school or only attend until they are cut, typically between 7 and 11 years old. Nancy’s passion for education, independent spirit and great courage enabled her to stand up to immense pressure from her family and community. Now with a young son to look after, Nancy is continuing her education at teacher training college and advocacy work. Her campaigning over the last decade has helped save many girls within the Pokot region in Kenya. A brilliant speaker and a fearless taboo-breaker, she is a modern-day suffragette who is leading a girl revolution and is an inspiration to other girls and young women. At the heart of Nancy’s story is her recognition from a young age that continuing her education was essential for her to fulfil her dreams and best help her family. Education is a fundamental human right, enshrined in international law, which is essential for the exercise of all other human rights. However, many are denied this right, especially girls. As recently as 2013, 31 million girls of primary school age and 32 million of lower secondary school age were not in school (UNICEF). Educating girls helps to break cycles of poverty, discrimination and widespread gender based violence. It is estimated that 1 in 3 (35%) of women worldwide have experienced either physical and/or sexual intimate partner violence or non-partner sexual violence in their lifetime (WHO). Globally over 200 million girls and women have undergone FGM and more than 700 million women alive today were married before their 18th birthday, with more than 250 million married before age 15 (UNICEF). Efforts to increase girls’ participation in school must be international and national, working to support local action. Organisations such as the Commonwealth can play a leading role in bringing nations together to share learning and develop effective strategies. Change is not easy but with the launch of the global goals for Sustainable Development earlier this year, which include specific goals to achieve a quality education and gender equality for all, there is an opportunity to focus energy and resources on these key areas. Nancy’s film will help advocate and amplify the message of the sustainable goals, utilising the power of story-telling and personal testimony to help reach remote communities as well as governments and policy makers. As a beacon of hope, Nancy believes her tribe is near a tipping point. With support, she hopes they will abandon these abusive practices by 2020. She wants to work with others to share her story, using it to show that change is happening and to spread this news far and wide, reaching every girl she can. On 25th November 2016, to mark the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women, The Commonwealth is hosting “Empowering girls and women:  the role of Health and Education in Eliminating Violence Against Women”. This event will bring together experts, policy makers and activists who will see an extract from “Nancy: A One Girl Revolution” and hear from Nancy how she hopes her film will spread her message and support the empowerment of girls and women across East Africa and beyond. Nancy and all of us supporting her campaign hope this will lead to increased commitment and support to educate and empower girls. Let’s all be part of this revolution. Blog post by Louise Robertson, Communications Advisor to Nancy: A One Girl Revolution 