Commonwealth Scholars are ‘shaping the future’
18 November 2014
Commonwealth Scholars are contributing to major scientific and social advances across the globe and changing peoples’ lives for the better, Deodat Maharaj, Deputy Secretary-General of the Commonwealth, has said. Mr Maharaj spoke at a welcome event for the ‘class of 2014’ – PhD and Masters students and fellows from academic and professional backgrounds from across the 53-nation Commonwealth – who are embarking on their studies courtesy of the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission in the United Kingdom. Describing Commonwealth Scholarships as a “critical vehicle to promote cultural cooperation,” Mr Maharaj told the audience of more than 300 students in London that they can “stand tall and be proud of being a member of a very special family: the Commonwealth family.” Maharaj said: “The Commonwealth believes that educating young people is critical for shaping the future of our member countries, not only as a desirable end in its own right, but because of its contribution to national development.” “Scholarships are particularly vital for an association where 31 of its 53 member states are small states. Many of our countries are too small to provide the full range of facilities and disciplines themselves and so must send students overseas. For them, this programme goes a long way in building human resource capacity,” the Deputy Secretary-General said. The host of the welcome event, the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission in the United Kingdom, delivers the UK Government’s contribution to the wider Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, supporting scholarships and fellowships for postgraduate study and professional development, as well as nominating UK students to study overseas. In the 2014-2015 academic year, 867 Commonwealth Scholars and Fellows from 43 Commonwealth countries will be funded to study in the UK. Globally, around 30,000 individuals have benefited from the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan since it was established in 1959. Other countries offering Commonwealth Scholarships include India, Malaysia and New Zealand. Professor Tim Unwin, Chair of the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission, gave the gathered students a warm welcome, thanking them for “pushing the boundaries of knowledge forward”. “You stand up for the values that the Commonwealth cherishes: democracy, human rights, fairness, respecting each other, and, above all, believing and making a difference to the common good rather than individual greed,” Professor Unwin said. The event took place at Central Hall Westminster in London on 14 November. During his address, Mr Maharaj thanked donor governments, including the UK’s Department for International Development, and urged Commonwealth Scholars everywhere to be champions for the programme. The Deputy Secretary-General added: “When you return to your countries, think about service and service above self, so collectively we can all advance as a Commonwealth.” To learn more about Commonwealth Scholarships, please visit the website of the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan: www.csfp-online.org Visit the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission in the United Kingdom website to learn about Commonwealth Scholarships and Fellowships in the UK: www.dfid.gov.uk/cscuk 