Anti-corruption leaders praise ‘invaluable’ workshop
6 October 2017
Senior officials from across Africa praised a training workshop last month aimed at helping heads of anti-corruption authorities better manage law enforcement agencies. The Commonwealth Secretariat, in partnership with the Commonwealth Africa Anti-Corruption Centre and South Africa’s Special Investigation Unit (SIU),), hosted the five-day course in Pretoria, South Africa. Delegates were affiliated to the Association of Anti-Corruption Agencies in Commonwealth Africa. Her Ladyship Justice Afia Serwaa Asare Botwe, from the High Court in Ghana, said: “The lessons on leadership and management that I have learned are invaluable. This is because judges have to manage and lead people, but the human side of things is not prioritised in judicial training.” The course had two facilitators - Ghana High Court Judge Botwe and Dr Roger Koranteng, Interim Head of Governance, Public Sector, from the Commonwealth Secretariat. Justice Botwe highlighted the quality of evidence that is required for a successful prosecution, and delegates discussed how to gather relevant and admissible evidence for successful prosecution of financial crimes. Justice Botwe delivered an in-depth explanation on practical modes of confiscation, and asset recovery and forfeitures after successful prosecution of corruption cases. Dr Koranteng focused on leadership and management skills required to lead anti-corruption agencies to achieve SDG 16 and covered areas including: cultural challenges to leadership, behaviour relationships with subordinates, conflict management, Strategic planning and Management ethics and professional values, effective time management, Management Functions, Roles & Skills  and team-building. Anti-corruption agency heads at the meeting came from: Botswana, Ghana, Lesotho, Mauritius, Malawi, Namibia, Nigeria, Swaziland, Uganda, South Africa, Sierra Leone, Seychelles and Zambia. Victor B Paledi, Director General, Directorate of Corruption and Economic Crime, Botswana, said: “Leading in today’s world is a very complex affair and I strongly feel and believe leaders should go on retreats like these to sharpen their saws.” Paulus Noa, Director General of the Anti-Corruption Commission of Namibia, said: “The knowledge that I acquired from the training was enormous and will richly help me in my profession. I wish to thank the Commonwealth Secretariat, particularly Dr Koranteng.” Dr Koranteng stated that: “The course was designed to enhance and build on the Anti-Corruption Agencies’ current leadership and management capabilities and to contribute to creating a well-functioning, accountable and transparent institutions capable for achieving SDG 16” 