Strengthening humanitarian law: what role for Commonwealth countries?
21 April 2015
Representatives from over 20 High Commissions and other guests gathered in Marlborough House recently for a seminar on international humanitarian law. The event, organised jointly by the Commonwealth Secretariat and the British Red Cross, was designed to inform Commonwealth member countries on the latest developments in international humanitarian law and discuss ways in which they can contribute to strengthening compliance. The Deputy Secretary-General (Political), Dr Josephine Ojiambo, opened the meeting and highlighted the commitment of the Commonwealth Secretariat to assist member countries in implementing their international humanitarian law obligations. She recalled that at their last meeting in Colombo, Sri Lanka, in 2013, Commonwealth Heads of Government acknowledged the importance of issues such as the Arms Trade Treaty and sexual violence against women in conflict. The meeting started with a presentation by HE Dr. Rohan Perera, Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka (designate) to the United Nations in New York, who discussed the challenges faced in implementing international humanitarian law in a world where conflicts have become increasingly complex and where the distinction between civilians and combatants is often difficult to draw. He stressed the importance of Commonwealth support in implementing international humanitarian law obligations. HE Mr Eden Charles, Deputy Permanent Representative of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago to the United Nations in New York, presented the Arms Trade Treaty and insisted on its importance in the Caribbean, the region being disproportionately affected by arms diversion, where arms fall in the hands of drug gangs. He urged Commonwealth member countries to ratify the Arms Trade Treaty. The meeting then heard from HE Ms Yvette Stevens, Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone to the United Nations in Geneva, who provided information on sexual violence in conflict, including the international law provisions applicable to such crimes and statistics on the magnitude of sexual violence in recent conflicts. She reminded attendees of the importance of ending impunity for such crimes and offering support to victims and their families. Representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross were present to update attendees on recent work being conducted. A series of consultations are currently being held on strengthening compliance with international humanitarian law. Countries have come to the conclusion that a new mechanism to monitor compliance is necessary. Dr Sarah McCosker, Legal Adviser, International Committee of the Red Cross, explained how this could represent one of the most significant developments in international humanitarian law since the signature of the Geneva Conventions. Discussions on the format such a mechanism would adopt are still ongoing. Two important meetings on international humanitarian law will take place in 2015: the 4th Commonwealth Red Cross and Red Crescent International Humanitarian Law Conference is coming up in July in Canberra, Australia, while the International Red Cross and Red Crescent International Humanitarian Law Conference will be held in December in Geneva. As attendees were informed, these events represent highly valuable forums where Commonwealth member countries can be involved in discussions and voice their opinions. The Commonwealth Secretariat and the British Red Cross are committed to continuing their collaboration in providing information to Commonwealth member countries on the implementation of international humanitarian law. 