Focus on Pacific trade-related issues in new development agenda
 11 November 2015
Pacific trade officials and experts in the Commonwealth are meeting in Tonga to address trade-related issues affecting the region.  Discussions will consider implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that were approved by the global community in September. The Pacific region, with its high density of small island countries, is invariably dependent on the role of international trade for growth and development. But stalled progress on multilateral trade issues, a complex regional trade negotiations agenda and other challenges facing the region - such as climate change - have raised concerns about the practicalities of implementing the SDGs. Organised by the Commonwealth Secretariat in partnership with the Tonga Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the regional consultation will take place from 12 to 13 November in Tongatapu, Tonga. Trade-related issues include the challenges to small countries of global supply chain and the rationalisation and impact of the Trade Facilitation Agreement on Pacific countries. Commenting ahead of the meeting, Mohammad Razzaque, Acting Head and Adviser of International Trade Policy at the Commonwealth Secretariat said: “The Pacific region faces unique trade challenges along with other urgent issues, such as climate change. This regional consultation offers an important opportunity to focus thinking on how to tackle these challenges in ways that enable Pacific countries to flourish and meet global commitments. “International trade has huge potential to drive forward the 2030 development agenda. But in order to make this a reality, the global community must take into account and support the challenges of smaller, more vulnerable countries, which are often overlooked.” The Pacific region contains many small island countries.  One of its key issues is managing the environmental and economic effects of climate change. Only recently Vanuatu and Tuvalu were struck by powerful cyclones that destroyed infrastructure and livelihoods. During the meeting, participants will consider measures to mitigate risks and build resilience to climate change through export diversification - including use of green technologies and moving towards a green growth strategy. Oceans are fundamental to livelihoods in the Pacific. Participants will address concerns about the practicalities of implementing Goal 14 of the SDGs, dedicated to the conservation and sustainable use of marine resources. They will consider how multilateral and regional trade negotiations can contribute to more sustainable fisheries. Discussions will also take into account important global events happening at the end of the year - the 2015 Paris Climate Conference (COP21) and the 10th World Trade Organization (WTO) Ministerial Conference. Both are likely to have a significant impact on international trade. Participants will have the opportunity to address critical elements of WTO negotiations and raise issues pertinent to the Pacific in preparation for COP21. The Commonwealth Secretariat supports small states to participate effectively in the global trading system by improving their trade competitiveness through capacity-building, helping them to achieve export diversification and advocating for a fair, transparent and inclusive multilateral trading system. Trade will be a key topic at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Malta this November, where the Commonwealth flagship trade publication and the new Trade Financing Facility will be launched. 