The Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust is launched
6 February 2012
The Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust has been formally launched on the 60th anniversary of the accession of HM Queen Elizabeth II to the throne. The Trust, which will fund projects in the Commonwealth, aims to celebrate the Queen’s enormous contribution and unswerving dedication to the association over the course of her 60-year reign. It will identify investments in legacy projects which will have a transforming impact on the lives of Commonwealth citizens. Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma will serve on the Trust’s Board of Trustees, which is chaired by former British Prime Minister Sir John Major. “Throughout sixty years of dedicated service and leadership as Head of the Commonwealth, the Queen has shown personal and unwavering commitment to all that the Commonwealth represents and holds dear - especially our shared values of democracy, development and diversity,” said Mr Sharma. “The Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust is an opportunity for Commonwealth citizens everywhere both to contribute and to be associated with initiatives that will ensure Her Majesty's commitment and service are celebrated in ways that are to the enduring benefit of our global Commonwealth family.” The establishment of the Trust was originally announced at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth, Australia, in 2011. It will work with established partner charities and organisations across the Commonwealth, to deliver projects which encourage generations to work together for the benefit of communities, and activities that bring Commonwealth citizens together across geographical boundaries. “It is our hope that individuals, organisations and countries will all wish to contribute to the Trust, as a tangible and enduring way of honouring HM The Queen, and to demonstrate the enormous respect and affection in which she is held, not only within the Commonwealth family, but also the wider world,” said Sir John. The Trust will be in existence for five years. Fundraising will take place during the Jubilee year itself (6 February 2012 – 6 February 2013) and funds will be distributed thereafter. As well as Sir John and Mr Sharma, the Board of Trustees comprises: Sir Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England; Sir Richard Chartres, Bishop of London; Sir Christopher Geidt, the Queen’s Principal Private Secretary; and Lord Robertson Of Port Ellen. More details about the Trust, including a way to contribute, can be found at the Trust’s website: http://www.jubileetribute.com/. 