The Commonwealth at COP23
UnknownDate
Commonwealth member states will be among the countries at the 23rd session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 23) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Bonn, Germany. Fiji will preside over COP 23 from 6 to 17 November 2017. Countries will meet to advance the aims and ambitions of the Paris Agreement. The Commonwealth has led the way in global advocacy on climate change and will be contributing to COP23. Among the highlights at this year’s conference, we will be: And Secretary-General Patricia Scotland will be setting out the Commonwealth’s continuing vision and work being carried out to help save the planet. Assisting Parties in NDC implementation: New developments on the ‘Law and Climate Change’ Toolkit 
8 November, 13:15-14:45 
Venue: Meeting Room 10, Bonn Zone. Young and Future Generations Day: Showcasing youth work to combat climate change (organized by YOUNGO) 
9 November Young and Future Generations Day: Intergenerational enquiry (organized by YOUNGO) 
9 November Climate Law and Governance Day 
10 November Commonwealth Intergenerational Climate Dialogue
13 November, 18:00-19:30
Organised and hosted by the Commonwealth Youth Climate Change Network (CYCN)
Chief guest: Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland 
Venue: ENGO Room, Observer Room 5, Bonn Zone. Accessing Climate Finance: The Commonwealth Support Mechanism to Developing Countries
14 November, 16:45-18:15  
Venue: Meeting Room 9, Bonn Zone This side-event will be co-hosted by the Commonwealth Secretariat and Government of Mauritius. It will feature a highlevel round table panel discussion, where participants will share experiences, challenges, and lessons learned about accessing climate finance, as well as the successes resulting from support provided by the Commonwealth’s Climate Finance Access Hub. The Hub receives funding from the Government of Australia. List of Speakers: For more information Commonwealth Secretary-General address at COP23
16 November.  Harsen Nyambe, Head of Climate Change, Commonwealth Secretariat on COP23. Ms. Shamoy Hajare is the founder and CEO of Jamaica School for Social Entrepreneurship (JSSE), and is passionate about the role of young people in strengthening the blue and green economies through enterprise development. MORE A new online resource that supports climate change law-making is to be unveiled at COP23 in Bonn this week. The Law and Climate Change Toolkit is aimed at government policy makers responsible for developing laws that help implement the Paris Agreement. MORE 