Sport experts call for Commonwealth action on integrity in sport
13 June 2013
The Commonwealth Advisory Body on Sport (CABOS) reiterated growing alarm expressed by Commonwealth sport ministers and their international colleagues on the failure to effectively address issues impacting the integrity of sport, namely sport governance, match-fixing and the safeguarding of sport participants. In their statement after the meeting, CABOS members said: “These issues have human rights implications and the potential to impact on member countries’ legal and constitutional affairs and governance and institutional development." CABOS is an independent body providing advice on sport policy issues and Sport for Development and Peace (SDP) to Commonwealth members and the Commonwealth Secretariat. SDP is about using sport as a tool to advance development and peace objectives. At the meeting, members agreed to develop a statement of Commonwealth consensus to promote the transparency and accountability of sport bodies and strengthen co-operation with other relevant bodies working on these issues. The Australian Office of Sport agreed to develop recommendations on policy frameworks for deterring and dealing with match-fixing as well as regulating sports betting at major sporting events. The Caribbean Sport and Development Agency will develop recommendations on establishing national safeguarding in sport policy instruments. CABOS will provide submissions to the Commonwealth Secretariat on the role sport can play in achieving positive development outcomes for submission to those developing the next round of global poverty eradication goals post-2015. Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma received the recommendations from CABOS, which will be circulated to Commonwealth member governments and sport stakeholders. Mr Sharma commended the efforts of CABOS members, specifically highlighting their work in the areas of sport integrity and youth engagement. CABOS also praised Barbados, Rwanda and Sri Lanka for using a Commonwealth Secretariat publication, The Commonwealth Guide to Advancing Development Through Sport, to assist in developing national Sport for Development and Peace action plans. Part of CABOS’ focus is to support the Commonwealth Secretariat’s mandate to play a coordinating role supporting member countries to strengthen SDP initiatives. CABOS’ membership includes 13 sport and development experts and senior sports officials from across the Commonwealth. Young people are contributing to the policy discussions through the Commonwealth SDP Youth Working Group. Louise Martin, Chair of Sportscotland (UK), was appointed Chair of CABOS. Sir Hilary Beckles, Pro-Vice Chancellor and Principal of the University of the West Indies, and Dr Dennis Bright, Right to Play Regional Director of West and Francophone Africa, were both appointed Vice-Chairs. 