Secretary-General marks closing of XX Commonwealth Games
3 August 2014
As the XX Commonwealth Games draw to a close in Glasgow the Commonwealth family joins in celebration of enormous team effort and great individual achievements, demonstrating extraordinary feats of resolve and fortitude. These steadfast qualities, displayed by both men and women and able and Para-Sport athletes over the past two weeks, are seen too as Commonwealth member states work together in many other spheres, cooperating to advance democracy, development, and respect for diversity. This world of diversity is at the heart of the Commonwealth. We salute all those who have worked so hard to deliver a superb festival of excellence of which the Commonwealth collectively can feel proud. The welcome and warmth of the hospitality shown by the people of Glasgow to visitors from around the globe has been memorable – most notably the thousands of volunteer Clydesiders. The United Kingdom as host, the Scottish Government, and the people of Scotland, together with the Glasgow 2014 Organising Committee, the Commonwealth Games Federation, and the Commonwealth Games Associations of the 71 nations and territories that participated, deserve immense credit and hearty thanks for their work in creating so hugely successful an event, and for preparing the teams of athletes who took part. The Commonwealth applauds them all. The Friendly Games of the Commonwealth are legendary. This spirit has been seen in abundance in Glasgow among athletes, spectators, and volunteers – and those working in hospitality and for the police, military, security and other public services. As we look forward to assembling on Gold Coast in Australia in four years’ time, we are reminded that it is our ambition and aspiration for the future, and our constant striving to achieve more and better things, that bind the people of the Commonwealth together. The slogan ‘People Make Glasgow’ is interchangeable with ‘People Make the Commonwealth’ these past two weeks. We wish everyone well as they return home from Glasgow as Commonwealth citizens, whether athletes, officials or spectators. And we thank the many millions around the world who followed events on television, radio and other media for their goodwill and support. The Commonwealth family feels stronger and looks to the future with self-belief and renewed vigour and vitality. Let us cherish the spirit of the Games, and the sense of common purpose which motivates us to build together on the values we share. 