Ninth Commonwealth Youth Forum: Declaration by the young people of the Commonwealth
16 November 2013
Young people constitute a majority proportion of the population in many Commonwealth countries. Commonly referred to as the ‘youth bulge’, this demographic imperative will result in the largest ever cohort of young people transitioning into adulthood. By 2015 there will be three billion young people in the world, with 2.5 billion living in developing countries. All the indicators point inexorably to the fact that young people will be exposed to greater challenges and inequalities that any other social group. It is essential that Governments across the Commonwealth consider young people as one of their most treasured assets to ensure future prosperity and growth of Commonwealth countries. The Commonwealth Youth Forum (CYF) provides a vital platform that enables Commonwealth youth leaders to discuss youth issues, agree on a common policy and share this with key decision makers and stakeholders. The theme for the 2013 CYF was ‘Inclusive Development-Stronger Together’, and in working towards this agenda the Commonwealth attempted to ‘leave no-one behind’ by inviting all relevant stakeholders to the forum to discuss issues important to young people. Young people in the Commonwealth are excited about a new representative youth body and are looking forward to participating in the work of the Commonwealth Youth Council. We stress the importance of youth voice and youth-led development to young people’s key role at the centre of sustainable and inclusive development. We emphasise the importance of the CYC’s autonomous, youth-led status, and the value of its role as a recognised representative body in and beyond the Commonwealth Post-2015 Development Agenda The increasingly large youth demographic in the world makes it impossible to discuss a future development framework without taking into account young people’s needs, aspirations and challenges. Special efforts should be made to ensure that the voices of marginalized young people – those with disabilities, girls and young women, key affected populations, migrant youth and indigenous youth – should be heard to ensure that they are not left behind. The youth of the Commonwealth note that: The youth of the Commonwealth believe: The youth of the Commonwealth call on: Professionalisation of Youth Work The Commonwealth Youth Forum recognises the important contribution of youth workers and volunteers in youth development, and endorses the Commonwealth Youth Programme’s essential work to establish a Professional Code of Ethical Practice and further develop Youth Work Education and Training. The youth of the Commonwealth note: The youth of the Commonwealth call on: Well-being and Economic Growth Youth are becoming increasingly concerned about the social and environmental consequences of economic growth and the potential damage this can have on the well-being of a nation and its citizens. The youth of the Commonwealth note: The youth of the Commonwealth believe: The youth of the Commonwealth call on: Education - Fit for Purpose? Youth of the Commonwealth recognise that educational outcomes for young people are directly related to the amount member states invest in quality education, skills based training and ICT. The youth of the Commonwealth note: The youth of the Commonwealth believe: The youth of the Commonwealth call on: Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights Sexuality and reproductive health rights are fundamental to the human experience; all women and men should be able to exercise these rights free from coercion and violence. The youth of the Commonwealth note: The youth of the Commonwealth believe: The youth of the Commonwealth call on: Gender Equality Women and girls make up 70% of the world’s poor, and are often the pillars of stability in communities, families and other social settings. The youth of the Commonwealth believe: The youth of the Commonwealth call on: Generating Quality Youth Employment Young people across the world face growing rates of unemployment, typically at higher rates than any other cohort in the world. Under-employment, un-fair working conditions and involuntary work can be attributed to a feeling of a lack of worth, social exclusion and vulnerability.  The young people of the Commonwealth recognise the importance of skills development, including vocational and technical skills training, and its potential to enhance their access to quality employment. The youth of the Commonwealth note: The youth of the Commonwealth believe: The youth of the Commonwealth call upon: Reconciliation and Social Cohesion Young people around the globe continue to seek and take opportunities to build a peaceful world. Moving towards global citizenship, having shared values and regenerating community efforts in ensuring mutual understanding and respect for each other are key priorities. Reconciliation is part of the pathway to social cohesion. The youth of the Commonwealth note: The youth of the Commonwealth believe: The youth of the Commonwealth call on: Conclusion The delegates of the 9th Commonwealth Youth Forum welcome and encourage partnership between the Commonwealth Youth Council, Commonwealth Youth Programme, member states and Commonwealth civil society in moving forward towards an inclusive and sustainable future for young people. Delegates elected the first Commonwealth Youth Council Executive Committee during this Forum and look forward to supporting and working with this committee in ensuring the recommendations from this Forum are taken forward with the full endorsement of the young people of the Commonwealth. 