Review and Development of New National Youth Policy in Dominica
UnknownDate
The current National Youth Policy of Dominica was tabled in Parliament in 2004 (over 11 years ago). It requires updating to take into account changes in the socio-economic landscape of the country and recent developments at the international level. In addition, long-standing challenges including youth unemployment, gender inequality and access to health care remain a serious impediment to youth development.  In order to meet the aspirations of young people in the country and enable them to make their full contribution to national development innovative, participatory and evidence-based approaches in youth policy are required. The Youth Division of the MYSCCE, in collaboration with the National Youth Council of Dominica and other key youth development stakeholders, is in the process of reviewing the National Youth Policy. To ensure this process is undertaken in a systematic manner and in line with regional and global Youth Policy Frameworks, Dominica has requested for Commonwealth Secretariat support through the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation. The aim of the project is therefore to evaluate the achievements and impact of the current policy, learn lessons, conduct a comprehensive literature review, carry out systematic and wide-ranging consultations with all stakeholders and help the country develop a new National Youth Policy that is evidence-based and fit for purpose in 2016 and beyond. A key objective of this consultancy will also be to identify appropriate strategies, frameworks, capacities and time-bound action plans that will be necessary to implement the policy over the short and medium term. The successful implementation of the project will enable the Ministry/Agency in charge of Youth to integrate young people as a critical and cross-cutting factor for the development of the Dominica’s Government policies, programmes and initiatives, have clear strategies and youth inclusive approaches in place for implementation of the youth policy, and have meaningful targets and measures in place to track progress. The main outcome will therefore be an improved environment that allows young people to reach their full potential and contribute meaningfully to the development of the country. Expected outputs of the intervention will be: 