Commonwealth/UNCTAD seminar to confront challenges facing ocean economy
 9 May 2016
Preserving marine biodiversity, conserving fishing stocks and tackling the effects of climate change are some of the key topics to be addressed at a two-day seminar (10-12 May) in Geneva. Discussions will focus on the role trade can play in driving sustainable development through better management of marine resources. The seminar, jointly organised by the Commonwealth Secretariat, the International Ocean Institute (IOI) and the United Nations Conference on Trade (UNCTAD), aims to examine how trade-related policies and rules can promote Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14, which commits member states to “to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development”. More than 3 billion people rely on the oceans for their livelihoods, amounting to 350 million jobs. But oceans are facing pressures and are at risk because of climate change, over-exploitation, poor management and unsustainable growth patterns. “Trade in marine products and services can create significant opportunities for economic growth, export diversification and new investments. But our oceans are at risk, threatened by a number of factors such as climate change and overuse of marine resources, said Mohammad Razzaque, Head of International Trade Policy at the Commonwealth Secretariat. “The seminar aims to tackle challenges facing ocean-dependent economies in the Commonwealth and identify ways trade can play a more directive role in maximising the value of our oceans without destroying them in the process.” With oceans and seas covering over two thirds of the earth’s surface, their health and productivity are critical for livelihoods, climate, economic growth, global trade and sustainable development. The world ocean-based economy is worth an estimated $3 trillion to $6 trillion annually. The event will bring together a broad-based audience, including leading global experts on trade, sustainable fisheries, transport and tourism, Geneva-based country delegates and international governmental and non-governmental organisations. Participants will discuss a wide range of themes relating to challenges facing the ocean economy and possible policy responses. Topics will include unregulated and illegal fishing, maritime transport, the marine biodiversity and tourism. #Happeningnow @commonwealthsec / @UNCTAD seminar to confront challenges facing #oceaneconomy https://t.co/z1jAZyRpFd pic.twitter.com/s9RzzUG970 — The Commonwealth (@commonwealthsec) May 10, 2016 Last year at an UNCTAD conference on sustainable fisheries, the Commonwealth called for “coherent global action” to conserve fish stocks and a fisheries trade deal that that supports small and developing countries. But talks on fisheries subsidies and market access have stalled at the World Trade Organization under the Doha Development Agenda and a multilateral trade deal is yet to emerge. The global ocean economy is characterised by challenges such as climate change and declining natural resources, but if managed properly, holds huge potential for economic growth. The Commonwealth is working with key development partners to help member countries implement SDG 14, dedicated to protecting oceans. 