Commonwealth and British Red Cross work together to minimise suffering during war
18 March 2014
The Commonwealth and the British Red Cross signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) today to help countries minimise suffering during armed conflict. The two organisations will increase and strengthen national International Humanitarian Law (IHL) committees and Red Cross and Red Crescent societies in the Commonwealth, which play key roles in promoting IHL and advising governments on policies and their obligations under international treaties. IHL governs the conduct of participants during armed conflict. It attempts to minimise suffering by regulating the methods and means of warfare. It also provides protection to the victims of armed conflict. Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma said: “Humanitarian issues should be at the heart of the agenda of any association which values peace. With the signing of this MoU, the Commonwealth affirms its readiness to respond to requests for technical assistance from member countries.” Sir Nicholas Young, Chief Executive of the British Red Cross said: “The Commonwealth and the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement share a number of features. Both are committed to dignity, humanity and the rule of law. Both of us are also committed to acting in a spirit of co-operation and mutual support. “In addition, both the Commonwealth and the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement are locally based but globally effective. Both act to provide technical and other practical assistance to develop the capacity of governments and peoples in areas of humanitarian concern.” The Commonwealth and British Red Cross have worked together in a variety of areas to strengthen networks, disseminate information and produce legal toolkits and research materials on IHL. They are also working to develop young lawyers’ skills in advancing IHL. The MoU will allow the work between the two organisations to be more consistent. Margaret Bruce, Legal Officer at the Commonwealth Secretariat said: “This Memorandum is timely given the increase in events around the world which pose continuous threats to peace, security and development. This makes humanitarian issues a priority. Such priority is apparent from the renewed commitment of Commonwealth leaders to humanitarian matters such as preventing sexual violence during conflict and regulating trade in small arms and light weapons.” Michael Meyer, Head of International Law at the British Red Cross, remarked: “The MoU places the  long-standing relationship between the Commonwealth Secretariat and the British Red Cross on a permanent footing, with a view to strengthening collaboration in IHL, to promoting increased use of Commonwealth National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies as auxiliaries to their respective governments and to exploring additional areas of co-operation between Commonwealth nations and peoples and Red Cross and Red Crescent organisations world-wide.” 