Building Capacity, Advancing Development
20 June 2012
This report on the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation (CFTC) provides an overview of our work in the period 2009-2011. A mutual and voluntary co-operation fund, the CFTC has grown from £250,000 in pledges at its birth in 1971 to more than £30 million four decades later. Along the journey, there has been an important constant – the CFTC has always striven to respond, on a demand-led basis, to the critical development needs of Commonwealth member countries, particularly the poorest, the smallest and the most vulnerable. This has required that the CFTC consistently work to build its reputation as a trusted partner in implementing its development programmes. These cover a range of areas that reflect the needs of member countries and the parameters of the Secretariat’s Strategic Plan, which is prepared and agreed collaboratively. The CFTC’s assistance is focused on delivering tangible results for our less developed members and small and island developing states, many of which face unique challenges. Capacity building continues to be the primary delivery mode for this development assistance. This is critical to ensuring country ownership and sustainable development impact. In accordance with the principles and provisions of the 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, and to improve the quality and impact of its development assistance, the CFTC also continues to strengthen its partnership with member countries as well as with regional, bilateral and multilateral agencies. As a learning entity, the CFTC continually evaluates its programmes of work, absorbing lessons that improve the focus and quality of its development assistance. It draws on both external and internal evaluations, several of which, during 2009-2011, confirmed the value and effectiveness of the CFTC programmes in such areas as maritime boundary delimitation, debt management, trade capacity building, and natural resources management. As we seek to deepen this learning process, other evaluations currently under way are examining our work in private-public partnerships, criminal law assistance and private sector development. The CFTC will also take fully into account the findings of recent evaluations undertaken by its major contributors – Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom – to ensure that its activities remain focused and relevant. We look forward to continued commitment by our membership to supporting the CFTC in its efforts to promote pro-poor growth and sustainable development. Ransford Smith
Deputy Secretary-General 