Pakistan General Elections 2013: Interim Statement
13 May 2013
Key Findings The Electoral Framework and Election Administration The Election Campaign and Political Participation The election campaign was characterized by a fairly active campaign, involving mass rallies by some parties, media advertising, extensive media reporting on the contest and widespread distribution of posters. However, the high level of insecurity and numerous attacks on candidates, party supporters and election offices cast a spectre over the process. Reporting on the number of casualties varies but it is clear that more than a hundred persons were killed and several hundreds injured in election-related violence, largely perpetrated by militants determined to undermine the process and with a particular emphasis to attack three political parties. This focus by militants against three parties in particular severely limited their election campaigns. The current campaign spending limit for each candidate is currently just 1.5 million Rupees ($15,000), which is very low. The ECP had suggested increasing the amount as part of a reform package, thereby making the limits more realistic, but this was not adopted. Voting and Counting Procedures Commonwealth observers largely reported that poll officials processed voters according to the stated procedures. One of the main challenges was in cases where a large number of voters were assigned to a polling station, resulting in large crowds and increased pressure for poll officials and security forces. In Lahore observers reported that polling officials were struggling to deal with fairly large numbers of voters at some stations and there was a degree of confusion among some voters in identifying their designated polling station. Teams also noted that small-sized premises impacted on the quality of the process. Teams noted that contrary to the regulations campaign materials were often present in the vicinity of the polling stations; though Presiding Officers and police were often overwhelmed by more pressing tasks. In Karachi NA-250, observers reported that poll officials were struggling to deal with a large voter turnout, partly due to a number of poll officials not turning up for duty and partly as polling materials had been delivered late, this led to some tensions in the constituency. There were other reports of various irregularities in the city, including the “capturing” of polling stations by party activists as well as some bomb blasts. There were also reported problems in other areas. But we were unable to look into these reports. Islamabad, 13 May 2013 For media enquiries, please contact Ms. Amna Jatoi at +92 (0)308 483 5749 or a.jatoi@commonwealth.int 