High level exchange on Pacific leadership at The Ocean Conference
UnknownDate
Small island developing states (SIDS) in the Pacific have played a significant leadership role in advancing global ocean policy. At the multilateral level, SIDS have negotiated a global common cause on oceans, resulting in global best practice as reflected in the SAMOA Pathway as well as a standalone Sustainable Development Goal on oceans: Goal 14. The Ocean Conference presents an opportunity for policy-makers and practice leaders from SIDS, alongside development partners, to mainstream ocean policy into national development plans and priorities and, regional policies, plans and priorities. This event, organised by UNCTAD in partnership with the Commonwealth Secretariat, will offer an opportunity for experience sharing and the showcasing of effective leadership through innovations developed and adapted to the Pacific. The event will also offer an opportunity to explore potential partnerships that could be developed to promote innovation and development through the ocean economy. Highlights will be presented from A Sustainable Future for Small States: Pacific 2050, a forthcoming report from the Commonwealth Secretariat. The report examines ocean governance issues in maximising ocean resources in a sustainable way, among other thematic areas. About the organisers: UNCTAD is supporting countries in understanding the options and implications of the fish subsidies negotiations in the World Trade Organization and in the design and implementation of oceans economy and trade strategies. The Commonwealth leads the way in helping coastal member countries to claim national maritime territory, manage sustainably the marine environment, and realise its economic potential. Forty-five of our 52 members are ocean states and 24 are small island developing states. Find out more. Registration: By invitation only. Event programme: For further information please visit the UNCTAD website. Partners:  About us: Discover more Commonwealth events at The Ocean Conference: thecommonwealth.org/oceanconference Social media Join the conversation online at @CommonwealthSec #BlueCommonwealth #saveouroceans 