CommonTies event strengthens Commonwealth reach
1 June 2017
Nearly 100 students, young professionals and representatives from Commonwealth accredited organisations met in London last week to discuss how young people can contribute towards strengthening the Commonwealth’s reach in key areas. Ethical and sustainable business, climate change, gender inequalities and community service were identified as issues where young people are actively engaged and could contribute as young leaders to the Commonwealth family of organisations. The meeting, at the Royal Over-Seas League (ROSL), was part of the ongoing CommonTies initiative for young Commonwealth citizens temporarily living in the UK, to encourage them to get involved in Commonwealth networks and eventually further the values and work of the institution in their home countries. The Royal Over-Seas League, which partnered with the Secretariat for Thursday’s event, has championed young people across the globe for over 60 years through their arts programme, humanitarian work, and youth network. Anja Nielsen of the Royal Commonwealth Society lauded CommonTies as an important opportunity for UK-based young people from across the Commonwealth to connect. ‘The most important and encouraging thing about these events is the focus on a sustainable relationship with the Commonwealth: attendees aren’t just asked to take part for an evening, they are encouraged to take part for life. And the meaningful discussions and breadth of opportunities on offer give young people the tools to do so.’ Jackie Yu Hon Lam, of the Royal Over-Seas League Younger Members Committee, said he has great confidence in the impact of young people in creating a better society underpinned by understanding and respect: ‘In a world that is divided along cultural, national, sectarian, class, and gender lines as we tackle climate change, poverty, corruption, and violation of human rights, young people can often find it difficult to connect with each other to share experiences and engage in dialogue. The Commonwealth offers enormous potential as a forum for young people from diverse backgrounds to connect with each other and act as agents for change within their own countries.’ The keynote speech was delivered by Rafi Kakar, a Pakistani peace activist and young professional at the Commonwealth Secretariat, who outlined the impact young people can have when they really put their mind to delivering change. Emma Kerr, Partnerships Officer at the Commonwealth Secretariat said: ‘The Commonwealth is not relevant unless it is relevant for the next generation. Young people’s ideas, input and enthusiasm are vital components for ensuring that the Commonwealth continues to resonate and have impact.’ Find out more about CommonTies. 