Youth charity Prince’s Trust International welcomed at UK launch
27 October 2016
Prince’s Trust International, a newly established charity aiming to support youth employment, education and training, is set to deliver “immense benefits” to young people in Commonwealth countries. The charity received its UK launch last night at a reception in London co-hosted by Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland, who welcomed the “drive, dynamism and innovation” the charity will bring to the youth development sector. “Prince’s Trust International is now set to capitalise on the strategic links of the Commonwealth, and our inbuilt advantages as a network of networks,” the Secretary-General said. “The more skilled young people are, and the more they are involved in planning and working for the future of our societies at every level, the more opportunities and freedom they will have to fulfil their aspirations and talents.” Here's @PrincesTrust Young Ambassador, Joyce, with Alderman Sir Mike Bear, Commonwealth Sec Gen @PScotlandCSG, & Lloyd Dorfman (PT Chair) pic.twitter.com/zFK1bSPuaZ — Lord Mayor of London (@citylordmayor) October 26, 2016 The Secretary-General joined Lloyd Dorfman, who chairs both Prince’s Trust and Prince’s Trust International, youth leaders and representatives of the City of London for the launch event at the Guildhall Art Gallery on Thursday. Prince’s Trust International was first announced during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Malta in November 2015. It aims to build on the success of the Prince’s Trust, which was created by HRH The Prince of Wales in 1976 to help disadvantaged young people in the UK. The charity will work in partnership with governments, NGOs, and corporations to tackle youth disengagement and improve employability skills, helping young people aged 13 to 30. It will complement the Commonwealth Secretariat’s own youth programme, which has been supporting Commonwealth member countries for over forty years. Secretary-General Scotland added: “I am very proud to be associated with this launch, and both the City and the Commonwealth can look forward to immense benefits cascading to where it is most needed as a result of investment in this wonderful initiative.” Thursday’s event follows the launch of the Global Youth Development Index by the Commonwealth Secretariat last week. The index examines the state of youth development in 183 countries looking at a range of indicators in youth employment, education, health and civic and political participation. In two weeks, the recipients of the 2016 Commonwealth Youth Worker Awards will be announced during Youth Work Week, from 7-13 November 2016. The week and awards are themed around ‘Empowering young people through sport and arts’. 