Secretary-General's departure statement following official visit to Fiji
3 September 2015
Today I concluded my first official visit to Fiji. The purpose of my visit was to develop a diverse programme of engagement and partnership with Fiji that is at a level in keeping with the collaborative potential. My visit followed a successful trip to Tuvalu where I witnessed, at first hand, the impact of rising sea levels on our island communities. I also appreciated the resilience and optimism displayed by the Government and people of Tuvalu despite the challenges and threats from climate change. In Suva, I had the opportunity to brief and consult the Government on Commonwealth priorities and brief them ahead of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), which takes place in Malta in November. I also had the opportunity to discuss regional priorities associated with climate change, ocean governance, natural disaster management and trade. I called on the President, HE Ratu Epeli Nailatikau. I met Prime Minister, Hon Josaia V Bainimarama; the Minister of Finance and Attorney-General, Hon Aiyaz Sayed-Kahiyum; the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Hon Ratu Inoke Kubuabola; the Minister of Education, National Heritage, Culture and Arts, Hon Dr Mahendra Reddy; the Minister for Youth and Sports, Hon Laisenia Bale Tuitubou; the Supervisor of Elections, Fiji Electoral Office, Mr Mohammed Saneem; the Chair of the Human Rights and Anti Discrimination Commission, Hon Justice Mohamed Ajmeer; and Leader of the Opposition, Hon Ro Teimumu Kepa  and senior members of opposition parties. I also had meetings with the Interim Secretary-General of the Pacific Islands Development Forum (PIDF) and the Acting Secretary-General of the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS). Our discussions included Commonwealth partnership in the areas of: The Commonwealth has an ongoing programme of assistance to Fiji in the area of maritime boundaries and natural resource management. Previous work in this area has included a bilateral maritime boundary treaty between Fiji and Tuvalu and support to conclude a maritime boundary agreement with Tuvalu and France.  The Commonwealth is currently assisting Fiji through a multi disciplinary team with a UN submission to extend its outer continental shelf. The Commonwealth would be happy to explore further technical assistance to Fiji in the area of Ocean Governance and the Blue Economy, including in revising and updating the Mining Act to incorporate new legislation on offshore deep-sea mining. Fiji benefits from the support given by Commonwealth Trade Advisers, including one dedicated National Adviser deployed at the Ministry of Industry and Trade and in the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat under the Commonwealth Hub and Spokes programme. We are pleased to have contributed to the development of the Fijian Trade Policy Framework (2015-2025). This is an area that we are committed to strengthening further. Fiji has adopted the Commonwealth’s globally recognised debt management software since 2002, which currently manages Fiji’s sovereign debt portfolio of US$2.17 billion. The Commonwealth Secretariat Debt Recording and Management System (CS-DRMS) benefits over 100 agencies including Ministries of Finance, Treasuries and Central Banks, and is in operation in 60 countries, including many outside the Commonwealth. In March 2015, the Commonwealth assisted Fiji in upgrading to the latest version of CS-DRMS. In June, training took place in Fiji for government officials from across the region. This is an area of ongoing assistance. I was delighted to learn that Fiji has created a national Youth Development Index (YDI), encouraged by the framework pioneered by the Commonwealth in 2013. With over 60 per cent of Commonwealth citizens under the age of 30, inclusion of youth in all aspects of nation building and particularly employment and entrepreneurship opportunities, remains a focus for the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth Alliance of Young Entrepreneurs, (CAYE) which works to strengthen and support the ambitions of young business owners, has been operating successfully in Asia since 2011. Recently, this model has been adopted and CAYE has launched in the Caribbean, Canada and East Africa. The Commonwealth will be pleased to pursue the setting up of a similar alliance for the Pacific region with the participation of Fiji. For almost 40 years, the Commonwealth has been a global leader in the professionalisation of youth work. Our Diploma in Youth Development Work is delivered in partnership with more than 30 universities and academic institutions across the Commonwealth.  The University of West Indies Open Campus is now offering a degree in Youth Development Work for the professional training of youth workers in government service, non-governmental organisations and community groups.  We would be pleased to support the expansion of this programme in partnership with the University of the South Pacific in Fiji. The Government of Fiji has generously agreed to host the Commonwealth Youth Programme representative for the Pacific region in the Ministry of Youth and Sports, together with a Young Professional. We are grateful for the offer of Fiji to host the 20th Commonwealth Conference of Education Ministers, which is the largest of our Ministerial Meetings and will be held in the Pacific for the first time since 1971. All effort will be made for the best outcome of the conference for the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth places the highest value on the conduct of free and fair elections.  The Fijian Elections Office (FEO) benefitted through technical support from the Commonwealth preparation for the September 2014 elections. Earlier this year, the FEO joined the Commonwealth Electoral Network (CEN), which facilitates peer support and knowledge sharing among election officials. The Commonwealth has agreed to explore the integration with the CEN of a Pacific-wide regional initiative for Election Management Bodies. We have agreed to the training of elections staff through our Junior Elections Professional programme; technical assistance in the areas of voter education and awareness, and in the design of an Electoral Management System. We have offered support and capacity building to the Fiji Human Rights and Anti-Discrimination Commission, including working towards an ‘A’ classification; assistance with the Universal Periodic Review process; and assistance with legislative changes required in decisions to join core conventions. We have also encouraged the Commission to actively engage in our Forum of Human Rights bodies. The Commonwealth has made a distinctive contribution in advancing the cause of small states and in international awareness of the challenges and approaches required. We advised of progress in the development of a Small States Centre of Excellence, to be based in Malta and in developing for CHOGM climate change, trade and disaster mitigation initiatives focused on the needs of small states. On 2 September, I had the honour of addressing the Third Summit of the Pacific Islands Development Forum on the theme Leadership for Climate Resilient Green Blue Pacific Economies. I outlined the Commonwealth’s unique contribution to advancing international awareness of the vulnerabilities of small states and the solutions we foster through innovative thinking, mutual support and practical assistance in the areas of Climate Change, the Blue Economy and Ocean Governance. Today, I will be travelling to Samoa and thereafter to Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, where I will also be attending the 46th Pacific Islands Forum Leaders Summit. The Pacific Region Commonwealth Youth Ministers Meeting is taking place this week in Apia, Samoa, where the Hon Minister for Youth and Sports of Fiji is participating. My visit to Apia coincides with the official opening of the Commonwealth Youth Games, where over one thousand young athletes from across our member states will compete. I look forward to Fiji’s participation at this month’s Commonwealth Foreign Affairs Ministers Meeting in New York and also to welcoming the Hon Prime Minister at CHOGM in November in Malta. Suva, 3 September 2015 