The Queen launches new Commonwealth Hub
 9 June 2016
Her Majesty The Queen today launched a new Commonwealth Hub which will bring Commonwealth organisations together in the same location to create a collaborative, dynamic and innovative way of working. The three Commonwealth organisations that will move to a new combined centre of Commonwealth activity – Marlborough House and Quadrant House – are the Commonwealth Games Federation, the Royal Commonwealth Society and the Commonwealth Local Government Forum. It is expected that other Commonwealth organisations will join the hub in due course with Quadrant House being renamed Commonwealth House. The Queen officially launched the new Hub during a visit to Marlborough House ahead of her official 90th birthday celebrations which will take place this weekend and will be attended by representatives from all 53 Commonwealth countries. The new Commonwealth Hub will help to deliver the Secretary-General's vision to work more closely with all Commonwealth organisations to honour the values of the Commonwealth Charter and the commitments on health, education, climate change, good governance, equality and the rule of law in the Sustainable Development Goals and COP 21. Other plans for the Commonwealth Hub include an education centre in the newly named Commonwealth House. The Commonwealth Hub will bring the Commonwealth Games to the heart of the Commonwealth headquarters and will encourage more young people to become engaged in Commonwealth issues. It will also provide a focal point for reaching to mayors and elected councillors and their local communities right across the Commonwealth. Patricia Scotland QC, Commonwealth Secretary-General, said: “I’m delighted to welcome Her Majesty to launch this coming together of the Commonwealth family in a new Commonwealth Hub. We’re all working to deliver the Sustainable Development Goals, the Paris Climate Agreement and the Commonwealth Charter so it’s right that we look to cement this relationship with the creation of Commonwealth House. “I would like to thank the three organisations who have joined us at the start of this journey and I look forward to us being joined by others as we have a better conversation with the public about our priorities as a Commonwealth.” Louise Martin CBE, Commonwealth Games Federation President, said: “Partnerships sit at the heart of Transformation 2022, our new vision to move from a four-yearly event cycle to a year-round movement connecting athletes and citizens across the Commonwealth through sport. We rely on and enjoy incredibly positive partnerships with colleagues across the Commonwealth family to promote the Commonwealth, deliver projects or showcase initiatives on the level playing field of sport. I’ve no doubt our combined move to Commonwealth House will realise an inspiring and impactful new era of Commonwealth-wide collaborations and celebrations built on shared values”. Carl Wright, Commonwealth Local Government Forum Secretary-General, said: “The Commonwealth Local Government Forum is the Commonwealth organisation focusing on delivering local democracy and development, including implementation of the SDGs. As one of the key Commonwealth organisations, CLGF is recognised as an associated organisation and works closely with the Commonwealth Secretariat and other relevant Commonwealth bodies including the Royal Commonwealth Society and the Commonwealth Games Federation. “This Commonwealth hub, based at Commonwealth House, is an exciting development that will help us better coordinate our work with other Commonwealth organisations and provide added value to our members and citizens of the Commonwealth to help deliver development, local government, good governance and a better quality of life for the 2.3 billion citizens we and our members serve.” Claire Whitaker OBE, Chair of the Royal Commonwealth Society, said: “This is a very exciting moment in the 148 year history of the Royal Commonwealth Society and we are proud to be collaborating with other Commonwealth colleagues on this exciting initiative. The Commonwealth Hub represents an aspirational and exciting step forward for the Commonwealth to make the best possible use of its many and varied assets. I anticipate invigorated collaboration across the Commonwealth family and a more vibrant and creative presence for the Commonwealth itself."  Ends For the Commonwealth Secretariat, please contact Will Henley on w.henley@commonwealth.int or +44 20 7747 6379 For the Commonwealth Games Federation, please contact Martin Reynolds on m.reynolds@thecgf.com or +44 7789 772619 For the Commonwealth Local Government Forum, please contact Susan Rhodes on susan.rhodes@clgf.org.uk or +44 20 7329 1496 For the Royal Commonwealth Society, please contact Rachel Ilett on Rachel.Ilett@thercs.org or +44 20 3727 4311 