African agencies seek broad coalition to fight corruption
5 June 2015
The heads of anti-corruption agencies in Africa have called for greater collaboration between governments, media, the public and international organisations, as part of a coordinated drive to root out corruption across the continent. The agency chiefs made the call at the 5th Regional Conference of Heads of Anti-Corruption Agencies in Africa, which was hosted by Tanzania’s Prevention and Combating of Corruption Bureau and organised by the Commonwealth Secretariat. The annual meeting provides the leaders of anti-corruption agencies in Commonwealth Africa with a forum for sharing information on emerging innovations and best practices in the fight against corruption in all its forms: from bribery and embezzlement, to theft and fraud. Their communique calls on anti-corruption agencies across the 18 Commonwealth member countries in Africa to “constructively engage the media, private sector and the general public in the fight against corruption”, while also urging appropriate financial, technical and human resources to be provided by central government. “Member countries and anti-corruption agencies are urged to work in close collaboration with international organisations to ensure transfer of knowledge, expertise and skills in combating corruption,” added the communique. In his conference address, Vice President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Dr Mohamed Gharib Bilal, welcomed anti-corruption agency efforts to partner with civil society to halt the “scourge of corruption”.  He stated: “I commend this initiative which will go a long way towards the reduction of corrupt practices in our respective countries and in the region as a whole.” “Civil society in Africa must work with government to add value in the design and implementation of policies, especially in good governance and anti-corruption.  Jointly, government and civil society can achieve the common goal of eliminating corruption within our society and bring about development for the betterment of our people.” Roger Koranteng, Governance and Anti-Corruption Adviser at the Commonwealth Secretariat, said: “It is encouraging to see the commitment demonstrated by anti-corruption agencies in Commonwealth Africa to redouble efforts to stamp out corruption and enlist a broad coalition of other important actors in this effort.” “Corruption is a global problem which requires united action by all stakeholders in society. This includes journalists who investigate and expose graft, the police and prosecutors who enforce the law, the civil society groups and public who demand action, and the international organisations which can provide technical and financial support and training.” Mr Isswar Jheengut, Director of Corruption Prevention and Education at Mauritius’ Independent Commission Against Corruption, said: “Corruption is growing beyond national boundaries while becoming more and more sophisticated. An effective fight requires collective actions through appropriate cooperation and mutual motivation as we realise that we are often fighting very powerful giants.” The Director added that the Regional Conference of Heads of Anti-Corruption Agencies in Africa, which was first launched in 2010, helps to improve regional cooperation. “All of us recognise the visible and sustained commitment of the Commonwealth Secretariat for advocating for good governance, empowering member states in the fight against corruption and keeping these high on the agenda,” he continued. The theme for the conference, which was held in Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania, from 25-29 May 2015, was ‘Engaging Civil Society as Partners in the Fight Against Corruption’. During the meeting, the heads also agreed on a plan for the agencies to benchmark best practice in other countries through information exchanges and field visits. It was further announced at the meeting that the 6th Regional Conference of Heads of Anti-Corruption Agencies in Africa will be held in Namibia in 2016. Notes to Editors: Download photos from the conference. 