Six more NGOs join list of accredited Commonwealth organisations
21 June 2017
Half a dozen non-governmental membership bodies have joined the family of civil society and professional organisations that are accredited by the Commonwealth. Commonwealth Resounds promotes music and musicians from across the Commonwealth. The  Commonwealth Equality Network  is a network of civil society organisations working to challenge inequality based on sexual orientation and gender identity. The  Commonwealth Fashion Council  brings together national fashion councils and supports programmes to develop the fashion industry. CommonAge advances the interests of older people by building capacity in health and care services. The  Institute of Certified Management Accountants  is a specialist accounting body that promotes good governance and sustainable economic and social development. The Commonwealth Association of Public Accounts Committees helps the work of parliamentary public accounts committees in promoting good governance. It received provisional accreditation. The Commonwealth’s board of governors, which approved the applications, consists of London-based high commissioners of 52 member countries. Accredited organisations can access certain intergovernmental meetings as official observers, participate in consultative processes, access services from the Secretariat and use the patented Commonwealth symbol. A Commonwealth spokesperson said: “In accordance with the guidelines for accreditation, applicant organisations must adhere to criteria including a commitment to the Commonwealth’s fundamental values and principles, and recognition and respect for the diversity of its membership. In addition, they must demonstrate accountability and transparency, have a track record of activity, and be open to all Commonwealth members.” In a  statement  , the Commonwealth Fashion Council said its newfound status provided opportunities to bring together fashion industries and governments at events such as the upcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in London in April 2018. “This presents the environment to submit papers, influence agendas and to encourage what is most needed within the global fashion sector,” it said. Responding to the announcement,  Rosanna Flamer-Caldera, Chair of the Commonwealth Equality Network  (TCEN) said: “Considering the process it takes, it is a small wonder and a great victory for TCEN to have been given accreditation as a Commonwealth organisation.” Visit the  Commonwealth’s organisational directory  to find out more about our more than 80 intergovernmental, civil society and professional organisations. 