Queen’s young leaders embody Commonwealth promise and potential
30 June 2017
Inspirational young people from more than 50 countries have taken part in a global challenge to show how they would demonstrate the values of the Commonwealth Charter. Secretary-General Patricia Scotland welcomed The Queen’s Young Leaders to Marlborough House in London, alongside representatives from the Royal Commonwealth Society (RCS), The Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust and Comic Relief. Launched in July 2014 in honour of the Queen’s 60 years of service to the Commonwealth, the Programme aims to discover, celebrate and support young people. It has produced 120 inspiring award winners over the past two years. After being set a challenge to tackle the Commonwealth Charter and see how they would implement its values, the young leaders fed back their ideas to the Secretary-General and the respective high commissioners. Recommendations included a Commonwealth Facebook, a Commonwealth passport, a toolkit for Commonwealth youth ambassadors and a Commonwealth leadership academy. Secretary-General Scotland said, “I was delighted to host the brilliant Queen’s Young Leaders at Marlborough House this week. These young people embody the Commonwealth, its promise and potential. They set an example for us all, and are a vibrant expression of our Commonwealth networks in action, locally and globally. “By building new connections the Queen’s Young Leaders continue to weave the fabric of our worldwide family into something ever stronger and more serviceable.” More than 60 per cent of the Commonwealth is under 30, so their engagement is a vital part of future success. Helen Jones, director of youth affairs and education programmes at the RCS said, “The Royal Commonwealth Society is proud to be associated with the Queen’s Young Leaders Programme and it was wonderful to meet so many inspiring young people in the headquarters of the Commonwealth.” The residential week programme included an audience with senior leaders, workshops with leading businesses and an award ceremony at Buckingham Palace where the young leaders received their award from The Queen. 