Diamond Jubilee celebrates Commonwealth
30 May 2012
The Commonwealth will be celebrated during events marking the Head of the Commonwealth, HM Queen Elizabeth II’s Diamond Jubilee from 2 to 5 June 2012. Acts from across the Commonwealth will perform on the Commonwealth Stage, in front of a crowd of 50,000 people, at the Jubilee Family Festival at Hyde Park in London, UK, from 2 to 3 June 2012. The Commonwealth Foundation is curating the stage, which will include performers: St Kitts Steel Band, Jaipur Maharaja Brass Band, Harambe Drummers, London African Gospel Choir, The Mahotella Queens and Ngati Ranana London Maori Kapa Haka. During the festival, Laura Wright will perform the song ‘Stronger as One’, written to celebrate the  Diamond Jubilee and focusing on the Commonwealth. The song was cited by the Queen in her Commonwealth Day message this year as supporting this year’s Commonwealth theme ‘Connecting Cultures’. Recording label Decca Records will donate a minimum of 50 pence from every digital single to The Queen Elizabeth Diamond Jubilee Trust. On Sunday, 3 June, up to 1,000 boats from the UK and Commonwealth countries will escort the Queen, travelling on a royal barge, down the River Thames in London for the Thames Diamond Jubilee Pageant. Around one million people are expected to line the river route. : For 60 years the Queen has laid much importance on her role as Head of the Commonwealth, which includes, by developing tradition, a number of symbolic functions. Her Majesty keeps in touch with Commonwealth developments through regular contact with the Commonwealth Secretary-General and the Commonwealth Secretariat. She also visits Commonwealth countries - including the host country of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, which is held every two years - meeting the people as well as Commonwealth leaders. Commonwealth flags will be on display on boats taking part in what is expected to be one of the largest flotillas ever assembled on the river. The Jubilant Commonwealth Choir will sing 13 traditional folk songs drawn from across the Commonwealth on one of the musical barges. On 4 June a network of over 4,000 beacons will be lit by communities throughout the UK, UK Overseas Territories and the Commonwealth in the Diamond Jubilee Beacons. Keep up to date with Commonwealth-related Diamond Jubilee events through our website, Facebook, Flickr and Twitter. We also welcome your stories. Send us photos, videos and comments on Diamond Jubilee celebrations in your region of the Commonwealth to connectingcultures@commonwealth.int  and we’ll feature a selection. 