The Commonwealth at Aid for Trade Global Review 2017
UnknownDate
The remoteness and vulnerability of many small and developing Commonwealth member countries mean they cannot compete with larger players in world markets and are vulnerable to economic and financial shocks. There is a growing need to improve regional integration and enhance connectivity to ensure a more inclusive form of trade. The Aid for Trade Global Review 2017 at the World Trade Organization in Geneva is dedicated to the theme of ‘Promoting Trade, Inclusiveness and Connectivity for Sustainable Development’. This year's conference, from 11 to 13 July 2017, provides an opportunity to examine how developing countries can be better integrated into the multilateral trading system and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. The Commonwealth Secretariat is pleased to join international partners and national delegations for the following events: An agreement to extend the successful Hub and Spokes programme for a new phase will be marked with an official signing ceremony between the four partners: the European Union, ACP Secretariat, Commonwealth Secretariat and Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie. European Commissioner Neven Mimica represents the European Union, while the Commonwealth Secretariat’s Head of Trade Paulo Kautoke represents Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland. Location: WTO Headquarters, Room ABC In recent decades, as international trade and investment flows have assumed a major role within a more interconnected global economy, the success of developing countries has become increasingly dependent on engagement with export markets, particularly in higher value segments of global value chains (GVCs). This panel discussion will explore the role of trade connectivity for economies seeking to graduate from least developed country (LDC) status and the trade-related objectives included in the Istanbul Programme of Action and the Sustainable Development Goals. Location: WTO Headquarters, Room D Speakers: This side-event will explore the innovative trade solutions implemented through the Hub and Spokes programme, an aid for trade initiative financed and supported by the European Union, the ACP Secretariat, the Commonwealth Secretariat and the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie. Find out more: thecommonwealth.org/hubandspokes Location: WTO Headquarters, Room D Poor trade connectivity is a challenge that greatly affects landlocked developing countries and small island states. It increases their trade costs and reduces their competitiveness. During this panel discussion, the Commonwealth Secretariat’s Head of Trade, Paulo Kautoke, will comment on the support offered to help vulnerable economies manage their human, natural and economic capital, to bolster national resilience to economic and social crises, and to improve prosperity through enhancing connectivity. Location: WTO Headquarters, Room CR Join the conversation online by tweeting your comments and questions using the hashtags #aid4trade #connectivity and #Commonwealth. Follow @WTO and @CommonwealthSec Watch the conference live on the WTO website and Facebook at @worldtradeorganization  