A Blue Commonwealth: high-level roundtable at The Ocean Conference
UnknownDate
The Government of the Republic of Seychelles and the Commonwealth Secretariat will host a high-level roundtable at the UN Ocean Conference, bringing together leaders and senior ministers from Commonwealth oceanic states. The side event will be opened by the Prime Minister of Fiji, co-chair of the conference, and include participation from Bangladesh, Barbados, Cyprus, Grenada and Tonga, as well as representatives from UNCTAD and civil society. The roundtable will examine the role of the Commonwealth in supporting the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 14 with reference to maximising innovation and economic opportunities in the development of blue economies. Ensuring fairness, equity, and women’s empowerment and mobilising Commonwealth partnerships and support will also be addressed. Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland will discuss the proposed development of a ‘Blue Charter’, a set of guiding principles for sustainable, fair and equitable ocean economic development based on the Charter of the Commonwealth. Speakers will discuss their experience of blue economy successes and hurdles and explore ways in which individual country needs and experiences can be supported. Panel discussion moderated by the Commonwealth Secretary-General: A view from civil society: Commonwealth Principles for Sustainable Ocean Development: a ‘Blue Charter.’ For enquiries please contact Jeff Ardron j.ardron@commonwealth.int, Ocean Governance Adviser at the Commonwealth Secretariat. The Commonwealth Secretariat leads the way in helping coastal member countries to claim national maritime territory, sustainably manage the marine environment and realise its economic potential. Forty-five of our 52 members are ocean states and 24 are small island developing states. Discover more Commonwealth events at The Ocean Conference: thecommonwealth.org/oceanconference Join the conversation online at @CommonwealthSec #BlueCommonwealth #saveouroceans 