Commonwealth summit begins with forum of youth leaders
 20 November 2015
Four hundred youth delegates from across the Commonwealth meet in Malta this week with a call for governments to partner with young people on issues of inequality, unemployment, climate change and extremism. The five-day Commonwealth Youth Forum takes place from 21 to 25 November, ahead of the biennial Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), at which leaders will consider their recommendations. National youth representatives from the Commonwealth’s 53 member countries will discuss and find consensus on key priorities for the generation aged under 30 and the societies in which they live. They will present their priorities and policy recommendations to Commonwealth leaders during the Heads of Government meeting later in the week. Delegates will also examine the role of young people in implementing the Sustainable Development Goals, developing policy recommendations on climate change, youth employment and entrepreneurship, education and other topics. Proceedings begin with a colourful tribute to Maltese heritage at an opening ceremony attended by Prime Minister Joseph Muscat of Malta and Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma on 21 November. The Commonwealth Youth Forum is organised by an international youth-led taskforce drawn from the Commonwealth Youth Council, the Commonwealth Secretariat and the Government of Malta. Mohammed Husni, Vice-Chairperson of the Council and co-chair of the taskforce stated: "Time and time again, young people are working to make a positive change for the betterment of society. The Youth Forum is a clear example of this, and I am confident that our efforts will result in an impactful forum with substantive inputs from Commonwealth youth leaders.” The Forum includes the General Assembly of the Commonwealth Youth Council, at which the Council’s leaders for the next two years will be elected.  Results will be announced on 25 November. During the forum, delegates will participate in workshops including peace-building, enhancing disaster resilience and youth work. Katherine Ellis, Director of Youth at the Commonwealth Secretariat, commented: “This is the first major gathering of Commonwealth youth leaders since the new Sustainable Development Goals were agreed. These ambitious goals can only be achieved by utilising the creative power and capabilities of young people. So this Youth Forum is the perfect opportunity to showcase and plan action on the ideas and solutions that this generation can offer.” Young people from around the world can participate in the Commonwealth Youth Forum by sending their questions and policy proposals to delegates on social media using the hashtags #CYF2015 and #WhatNext. Notes to Editors:There are more than 1.2 billion people under the age of 30 in the 53 countries of the Commonwealth, accounting for over 60 per cent of its total population. In some member states, particularly in Africa, the youth demographic rises to more than 70 per cent. Find out more information on the Commonwealth Youth Forum at: https://chogm2015.mt/fora/youthforum. The Commonwealth Secretariat’s youth development work is delivered through the Commonwealth Youth Programme, which has been running for more than 40 years. Social Media:Join the conversation online:@commonwealthsec @ComSecYouth#CYF2015 #WhatNext #YoungCommonwealth 