Commonwealth Team to observe Cameroon Presidential Elections
3 October 2011
A Commonwealth Expert Team will observe the Presidential Elections due to take place on 9 October in Cameroon, Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma announced today. The Team has been constituted at the invitation of the Minister of External Relations of Cameroon. Mr Sharma said that the team of six experts, supported by a four-member staff team from the Commonwealth Secretariat, will be led by Mr Frederick Mitchell MP, former Foreign Affairs Minister for The Bahamas. The Secretary-General added that the mandate of the team is to observe the preparations for the election; the polling, counting and results process; and the overall electoral environment. The team is to assess the overall conduct of the process and make appropriate recommendations for the future strengthening of the electoral process in Cameroon. The team arrives in Yaoundé today and will remain in Cameroon until 15 October. The full composition of the Commonwealth Expert Team is as follows: Mr Fred Mitchell (Chair) Former Foreign Minister Bahamas  Ms Gabrielle Giroday Journalist Winnipeg Free Press Canada  Mr Samuel Tembenu Lawyer & former President, Malawi Law Society Malawi  Mr Irfan Abdool Rahman Electoral Commissioner Mauritius  Ambassador Bariyu Adekunle Adeyemi Former Diplomat Nigeria  Dr. Tumelontle Thiba Provincial Electoral Officer North West Province South Africa The Commonwealth Secretariat support staff team will be led by Linford Andrews, Political Affairs Officer in the Political Affairs Division. The Commonwealth observed the 1997 Presidential Elections, and the 2002 Municipal and Legislative Elections in Cameroon. The Commonwealth also observed the 2004 Presidential Elections. A Commonwealth Assessment Team was present for the 2007 Parliamentary elections. Note to Editors: The Team’s report will be submitted to the Commonwealth Secretary-General, who will then in turn send it to the Government of Cameroon, Elections Cameroon (ELECAM), and Commonwealth Governments. The Expert Team will act impartially and independently and shall conduct itself according to the standards expressed in the International Declaration of Principles for Election Observation to which the Commonwealth is a signatory. 