Making the world a better place: Children learn about an inclusive Commonwealth
14 March 2016
“I want this world to be a better place, starting with my school!” said nine-year old Amani Ibrahim, as over 300 schools around the world connected for a special global assembly at the beginning of Commonwealth Day. The young pupil joined classmates from Stewart Headlam Primary School and students from St Mary’s CEP Academy to lead the Commonwealth Day assembly. The event was webcast to educational institutions elsewhere in the UK and other Commonwealth member countries, as well as non-member countries including Poland, China, Russia and Indonesia. The event was held at the British Council in London as part of Commonwealth Class, an initiative by the Council and the Commonwealth Secretariat to celebrate the values of the Commonwealth, and connect schools and young people across the globe on joint learning programmes. At the assembly, schoolchildren from Hendon School presented facts about the Commonwealth. “This year’s theme celebrates the diversity of the Commonwealth. Every citizen is different, each of them has something unique to offer,” students said. They added: “All countries within the Commonwealth are treated equally. Everyone at the Commonwealth table has an equal say and is equally listened to.” Participating schools were also asked to describe how they celebrate diversity and ensure that everybody is included. Their ideas included international school exchanges, to debating and celebrating cultural days, addressing bullying and encouraging environmental sustainability. They also suggested helping children to understand democracy, peace, inclusion and the other values expressed in the Commonwealth Charter. Vicky Gough, British Council schools and education expert, said the Council “is pleased to be celebrating Commonwealth Day and its theme of “An Inclusive Commonwealth” with a ‘school assembly’ led by inspirational pupils from the UK and involving schools from all over the Commonwealth” She added: “This event highlights the importance of teaching Commonwealth values such as democracy and equality at an early age.” Commonwealth Day 2016 