Trinidad and Tobago forum addresses accountability and transparency in the Caribbean
 29 February 2016
We need better collaboration between integrity commissions and anti-corruption agencies to improve transparency and address corruption in the Caribbean, Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General Deodat Maharaj has said. Mr Maharaj was speaking at the start of the 2nd Commonwealth Regional Meeting for Heads of Integrity Commissions and Anti-Corruption Bodies in Commonwealth Caribbean. The Forum for regional integrity commissions, anti-corruption agencies, global experts and other stakeholders, began today in Trinidad and Tobago and will run until 4 March. According to the World Economic Forum, corruption is estimated to cost more than 5% of the global GDP, or a staggering US$2.6 trillion, with more than US$1 trillion paid in bribes every year. “Caribbean countries are already facing economic challenges such as unsustainable levels of debt and vulnerabilities due to climate change. They simply cannot afford to lose precious resources to such leakages,” said Mr Maharaj. He added: “When those in positions of power abuse office for personal gain, it robs our citizens of important resources, such as access to healthcare, a good education and much needed infrastructure. “To effectively address corruption and build strong and accountable institutions, everyone has to be involved and come on board. Our aim is to work with integrity commissions, anti-corruption agencies and key stakeholders to agree on viable and effective solutions.” The meeting was organised by the Commonwealth Secretariat in collaboration with the Trinidad and Tobago Integrity Commission and the Association of Integrity Commissions and Anti-Corruption Bodies in Commonwealth Caribbean, which was formed at the 2015 Commonwealth meeting on anti-corruption in Grenada. The body was set up to create networks to improve governance and reduce corruption in the region. Commonwealth Secretariat anti-corruption expert, Roger Koranteng, said “rooting out” systemic corruption at both the national and international levels, one of the mandates of the 2005 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, remains a priority for the Commonwealth Secretariat. “Over the course of the next few days we will be working with our regional partners to agree on sound and tailored strategies and a range of services to fight corruption. We will be exploring options such as annual peer reviews to encourage transparency and share best practice.” 