Commonwealth Secretary-General congratulates Malawi’s new President
1 June 2014
Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma has congratulated the new President of the Republic of Malawi, Professor Arthur Peter Mutharika, and Vice-President Saulos Klaus Chilima, on their election as announced by the Malawi Electoral Commission. Mr Sharma welcomed the call made by the new President, during his swearing-in ceremony at the High Court, urging Malawians to put aside their political differences and work together to continue with the nation-building project. “Such a spirit of reconciliation, inclusiveness and leadership is commendable and fundamental for the country’s long-term peace, development and national unity,” he said. The Secretary-General also thanked the outgoing President, Dr Joyce Banda, for presiding over a generally peaceful electoral process and for her leadership of the country over the last two years. He further complimented all the presidential candidates for their commitment to the rule of law throughout the process. He reiterated his hope that any electoral disputes would be settled through due legal process. Mr Sharma commended the Malawi Electoral Commission for continuously encouraging dialogue and inclusiveness among stakeholders throughout the process, as well as its ongoing efforts to ensure the credibility of these first-ever tripartite elections. The Secretary-General conveyed a special word of appreciation to the people of Malawi for coming out in large numbers to exercise their franchise, and for their patience and commitment to a peaceful electoral process despite some reported challenges. “This is a sign of their commitment to democracy and a strong determination to be involved in building the country’s future,” he observed. Concluding, Mr Sharma said: “I wish President Mutharika and his team the very best as they set out to face the challenges that lie ahead and to reassure the Government and people of Malawi of the Commonwealth’s continued support." 