Young people and schools given resources to mark Commonwealth Day
 27 February 2015
An illustrated poster, children’s guidebook and digital graphics have been released by the Commonwealth Secretariat to help children, young people, schools and communities celebrate ‘A Young Commonwealth’, the Commonwealth theme for 2015. The poster design, created by Studio Muti, an illustration company based in Cape Town, South Africa, features a colourful light bulb motif. The light bulb signifies the energy and ideas that young people, Commonwealth organisations and countries provide to the world. A children’s guidebook, entitled ‘Our Commonwealth’, introduces children to the rich diversity, values and history of the 53-nation community. It was designed by Anthony Godber and illustrated by Mark Ruffle and includes fun facts and activities for use by teachers and parents. “The Commonwealth theme for 2015 recognises the capacity, contribution and potential of young people, who play a vital role at the heart of sustainable development and democracy,” said Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma. "The Commonwealth is also a family of dynamic countries at the forefront of innovation, growth and contributing global value.” The Secretary-General added that, as a diverse and increasingly connected global network, the Commonwealth brings fresh perspectives and new ideas to the dialogue on development. The poster and children’s guidebook are sent to schools, youth networks and Ministries of Education around the globe ahead of Commonwealth Day on 9 March 2015. These resources are available to order, free of charge, by contacting Catherine Price at c.price@commonwealth.int. Other materials, such as stickers, maps and information booklets are also available on request. Digital imagery including Twitter and Facebook covers are available to download from the Commonwealth website at thecommonwealth.org/day. Other materials available for sharing online include interactive educational quizzes. Get creative On social networks •           Share your ideas and stories on Twitter using the hashtag #YoungCommonwealth or visit our Facebook page at www.facebook.com/commonwealthsec Community leaders •           Hold an event themed around ‘A Young Commonwealth’ or in celebration of Commonwealth diversity and values. Schools and teachers •           Organise a school lesson about Commonwealth values such as democracy, human rights, tolerance and respect, freedom of expression or sustainable development. More information: Learn more about the theme for 2015: thecommonwealth.org/ayoungcommonwealth Watch our video: Introducing the Commonwealth http://thecommonwealth.org/media/news/helping-every-voice-be-heard Artwork credits: Poster design: Studio Muti / Folio Illustration.
Our Commonwealth guidebook: Anthony Godber / Mark Ruffle 