Duke and Duchess of Cambridge to meet Commonwealth youth leaders
15 September 2012
The royal couple will address young people from 12 Pacific countries at the start of the Commonwealth Pacific Youth Leadership and Integrity Conference in Honiara on 17 September. The six-day conference involves young people from 14 Pacific countries and will focus on democracy, parliaments, leadership models, conflict resolution and effective communication. Commonwealth Youth Programme (CYP) Regional Director, Afu Billy, said: “It is an honour to have the Duke and Duchess with us at the start of this important regional meeting. The royal couple are an inspiration to many young people and we hope in turn, they are equally inspired by the young leaders they meet in Honiara.” At Monday’s event the Duchess of Cambridge will meet with women working in public service, local and international non-governmental organisations and youth and church groups in a CYP leaf hut, while in the main CYP conference venue the Duke of Cambridge will be welcomed by Katherine Ellis, Director of Youth Affairs at the Commonwealth Secretariat, and Youth Programme staff. The Duke will then present young Pacific Islanders with the Duke of Edinburgh Gold Awards. The Boy Scouts and Girl Guides of Solomon Islands will present a Guard of Honour and pupils from three Solomon Islands secondary schools will perform Pacific songs. The couple will also meet young people in the Oceania Football Confederation’s ‘Just Play’ programme – a sport for development initiative that teaches primary school pupils games skills and how to lead healthier lives. The Commonwealth Pacific Youth Leadership and Integrity Conference is a collaboration between the Commonwealth Youth Programme Pacific Centre and its regional partners: the Oceania Football Confederation, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, the Pacific Leadership Program, the United Nations Development Programme, the International Labour Organization, and the Pacific Youth Caucus. After the conference, the Youth Programme will prepare a manual for the young leaders to use in their communities. In celebration of HM Queen Elizabeth II’s Diamond Jubilee, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge have toured Singapore and Malaysia. From 16 to 19 September they will visit Solomon Islands and Tuvalu, which are also members of the Commonwealth. Notes to Editors: The Commonwealth Youth Programme Pacific Centre supports countries in the region to engage and empower young people and enhance their contribution to development. There are four regional offices in the Commonwealth, the others being in Guyana, India and Zambia. The Commonwealth Youth Programme is the only intergovernmental youth development agency that has young people participating at every level of its management and operations. 