Small states’ education needs a voice
23 June 2015
The Commonwealth’s first forum focusing on education in small states opened in Nassau, Bahamas (Monday) with a call to ensure that the needs of small states are not eclipsed by the wider social development agenda. Opening the meeting, Bahamas Education Minister Jerome Fitzgerald told delegates: “In the process of providing quality and equitable education, the voices of the small states must be heard.  I encourage you to consider the hopes and dreams of the 31 (Commonwealth) small states, but especially those who are affected by unique challenges and issues related to size, dispersed populations, volatility – of economics and weather, and single source economy; incurring challenges, that hinder the social and economic well-being and security.” And he urged ministers to think about the challenges ahead – during the next 15 years of the new sustainable development goals and beyond: “It is imperative that you share the successes that you have experienced within your respective countries, and share what you have learnt with fellow small states,” he said. Deliberations from the forum will feed into the main ministerial meeting which opens today (Tuesday). Deodat Maharaj, Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General said that one of the greatest challenges facing small states is securing the requisite funding needed to achieve international education targets. “We have to have this conversation because small states risk being marginalised in the larger, emerging global framework. Size and limited resources mean that their needs may be eclipsed by that of larger, more populous developing countries,” he said. “Education is the most powerful instrument to move people from poverty. We therefore cannot solve the problem of poverty and inequality if investments in education are not made. The situation for small states is particularly difficult, when compared to larger and wealthier nations. “Many of our smallest and most vulnerable members are facing crippling debt burdens and struggle to access finance on affordable terms and conditions.  This renders the need for us to find new and innovative strategies to fill this financing gap. “This is the value of the Commonwealth as an association of diverse countries, whereby larger countries can advocate for and support the small states in our membership,” said Mr Maharaj. He urged small states to continue to strengthen their partnership with the Commonwealth, which has been working to draw attention to the issue. “We must ensure that the concerns of small states gain prominence and are increasingly being discussed by the international community,” he added. 