Last chance to enter the Commonwealth Youth Awards
23 October 2018
Nominations for the 2019 Commonwealth Youth Awards for Excellence in Development Work will close on 7 November 2018, leaving just over two weeks for aspirants from across the Commonwealth to submit final entries. Organised in partnership with the Commonwealth Youth Council and the Commonwealth Youth Networks, the awards recognise exceptional young people (aged 15 to 29) who are making a difference in their communities through their development work. Nominees must be able to show tangible impacts of their work, linking to any one of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. Winners will be selected based on the impact, sustainability, and level of innovation in their achievements, as well as the supporting evidence provided. Sixteen finalists will each receive a trophy, a certificate and £1000 in cash. Of these, four regional winners will be awarded an additional £2000, as well as a trip to London to receive their awards at an official ceremony during Commonwealth Week in March. The top regional candidate will receive the Pan-Commonwealth prize, amounting to a total cash grant of £5000, as well as the title of Commonwealth Young Person of the Year. Head of Social Policy at the Commonwealth, Layne Robinson, encouraged youths from all walks of life to enter. Previous nominees include entrepreneurs, inventors, environmentalists, women’s rights advocates, health campaigners and political activists. “What they all have in common is their creative ideas, passion for their community and a commitment to excellence and to making a difference in their communities and the world at large. This award gives them a global platform to promote their innovations, and some funding to help them scale up their development projects,” he said. The awards are open to all nationals of Commonwealth countries from the ages of 15 to 29, who have been engaged in the development sector for at least a year, either as a professional or a volunteer. Candidates can nominate themselves or be nominated by others familiar with theirwork. For more information about eligibility criteria and deadlines, visit the awards website. Read the announcement of the awards. 