Ghana urged to meet Commonwealth standards for peaceful and credible elections
3 November 2016
The head of Ghana’s election commission met senior officials from the Commonwealth Secretariat in London today to discuss preparations for the country’s general elections, to be held a little over a month away, on 7 December. Charlotte Osei, Chairperson of the Electoral Commission of Ghana, was greeted by Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General Dr Josephine Ojiambo at Marlborough House, who urged all national stakeholders to play their part in ensuring Ghana enjoys “free and fair” elections. Commonwealth Secretary-General Patricia Scotland, in Singapore this week on an official visit, is preparing to send a Commonwealth Observer Group team of experts to the country, having received an invitation from the electoral commission. The composition of the team and its chairperson will be announced later this month. Dr Ojiambo said: “Ghana has a proud Commonwealth history of setting the bar high for peaceful and credible democratic elections. The Electoral Commission, political parties, civil society, religious and traditional leaders, and all Ghanaians, will be expected to play their part in upholding Ghana’s commendable record for the upcoming elections on 7 December.” The Commonwealth Deputy Secretary-General recalled that although Ghana has a history of closely contested elections, the country has shown leadership in conducting them peacefully. She also recalled that the legal system has been used to settle any grievances after elections. “The Commonwealth Charter is clear - all Ghanaians have the inalienable right to participate in democratic processes, especially free and fair elections, to shape their society. The Commonwealth urges all concerned in Ghana to continue on the well-worn path of peaceful elections and recourse to the rule of law where differences arise. We also urge the preparations and the December elections themselves to be conducted with transparency, inclusivity, respect and tolerance.” Mrs Osei on her part assured that the Electoral Commission under her leadership is determined to exceed its previous record to make the 2016 elections its best ever. “We are consolidating Ghana’s successful track record of holding free and fair elections, which lead to peaceful transitions of power. The 2016 election brings a new set of challenges, but we are using innovation, technology, training and education to ensure that the election can be a model for the rest of Africa,” she said. “Elections are the foundation of democracy. Politicians, governments must earn their legitimacy by winning their mandates in an obviously free and fair process. In an interconnected digital age, everyone has a responsibility to ensure the process is robust and transparent and our only role as an election management body is to ensure that happens, and we are committed to it.” The Deputy Secretary-General and Chairperson discussed the importance of ensuring that women, young people and those with disabilities are able to fully participate in election processes. During the meeting, Dr Ojiambo also presented an advance copy of the Compendium of Commonwealth Good Practice on Election Management, which acts as a guide to democratic principles and practices for policy-makers and election management bodies. 