Tackling Corruption Together
UnknownDate
Global leaders from civil society, business and government who are championing the fight against corruption gathered for Tackling Corruption Together, a major conference in London on 11 May 2016. The leaders set out their commitments to end impunity, prevent corruption, empower victims and support activists, in an effort to bolster good governance and transparency and support sustainable development. Tackling Corruption Together was hosted by the Commonwealth Secretariat in partnership with Transparency International, Thomson Reuters, Omidyar Network, the Commonwealth Enterprise and Investment Council, the B Team, and ONE. The conference preceded the Anti-Corruption Summit: London 2016, hosted by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, at which practical measures to expose and drive out corruption were agreed by governments. Secretary-General Patricia Scotland today rallied support for the fight against corruption at a high-level conference in London. READ MORE >> President Buhari of Nigeria has called for an effective international initiative to deal with cross-border corruption. READ MORE >> Sexual exploitation and cross-border theft of natural resources were in focus at the Commonwealth’s anti-corruption conference. READ MORE >> Introducing the Global Beneficial Ownership Register - Chris Taggart, Founder and CEO, OpenCorporates The Global Beneficial Ownership Register is a new initiative to create an open global beneficial ownership register to aggregate public beneficial ownership data, and provide an open platform to help governments, international organisations and companies collect and publish beneficial ownership data. Understanding pharmaceuticals and healthcare corruption risks and improving integrity in healthcare procurement - Sophie Peresson, Director, Pharmaceuticals and Healthcare Programme and Open Contracting initiatives in Healthcare (WHO/TI) Profiling the new Transparency International dedicated global programme to tackle priority problems within the health sector focused on three activities: developing the knowledge base to understand corruption risks in the sector; developing global standards so that necessary tools are available to address corruption vulnerabilities; and undertaking national and locally driven interventions. TI will work in several high risk areas of health systems, with procurement processes being a key area of initial activity. Technical assistance for Commonwealth countries to improve anti-corruption and anti-money laundering legal and regulatory standards - Josephine Ojiambo, Deputy Secretary General (Political), Commonwealth Secretariat Creating public-private information sharing partnerships to tackle money laundering in the finance sector - Geraldine Lawlor,  Global Head of Financial Crime, Barclays Bank PLC Establishing a network of forums in financial centres that bring together banks, law enforcement and the regulator in both operational and strategic environments to collectively tackle money laundering, terrorist financing and associated threats. Finalising the Open Data Charter and Anti-Corruption Sector Package - Ania Calderón Mariscal, Office of the Presidency, Mexico Open data is a vital resource to build transparency, accountability and integrity, by empowering citizens, the private sector and governments to work together to prevent, expose and prosecute acts of corruption. The International Open Data Charter sets out clear principles for governments to make their data open by default, and the Anti-Corruption Sector Package of the charter will set out the core datasets that should be made available and interoperable as part of a global anti-corruption open data infrastructure. As a participatory, and multi-stakeholder initiative, the International Open Data Charter is inviting collaboration in developing and implementing the sector package. Find out more Understanding the potential of the Open Government Partnership Anti Corruption Working Group - Raluca Alexandra Pruna, Minister of Justice, Romania Highlighting the elements of Romania’s new Summit commitments and anti-corruption plan that will be included in Romania’s next OGP Action Plan; and Romania's membership of the new OGP Anti-Corruption Working Group, which is focused on maximizing the potential of the OGP mechanism to bring about ambitious anti-corruption reforms. 