Supporting the establishment of a Public Policy Unit
UnknownDate
Country: Antigua and BarbudaHost: Cabinet OfficeStart Date: 01 June 2016End Date: 01 June 2017Policy Area: Public InstitutionsPolicy Expert: Joan NwasikeProject Manager: Pauline Campbell Antigua and Barbuda is a service based economy with tourism and government services representing the largest sources of employment and income. Tourism and tourism related activities have been the main drivers of economic growth over the past two decades contributing to over half of GDP and is also the principal earner of foreign exchange in Antigua and Barbuda. As a relatively new administration, the government requested, from the Commonwealth Secretariat, the facilitation of a working session between Ministers and Permanent Secretaries aimed at creating a common vision for national development and a harmonious working relationship between both groups. Against this background the Commonwealth Secretariat organised and facilitated a Cabinet Consultative Forum which took place in June 2015. What emerged was the priority request from the Forum for the need to establish a Policy Unit within the Cabinet Office, Office of the Prime Minister. The purpose of the project is to provide technical support to the Government of Antigua and Barbuda to enable the establishment of a Policy Unit within the Cabinet Office and, by extension, an effective organisational environment to facilitate coordinated policy formulation and implementation. The Public Policy Unit will allow the Cabinet Office to manage the entire process involving research, analysis, consultation, monitoring, producing recommendations and guiding implementation, while at the same time building organisational-wide institutional capacity to ensure sustainability of the policy development process. In essence the overall aim of the Unit will be to drive the coherence, quality and delivery of policy and operations across the public service. Achieving the aims of the project are aligned to the priorities of the Government. Based on the Prime Minister’s last budget statement, some of the priorities for the Cabinet Office and the Office of the Prime Minister were outlined as follows: Achieving these priorities will be central to improved public service delivery which needs to be urgently addressed if the government is to achieve “putting people first; and focusing on human development, environmental sustainability, economic dynamism and prosperity for all citizens and residents”. A Policy Unit will assist with the establishment of a coordinated strategic framework for policy formulation and implementation while strengthening institutional capacity at the Centre of Government. The expected outputs of this project will be: 