World Day for Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development
20 May 2015
‘Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development’ could easily be chosen as a slogan for the Commonwealth. We often refer to the three ‘Ds’ of the Commonwealth - Democracy, Development, and Respect for Diversity – and of course democracy is simply an inclusive and formalised system of dialogue, of ‘government by discussion’. So today, as we mark World Day for Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development, it is good to reflect on the principles and values that guide the Commonwealth, and which bring together our 53 member states in mutual support and shared endeavour. Our Commonwealth Charter affirms ‘that the special strength of the Commonwealth lies in the combination of our diversity and our shared inheritance in language, culture and the rule of law; and bound together by shared history and tradition; by respect for all states and peoples; by shared values and principles and by concern for the vulnerable’. Continuing, it says ‘that the Commonwealth way is to seek consensus through consultation and the sharing of experience, especially through practical co-operation, and further affirming that the Commonwealth is uniquely placed to serve as a model and as a catalyst for new forms of friendship and co-operation in the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations’. It is with this in mind that we look forward to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and its associated Forums for Civil Society, Business, and Youth – and innovatively for Women - assembling in Malta later this year. Convening under the overarching theme ‘The Commonwealth - Adding Global Value’ these gatherings are immensely practical expressions of Commonwealth commitment to Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development. Through dialogue, and by working together in practical ways, we are able to bring immense benefit to our own citizens, and to offer thought-leadership and innovative solutions to the wider international community. There is no better reflection of this than the report Civil Paths to Peace issued by the Commission the Commonwealth established on Respect and Understanding. It is a pivotal contribution to Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development in the wisdom it brings. Today and every day, as we celebrate our cultural diversity, and the rich variety of development, size, population, faith, ethnicities, and geographical location represented among Commonwealth member states, let us seek and grasp new opportunities for dialogue at every level, and work together in a spirit of respect and understanding to advance social progress and lasting economic prosperity in which all can share. 