‘A tale of many peoples’ - Commonwealth leaders speak on inclusiveness
14 March 2016
As goodwill messages pour in on Commonwealth Day, Commonwealth Deputy Secretaries-General Josephine Ojiambo and Deodat Maharaj join Commonwealth leaders in tributes and deep reflections on the meaning of an inclusive Commonwealth. Read messages from the Head of the Commonwealth and Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma. We pride ourselves on a Commonwealth that, at its core, promotes the values of tolerance, respect, understanding, equity, fairness, and where each member state is valued equally and has an equal voice. I cannot but agree with the Secretary-General’s belief that in changing times, the need for the Commonwealth to act as an inclusive network for mutual support, development and growth of opportunity and rights for all is as great as ever. The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting that was held in Malta last November centred around the theme “Adding Global Value”. I feel very strongly that this is equally reflected in the Commonwealth’s 2016 theme of inclusiveness. Indeed global value cannot be achieved without putting inclusiveness in the driving seat. Only then can we pursue our goal of making the Commonwealth more relevant, more alive and more connected for the benefit of all our citizens. At a time of unprecedented global challenges, the Commonwealth is more important than ever – bringing together a unique family of 53 nations, spanning every continent, to promote respect and understanding and to uphold our shared democratic values. In the coming year, we should seize on the progress made at the Malta Summit and work together to strengthen the Commonwealth’s contribution to global efforts to tackle challenges including extremism, corruption, and climate change. It is by being a member of strong networks and international organisations such as the Commonwealth, the UN Security Council, the EU, NATO and G8 that we amplify Britain’s influence in the world. As the only country to belong to all of these organisations, we have a unique opportunity to make our voice heard and our partners value the role we can play in bringing together these different networks, so we all work together to deliver greater security and prosperity for our citizens. Bound by our collective commitment to the core values of democracy, human rights and the rule of law, the Commonwealth is a testament to the principle of inclusiveness. The Commonwealth promotes mutual understanding and respect for different cultures, while rejecting intolerance, prejudice and racism. On Commonwealth Day, we come together to recognize the common ties and shared values that unite the citizens of the 53 member countries. Our Commonwealth family spans Africa, Asia, the Americas, Europe, and the Pacific; it includes more than two billion people, and many different backgrounds, cultures, and languages. Canada remains committed to protect and promote the key principles of the Commonwealth: democracy, inclusivity, and accountable governance. Moving forward, we will continue to promote human rights, advance the rights of women, and address discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity. Our shared history and values – outlined in the Commonwealth Charter – provide the foundation for our nations to tackle the challenges ahead. In collaboration with our Commonwealth partners, we can ensure a brighter, better world for all generations to come. I am pleased to extend my warmest felicitations to the Commonwealth family as it celebrates Commonwealth Day 2016. ‘An inclusive Commonwealth’ is a goal that unites all of us beyond nations and borders. It is reflective of a rich and diverse community that is dedicated to the upliftment of humanity. Our collective pursuit has always been directed to achieving practical and lasting solutions to common challenges. In this era of inclusive and sustainable development, each country and every human being has a role to play and has a responsibility to contribute towards its achievement.  The new development agenda – 2030 is a means of empowering our nations, to be better able to make development equitable, resilient and beneficial for all. Inclusiveness is an important element of the goal of empowerment. The Commonwealth unity on pluralism, liberalism, democracy, and shared history is a unique testament to our strength. That, no doubt, rests on the foundation of inclusiveness. We are proud to celebrate these outstanding tenets. An inclusive Commonwealth means coming together to promote equality, to strengthen the bonds of partnership and to work together in addressing common challenges. It means upholding the vision of breaking cultural and religious barriers and certainly overcoming discrimination. Drawn from every region of the world and from peoples of different races, religions and cultures, the membership of the Commonwealth reflects these ideals and aspirations. But also important is that every member of the Commonwealth has the opportunity to participate in the decision making process of the organization and everyone stands to benefit from its rich culture and experiences. Commonwealth Day is an opportunity to celebrate the diverse partnership of nations that makes up the modern Commonwealth. I welcome this year’s theme of an Inclusive Commonwealth, which goes to the heart of the shared values set out in the Commonwealth Charter. Promoting tolerance, tackling discrimination and building inclusive governance and opportunity for all are critical to developing stronger, more secure and prosperous societies. The UK is committed to working with the Commonwealth, its member states and leaders to uphold our shared democratic values and the international rules-based system. A young person casting their vote for the first time, or a woman serving her first term in parliament; the Commonwealth exists to ensure citizens experience milestones such as these. This is why we place such vital importance on promoting democracy through our elections observation work, empowering women through our advocacy and research, and working with governments as a trusted partner for peace.  These activities underscore values such as democracy, gender equality and human rights, which are clearly expressed in the Commonwealth Charter. Today we reaffirm our commitment to promote and support true inclusiveness in the Commonwealth, to realise a vision of parliaments where women and men are equally represented, where the rule of law prevails and where every citizen of voting age is able to exercise their franchise and is confident in the integrity of their democracy. The Commonwealth is a tale of many peoples, many villages and a rich diversity of cultural expressions.  From the Pacific to Asia, to Europe, Africa and the Caribbean our 53 nations are spread across the globe. We have been supporting this diverse family with its many assets and different needs for more than 50 years. From parents working to educate their children, to young aspiring entrepreneurs, to nurses and teachers, to policy makers in developing countries, we have been helping to advance human development in our Commonwealth family. As a Commonwealth our commitment is to work hard every day for inclusive development. One of our greatest advantages is our ability to bring our members, big and small, rich and poor together to find solutions to shared concerns such as climate change. Just last November on the very eve of the Paris Climate Summit, Commonwealth Leaders were instrumental in helping the world to come to a strong climate change agreement. Today on Commonwealth Day, we celebrate these achievements and listen to the sweet chorus of the over two billion and counting voices in our Commonwealth. Today, while we pause for a moment to celebrate our accomplishments as a family, we recognise there is much more to be done and we are committed to help make this world of ours a better place. Commonwealth Day 2016 