Commonwealth Secretariat lauded for “positive changes”
15 August 2017
Mozambique’s President Filipe Nyusi has joined leaders across Africa to praise the Secretariat for the revamping and the renewed relevance of the Commonwealth. The President made the comments in a meeting with Secretary-General Patricia Scotland. "Since your nomination, we have seen several positive changes in the Commonwealth,” he said as he thanked the Secretary-General for accepting his invitation to visit Mozambique. The head of state echoed the sentiments of the other leaders and stakeholders the Secretary-General has met during her peace and relationship building tour of Africa, which also included official visits to Uganda, Zambia, Tanzania and Zanzibar. Secretary-General Scotland received strong support for new measures such as the recently launched Office for Civil and Criminal Justice Reform (OCCJR), aimed at supporting access to justice, judicial reforms and tackling legal issues associated with violence against women and girls, gender discrimination, corruption, climate change and other challenges. Stakeholders also welcomed the Commonwealth’s new Regenerative Development to Reverse Climate Change initiative which will boost social and economic development while addressing global warming. “As I near the end of this peace and relationship building tour I feel a sense of sadness about leaving and about the fact that I was unable to see all the parties I would have liked. But I have been revitalised and empowered by the unwavering commitment to the Commonwealth and its values I have seen clearly during my visit, and the strong pledges of support from all the leaders I have met,” said Secretary-General Scotland. She continued, “Throughout my tour, I have witnessed an extraordinary, courageous and selfless commitment to peace. And I commend President Nyusi’s decision to actively and persistently engage in peaceful dialogue with the country’s opposition leaders. “I remain committed to persevering, whatever the obstacles, and working with all stakeholders to craft a better Commonwealth for our 2.4 billion citizens.” The Secretary-General also had meetings with Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Oldemiro Júlio Marques Baloi, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Nyeleti Brooke Mondlane, Minister of Gender, Children and Social Action, Cidália Manuel Chauque Oliveira, and Mineral Resources and Energy Minister, Leticia Klemens. She will complete her current tour tomorrow, but is due to return to the continent later this year. 