The Commonwealth’s Young Professionals Programme
27 January 2017
Launched two years ago, the Commonwealth Secretariat’s Young Professionals Programme has enabled the best and the brightest young graduates to contribute to international development and build their skills and experience. The first intake of young professionals, who joined during 2015, have been advancing the organisation’s work in trade, youth, health, education, economic policy, ocean governance, human resources and information technology. Each of the 22 recruits have brought “talent, expertise and innovation” to the Secretariat, says Catherine Stow, head of organisational development. “What really stood out for me is the diversity, not just in personality and expertise, but in people’s experiences. “We have ‘YPs’ who have worked in international organisations and some who come from commercial enterprises or have never worked outside their home country before - a real host of different experiences.” Rafi Kakar, from Pakistan, who joined the programme as an assistant research officer in the Secretariat’s Youth Division, has contributed toward research papers on youth entrepreneurship and employment, and was the principal researcher for the 2016 Youth Development Index. “To all the talented and bright young people out there who have a passion for public service and want to serve your respective countries or contribute for positive social change, this is one of the most amazing experiences you will ever have,” he says. Neena Jain, from Canada, assistant programme officer in the Economic Policy Division, supports communications and advocacy strategy, project management and reporting. This has involved organising an international policy dialogue with the G20 as well as the Commonwealth Finance Ministers Meeting in Washington DC. “Supporting those major events has been quite an opportunity and I’ve been very thankful to be part of that process, especially because these are events that take place on a global stage,” she says. “To me, this programme has been hugely influential on my career, it’s helping me figure out what I want to do next.” Mohammed Razzaque, head of international trade policy at the Secretariat, said the young professionals he has worked with have had a major impact on the Secretariat’s programme work. “With their help we have been able to undertake some cutting edge applied trade policy research. They have also helped us to organise Commonwealth events and advocate for member states in international forums.” Katherine Ellis, director of youth, who spearheaded the Young Professionals Programme, says it is about “walking the talk on youth participation”, ensuring that young people play a central role in shaping policy and practice at a major international development organisation. “I would love to see other organisations, institutions and government bodies implement some kind of Young Professionals Programme like we have here. I think it would be very valuable for them in terms of bringing in new talent and new perspectives into their organisations.”  