Malaysian Charter on Human Rights
1994
By Malaysian Non-Governmental Organisations
(December 1994)1. Acknowledging the impact of changing geopolitical realities
in the present global order on a multi-cultural country like Malaysia and recognising
the diversity of situations, experiences and perceptions in our context, we believe
that there is a common basis for the protection of human rights.2. Human rights are the foundation of the holistic well-being
of all humans in all spiritual, moral, mental, physical and social aspects. With
these rights come the responsibility to protect and respect the well-being of
other individuals and communities in society, as well as to ensure a harmonious
relationship between humankind and the natural environment.3. In a developing country like Malaysia, recognition and
respect of the right to political, social, cultural and economic self-determination
of all peoples are fundamental to the protection of our dignity and equality;
and to justice, peace and freedom in our country.4. The promotion of human rights is indivisible to the pursuit
of a holistic and just development. We believe that all forms of expression and
choices about the processes of economic development in this country must be respected.5. We note that the Malaysian government has not ratified
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In addition, other United Nations Conventions
such as the Convention Against Torture, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination Against Women, and the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child, have not been ratified as well. We strongly believe that
the ratification, and effective implementation, of these standards is vital to
the promotion of human rights in Malaysia, and urge the Government to do so immediately.1. Human rights are universal. Universal human rights standards
are rooted in our many and rich cultures. Human rights are universal in value
and are of universal concern.2. Human rights afford protection to all of humanity, including
special groups such as children, minorities and indigenous peoples, workers,
refugees and displaced persons, people with disabilities and the elderly.3. Whilst we recognise and advocate cultural pluralism, those
cultural practices which derogate from universally accepted human rights must
not be tolerated.1. Human rights, be they economic, social, cultural, civil
and political rights, are indivisible and interdependent. The protection of economic,
social and cultural rights requires full respect by governments for the exercise
by peoples of their civil and political rights.2. Poverty denies people much of their basic economic and
social rights. However, the poor must never be denied their right to speak, to
organize, and to exercise their right to participate in decision-making in the
development process on the grounds that they must first be fed, housed and educated.3. We affirm that one set of rights can never be used to bargain
for another set of rights.1. Women's rights are human rights. Women's rights must be
addressed in both the public and private spheres of society, in particular the
family.2. The patriarchal system is manifest in all institutions,
attitudes, social norms and values in our society. It takes many forms and cuts
across class, culture, caste and ethnicity. It must be eradicated.3. All forms of discrimination against women are to be eliminated.4. Violence against women is one of the main instruments by
which patriarchy perpetuates itself, and thereby the subjugation, oppression
and exploitation of women.Violence against women is a violation of women's basic human
rights and must be eradicated if there is to be social justice and equity.Violations of women's human rights are not simply individual
acts of violence.Within all areas of human rights - whether civil, political,
economic or social - human rights violations against women take specific forms.
Entrenched structures and practices such as caste, customary law, the family,
and religion continue to discriminate against women.Economic and social institutions which are exploitative oppress
women, and legal institutions which claim to dispense equal justice are in fact
gender biased.5. To provide women a life with dignity and self-determination,
women must be guaranteed inalienable equal economic, social, political and religious
rights.1. The right to holistic development is a basic human right.
In order to attain socially equitable and environmentally sustainable development,
there must be respect for civil and political rights as well as social, cultural
and economic self-determination of all people.People's participation in the development process is essential
to ensure that development is socially just and culturally appropriate.2. Human development is dependent on resources provided by
our natural environment.The protection and the sustainable use of these resources
is integral to the well-being and survival of all peoples, in particular those
communities that live in close harmony with their environment, and for future
generations.3. Our models of economic development need to be recast in
recognition of the fragility of the present ecological crisis and the growing
inequities of the present economic systems.Alternative development frameworks need to be constructed
using culturally and socially appropriate models, drawing from, in particular,
the experiences of the indigenous communities of our country.1. True democracy cannot be separated from holistic development.
Each is essential for the attainment of the other.2. Democracy is more than the ritual casting of a ballot once
every few' years. True democracy involves ongoing participation by the people
at all levels so that the people can determine their political status and freely
pursue their economic, social, cultural and spiritual development.3. Participatory democracy must permeate all levels of human
living the home, the workplace, the local community and the nation.1. The present world order allows the arbitrary control and
domination of development by the powerful in the North, abetted by elites in
the South. This gross injustice perpetrates vast social and economic disparities
both globally and nationally and denies individuals and communities the right
to social, cultural and economic self-determination.2. The development process at the international level must
also be guided by the same principles of participatory democracy, equity and
justice.3. The United Nations must be democratised through the abolition
of the veto and permanent membership of the Security Council, and an enhancement
of the powers of the General Assembly.4. The external debt of the chronically poor nations of the
South aggravates poverty and thus violates the human rights of their peoples.
These debts should be written off. Otherdebtor nations of the South should be allowed to reschedule
their debts and not be further burdened by structural adjustment policies.5. The present policies of the Group of Seven and North-dominated
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade inflict gross human rights violations
on the poor of the South. This must be stopped.6. Every person and community has the right to have direct
access to international institutions to seek redress.1. Everyone is entitled to live in a clean, healthy, safe,
and sustainable environment free from agricultural and industrial pollution.2. All peoples and nations have a right to participate in
decisions regarding local, regional, and global environmental issues such as
nuclear arsenals, storage, transportation, and dumping of toxic wastes, pollution,
and location of hazardous industries.1. All persons are born free and equal in dignity and rights.2. There shall be no discrimination in the rights and privileges
of persons based on their ethnic origin, class, social status, age, sex, mental
and physical being, language, religious belief, sexual identity or political
conviction.3. There shall be a more just distribution of wealth, power
and opportunities without distinctions based on ethnic origin, age, sex, mental
and physical being, language, religious belief, sexual identity or political
conviction., The government and private sector should formulate and implement
policies to achieve this end.1. All persons. are entitled, irrespective of ethnic origin,
age, sex, mental and physical being, language, religious belief, sexual identity
or political conviction to sufficient food, clothing, shelter, education, energy,
water, medical care, social services, information, public amenities and a clean
and safe environment to maintain a standard of living adequate for the dignity,
health and well-being of the person, the family and the community.2. Everyone has the right to live and die with dignity and
to social protection against unemployment, sickness, disability, old age, death
or abandonment in circumstances beyond the person's control.1. Everyone has the right to full employment with fair working
conditions, a safe working environment and with a humane and democratic management.2. All workers must receive equal pay for the same job done
irrespective of gender and ethnicity.3. All workers must receive a fair and just wage that allows
the person and family to maintain an adequate standard of living.4. All workers are entitled to job security, the right to
organize and join a union of the person's choice, and exercise the right to take
all forms of industrial action in a peaceful manner.1. Everyone has the right to free primary and secondary education
which shall be compulsory. The state shall provide the social, economic and legal
mechanisms to ensure the above right. Higher education which includes technical
and vocational education should be made available within the resources of the
country to all, irrespective of gender, ethnicity and socioeconomic background.2. All persons have the right to choose and practise their
own religion, beliefs and traditions.3. All persons have the right to use and learn their own languages
and maintain their cultural traditions and identity.4. National minorities have the right to carry on their own
educational activities, including the maintenance of schools and higher educational
institutions and the use and teaching of their own language; provided that this
right is not exercised in a manner which prevents the members of these minorities
from understanding the culture and language of the community as a whole and from
participating in its activities in order to attain national unityand integration.1. Everyone has the right to live in peace and be free from
fear of arbitrary arrest and detention without fair and public trial.2. No person shall be tortured or subjected to cruel or degrading
treatment or punishment by individuals, police, military or any other state agency.3. Everyone has the right to legal counsel forthwith upon
arrest, to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, to be equally protected
by the law and to be given a fair and public trial.4. Everyone has the right to freedom from persecution and
to obtain asylum in other countries.5. Everyone shall have the right to move freely in and out
of the country.1. Everyone is entitled to organize or participate in meetings,
forums, gatherings, discussions, and other peaceful activities without having
to obtain the prior permission of any state body.2. Everyone has the right to join or form any Organisation
including political organisations of their choice and conduct peaceful activities.Article 14 - Freedom of expression and access to Information1. Everyone has the right to freedom of opinions and responsible
exercise of the freedom of expression without interference and persecution.2. Everyone is entitled to seek, receive and impart information
and ideas through an independent and responsible mass media free of political
censorship and monopoly.3. The media of mass communications shall not be subject to
licensing at the discretion of government.4. Mass communication media owned by the state must be governed
and run by an autonomous impartial board made up representatives appointed by
the state, the nongovernmental sector and opposition political parties.1. Every child is entitled toa) adequate food, clothing, shelter and medical care for healthy
  physical growth.b) a stable environment to encourage healthy mental and emotional
  growth.c) proper supervision and education in basic moral values
  and social ethics.d) live in a clean, healthy, and peaceful environment.2. Children should not be deprived of a childhood which has
adequate education, recreation, and social interaction with other children.3. Children shall not be forced into child labour, prostitution
and other forms of abuses.4. All governments shall ratify and implement the rights of
children to survival, protection and development and participation as embodied
in the Convention on the Rights of Children.1. Indigenous peoples are entitled to self-determination.
By this is meant their natural and inalienable rights to retain and control the
land and all resources found on their traditional territories, and the right
to choose their own way of life.2. They have the right to practise and develop their culture
and indigenous religion and to maintain their cultural identity. They shall also
be provided with ample opportunity for material progress.1 . People with disabilities shall be recognized as members
of society and have the right to adequate care in their daily lives.2. They shall have the right to equal opportunity in education
and employment and to be given adequate access to all basic public and social
amenities.3. They shall have the right to participate in the planning
of the services for people with disabilities.1. All refugees should have access to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, other possible form of assistance and to recognition
as refugees. They should not be forcibly returned to their home country especially
at the risk of persecution.2. Foreign workers should have access to all basic amenities,
fair working conditions, a just and equal wage, a safe working environment, and
also a channel to redress discrimination and exploitation.1. Human rights education and training empower people to prevent
human rights violations and nurture respect for the human rights of others.2. Human rights education and training are central to the
promotion and protection of human rights.3. Comprehensive human rights education and training programmes
both in and out of school shall be developed by the government and non-government
sector.1. No government shall declare a state of emergency except
when a real danger exists to the very existence and life of the nation; and all
declarations of state of emergency shall be abrogated immediately when the need
for their perpetration no longer exists.2. Even under a validly declared emergency, governments shall
not deny nor violate the following rights and freedoms: right to life, right
to recognition of personal dignity and legal personality, freedom of conscience
and of religion, freedom from torture, retroactive penal measures, and cruel
punishment, the right to leave from and return to one's own country, the right
to habeas corpus, the right of access to civil courts and to fair, public and
speedy trial.3. The protection of human rights requires an independent
and socially responsible judiciary.4. We call for the establishment of international, regional,
and national mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights with
guarantees of independence, impartiality and accessibility.The repeal of the Internal Security Act (ISA) and other laws
providing for detention without trial, the Official Secrets Act, the Printing
Presses and Publications Act and the amending of all our national laws to bring
them in line with the human rights standards stated in this declaration.The government to ratify immediately the International Covenant
on Civiland Political Rights ; the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights; Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination
Against Women; Convention Against Torture and the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of the Child.- - - - - - o - - - - -Malaysian NGOs that have endorsed the Malaysian charter on
Human Rights are as follows:Published by: 
Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM) 
383, 1st Floor, Jalan 5/59, 
Taman Petaling, 46000 P.J., 
Selangor, Malaysia. 
Tel: +603 7784 3525 Fax: +603 7784 3526 
Email: wkpeng@pc.jaring.my 
URL: www.suaram.org