Kathmandu Dalit Declaration
2004
Establishing Dalit Rights in the Contemporary World;
the Role of Governments, the United Nations and the Private Sector
November 29 - December 1 2004
Kathmandu, NepalThe Participants to the International Consultation on Caste-Based
Discrimination:RECOGNIZING that caste discriminationi affects,
in its most severe forms, at least 260 million people worldwide and is particularly
acute in South Asia, Africa, and Japan,RECALLING the terms of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights according to which all human beings are born free and equal in dignity
and rights and are entitled to the rights and freedoms therein without distinction
of any kind, including race, colour, sex, language, religion, social origin,
birth or other status,RECALLING the terms of the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action of the World Conference on Human Rights according to which it is the
duty of States, regardless of political, economic and cultural system, to promote
and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,RECALLING the condemnation of discrimination against persons
of Asian and African descent and indigenous and other forms of descent in the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action of the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,RECALLING also General Recommendation XXIX on descent-based
discrimination of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,RECOGNIZING the relevance of the Discrimination (Employment
and Occupation) Convention, 1958 and its accompanying Recommendation (No. 111)
for Dalitii Human
Rights,HIGHLIGHTING the reinforcing relationship between poverty,
landlessness, and caste discrimination,AFFIRMING the need for the full implementation of the Millennium
Development Goals as key mechanisms for the elimination of extreme poverty and
the fulfilment of other rights-based human needs.FULLY SUPPORTING Resolution 2004/17 of the U.N. Sub-Commission
on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to appoint two Rapporteurs with
the task of preparing a comprehensive study on discrimination based on work and
descent,SUPPORTING also the U.N. Sub-Commission Norms on the Responsibilities
of Transnational Corporations and Other Business Enterprises with Regard to Human
Rights,CONSCIOUS OF the difficulties faced by Nepal's Dalits who
represent a significant sector of Nepal's population and economy, and who are
being caught in the crossfire of the conflict being waged in the country,RECOMMEND that concerned governments, international and national
human rights bodies, U.N. and aid agencies, the European Union, donor countries,
international financial institutions, the private sector, and non-governmental
organisations adopt the following measures:CONCERNED GOVERNMENTS MUST ACT TO UPHOLD THEIR CONSTITUTIONAL
PRINCIPLES AND INTERNATIONAL TREATY OBLIGATIONS AND WORK TOWARD THE FULL ENJOYMENT
OF RIGHTS BY ALL CITIZENS, REGARDLESS OF CASTE OR DESCENT.In particular, we call on concerned governments to:1. Ensure that all necessary constitutional, legislative and
administrative measures, including appropriate forms of affirmative action and
public education programs, are in place to prevent, prohibit and redress caste-based
discrimination, and that such measures are respected and implemented by all state
authorities at all levels.2. Establish a program and timetable to enforce the abolition
of "untouchability", segregation, manual scavenging and similar practices. In
both public and private sectors, Dalits and other outcaste communities should
have full access to employment opportunities; agricultural land; credit; adequate
housing; health; and common property resources, such as forest and water resources.
Similar programs should also be established to counter existing cultural exclusion
and social discrimination, such as the separation of Dalit children in schools
and the social exclusion of inter-caste couples. National surveys should be conducted
on a regular basis to assess the effectiveness of such programs.3. Ensure that, where they exist, national human rights institutions,
women's commissions, minority commissions and Dalit commissions can act independently
and effectively in protecting the interests of all people affected by caste discrimination
by providing adequate financial, statutory and personnel support. Establish such
institutions in caste-affected countries where they do not already exist.4. Take special measures to guarantee that members of Dalit
and other outcaste communities enjoy the rights to vote, stand for election and
have due representation in government and legislative bodies, revenue administration,
the police, and the judiciary. Dalit women should be proportionally represented.5. Ensure greater participation by Dalits in civil administration.
Priority should be given to the administration of justice, particularly in key
institutions such as the police and the judiciary.6. End the culture of impunity for atrocities against Dalits
through strict enforcement of relevant penal codes and legislation. Prosecute
and condemn those responsible for incidents of caste-based discrimination, segregation,
exploitation and violence.7. Monitor and publicize the extent to which existing laws
and rulings to end caste discrimination, including untouchability, have been
implemented.8. Repeal national security and anti-terrorism laws that are
contrary to the due process norms of international law. Ensure that anti-terrorism
measures do not discriminate against anyone on any ground, including caste, and
are not used against human rights defenders, including Dalit rights activists.9. Uphold human rights obligations, even in the face of national
security concerns. In particular, cease diversion of state resources away from
social and development programs for vulnerable communities.10. Ensure that Dalit human rights defenders are able to carry
out their mandates effectively without any illegal or arbitrary interference
or intimidation by the government or other forces in society.11. Take the necessary steps to secure equal access to the
justice system for all members of descent-based communities, including by providing
legal aid, facilitating of group claims and encouraging non-governmental organisations
to defend individual and peoples' rights.12. Reform criminal justice systems to ensure that Dalits
at the local level have an independent complaints mechanism freely available
to them in cases of police torture, other abuses or general failures to uphold
justice.13. Implement the recommendations of national HR institutions
and other relevant national commissions on measures to eliminate caste-based
discrimination.14. Take adequate measures to address abuses particular to
Dalit women and girls who suffer multiple discrimination on the basis of caste,
class and gender. Ensure the representation of Dalit women in relevant institutions
referenced in this Declaration and evolve a comprehensive development policy
focused on Dalit women as a special category.15. Take action to eradicate trafficking, forced and ritual
prostitution of Dalit girls and women; take measures to address sexual exploitation
and domestic violence, including early marriage and sexual violence in marriage,
against Dalit women and girls.16. Amend discriminatory laws regarding birth and marriage
registration, and citizenship laws that confer citizenship to children solely
on the basis of their father's identity.17. Take special affirmative measures to promote due representation
in the mass media of members of Dalits and other disadvantaged groups, including
women.18. Carry out sensitisation campaigns and awareness-raising
programs with media representatives.19. Liaise with media outlets to profile and publicize abuses
faced by caste-affected communities, including acts of violence, discriminatory
social and customary practices and exploitation of labour. Policy Reform and
Access to Land, Education, Health, Housing and Common Resources20. Enact land reform legislation that includes land distribution
clauses to counter the pervasive landlessness of Dalits, a majority of whom are
dependent on agriculture for their livelihood.21. Amend and enforce existing land reform legislation to
prevent land alienation and ensure development of land belonging to Dalits through,
among other things, greater access to credit and markets.22. Introduce measures to combat homelessness and discrimination
in tenancy, particularly in urban areas.23. With the involvement of and input from civil society organisations,
launch nationwide public awareness campaigns regarding legal prohibitions on
caste discrimination. These campaigns should explain in simple terms what actions
are legally prohibited and what recourse is available to victims of such discrimination
and abuse. Enlist the support of civil society groups in such campaigns. Ensure
removal of prejudicial content from textbooks and other teaching resources and
methodologies.24. Enlist the support of school teachers, social workers,
law enforcement officials, government employees, the private sector and other
relevant actors to undertake active training and sensitization programs against
caste discrimination. Include a social justice education component in the curricula
from primary to tertiary levels as well as in all teacher training programs.
Implement the U.N.'s World Program on Human Rights Education in primary and secondary
schools with a particular focus on caste discrimination.25. Ensure the inclusion of all Dalit children in free, full-time
formal quality education from primary level until the completion of elementary
level. All working and other out-of-school children up to 15 years of age, including
Dalit children, should have the right and opportunities to enter and finish a
formal elementary education through the provision of transitional educational
support such as bridging classes and courses.26. Introduce mid-day meal schemes in all public schools and
ensure non-discriminatory access. Where meal schemes exist, ensure that Dalit
children are not denied access to these meals and that Dalit cooks are employed
by the schools in the preparation of the meals.27. Ensure greater participation by Dalits and other outcaste
communities in educational institutions after finishing elementary education.28. Introduce social justice and human rights education, including
principles of non-discrimination, in public schools.29. Enact equality laws that prohibit public and private employer
discrimination on the basis of caste. Require affirmative action programmes in
the public and private sector and set up appropriate monitoring and reporting
systems.30. Take necessary steps to remove the customary constraints
on leaving traditional caste-based occupations and promote more gainful alternative
employment opportunities for Dalits. Increase access to finance and marketing
to enable Dalits to set up enterprises. Improve functional literacy, for Dalit
women and girls in particular, so they may engage in both skilled labour and
entrepreneurship.31. Enact and enforce legislation guaranteeing decent work,
a living wage, labour rights, and access to land for Dalits and other exploited
or oppressed communities, particularly in the informal economy32. Ensure that government programs are designed in consultation
with Dalits and other marginalized communities at both the state and central
government levels. In particular, infrastructure projects in the areas of water
and sanitation, irrigation, rural roads and electricity should actively involve
Dalit community members to ensure access to basic services.33. Pay particular attention to the needs of Dalit and other
outcaste communities in the devising and implementation of strategies and plans
to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). To this end, disaggregate
the data on progress achieved on each and every MDG for Dalits.34. Include Dalit groups and other civil society groups in
discussions on priorities for engagement with the World Bank and Asian Development
Bank.35. Allocate adequate funding for programs for the socio-economic
and educational support of communities that have faced discrimination on the
basis of caste or descent. Actively involve caste-affected communities in the
formulation and monitoring of these programs.36. Strongly support initiatives to promote and enhance the
fight against caste discrimination in all relevant United Nations and related
fora, including U.N. human rights bodies, the International Labour Organisation
(ILO), the United NProgramme (UNDP), the United Nations Fund for Women (UNIFEM),
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World Bank, the Asian Development
Bank and the International Monetary Fund.37. Support efforts at the 61st session of the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights in 2005 to adopt the draft decision contained in resolution 2004/17
of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to appoint
two Rapporteurs with the task of preparing a comprehensive study on discrimination
based on work and descent. Cooperate fully with the appointed Rapporteurs.38. Ratify (or accede to) and fully implement provisions of
the U.N. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
(ICERD). Make a declaration under Article 14 of the Convention recognizing the
jurisdiction of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD)
over individual and group complaints regarding violations of any rights under
the Convention committed by a State party. Ensure timely submission of state
reports to the Committee.39. Implement without delay recommendations contained in CERD's
General Recommendation XXIX on descent-based discrimination, including those
on the administration of justice, civil and political rights, economic and social
rights, the right to education, and the dissemination of hate speech.iii Duly
implement recommendations on descent-based discrimination addressed togovernments by CERD following consideration of state reports
due under the Convention. Include in periodic reports all follow-up measures
taken to implement CERD's General Recommendation XXIX.40. Promote the call for the appointment of a Special Rapporteur
on Caste Discrimination by the U.N. Commission on Human Rights. Extend invitations
to and cooperate with all relevant Special Rapporteurs to investigate caste-based
abuses specific to their respective mandates.41. Ratify and implement the provisions of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (including its Optional Protocol), the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), the
U.N. Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment (including its Optional Protocol), the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (including its Optional Protocol),
and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Cooperate fully with the treaty
bodies set up to monitor these covenants and conventions.42. Review and make effective time-bound action plans for
the implementation of all ILO Conventions and domestic laws pertaining to labour
rights, bonded and child labour, and manual scavenging.43. Ensure affected community representation, including women,
in the membership and staff of national human rights institutions, women's commissions,
minority commissions, and Dalit commissions. Where relevant, establish state-level
branches for these institutions and commissions.44. Create a core group of NGOs to assist in the commissions'
work and ensure Dalit NGO representation in this group.45. Ensure that the Asia Pacific Forum of National Human Rights
Institutions (APFNHRI) discusses specific strategies to fight caste discrimination.
The NGO Forum of the APFNHRI should include representation from caste-affected
communities.46. Take every opportunity to raise the issue of caste and
descent-based discrimination with relevant governments and encourage enactment
and implementation of laws against the violations of human rights of members
of Dalit communities, including laws prohibiting manual scavenging, bonded labour,
caste-based violence and other abusive practices.47. The Commission on Human Rights should adopt the draft
decision contained in the resolution 2004/17 of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights to appoint two Rapporteurs with the task of preparing
a comprehensive study on discrimination based on work and descent, and call upon
States to extend all necessary cooperation to the Rapporteurs.48. The Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Racism
should continue to raise the issue of caste discrimination in their reports,
make specific recommendations to concerned governments, and continue to request
government invitations for official visits to the respective countries.49. All relevant Special Rapporteurs should pay particular
attention to the plight of Dalits in a manner relevant to their respective mandates.50. The Commission on Human Rights should appoint a Special
Rapporteur on Caste Discrimination and declare in a resolution that caste-based
discrimination is prohibited by international law, and call upon all concerned
States to the take necessary measures for its elimination.51. Support the U.N. Norms on the Responsibilities of Transnational
Corporations and Other Business Enterprises with Regard to Human Rights and promote
its development into an international instrument that is binding on companies
in order to ensure, within their sphere of influence, their accountability and
liability with regard to the realisation of human rights. Sub-Commission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights52. The Sub-Commission's prospective Rapporteurs on discrimination
based on work and descent should be provided with all the necessary support and
resources required to carry out their mandate.53. Subject to confirmation of the Rapporteurs' mandate by
the Commission on Human Rights, priority should be given to the formulation of
the requested Principles and Guidelines for the Elimination of Discrimination
Based on Work and Descent.54. Treaty monitoring bodies -in particular the Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Committee on the Rights of the
Child, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women, the Human Rights Committee,
and the Committee Against Torture -should pay particular attention to human rights
violations against Dalits when examining the periodic reports of concerned countries,
and should take into account the recommendations contained in this Declaration
when formulating their Concluding Observations, Comments and Recommendations.55. The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights should help ensure that all U.N. agencies
working in caste-affected countries pay particular attention to the issue of
caste violence and discrimination.56. Assess the impact of existing programs in caste-affected
countries with regard to caste discrimination. Develop social, economic, educational
and health programs and strategies designed to curb abuse and encourage accountability.57. All U.N. agencies should build partnerships with Dalit
organisations and establish consultative mechanisms to seek Dalit NGO input into
project design and evaluation. All U.N. agencies should incorporate an analysis
of caste into poverty reduction strategies and ensure that all data is disaggregated
on the basis of caste and gender.58. In its programs on HIV/AIDS, the UNDP should ensure that
Dalit children are not discriminated against in their access to health and education.
UNDP Annual Development Reports should include caste disaggregated data and analyses
on patterns of discrimination.59. All U.N. agencies should implement affirmative action
measures in order to proportionately employ Dalits, including women, in all development
activities.60. In its forthcoming Global Report on non-discrimination
as one the four fundamental labour rights, the ILO should conduct a thorough
analysis of the impact of caste discrimination on labour. The report should include
a specific plan of action to address and eradicate caste discrimination in the
labour force, forced and bonded labour, and child labour, including a gender
analysis. The ILO should work closely with its social partners to eradicate caste
discrimination at the national level.61. Undertake assessments of UN recruitment policy and practice
in relevant country offices to ensure non-discrimination of Dalits and other
caste affected and marginalised groups.62. Promote the inclusion of marginalized groups such as Dalits
into the consultation and design of programs.63. Provide political and financial support for programs of
the United Nations and regional bodies to assist countries seeking to eradicate
caste discrimination.64. Provide assistance for Dalit groups at the community level
to participate in the planning of infrastructure and other government programs
to ensure equal access by Dalits.65. Take every opportunity to raise the issue of caste discrimination
with caste-affected country officials, and encourage enactment and implementation
of relevant laws against caste-based abuses.66. Support civil society initiatives, including those led
by Dalit organisations, that seek to eliminate caste-based discrimination.67. Implement affirmative action measures in order to proportionately
employ Dalits, including women, in all development activities.68. Open up political and human rights dialogue with caste-affected
countries on caste discrimination and ensure the effectiveness of EU Human Rights
policy in this respect by ensuring that the issue forms a central part of Ministerial-level
dialogues.69. Ensure that caste-discrimination and its consequences
are effectively analyzed and included in EU country strategy papers, reports,
recommendations, resolutions, mid-term reviews and communications on affected
countries.70. Ensure that EU development programmes in affected countries
are designed to assist national Governments to counter existing inequalities
and specifically eradicate caste discrimination, and monitor the results.71. The EU must promote and support initiatives to address
caste-based discrimination in all relevant United Nations fora, including the
adoption of the U.N. Sub-Commission's resolution 2004/17 by the U.N. Commission
on Human Rights at its forthcoming session in March/April 2005.72. Include references to and recommendations for the elimination
of caste-based discrimination in all relevant EU statements, resolutions, working
papers, declarations and programs of action pertaining to relevant agenda items
in the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, the General Assembly's Third
Committee, and in the follow up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance.73. As part of its policies on corporate social responsibility,
encourage and provide incentives for private companies with EU origin operating
in caste-affected countries to adopt and implement the Ambedkar Principles.iv74. Assess the impact of trade, investment relations, and
cooperation programs between EU and caste-affected countries on those suffering
from caste discrimination. Formulate recommendations to make these programmes
non-detrimental and more beneficial to Dalits.75. Fulfil commitments made under Millennium Development Goal
8 to build a global partnership for development. Specifically work with national
governments to address the elimination of caste discrimination as pivotal to
the achievement of the MDGs 1 to 7 in caste-affected countries and undertake
regular reporting.76. Fulfil the human rights obligations of international cooperation
as found in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the U.N. Charter and the
ICESCR, toward the promotion of economic, social and cultural rights in developed
and developing countries. In this regard, provide financial support to the U.N.
World Program on Human Rights Education in primary and secondary schools and
promote inclusion of caste discrimination in the curricula.77. Be mindful that the obligation of States to protect economic,
social and cultural rights extend also to their participation in international
organisations, where they act collectively, such as the World Trade Organisation
and international financial institutions. It is particularly important for States
to use their influence to ensure that violations and discrimination such as caste-based
discrimination do not result from the programmes and policies of the organisations
of which they are members.78. Incorporate an analysis of caste exclusion into Corporate
Social Development Strategies. For policy-based lending ensure that Poverty and
Social Assessments (PSIA), carried out before loans are approved, include investigations
of how the proposed policy changes will affect Dalit men and women, and their
livelihoods. For sector investments or project loans ensure that the social analysis
covers Dalit issues, and that measures to ensure equal benefits to Dalits -as
well as women, indigenous peoples and other disadvantaged groups -are included
in the Vulnerable Communities Development Plan (VDCP).79. As part of their commitment to good governance, the World
Bank and Asian Development Bank, as well as other international lending institutions,
should, together with the governments concerned, establish an ongoing dialogue
with Dalit NGOs and representatives of other marginalized groups at all stages
of the decision-making process, i.e. before a loan is released, whilst a project
is being implemented, and in the course of any post-project evaluation.80. In the design of infrastructure programs, the World Bank
and Asian Development Bank should ensure that concerned governments consult with
Dalit and other marginalized groups, particularly women, to promote access to
water, food, sanitation, land, rural transport, irrigation and social infrastructure.81. With regard to basic services in health and education,
the World Bank and Asian Development Bank should design an accountability framework
that allows Dalit and other civil society groups to monitor access to these services.82. All companies investing in or operating in caste-affected
countries should support and implement the U.N. Norms on the Responsibilities
of Transnational Corporations and Other Business Enterprises with Regard to Human
Rights, as well as sign the more general Global Compact, and implement changes
in their business practices consistent with its principles.83. Companies from OECD countries, should also implement the
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) Guidelines for
Multinationals and other Enterprises, whilst all companies should implement the
principles contained in the ILO Tripartite Declaration.84. Adopt specific policies pertaining to human rights and
ensure that, within your sphere of influence, these principles are also implemented
by all suppliers and business partners.85. Ensure that infrastructure investments are carried out
in consultation with marginalized groups, including Dalits, and prioritise access
of these groups to the fruits of these investments.86. Ensure compliance with nationally mandated affirmative
action programs. Where no such programs exist, companies should voluntarily institute
and implement affirmative action programs for Dalits.87. As a specific development of the above, adopt and implement
the Ambedkar Principles (see Appendix A). The Ambedkar Principles are employment
principles to assist foreign investors to address caste discrimination in South
Asia. They are intended to acknowledge and compensate for historic injustices
against Dalits through affirmative action and the norms of non-discrimination
and labour rights that are in line with international human rights standards88. Include documentation on caste-based abuses and analysis
of caste-based discrimination in reporting on caste-affected countries. Where
appropriate, include critical assessments of the effectiveness of national policies
and legislation addressing caste discrimination. Documentation of the plight
of communities discriminated against on the basis of work and descent in Africa,
Latin America, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka is sorely lacking and much
needed.89. Pay particular attention to the intersection of gender,
class and caste discrimination as it affects Dalit and other outcaste women.90. Give due attention to the nexus between caste discrimination
and other forms of human rights violations such as torture, gender-based violence,
modern forms of slavery including child and bonded labour, denial of equal treatment
before the law, and deprivations of livelihood, food, water, healthcare, education,
housing and land.91. Plan for the reduction and elimination of caste-based
discrimination and violence through development programming and monitor the impact
of such programs.92. Implement public awareness-raising and education campaigns
to promote positive change in public attitudes and practices vis-à-vis members
of communities affected by caste discrimination.93. Lobby and provide information to relevant U.N. bodies
(including the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights,
CERD and all relevant Special Rapporteurs) to increase their attention to the
plight of Dalits and other caste-affected communities, and encourage the creation
of social, economic, cultural and political programs to help overcome historic
discrimination.94. Lobby governments to implement CERD General Recommendation
XXIX as well as recommendations addressed to them following consideration of
state reports by CERD.95. Translate into national languages and disseminate widely
CERD General Recommendation XXIX and CERD's country-specific recommendations.
Provide CERD's Coordinator on Follow-up with information on the measures taken
at the national level to implement CERD's country-specific recommendations on
descent-based discrimination.96. Provide CERD and other relevant human rights treaty bodies
with information on caste-based discrimination and encourage them to review the
implementation of ICERD and other relevant instruments even when governments
fail to comply with their reporting obligations.97. Raise awareness among international aid agencies, the
private sector, transnational corporations, and governments on the prevalence
of caste discrimination and recommend appropriate interventions similar to those
outlined in this document.98. Develop and implement staff policies that will ensure
the maximum participation of Dalits at all levels within domestic and international
NGOs. Ensure that Dalits, including women, are involved in all stages of relevant
projects, including planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation.THE AMBEDKAR PRINCIPLES*(Please refer to the document in the Declarations section
of this website)Appendix B: General Recommendation XXIX on descent-based discrimination
adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination(Please the OHCHR webpage for this document: http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/%28Symbol%29/f0902ff29d93de59c1256c6a00378d1f?Opendocument)Dalit NGO Federation Nepal
Lhotse Marg 
Kamalpokhari 
Katmandu, Nepal 
P.O.Box 12729 
Telephone +977 1 4415397International Dalit Solidarity Network
Nørregade 13 
DK - 1165 Copenhagen K 
Telephone +45 33 18 77 99 
E - mail: rn@idsn.org 
www.idsn.orgiEndnotesThe term "caste discrimination" as used in the Declaration,
is meant to cover discrimination based on work and descent and analogous forms
of discrimination.ii The
term "Dalit", as used in this Declaration, is meant to encompass Dalits, outcasts
and other communities discriminated against on the basis of work and descent.iii See
Appendix B.iv The
Ambedkar Principles: Employment Principles to Assist Foreign Investors to Address
Caste Discrimination in South Asia, are attached as Appendix A.