Our Common Humanity - Asian Human Rights Charter
1998
A PEOPLES' CHARTEROn the Occasion of the Commemoration of the 50th Anniverssary
of Universal Declaration of Human RightsFor long, especially during the colonial period, the peoples
of Asia suffered from gross violations of their rights and freedoms. Today large
sections of our people continue to be exploited and oppressed and many of our
societies are torn apart by hatred and intolerance. Increasingly the people realize
that peace and dignity are possible only when the equal and inalienable rights
of all persons and groups are recognised and protected. They are determined to
secure peace and justice for themselves and the coming generations through the
struggle for human rights and freedoms. Towards that end they adopt this Charter
as an affirmation of the desire and aspirations of the peoples of Asia to live
in peace and dignity.1.1 The Asian struggle for rights and freedoms has deep historical
roots, in the fight against oppression in civil society and the political oppression
of colonialism, and subsequently for the establishment or restoration of democracy.
The reaffirmation of rights is necessary now more than ever before. Asia is passing
through a period of rapid change, which affects social structures, political
institutions and the economy. Traditional values are under threat from new forms
of development and technologies, as well as political authorities and economic
organizations that manage these changes.1.2 In particular the marketization and globalization of economies
are changing the balance between the private and the public, the state and the
international community, and worsening the situation of the poor and the disadvantaged.
These changes threaten many valued aspects of life, the result of the dehumanizing
effects of technology, the material orientation of the market, and the destruction
of the community. People have decreasing control over their lives and environment,
and some communities do not have protection even against eviction from their
traditional homes and grounds. There is a massive exploitation of workers, with
wages that are frequently inadequate for even bare subsistence and low safety
standards that put the lives of workers in constant danger. Even the most elementary
of labour rights and laws are seldom enforced.1.3 Asian development is full of contradictions. There is
massive and deepening poverty in the midst of growing affluence of some sections
of the people. Levels of health, nutrition and education of large numbers of
our people are appalling, denying the dignity of human life. At the same time
valuable resources are wasted on armaments, Asia being the largest purchaser
of arms of all regions. Our governments claim to be pursuing development directed
at increasing levels of production and welfare but our natural resources are
being depleted most irresponsibly and the environment is so degraded that the
quality of life has worsened immeasurably, even for the better off among us.
Building of golf courses has a higher priority than the care of the poor and
the disadvantaged.1.4 Asians have in recent decades suffered from various forms
of conflict and violence, arising from ultra-nationalism, perverted ideologies,
ethnic differences, and fundamentalism of all religions. Violence emanates from
both the state and sections of civil society. For large masses, there is little
security of person, property or community. There is massive displacement of communities
and there are an increasing number of refugees.1.5 Governments have arrogated enormous powers to themselves.
They have enacted legislation to suppress peopleís rights and freedoms and colluded
with foreign firms and groups in the plunder of national resources. Corruption
and nepotism are rampant and there is little accountability of those holding
public or private power. Authoritarianism has in many states been raised to the
level of national ideology, with the deprivation of the rights and freedoms of
their citizens, which are denounced as foreign ideas inappropriate to the religious
and cultural traditions of Asia. Instead there is the exhortation of spurious
theories of "Asian Values" which are a thin disguise for their authoritarianism.
Not surprisingly, Asia, of all the major regions of the world, is without a regional
official charter or other regional arrangements for the protection of rights
and freedoms.1.6 In contrast to the official disregard or contempt of human
rights in many Asian states, there is increasing awareness among their peoples
of the importance of rights and freedoms. They realize the connections between
their poverty and political powerlessness and the denial to them of these rights
and freedoms. They believe that political and economic systems have to operate
within a framework of human rights and freedoms to ensure economic justice, political
participation and accountability, and social peace. There are many social movements
that have taken up the fight to secure for the people their rights and freedoms.1.7 Our commitment to rights is not due to any abstract ideological
reasons. We believe that respect for human rights provides the basis for a just,
humane and caring society. A regime of rights is premised on the belief that
we are all inherently equal and have an equal right to live in dignity. It is
based on our right to determine our destiny through participation in policy making
and administration. It enables us to develop and enjoy our culture and to give
expression to our artistic impulses. It respects diversity. It recognizes our
obligations to future generations and the environment they will inherit. It establishes
standards for assessing the worth and legitimacy of our institutions and policies.2.1 It is possible from specific rights and the institutions
and procedures for their protection to draw some general principles which underlie
these rights and whose acceptance and implementation facilitates their full enjoyment.
The principles, which are discussed below, should provide the broad framework
for public policies within which we believe rights would be promoted.2.2 We endorse the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and other international instruments for
the protection of rights and freedoms. We believe that rights are universal,every person being entitled to them by virtue of being a human
being. Cultural traditions affect the way in which a society organizes relationships
within itself, but they do not detract from the universalism of rights which
are primarily concerned with the relationship of citizens with the state and
the inherent dignity of persons and groups. We also believe that rights and freedoms
are indivisible and it is a fallacy to suppose that some types of rights can
be suppressed in the name of other rights. Human beings have social, cultural
and economic needs and aspirations that cannot be fragmented or compartmentalised,
but are mutually dependent. Civil, political and cultural rights have little
meaning unless there are the economic resources to exercise and enjoy them. Equally,
the pursuit and acquisition of material wealth is sterile and self-defeating
without political freedoms, the opportunity to develop and express one's personality
and to engage in cultural and other discourses.2.3 Notwithstanding their universality and indivisibility,
the enjoyment and the salience of rights depend on social, economic and cultural
contexts. Rights are not abstractions, but foundations for action and policy.
Consequently we must move from abstract formulations of rights to their concretization
in the Asian context by examining the circumstances of specific groups whose
situation is defined by massive violations of their rights. It is only by relating
rights and their implementation to the specificity of the Asian situation that
the enjoyment of rights will be possible. Only in this way will Asia be able
to contribute to the world-wide movement for the protection of rights.2.4 Widespread poverty, even in states which have achieved
a high rate of economic development, is a principal cause of the violation of
rights. Poverty deprives individuals, families, and communities of their rights
and promotes prostitution, child labour, slavery, sale of human organs, and the
mutilation of the body to enhance the capacity to beg. A life of dignity is impossible
in the midst of poverty. Asian states must direct their development policies
towards the elimination of poverty through more equitable forms of development.2.5 The responsibility for the protection of rights is both
international and domestic. The international community has agreed upon norms
and institutions that should govern the practice of human rights. The peoples
of Asia support international measures for the protection of rights. State sovereignty
cannot be used as an excuse to evade international norms or ignore international
institutions.The claim of state sovereignty is justified only when a state
fully protects the rights of its citizens.2.6 On the other hand, international responsibility cannot
be used for the selective chastisement or punishment of particular states; or
for the privileging of one set of rights over others. Some fundamental causes
of the violation of human rights lie in the inequities of the international world
economic and political order. The radical transformation and democratization
of the world order is a necessary condition for the global enjoyment of human
rights. The logic of the universalism and equality of rights is the responsibility
of the international community for the social and economic welfare of all people
throughout the world, and consequently the obligation to ensure a more equitable
distribution of resources and opportunities across the world.2.7 The primary responsibility for the promotion of human
rights rests with states. The rights of states and peoples to just economic,
social, political and cultural development must not be negated by global processes.
States must establish open political processes in which rights and obligations
of different groups are acknowledged and the balance between the interests of
individuals and the community is achieved. Democratic and accountable governments
are the key to the promotion and protection of rights.2.8 The capacity of the international community and states
to promote and protect rights has been weakened by processes of globalization
as more and more power over economic and social policy and activities has moved
from states to business corporations. States are increasingly held hostage by
financial and other corporations to implement narrow and short sighted economic
policies which cause so much misery to so many people, while increasing the wealth
of the few. Business corporations are responsible for numerous violations of
rights, particularly those of workers, women and indigenous peoples.It is necessary to strengthen the regime of rights by making
corporations liable for the violation of rights.2.9 Economic development must be sustainable. We must protect
the environment against the avarice and depredations of commercial enterprises
to ensure that the quality of life does not decline just as the gross national
product increases. Technology must liberate, not enslave human beings. Natural
resources must be used in a manner consistent with our obligation to future generations.
We must never forget that we are merely temporary custodians of the resources
of nature. Nor should we forget that these resources are given to all human kind,
and consequently we have a joint responsibility for their responsible, fair and
equitable use.3.1 We endorse all the rights that are contained in international
instruments. It is unnecessary to restate them here. We believe that these rights
need to be seen in a holistic manner and that individual rights are best pursued
through a broader conceptualization which forms the basis of the following section.3.2 Foremost among rights is the right to life, from which
flow other rights and freedoms. The right to life is not confined to mere physical
or animal existence but includes the right to every limb or faculty through which
life is enjoyed. It signifies the right to live with basic human dignity, the
right to livelihood, the right to a habitat or home, the right to education and
the right to a clean and healthy environment for without these there can be no
real and effective exercise or enjoyment of the right to life. The state must
also take all possible measures to prevent infant mortality, eliminate malnutrition
and epidemics, and increase life expectancy through a clean and healthy environment
and adequate preventative as well as curative medical facilities. It must make
primary education free and compulsory.3.3 Yet in many parts of Asia, wars, ethnic conflicts, cultural
and religious oppression, corruption of politics, environmental pollution, disappearances,
torture, state or private terrorism, violence against women, and other acts of
mass violence continue to be a scourge to humanity resulting in the loss of thousands
of innocent human lives.3.4 To ensure the right to life, propagation of war or ethnic
conflict or incitement to hatred and violence in all spheres of individual or
societal or national or international life should be prohibited.3.5 The state has the responsibility to thoroughly investigate
cases of torture, disappearances and custodial deaths, rapes and sexual abuses
and to bring culprits to justice.3.6 There must be no arbitrary deprivation of life. States
should take measures not only to prevent and mete out punish for the deprivation
of life by criminal acts and terrorist acts but also prevent arbitrary disappearances
and killings by their own security forces. The law must strictly control and
limit the circumstances in which a person may be deprived of his or her life
by state authorities or officials.3.7 All states must abolish the death penalty. Where it exists,
it may be imposed only rarely for the most serious crimes. Before a person can
be deprived of life by the imposition of the death penalty, he or she must be
ensured a fair trial before an independent and impartial tribunal with full opportunity
of legal representation of his or her choice, adequate time for preparation of
defence, presumption of innocence and the right to review by a higher tribunal.
Execution should never be carried out in public or otherwise exhibited in public.4.1 All persons have the right to live in peace so that they
can fully develop all their capacities, physical, intellectual, moral and spiritual,
without being the target of any kind of violence. The peoples of Asia have suffered
great hardships and tragedies due to wars and civil conflicts which have caused
many deaths, mutilation of bodies, external or internal displacement of persons,
break up of families, and in general the denial of any prospects of a civilized
or peaceful existence. Both the state and civil society have in many countries
become heavily militarized in which all scores are settled by force and citizens
have no protection against the intimidation and terror of state or private armies.4.2 The duty of the state to maintain law and order should
be conducted under strict restraint on the use of force in accordance with standards
established by the international community, including humanitarian law. Every
individual and group is entitled to protection against all forms of state violence,
including violence perpetrated by its police and military forces.4.3 The right to live in peace requires that political, economic
or social activities of the state, the corporate sector and the civil society
should respect the security of all peoples, especially of vulnerable groups.
People must be ensured security in relation to the natural environment they live
in, the political, economic and social conditions which permit them to satisfy
their needs and aspirations without recourse to oppression, exploitation, violence,
and without detracting from all that is of value in their society.4.4 In fighting fascist invasion, colonialism, and neo-colonialism,
Asian states played a crucial role in creating conditions for their peoples to
live in peace. In this fight, they had justifiably stressed the importance of
national integrity and non-intervention by hegemonic powers. However, the demands
of national integrity or protection against the threats of foreign domination
cannot now be used as a pretext for refusing to the people their right to personal
security and peaceful existence any more than the suppression of people's rights
can be justified as an excuse to attract foreign investments. Neither can they
justify any refusal to inform the international community about the individual
security of its people. The right of persons to live in peace can be guaranteed
only if the states are accountable to the international community.4.5 The international community of states has been deeply
implicated in wars and civil conflicts in Asia. Foreign states have used Asian
groups as surrogates to wage wars and have armed groups and governments engaged
in internal conflicts. They have made huge profits out of the sale of armaments.
The enormous expenditures on arms have diverted public revenues from programmes
for the development of the country or the well-being of the people. Military
bases and other establishments (often of foreign powers) have threatened the
social and physical security of the people who live in their vicinity.5.1 Colonialism and other modern developments significantly
changed the nature of Asian political societies. The traditional systems of accountability
and public participation in affairs of state as well as the relationship of citizens
to the government were altered fundamentally. Citizens became subjects, while
the government became more pervasive and powerful. Colonial laws and authoritarian
habits and style of administration persisted after independence. The state has
become the source of corruption and the oppression of the people. The democratization
and humanization of the state is a pre-condition for the respect for and the
protection of rights.5.2 The state, which claims to have the primary responsibility
for the development and well-being of the people, should be humane, open and
accountable. The corollary of the respect for human rights is a tolerant and
pluralistic system, in which people are free to express their views and to seek
to persuade others and in which the rights of minorities are respected. People
must participate in public affairs, through the electoral and other decision-making
and implementing processes, free from racial, religious or genderdiscriminations.6.1 The right to life involves not only material but also
the moral conditions which permit a person to lead a meaningful existence. This
meaning is not only individually determined but is also based on shared living
with other human beings. The Asian traditions stress the importance of common
culturalidentities. Cultural identities help individuals and communities
to cope with the pressures of economic and social change; they give meaning to
life in a period of rapid transformation. They are the source of pride and security.
There are many vulnerable communities in Asia as elsewhere whose cultures are
threatened or derided. Asian peoples and governments must respect the cultures
and traditions of its diverse communities.6.2 The plurality of cultural identities in Asia is not contrary
to the universality of human rights but rather as so many cultural manifestations
of human dignity enriching universal norms. At the same time we Asian peoples
must eliminate those features in our cultures which are contrary to the universal
principles of human rights. We must transcend the traditional concept of the
family based on patriarchal traditions so as to retrieve in each of our cultural
traditions, the diversity of family norms which guarantee women's human rights.
We must be bold in reinterpreting our religious beliefs which support gender
inequality. We must also eliminate discriminations based on caste, ethnic origins,
occupation, place of origin and others, while enhancing in our respective cultures
all values related to mutual tolerance and mutual support. We must stop practices
which sacrifice the individual to the collectivity or to the powerful, and thus
renew our communal and national solidarity.6.3 The freedom of religion and conscience is particularly
important in Asia where most people are deeply religious. Religion is a source
of comfort and solace in the midst of poverty and oppression. Many find their
primary identity in religion. However religious fundamentalism is also a cause
of divisions and conflict. Religious tolerance is essential for the enjoyment
of the right of conscience of others, which includes the right to change oneís
belief.7.1 Every individual has the right to the basic necessities
of life and to protection against abuse and exploitation. We all have the right
to literacy and knowledge, to food and clean water, shelter and to medical facilities
for a healthy existence. All individuals and human groups are entitled to share
the benefits of the progress of technology and of the growth of the world economy.7.2 Development, for individuals and states, does not mean
merely economic development. It means the realization of the full potential of
the human person. Consequently they have the right to artistic freedom, freedom
of expression and the cultivation of their cultural and spiritual capacities.
It means the right to participate in the affairs of the state and the community.
It implies that states have the right to determine their own economic, social
and cultural policies free from hegemonic pressures and influences.8.1 Asian states should formulate and implement public policies
within the above general framework of rights. We believe that in this way we
will establish fair and humane conditions for our individual and corporate lives
and ensure social justice. However, there are particular groups who for historical
or other reasons are weak and vulnerable and consequently require special protection
for the equal and effective enjoyment of their human rights. We discuss the situation
of several such groups, but we recognize that there are also other groups who
suffer from discrimination and oppression. They include people who through civil
conflict, government policies or economic hardships are displaced from their
homes and seek refuge in other places internally or in foreign lands. Our states
and societies have become less tolerant of minorities and indigenous people,
whose most basic rights are frequently violated. Many of our societies still
discriminate against gays and lesbians, denying them their identity and causing
them great anguish and misery. Various economic groups, like peasants and fishing
communities, suffer from great deprivation and live in constant fear of threats
to their livelihood from landlords and capitalist enterprises. All these groups
deserve special attention. We urge states and communities to give the highest
priority to the amelioration of their social and economic conditions.9.1 In most Asian societies women suffer from discrimination
and oppression. The cause of their oppression lies in both history and contemporary
social and economic systems.9.2 The roots of patriarchy are systemic and its structures
dominate all institutions, attitudes, social norms and customary laws, religions
and values in Asian societies, crossing the boundaries of class, culture, caste
and ethnicity. Oppression takes many forms, but is most evident in sexual slavery,
domestic violence, trafficking in women and rape. They suffer discrimination
in both public and private spheres. The increasing militarization of many societies
in Asia has led to the increase of violence against women in situations of armed
conflict, including mass rape, forced labour, racism, kidnapping and displacement
from their homes. As female victims of armed conflict are often denied justice,
rehabilitation, compensation and reparation of the war crimes committed against
them, it is important to emphasis thatsystematic rape is a war crime and a crime against humanity.9.3 To end discrimination against women in the field of employment
and the right to work, women should be given the right to employment opportunities,
the free choice of profession, job security, equal remuneration, the right to
compensation in respect of domestic work, the right to protection of health and
safe working conditions, especially in safeguarding of the function of reproduction
and special protection in times of pregnancy from work that may be harmful. Women
should be given the full right to control their sexual and reproductive health,
free from discrimination or coercion, and be given access to information about
sexual and reproductive health care and safe reproductive technology.9.4 There are few legal provisions to protect women against
violations of their rights within the domestic and patriarchal realm. Their rights
in public law are seldom observed. Affirmative measures should be taken to ensure
full and equal participation of women in the political and public life of the
society. A considerable increase in the presence of women in the various institutions
of state power and in the fields of business, agriculture and land ownership
must be provided for by way of affirmative action. The political, social and
economic empowerment of women is essential for the defence of their legal rights.10.1 As with women, their oppression takes many forms, the
most pervasive of which are child labour; sexual slavery; child pornography;
the sale and trafficking of children; prostitution; sale of organs; conscription
into drug trafficking; the physical, sexual and psychological abuse of children
within families; discrimination against children with HIV/AIDS; forced religious
conversion of children; the displacement of children with and without their families
by armed conflicts; discrimination; and environmental degradation. An increasing
number of children are forced to live on the streets of Asian cities and are
deprived of the social and economic support of families and communities.10.2 Widespread poverty, lack of access to education and social
dislocation in rural areas are among the causes of the trends which increase
the vulnerability of children. Long-established forms of exploitation and abuse,
such as bonded labour or the use of children for begging or sexual gratification
are rampant. Female infanticide due to patriarchal gender preference and female
genital mutilation are widely practised in some Asian countries.10.3 Asian states have failed dismally to look after children
and provide them with even the bare means of subsistence or shelter. We call
on Asian states to ratify and implement the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
We also call on communities to take the responsibility for monitoring violations
of children's rights and to press for the implementation of the UN Convention
in appropriate ways in their own social contexts.11.1 Traditionally Asian societies cared for those who were
physically or mentally handicapped. Increasingly our communal values and structures,
under the pressure of new forms of economic organizations, have become less tolerant
of such persons. They suffer enormous discrimination in access to education,
employment and housing. They are unable to enjoy many of their human rights due
to prejudice against them and the absence of provisions responding to their special
demands. Their considerable abilities are not properly recognized and they are
forced into jobs which offer low pay and little prospects of promotion. They
have the right to provisions which enable them to live in dignity, with security
and respect, and to have opportunities to realize their full potential.11.2 The need to treat such persons with respect for their
human rights is apparent in the dismal way Asian states treat those with HIV
or AIDS. They are the victims of gross discrimination. A civilized society which
respects human rights would recognize their right to live and die with dignity.
It would secure to them the right to adequate medical care and to be protected
from prejudice, discrimination or persecution.12.1 The rapid industrialization of Asian societies has undermined
traditional forms of the subsistence economy and has destroyed possibilities
of the livelihood of large sections of the rural people. Increasingly they and
other groups are forced into wage employment, often in industry, working under
appalling conditions. For the majority of the workers there is little or no protection
from unfair labour laws. The fundamental rights to form trade unions and bargain
collectively are denied to many. Their wages are grossly inadequate and working
conditions are frequently grim and dangerous. Globalization adds to the pressures
on workers as many Asian states seek to reduce the costs of production, often
in collusion with foreign corporations and international financial institutions.12.2 A particularly vulnerable category of workers are migrant
workers. Frequently separated from their families, they are exploited in foreign
states whose laws they do not understand and are afraid to invoke. They are often
denied rights and conditions which local workers enjoy. They slog without access
to adequate accommodation, health care, or legal protection. In many cases migrants
suffer racism and xenophobia, and domestic helpers are subjected to humiliation
and sometimes, sexual abuse.13.1 Students in Asia struggled against colonialism and fought
for democratization and social justice. As a result of their fearless commitment
to social transformation they have often suffered from state violence and repression
and remain as one of the key targets for counter-insurgency operations and internal
security laws and operations. Students are frequently denied the right to academic
freedom and to the freedoms of expression and association.14.1 In few areas is there such a massive violation of internationally
recognized norms as in relation to prisoners and political detainees.14.2 Arbitrary arrests, detention, imprisonment, ill-treatment,
torture, cruel and inhuman punishment are common occurrences in many parts of
Asia. Detainees and prisoners are often forced to live in unhygienic conditions,
are denied adequate food and health care and are prevented from having communication
with, and support from, their families. Different kinds of prisoners are frequently
mixed in one cell, with men, women and children kept in proximity. Prison cells
are normally overcrowded. Deaths in custody are common. Prisoners are frequently
denied access to lawyers and the right to fair and speedy trials.14.3 Asian governments often use executive powers of detention
without trial. They use national security legislation to arrest and detain political
opponents. It is notable that, in many countries in Asia, freedom of thought,
belief and conscience have been restricted by administrative limits on freedom
of speech and association.15.1 Many Asian states have guarantees of human rights in
their constitutions, and many of them have ratified international instruments
on human rights. However, there continues to be a wide gap between rights enshrined
in these documents and the abject reality that denies people their rights. Asian
states must take urgent action to implement the human rights oftheir citizens and residents.15.2 We believe that systems for the protection of rights
should be based on the following principles.15.2a Human rights are violated by the state, civil society
and business corporations. The legal protection for rights has to be extended
against violations by all these groups. It is also necessary to reform these
groups by strengthening their ethical foundations and values and inculcating
in them a sense of their responsibility towards the disadvantaged and the oppressed.15.2b The promotion and enforcement of rights is the responsibility
of all groups in society, although the primary responsibility is that of the
state. The enjoyment of many rights, especially social and economic, requires
a positive and proactive role of governments. There is a clear and legitimate
role for NGOs in raising consciousness of rights, formulating standards, and
ensuring their protection by governments and other groups. Professional groups
like lawyers and doctors have special responsibilities connected with the nature
of their work to promote the enforcement of rights and prevent abuses of power.15.2c Since rights are seriously violated in situations of
civil strife and are strengthened if there is peace, it is the duty of the state
and other organizations to find peaceful ways to resolve social and ethnic conflicts
and to promote tolerance and harmony. For the same reasons no state should seek
to dominate other states and states should settle their differences peacefully.15.2d Rights are enhanced if democratic and consensual practices
are followed and it is therefore the responsibility of all states and other organisations
to promote these practices in their work and in their dealings with others.15.2e Many individuals and groups in Asia are unable to exercise
their rights due to restrictive or oppressive social customs and practices, particularly
those related to caste, gender, or religion. Therefore the immediate reform of
these customs and practices is necessary for the protection of rights. The reforms
must be enforced with vigour and determination.15.2f A humane and vigorous civil society is necessary for
the promotion and protection of human rights and freedoms, for securing rights
within civil society and to act as a check on state institutions. Freedoms of
expression and association are necessary for the establishment and functioning
of institutions of civil society.15.2g It is necessary to curb the exploitative practices of
business corporations and to ensure that they do not violate rights of workers,
consumers and the public.15.3a It is essential to secure the legal framework for rights.
All states should include guarantees of rights in their constitutions, which
should be constitutionally protected against erosion by legislative amendments.
They should also ratify international human rights instruments. They should review
their legislation and administrative practices against national and international
standards with the aim of repealing provisions which contravene these standards,
particularly legislation carried over from the colonial period.15.3b Knowledge and consciousness of rights should be raised
among the general public, and state and civil society institutions. Awareness
of the national and international regime of rights should be promoted. Individuals
and groups should be acquainted with legal and administrative procedures whereby
they can secure their rights and prevent abuse of authority. NGOs should be encouraged
to become familiar with and deploy mechanisms, both national and inter-national,
for monitoring and review of rights. Judicial and administrative decisions on
the protection of rights should be widely disseminated, nationally and in the
Asian region. Governments, NGOs and educational institutions should co-operate
in disseminating information about the importance and content of human rights.15.3c Numerous violations of rights occur while people are
in custody and through other activities of security forces. Sometimes these violations
take place because the security forces do not respect the permissible scope of
their powers or do not realise that the orders under which they are acting are
unlawful. Members of the police, prison services and the armed forces should
be provided training in human rights norms.15.4a The judiciary is a major means for the protection of
rights. It has the power to receive complaints of the violation of rights, to
hear evidence, and to provide redress for violations, including punishment for
violators. The judiciary can only perform this function if the legal system is
strong and well-organized. The members of the judiciary should be competent,
experienced and have a commitment to human rights, dignity and justice. They
should be independent of the legislature and the executive by vesting the power
of their appointment in a judicial service commission and by constitutional safeguards
of their tenure. Judicial institutions should fairly reflect the character of
the different sections of the people by religion, region, gender and social class.
This means that there must be a restructuring of the judiciary and the investigative
machinery. More women, more under-privileged categories and more of the Pariahs
of society must by deliberate State action be lifted out of the mire and instilled
in judicial positions with necessary training. Only such a measure will command
the confidence of the weaker sector whose human rights are ordinarily ignored
in the traditional societies of Asia.15.4.b The legal profession should be independent. Legal aid
should be provided for those who are unable to afford the services of lawyers
or have access to courts, for the protection of their rights. Rules which unduly
restrict access to courts should be reformed to provide a broad access. Social
and welfare organizations should be authorised to bring legal action on behalf
of individuals and groups who are unable to utilize the courts.15.4c All states should establish Human Rights Commissions
and specialized institutions for the protection of rights, particularly of vulnerable
members of society. They can provide easy, friendly and inexpensive access to
justice for victims of human rights violations. These bodies can supplement the
role of the judiciary. They enjoy special advantages: they can help establish
standards for the implementation of human rights norms; they can disseminate
information about human rights; they can investigate allegations of violation
of rights; they can promote conciliation and mediation; and they can seek to
enforce human rights through administrative or judicial means. They can act on
their own initiative as well on complaints from members of the public.15.4d Civil society institutions can help to enforce rights
through the organization of Peopleís Tribunals, which can touch the conscience
of the government and the public. The establishment of Peopleís Tribunals emphasizes
that the responsibility for the protection of rights is wide, and not a preserve
of the state. They are not confined to legal rules in their adjudication and
can consequently help to uncover the moral and spiritual foundations of human
rights.16.1 The protection of human rights should be pursued at all
levels, local, national, regional and international. Institutions at each level
have their special advantages and skills. The primary responsibility for the
protection of rights is that of states, therefore priority should be given to
the enhancement of state capacity to fulfil this obligation.16.2 Asian states should adopt regional or sub-regional institutions
for the promotion and protection of rights. There should be an inter-state Convention
on Human Rights, formulated in regional forums with the collaboration of national
and regional NGOs. The Convention must address the realities of Asia, particularly
the obstacles that impede the enjoyment of rights. At the same time it must be
fully consistent with international norms and standards. It should cover violations
of rights by groups and corporations in addition to state institutions. An independent
commission or a court must be established to enforce the Convention. Access to
the commission or the court must be open to NGOs and other social organizations.