Osaka City University Declaration of Human Rights 2001
2001
(Adopted by the University Council on 17 December 2001 and revised on 17 May 2010)PreambleHuman beings are born free, being equal in dignity and rights. Since the enactment of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, each of us has been expected to live with people from around the world, respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms. Nevertheless, discrimination persists regarding characteristics such as social status, descent, race, ethnicity, belief, sex, and disability. Furthermore, we are confronting new human rights issues caused by rapid social change as well as technological and scientific advance.Osaka is a city in which historically different cultures have developed, evolving in unique fashion through respect for freedom and the spirit of coexistence. Being a major center for international exchange in East Asia, the city welcomes people from all parts of the world. The diversity of its people encourages an ever-rising awareness of dignity and human rights.Osaka City University has created an academic tradition of respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms supported by respect for freedom and the spirit of coexistence of the people of Osaka City. The University has held lectures on human rights issues since 1968, and in 1973 established the Dowa Mondai Research Institute (currently, Research Center for Human Rights). The Center was Japan's first academic research institute on human rights issues, and remains a leader in education and research on eliminating discrimination and protecting human rights.Osaka City University is a seat of learning based on the dignity of people and the spirit of equality. In the 20th century, the results of academic research were often used, serving as tools or justification for instigating wars and violating human rights. We, however, shall turn once again to the basic ideas of fundamental human rights, the dignity of human beings, and equal rights of men and women, utilizing academic research to promote peace and respect for human rights. Moreover, we shall actively confront human rights issues resulting from rapid social change, economic development, and scientific and technological innovation, resolutely seeking to create a society imbued with the spirit of humanity.Osaka City University shall respect international human rights laws, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights. It shall also comply with the Constitution of Japan and domestic laws and regulations on human rights in cooperation with Osaka City, formulating and promoting policies to strengthen respect for human rights in all areas, including education and research activities.Osaka City University shall set forth the following provisions in order to create a university that respects human rights and fundamental freedoms. The University declares that it shall not only work for the development of education and research in human rights and fundamental freedoms, but will disseminate its academic traditions and achievements to the outside world in the hope of turning the 21st century into the century of human rights.Article 1. Responsibility of UniversityOsaka City University and its members have responsibility of acting to establish a university that respects human rights and fundamental freedoms.Article 2. Academic freedom1. Osaka City University shall ensure academic freedom.  Freedom of research and education, freedom of thought and conscience, and freedom of expression shall be given to all the members.2. The foregoing paragraph does not allow the necessity of violating human rights and fundamental freedoms of others.Article 3. Establishment of university without discrimination, exclusion and harassment1. Osaka City University and its members shall not practice any discrimination, exclusion or harassment in social status, descent, race, ethnicity, nationality, sex, sexual orientation, language, religion, ideology, belief, and type or level of disability, in educational and research activities.2. Osaka City University and its members shall not abuse professional status, authority or influence to force unjust work and assignments, or sexual harassment.Article 4. Acceptance of diversity and creation of a multicultural and harmonious societyOsaka City University and its members shall contribute to the creation of a multicultural and harmonious society by welcoming diverse peoples and promoting intercultural exchange.Article 5. Promotion of human rights educationOsaka City University shall promote human rights education through training, awareness-raising and social interaction programs, so that all its members can understand and act on the idea of human rights and fundamental freedoms.Article 6. Information disclosure and its contribution to the increase of human rights awarenessOsaka City University shall enrich its human rights policy by promoting disclosure of information about the policy, and actively soliciting opinions from both inside and outside the University. It shall also contribute to the development of human rights awareness throughout society by publicizing the results of research on human rights and fundamental freedoms.Article 7. Handling of human rights violationsOsaka City University and its members shall strive never to tolerate human rights violations. Osaka City University shall respond swiftly and appropriately to any complaints of violations of human rights or fundamental freedoms from its members, and shall remedy such problems.Article 8. Action plan for human rights and fundamental freedomsOsaka City University shall formulate and promote a concrete "Action Plan for Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms" based on the "Osaka City University Action Plan to Create a Discrimination-free Campus." The University shall amend the Action Plan for unforeseen needs or contingencies through continuous and multilateral assessment of its human rights policy.Source: Osaka City University, www.osaka-cu.ac.jp/en/about/declaration2001