Colombo Declaration
2002
We, the 132 participants from 24 countries, representing foreign
migrant domestic workers, governments, trade unions, NGOs and international organizations
met at the Regional Summit on Foreign Migrant Domestic Workers from 26 to 28
August, 2002, in Colombo, Sri Lanka.The right to stay and the right to move within and across
borders with dignity are fundamental to human civilization. Foreign migrant domestic
workers contribute to the socio-economic development of societies and economies.The summit aimed at developing a framework for dialogue at
various levels to ensure appropriate recognition, protection and dignity of foreign
migrant domestic workers. The main principles defining the dialogue included
the principles of human rights for all without discrimination, and the values
of freedom, equality and justice.The experiences of foreign migrant domestic workers in the
migration process reveal that domestic work is still to be recognized as a socio-economic
activity and valued accordingly. This leads to a serious lack of protection,
vulnerability and exploitation.   Multiple discriminations based on gender,
race and class within the family, the community and nations and the isolated
and individualized conditions of work, and lack of protection and appropriate
services and information increases their vulnerabilities to exploitation and
violence.  It also compromises their health and human security.The different stakeholders (recruiters, employers, agencies,
states, societies and economies) work together in benefiting from foreign migrant
domestic workers' social and economic contribution.From the testimonies and voices of foreign migrant domestic
workers and other stakeholders at the summit, it was apparent that the isolation
and unequal dependency on the employer for the fulfillment of the foreign migrant
domestic workers' basic human needs, and the absence of access to own documents,
restricted mobility and captivity within the household makes them, especially
women, vulnerable.   We have heard accounts of foreign migrant domestic
workers being further victimized, accused, blamed and punished as consequences
of sexual abuse, assault and exploitation which even ended in death.   Lack
of access to free and fair trial, appeal, judicial and immigration procedures
and decisions, gender biased policies, regulations and practices further increase
risks to their human security and rights.It is only when socio-economic value and contribution and
due respect are given to domestic work, dignity, justice and rights of foreign
migrant domestic workers will be guaranteed.  Legal recognition and protection
of their rights, including fair and decent wage, freedom of expression, association,
unionization, religion, privacy, rest and recreation and right to vote should
be ensured. Free access to health care services, social security systems, communication
and information, services including training, legal aid and counseling, socio-economic
benefits to the foreign migrant domestic workers and their families are also
essential components for a successful and safe migration process.  This
should empower and improve the quality of lives of foreign migrant domestic workers
and their families as well as enhancing the quality of life of the societies
where they live and work.We recognize the various positive actions and developments
undertaken by governments, international organizations and civil society to address
the growing issues and concerns affecting the life of foreign migrant domestic
workers.  However, we need to build on these initiatives to further strengthen
the mechanisms, measures and create new and innovative interventions and services
through an expanding partnership.Protecting the rights of foreign migrant domestic workers
necessitates the inclusion of domestic work in national labor legislation in
accordance with international labor standards and human rights principles and
practices including gender justice.  We also need to define domestic work
in the context of human rights principles specially for developing and implementing
work contracts.The following strategies, policies, plans and development
interventions should be established to address the issue of recognition, protection
and dignity of foreign migrant domestic workers:Rights1. Origin countries should ensure that overseas employment
opportunities are not achieved at the expense of compromising the protection
and welfare of migrants especially foreign migrant domestic workers.2. Foreign migrant domestic worker should be recognized as
a migrant and as a worker.3. Documented and undocumented foreign migrant domestic workers
should be treated as per existing international labor and human rights standards.4. Accurate and realistic information concerning economic
and social costs and benefits of overseas employment, including health vulnerabilitiesshould be provided at all stages of migration to facilitate
successful integration.5. Foreign migrant domestic workers should be able to enjoy
physical and mental health, reproductive health and sexual health rights at all
stages of migration, including the right to marry, bear children and enjoy family
life.6. Foreign migrant domestic workers should enjoy equal rights
of all workers including the right to change their place and nature of work.7. Migrant workers, particularly, foreign migrant domestic
workers and their children should have access to education at all stages of migration.8. Origin countries should facilitate the exercise by migrant
domestic workers' of their right to vote in elections in their home countries.Policies  & Mechanisms9. Migration should be incorporated in the development policy
and planning in the origin and destination countries as well as in the international
social and economic institutions.10. Ratification of the 1990 UN International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families,
and other relevant international instruments to ensure a rights based approach
for protection, both in origin and destination countries is imperative.11. The ban and restriction on female migration and all types
of migrants should be removed to uphold core human rights principles.12. Concerns about security must not turn into xenophobic
actions against migrants especially foreign migrant domestic workers.13. Bilateral and multilateral agreements and arrangements
between the origin and destination countries should be established to protect
the rights of migrants including foreign migrant domestic workers. The agreements
should reflect accountability and transparency in regulating recruiting and employment
agencies. They must be accompanied by implementing guidelines and action plans.
The agreements should also include the definition and clear enunciation of terms
of contracts for upholding international labor standards.14. Regional processes both at government and civil society
levels should be initiated to evolve consensus to address regional migration
challenges.15. Mechanism needs to be established at national and regional
levels for effective development, independent monitoring and implementation of
support services for foreign migrant domestic workers. Rights of access to consular
services should be guaranteed. The consular services should be further strengthened
and made effective especially in providing legal and health services.16. Mechanisms and policies must be established to enable
greater involvement of foreign migrant domestic workers in the development and
implementation of programs addressing their issues and concerns.Interventions17. Programs should be put in place to effectively address
trafficking and smuggling that may occur during the process of migration.18. Provisions and arrangements should be made available to
foreign migrant domestic workers for safe and secured transfer of remittances
and their productive utilization.19. In cases of serious human rights violations or serious
injuries such as death, arbitrary detention, crimes, unfair trials, sexual violence
and abuse, States must undertake full and transparent investigation and ensure
that those responsible are held accountable.20. Interventions should be developed by the State and civil
society for enhancing skill and empowerment of foreign migrant domestic workers.21. The Durban Declaration and Program of Action of the World
Conference Against Racism seeks to eliminate racism, xenophobia, racial discrimination
and other forms of related intolerance. As part of this process public awareness
to build positive attitudes to recognize and value domestic work is imperative.  Responsible
media and civil society advocacy must be engaged.22. We the participants agreed to continue this process of
dialogue through existing structure and non-traditional regional cooperation.   The
dialogue should be based on a mechanism to reconcile contradictory priorities,
concerns and interests of all stakeholders.Institutions23. Member States of the UN should implement the recommendations
in the resolutions in the UN Commission on Human Rights relating to migrants
and their families.24. The Commission on Human Rights should also act on the
recommendations made by the UN Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants
and give special attention to the reports which refer to the situation of foreign
migrant domestic workers. Member states of the UN should also implement the recommendations
in the Secretary General's reports on migrants and foreign migrant domestic workers.25. National human rights commissions should integrate into
their agenda foreign migrant domestic workers.26. The IOM, ILO and UN agencies, including the office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), UNIFEM, UNDP, UNICEF, UNAIDS
and WHO, should coordinate and work together to strengthen the protection of
foreign migrant domestic workers.Foreign migrant domestic workers are human beings. They have
life, rights and dignity.  They have also feelings, need warmth, respect,
care and love.  They are not just individuals and cannot live in isolation.
They are as part of families, communities, cultures and civilizations. Their
work must be considered as such according to the universal values of human rights
and internationally recognized labor standards. The kind of work they do should
not be used as a reason for their discrimination and an excuse for violating
their rights as human beings and as workers.Violations of foreign migrant domestic workers rights, including
fundamental principles and rights at work, must be stopped, in order to ensure
decent work and life of dignity for them and their families. It is only
when the foreign migrant domestic workers can enjoy their rights and universal
values, can we then realize a just and democratic society. Towards this end we
will build international solidarity by making August 28 the International Solidarity
Day with Foreign Migrant Domestic Workers.Adopted on August 28, 2002 in Colombo, Sri Lanka