Conclusions and Recommendations of the Experts Meeting on Human Rights in the Asia-Pacific
1995
July 26-28, 1995, Osaka, Japan1. All human rights are universal, indivisible, and interdependent
and interrelated. The Asia-Pacific community must treat all human rights in a
fair and equal manner, on the same footing, and with the same emphasis. While
the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical,
cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States,
regardless of their political, economic and cultural systems, to promote and
protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms.2. Respect for and implementation of human rights provides
the basis for peaceful and harmonious coexistence among peoples with diverse
cultural and religious backgrounds. This diversity of cultures and religions
enriches the universal meaning of human rights at the national and regional levels.3. A holistic approach should always be adopted in the implementation
of human rights programmes. Equal attention should be given to civil, cultural,
economic, political and social rights.4. Activities for the promotion and protection of human rights
have been excessively compartmentalized within the United Nations system. Major
development, financial and humanitarian agencies have not shown much interest
in the human rights implications of their activities. All UN agencies, including
those directly responsible for implementing human rights programmes, should take
full account of international human rights law in all their activities and coordinate
their policies and programmes in line with human rights norms. They should be
held accountable for their actions in this regard.5. The United Nations should continue setting human rights
standards designed to further promote, protect and realize the rights of the
socially disadvantaged such as indigenous people and minorities.6. The existing UN mechanisms and procedures for the promotion
and protection of human rights should be further strengthened and made more effective.7. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights should
be provided with sufficient funding and staff to enable the High Commissioner
to comply effectively with his mandate including the ability to respond effectively
to human rights challenges and coordinate UN activities related to human rights.
Governments should recognize the importance of the Office of the High Commissioner
and extend all possible cooperation to the High Commissioner.8. The United Nations should consider holding some of its
human rights meetings in the Asia-Pacific region. In particular, some of the
sessions of the United Nations Human Rights Commission and human rights treaty
bodies should be held in the region. Such meetings should be substantive rather
than simply ceremonial, ensure full involvement of local and regional NGOs and
should be a means for facilitating a better understanding of the region for members
and agencies involved in such meetings.9. The High Commissioner should consider submitting to the
United Nations General Assembly a plan of action for undertaking programmes in
the region and include in the plan of action a critical review of human rights
activities undertaken by relevant UN agencies in the region. It is recommended
that the High Commissioner consult as much as possible the human rights organizations
in the region in preparing the plan of action.10. The United Nations should consider establishing a regional
office in the Asia-Pacific region to represent the High Commissioner. The High
Commissioner should consider the possibility of establishing an expert body,
consisting mostly of experts from the region, to provide assistance to the programmes
conducted in the region.11. The High Commissioner should expand and coordinate extensive
technical cooperation programmes designed to strengthen domestic laws and structures
that will promote human rights in Asia-Pacific countries. Technical cooperation
programmes should provide for participation of relevant non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) in the formulation, implementation and evaluation of these programmes.12. NGOs in the region should be provided with training, employing
participatory methodologies, on the effective use of UN mechanisms and the means
of implementing human rights instruments. Regional organizations such as the
Asia-Pacific Human Rights Information Center (HURIGHTS Osaka) as well as universities
and research centres in the region should facilitate such training. Technical
assistance should be provided by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights for this purpose.13. Asia-Pacific is yet to establish a regional inter-governmental
institution for the promotion and protection of human rights. Any discussion
concerning the feasibility of establishing a regional mechanism should take into
account serious violations of human rights that still occur in many countries
in the region, the low level of ratification of human rights treaties, the non-observance
of treaty-obligations after ratification, and the tendency of some prominent
individuals in some states to advocate a cultural relativist position on human
rights as opposed to universality of human rights.14. Despite a number of UN-sponsored workshops on regional
human rights mechanism for Asia-Pacific, states in the region have so far failed
to reach a consensus on such a mechanism. Cultural, linguistic and religious
heterogeneity, and the lack of agreement on the geographical definition of the
region are cited by states as obstacles to such a consensus. The human rights
community in the region is of the view that heterogeneity of language and religion
is not an impediment to the establishment of such regional mechanism.15. Respect for and observance of the principles of existing
human right instruments and recognition of the universality and indivisibility
of human rights should be the foundation stone upon which any regional mechanism
is established. Such a mechanism must not in anyway restrict full access by individuals
from the region to the United Nations human rights mechanisms.16. A two-step strategy should be pursued to establish a regional
inter-governmental organization for promotion and protection of human rights.
The first step would be the establishment of a regular inter-governmental forum
to facilitate discussion and debate among governments on the establishment of
a regional mechanism. The second step would be the establishment of a regional
or sub-regional inter-governmental bodies for the promotion and protection of
human rights.17. Considering the lack of consensus among governments in
the region, establishment of human rights mechanisms in different sub-regions
may be more feasible and should be pursued with the objective of eventually establishing
a single mechanism for the whole region.18. The United Nations and its Specialized Agencies should
coordinate their efforts to facilitate creation of a regional mechanism for promotion
and protection of human rights . Similarly, regional and sub-regional non-governmental
organizations and issue-based networks should also work toward persuading the
governments in the region to help establish a regional mechanism.19. Discussion forums for representatives of governments on
this issue should be encouraged. The United Nations University and the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Japan should be congratulated for organizing a seminar
on regional human rights issues recently in Tokyo and encouraged to follow-up
on their joint efforts.20. The Asia-Pacific Human Rights Information Center (HURIGHTS
OSAKA) and other regional organizations in Asia-Pacific are encouraged to interact
and form a network to enhance the promotional and educational activities that
emphasize the importance of a regional human rights mechanism.21. It is now fully accepted by all member-states of the United
Nations that human rights are universal and indivisible. In order to give operational
effect to this agreement, it is urged that those governments which have not ratified
major international human rights instruments should do so. It is a matter of
international concern that many states in the Asia-Pacific region have not yet
ratified the International Covenants on Human Rights.22. Following the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
as well as declarations and programmes of action of other UN world conferences,
all governments should formulate national plans of action for realizing human
rights at the domestic level. The implementation of such plans should be monitored
by the United Nations, national institutions and NGOs.23. Following the practice on civil and political rights questions,
governments should make a clear commitment to the realization of economic, social
and cultural rights at the national level. That commitment should be cast in
terms of human rights terminology which is inherently empowering. The commitment
of governments should include time-bound plans to realize those rights.24. In accordance with the Copenhagen Declaration, governments
should promote social development (comprehensive human development) rather than
mere economic growth by ensuring that all human rights are respected and promoted
through their economic policies.25. Official Development Assistance (ODA) should be so rendered
as to promote civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights by encouraging
and assisting recipient governments to develop a plan of action for the realization
of these rights.26. The Asia-Pacific human rights community has not sufficiently
addressed the existing inequalities in society and their human rights implications.
There is a need to strengthen its links to disadvantaged communities and to develop
the latter's capability to deal with more sophisticated human rights issues affecting
them in a more sophisticated manner. Adequate knowledge and skills in using multi-disciplinary
approaches in addressing the underlying causes of human rights violations should
be developed.27. The human rights community in all regions of the world
face challenges in ensuring an adequate response to sociocultural practices such
as discrimination against women. The Asia-Pacific human rights community must
take up this challenge.28. The category of human rights defenders should encompass
all those who are working for civil, cultural, economic, political and social
rights. Special efforts should be made to protect them at regional and international
levels.29. Initiatives by the human rights community in formulating
human rights principles in the form of people's charters, declarations and other
statements are effective means of educating people on human rights. These efforts
should be encouraged and supported.30. The human rights community should develop more creative
human rights education and training programmes to help communities make use of
human rights norms as effective tools. They should conduct programmes to develop
capabilities at the community level of effectively monitoring human rights violations
and contributing to the development of remedies. Training, for instance, on monitoring
violations of economic, social and cultural rights and finding the means to redress
them should be held.31. The human rights community should take necessary steps
to ensure that all relevant UN agencies are held accountable for their policies
and programmes relating to human rights. The human rights community should realize
the potential benefit of the High Commissioner's role in responding to human
rights issues in the region. They should be prepared to provide assistance to
the High Commissioner whenever necessary.32. Training programmes should be further developed to enable
women and their organizations articulate the demand for gender sensitivity in
all areas of national and international structures and institutions. Teachers
at all levels of educational systems and decision-makers in government should
be particularly involved in these training programmes.33. Both women and men should develop strategies for creating
a gender sensitive society. Social structures which cause gender discrimination
must be given special attention. Monitoring the implementation of the Plan of
Action of the Beijing conference is one opportunity for realizing this objective.34. Networking among women's groups, particularly on thematic
issues, should be further encouraged and provided with full resource support.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights is urged to provide support
through its technical assistance programme for the advancement of the human rights
of women.35. In many countries in the region, judicial and administrative
structures do not provide sufficient safeguard against human rights abuses by
governments at all levels and by other actors. This applies in particular to
the denial of human rights as a result of the acts and omissions of public authorities.
Human rights discourse in the region has focused principally on setting norms
and not on implementation and enforcement of those norms. The weakness of the
rule of law and absence of independent judiciary, for instance, have not been
sufficiently addressed by the human rights community.36. National jurisprudence should take into full account the
international human rights norms and standards. The United Nations should assist
in developing or strengthening national judicial and administrative structures
that will enforce human rights norms and standards. Regional and national experts
may be asked to assist in this regard.37. The public should be made aware of these norms and standards
as well as the mechanisms for their implementation. Facilities and institutions
should be created for this purpose.38. The media should be considered as having an important
responsibility for promoting and protecting human rights. At the same time, media
persons should be protected against human rights abuses. NGOs should give this
matter special attention and undertake programmes designed to inform and train
media persons on human rights issues.