Turning up the Volume - Mekong Youth Raise their Voices against Human Trafficking
2007
2007 Mekong Youth Forum (MYF)
2-9 September 2007
Bangkok, ThailandAccording to our discussion
and observations, we see that inadequate systems are in place to help victims
report their trafficking experiences. Most victims are unaware of where and how
they can get assistance. In some cases, we've seen that victims faced discrimination
after they returned to their communities. There are also people returning (whom
haven't been 'rescued' or returned by authorities) to their homes and who do
not even realize they had been victimised. We also think there is not enough
prosecution of traffickers.1. Enforce specific laws that
strictly punish traffickers. In particular, those who employ domestic workers
and beat them, and those who employ young people for exploitation must be punished,
and the communities must be informed on these laws and penalties. This will help
prevent others from trafficking children. Traffickers who are in jail must be
rehabilitated and educated so that they would not repeat their crimes.2. Victims need more ways to report the abuses and receive
help, and this can be done through mass media campaigns, setting up hotlines
at hospitals12
and within communities, and through establishing collaboration systems with local
authorities, NGOs and relevant departments. International anti-trafficking hotlines
should also be set up and should share the same number (if possible).3. The decision to return home
must be voluntary.For those returning to
their communities:• There has to be a family
assessment before the victim returns to make sure that it is safe for the victim
to come back.• Family should welcome victims
without any discrimination.• Encourage victims to participate
in activities so that they can regain their sense of value and belonging in the
community.• Provide psychological support
to the victims.• Provide vocational skills
and support according to their needs and find markets for their products.• There has to be a system
to monitor and follow up with the victims after their return. Governments must
clearly identify which agencies are responsible for this.• If for some reason, the family
cannot welcome the victim, the community must find another safe place for him/her.2 Hotline for hospitals will be used by staff to report to
authorities on cases that they discover from among their patients.For those who cannot return to
their own communities and families:• Governments in areas where
they like to stay must provide job opportunities for them.1. Establish child protection
networks in village, commune, and province under collaboration with local authority
and all people in all levels2. Enforce specific laws that
strictly punish traffickers. This will also prevent others from trafficking children.
Those who use domestic workers and beat them, those who employ young people for
exploitation must be punished, and the communities must be informed on these
laws. Traffickers who are in jail must be rehabilitated and educated so that
they would not repeat their crimes.3. Information materials regarding
trafficking, identifying victims and how victims could get help must be made
available for young people in local languages in the destination and in places
of origin. The material must say that "victims are not offenders..."As young people living in this
region, we realise that everyone needs to be involved in child protection and
prevention of trafficking. Children with no protection are vulnerable to trafficking.
We have also learned that society, communities, families and schools are not
aware of our rights. Sometimes, even we ourselves are not familiar with those
rights because we don't have enough access to information. We do not see enough
information posted in places where we might look, and the anti-trafficking materials
that we do see we often don't like - nor understand. There are tens of thousands
of children living in the countryside who have never seen information or materials
on anti-trafficking. In their hometowns, there are no financial or human resources
to help them learn how to protect themselves from trafficking. Meanwhile in both
the cities and in the countryside, there are thousands of children with no parental
care. They are vulnerable to trafficking.1. Advocacy on child rights
and anti-trafficking shouldn't only be targeted at children but also adults.2. If only we had more financial
and human support, we as young people could better deliver information on anti-trafficking
to other children.3. In addition, if we can get
more involved in developing advocacy materials on child rights, we'll like those
materials better.4. Parents should learn how
to be better parents through schools and other means, including media.5. A system should be set up
to support poor families so that parents can stay united with their children,
instead of going away to work.6. More social resources should
be allocated to the most marginalised children and to care for children without
parents to make sure that they are properly looked after.7. Child protection systems
should be established to help children in all places, especially where trafficking
is a big problem - not only in the cities but also in the rural areas.8. There should be better awareness
raising and information sharing within the community about trafficking, including
the real stories of victims (who are willing to speak out) or as told through
their friends. Education/information materials on human trafficking must be available
at schools, supermarkets, stations, and hospitals, so that all people are aware
of the issue.9. More materials should be
translated to local (and minority) languages.10. Governments in our six
countries should organise international activities like MYF more regularly and
invite the victims (if they are willing) to tell their stories to us to prevent
other children from being trafficked.Since trafficking affects the
lives of many children and young people, better solutions to the problem of human
trafficking could be found and implemented through direct participation of children
and youth. However, there is not enough understanding and support from the government,
community and parents regarding children's participation. In general, children
do not have enough opportunity to participate and/or they lack the confidence
to participate.There are other factors that
need to be addressed to make participation fairer for all young people, such
as ongoing discrimination between educated and uneducated children, rich and
poor children, those from rural areas and urban areas, as well as gender-based
discrimination. All of these affect the opportunities available for participation.1. All children and youth should
be given the opportunity to participate in activities without discrimination
between the rich and the poor, educated and uneducated, male and female, children
and youth, or against victims, the disabled and people of different religions.
The government, parents, and international organisations should provide financial
and technical support for children's participation.2. Children and youth should
participate in planning, implementing and monitoring of activities against human
trafficking.3. Provide space for children
to share their opinions and their experiences on human trafficking and child
participation with other children and youth, and also with responsible adults.
Provide victims with opportunities to voluntarily share information with other
people as a specific part of this participation effort.Trafficking victims, poor children,
migrant children, stateless children, working children, and children in remote
areas don't have a chance to access education and, therefore, they become vulnerable
groups. Girls should alsohave just as much chance to
attend school as boys. Physical abuse and neglect, bullying, as well as discrimination
are still problems in schools. These issues can lead to students not wanting
to attend school.Quality of education in remote
areas is not equal to that in urban areas. We lack teachers in remote areas due
to lack of incentives offered to the teachers. There is lack of information on
child trafficking and child protection in schools. There are still parents who
don't send children to school and, instead, ask them to work to earn money for
the families. Therefore, these children also become vulnerable to trafficking.1. All children must receive
formal education and have access to non-formal education to help protect them
from being trafficked.2. Raise awareness of school
teachers (and students) on child protection issues, child rights, and trafficking.
There should be stricter punishments to prevent teachers (and other students)
from abusing children and discriminating against them.3. Governments need to supply
more - and better-quality - teachers in remote areas. They should include increased
incentives for urban teachers to work in these remote areas. Meanwhile, governments
should encourage and support villagers to become teachers. We should encourage
students to go back to their schools and become teachers after graduation.4. There should be participatory
extra-curricular activities to equip children with knowledge and skills on child
trafficking and child protection. Sharing experiences from trafficking victims
should be done in school.5. We should help parents understand
that sending their children to school can prevent them from being trafficked
and can improve their prospects for the future.6. Governments should build
more schools, provide free basic education (including school materials) and,
when necessary, provide financial assistance to poor children to ensure that
everyone can go to school.7. Parents and their communities
should encourage children to continue their studies and participate in activities
regarding child rights, health education, reproductive health, anti-trafficking,
etc.Because of reasons such as
poverty, lack of job opportunities, lack of protection in schools and within
families, or not enough land to farm in order to sustain a living, many people
- including children - are migrating without the proper documents, both inside
the country and to neighbouring countries.There are either no laws or
limited laws that relate to the protection of migrant children. Due to unsafe
migration and a lack of information available to young people about the destination,
children and youth become very vulnerable. There are language barriers and lack
of social support for migrant people working at these destinations, and migrant
people in these places are exploited by employers due to lack of documents.1. The governments of all countries,
both at the origin and destination, need to have workable agreements and policies
in place to ensure the rights of all migrants (for example, access to legal documents,
laws that protect migrants, etc) and to take action immediately in situations
of abuse and exploitation. The governments of all countries need to establish
an organisation or office which is responsible for providing support to the migrants.2. There should be no discrimination
against migrants. Child protection systems for migrant children must be established
in destination areas.3. Governments and international
NGOs should create job opportunities for young people within their own communities/countries
so that migration for work does not become their only choice.4. Set up job information centres
in both cities and remote areas to provide information for migrant children and
youth (of legal working age) about safe migration and also about available job
opportunities.5. Governments should make
efforts to advocate and implement labour laws and get employers to understand
them and respect them.6. Illegal employment agencies
should be prohibited,Children and youth without
nationality are at higher risk of being trafficked because they have limited
access to protection, they often have no access to basic services such as education,
health care or legal help, and they have no right to vote.1. Officially registering all
children born in the country as soon as possible to allow them access to all
public services.2. Government agencies must
provide special identification for those whose nationality is not recognised
and for victims of trafficking who want to remain in the country where they are
at present, in order that they canrely on receiving basic public
care.3. The destination countries
and countries of origin should have more discussions to achieve an agreement
on how to identify the migrants' nationalities.4. Governments should provide
equal access to education and educational certificates to all children, even
if their nationalities are in question.i Hotline
for hospitals will be used by staff to report to authorities on cases that they
discover from among their patients.