Dui Hua Launches New Website as Need for China Dialogue Grows
January 12, 2012
SAN FRANCISCO (January 12, 2012) — Dui Hua, a nonprofit organization with 13 years of experience promoting respect for human rights in China, today announces the launch of its new website, www.duihua.org, to better communicate its ongoing and expanded mission. The need for dialogue and accessible information is crucial, as there are now more people incarcerated in China for political reasons than at any time since 1989, the year of the Tiananmen Square crackdown.Articles on China’s criminal justice system and Dui Hua’s work advancing the rights of at-risk detainees are now featured on a dynamic homepage. A more intuitive menu organizes content on Dui Hua’s four areas of focus—political and religious prisoners, juvenile justice, women in prison, and criminal justice; five-pronged, dialogic approach; and history, from its founding by businessman-cum-activist John Kamm in 1999.For research professionals, officials, diplomats, and others with a scholarly interest, the website’s Research Resources page provides links and information on Dui Hua publications, databases, and official testimonies and statements. For media professionals, the Press page offers a complete archive of Dui Hua press statements and selected media coverage in a variety of formats.Fostering the dialogue with Dui Hua’s friends and supporters, the new website also provides a list of ways to Get Involved. Job openings, internship and volunteer opportunities, and events are featured. Direct paths to making online donations and information on other ways to contribute to Dui Hua’s work are available on the Give page.“Transparency and access are important to our advocacy work, and they should be equally important to our website,” says John Kamm, founder and executive director of Dui Hua. “With this new web launch, Dui Hua hopes to make its mission and efforts clear to help advance informed, mutually respectful human rights dialogue with China.”Dui Hua will launch its new website on Thursday, January 12, 2012, US Pacific Standard Time. During the update links may still be directed to old website content. Thank you for your patience and understanding.“Dui Hua” (对话) means “dialogue” in Mandarin Chinese. Founded in April 1999 by former businessman John Kamm, Dui Hua is a nonprofit humanitarian organization that brings clemency and better treatment to at-risk detainees through promotion of universally recognized human rights in a well-informed, mutually respectful dialogue with China. As testament to its work, Dui Hua enjoys special consultative status with the UN Economic and Social Council and is the only independent NGO focusing on human rights in China to have such status.Dui Hua has established productive working relations with officials in China, the European Union, the United States, and other countries that conduct human rights exchanges or dialogues with China. Fueled by a growing database that now includes more than 25,000 prisoners, the organization pioneered the use of prisoner lists as a means to raise individual cases during diplomatic encounters. Prisoner lists have since been used by more than a dozen countries and organizations during human rights dialogues and consultations.