Eradicating Dissent in post-Mubarak Egypt: Civil Society Face New Repressive Laws
11 Feb 2013
Egypt,
Impunity/Accountability,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society,
Statement,
Women’s rights and gender justice February 11, 2013 Read in: 
French 
Arabic Last week, and in the aftermath of mounting political tensions and street violence shaking the country, the Egyptian Ministry of Justice announced a new draft Law on Civil Associations and Foundations and a draft law on demonstrations for consideration and approval by the government. The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN), the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation against Torture (OMCT) are deeply disturbed that such repressive legislation should be taken by the Egyptian authorities in an attempt to muzzle dissenting voices and gag public freedoms in the country. This most disquieting development comes in a context where public authorities have been meeting street protests with excessive use of force entailing tear gas and rubber bullets, leaving over60 dead and dozens of wounded over the past weeks. Widespread criticism from the media and Human Rights organisations alike, have been met with defamation and trials, and legal moves attempting to criminalise such criticism. Our organisations are particularly worried that the Egyptian government aims at institutionalising and legalising repressive practices that have not changed since the Mubarak era. If ratified, the law on demonstrations would blankly criminalise peaceful protest movements, by prohibiting any disturbance “of security or public order, prohibiting the hindrance to citizens’ interests, or the blocking of roads and other means of transport, obstructing traffic, or attacking personal property, or hindering the freedom to work.”[1] It would also result in justifying use of excessive force by security forces in dispersing demonstrations. The bill on associations and foundations, currently tabled for discussion by the Egyptian government, would leave only a dramatically-shrunken space for NGOs and other Civil Society Organisations to operate in Egypt, by virtually “nationalising” civil organisations.[2] This draft law grants indeed broad powers to a “steering committee” composed of representatives from several ministries with heavy presence of the security apparatus. In contravention with the requirement of ‘notification’, it mandates ‘registration’ of all NGOs and foundations. It grants this committee the authority to define the associations’ objectives, interfere in their activities, and authorise or not foreign funding based on the type of activities. International NGOs would not be allowed to settle and activate in Egypt without prior authorisation. Receiving foreign government funding, directly or indirectly, would be flatly prohibited for all CSOs, threatening the means of subsistence of many associations, in particular human rights organisations, who depend on public grants. Finally and worryingly, this draft law provides with “imprisonment for a term of not less than one year” and fines of up to £E 100,000 for a wide range of violations of the law, including “aiding” a foreign CSO “in the exercise of any activity in Egypt” or “field research or opinion polls”… without the approval of the concerned authorities. Our organisations are alarmed that the Egyptian authorities should resort to such authoritarian-like measures instead of opening the gates to genuine dialogue with civil society and all the political forces at play in the country with a view to achieve outcomes conductive of human rights and democracy. Indeed these repressive policies do not help building confidence between government and civil society as needed in order to build a successful dialogue and find a way out from the on-going political crisis. We therefore urge the Egyptian authorities to: Our organisations also ask that the European Union [1] Read CIHRS Statement ‘New Draft Law Aims to Criminalize Peaceful Demonstrations’ (1/2/2013) [2] Read CIHRS Statement ‘Strangling Civil Society with Repressive Laws: Morsi’s Bill to Nationalize Civic Activity Must be Retracted’ (7/2/213) and ICNL’s preliminary review of the draft law here  