Transitional governments should ensure women get their full rights
7 Mar 2012
Economic & Social Rights,
Impunity/Accountability,
International Women's Day (IWD),
Statement,
Violence against Women,
Women’s rights and gender justice March 07, 2012 Read in: 
French 
Arabic EMHRN commemorates International Women’s Day. The celebration comes in the context of uprisings for democracy in the Southern Mediterranean region and the economic crisis in Europe. The network congratulates the continuous and persistent aspirations and struggles for dignity and freedoms in the Southern Mediterranean, commending in particular the central role of women in the movements against oppressive regimes. The EMHRN is, however, concerned by the backlashes and frustrating setbacks on the situation of women in several of these contexts which threaten a real promotion of women’s rights and gender equality in the transitional processes in the Southern Mediterranean, as well as in a Europe, in particular Southern Europe, struck by financial and economic crisis. Even though women, as much as men, have played a key role in the revolutions , the transitional period following the Arab uprisings is characterized by a tendency towards their systematic marginalization  and almost complete absence of their priorities and concerns  from  the transitions’ agendas. Women fear the seeming strong intentions to deprive them from enjoying their full citizenship rights. The EMHRN welcomed the parity provision in the Constituent Assembly elections in Tunisia yet regrets that no real parity was achieved on the ground and that in the end women were far from equally represented.  It also welcomed the gender equality provisions in the amended Moroccan constitution yet remains worried that they were not activated. The EMHRN regrets that the Egyptian women has been excluded from the transitional bodies and decision-making processes. It is deeply concerned with the campaigns aim to distort the image of female activists who are involved in peaceful demonstrations and political movements. EMHRN particularly condemns the subjugation of some women activists to compulsory medical test on their virginity and the brutality used by the Egyptian military and police against women demonstrators. In the occupied Palestinian territory, Palestinian women continued to be victims of violence resulting from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Moreover, the disadvantaged situation of Palestinian women continue to be exacerbated by weak rule of law and gender-based discrimination that remains embedded in legislation, regulations and policies. In Europe women are the first to suffer the effects of the economic crises such as job loss, unemployment, precariousness, policies of budgetary austerity that affect public services of education and health and mounting populism and right-wing extremism that normalize the idea of compromising women’s right to control their fertility. Moreover, EU member states gender equality measures are being cancelled or delayed as a part of the response to the challenges of the crisis, directly or indirectly affecting gender equality progress throughout Europe. Throughout the Northern as well as the Southern Mediterranean regions, it thus seems that the dominating patriarchal culture is reproducing its values more strongly backed with the raising of conservative religious approaches and the seeming diminished political will and decreasing commitments of the governments to the promotion of gender equality. Women are subjected to increasing   discrimination and violence due to the prevailing non secure transitional periods. We recall the expressed commitments of these states to CEDAW as well as UN Security Council Resolution 1325 which were both reiterated in the joint Euro-Med policy for promotion of women’s rights, the 2009 euro-med ministerial Marrakech conclusions, in particular articles 4 and 15 underlining the crucial importance of equal participation of women in all spheres of life for democracy and sustainable development. We also refer to the Council of the European Union’s Conclusions of 1st of December, 2011 on the European Neighbourhood Policy that reiterates that “women’s rights, gender equality and women’s participation in the political processes are essential components of a democratic society and important for inclusive economic development”. Women in the region want and deserve democracy and citizenship based on the fundamental principles of equality between men and women, freedom, dignity, physical and psychological integrity, access to resources, health, education and power of decision on their own bodies and lives. Therefore, EMHRN calls on: Governments, provisional governments and transitional bodies in the Southern Mediterranean European governments The European Union (EU) and Mediterranean countries 