PCHR Congratulates Sha’awan Jabarin, Director of Al-Haq, for having been elected as FIDH’s Vice-President
28 May 2013
Israel / OPT,
Press Release May 28, 2013 On Monday, 27 May 2013, the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) held its international bureau elections during its 38th congress, entitled “Human Rights and Democratic Transitions: Experiences and Challenge”, in Istanbul in Turkey from 23 to 27 May 2013. Mr. Karim Lahidgy, an Iranian lawyer, was elected as the FIDH President succeeding Ms. Suheir Bolhasan.  Mr. Sha’awan Jabarin, Director of al-Haq, the pioneer of the human rights movement in Palestine, was elected as FIDH’s Vice-President.  Mr. ‘Ezz Eddin al-Asbahi, Director of Human Rights Information and Training Centre (HRITC) in Yemen, was also elected for the same position. Aminah Abu ‘Ayyash, a Moroccan human rights activist, was elected as the Secretary.  During the congress, al-Mezan Centre for Human Rights’ was awarded with FIDH’s membership. It should be noted that Raji Sourani, Director of the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights (PCHR), was elected to preside the congress, while taking into consideration that he finished his fourth term as the FIDH’s Vice-President.  Sourani had occupied the position for 12 consecutive years during the 34th, 35th, 36th and 37th congresses in 2001, 2004, 2007, and 2010. FIDH is a non-governmental organization based in Paris, since 1922. It is one of the leading international organizations dedicated to defending human rights.  It has 168 member organizations active in 122 countries throughout the world, including a number of Arab human rights organizations, PCHR being one of them.  FIDH holds its Congress every three years; during which members define strategies for action and elect the International Bureau of FIDH. PCHR regards this day, of FIDH Bureau election, a special day for the Palestinian human rights movement.  This day witnessed the approval of al-Mezan Centre’s membership (Al-Mezan is a Palestinian organization active in human rights field), and electing Sha’awan Jabarin, one of the most prominent Palestinian human rights advocates, as FIDH’s Vice-President.  Sha’awan Jabarin is a highly acclaimed human rights defender, PCHR congratulates Mr. Sha’awan Jabarin, Director of al-Haq, for being elected as FIDH’s Vice-President.  PCHR also considers Jabarin’s appointment as international appreciation for the Palestinian human rights movement and for al-Haq, which is the pioneer in defending Palestinians’ rights.  Jabarim spent 8 years in administrative detention, and was banned from traveling by Israeli forces for 17 consecutive years. PCHR also congratulates al-Mezan Centre for its membership in FIDH.  PCHR is looking forward to further efforts and the important work to be done by Palestinian human rights organizations under the umbrella of international organizations and networks in support for human rights causes and the rule of international law, and seeking accountability and prosecution of war criminals. 