Israeli forces continue systematic attacks against Palestinian civilians and property in the OPT
24 Oct 2013
Gaza Strip,
Israel / OPT,
Press Release October 24, 2013 –       4 Palestinian civilians, who tried to take the corpse of the victim from the Israeli forces, were wounded. –     A Palestinian civilian was wounded during Bil’in weekly protest, northwest of Ramallah. –     Dozens of civilians suffered tear gas inhalation. –       At least 48 Palestinian civilians, including 5 children and a girl, were arrested in the West Bank –      Israeli forces established dozens of checkpoints in the West Bank. –       At least 16 Palestinian civilians, including 4 children and a woman, were arrested at checkpoints in the West Bank. –       A companion of a Palestinian patient was arrested at Beit Hanoun (Erez) crossing. –       Israeli forces opened fire at Palestinian fishing boats, but neither casualties nor material damage were reported. –       Israeli forces issued notices to demolish houses and civilian facilities in area (C)[1][1]. –       The Palestinian farmers were denied access to their lands to harvest olives in many areas. –       Settlers continued their attacks against Palestinian civilians and their property. –       80 olive seedlings in al-Khader village, south of Bethlehem, were uprooted. Shooting: During the reporting period, Israeli forces killed a member of a Palestinian armed group and wounded 5 others in the West bank; 4 of whom were wounded when they tried to take the corpse of the victim, while the fifth one was wounded during a peaceful protest against the annexation wall in the West Bank. In the Gaza Strip, Israeli forces continued opening fire at Palestinian civilians near the border fence and targeting fishermen in the sea. In the West Bank, on Tuesday, 22 October 2013, Israeli forces killed Mohammed ‘Assi, from Beit Luqia village, southwest of Ramallah. The aforementioned person was killed in an armed clash with Israeli forces after the latter surrounded a cave in which he was hiding. Israeli forces, according to Yediot Aharonot, claimed that ‘Assi had planned for the explosive device that was detonated in an Israeli bus during the latest Israeli offensive on the Gaza Strip in November 2012. Israeli forces kept his corpse, but a number of boys and young men gathered trying to take the corpse from an Israeli vehicle. Israeli soldiers opened fire to disperse them. As a result, 4 persons were wounded and others suffered tear gas inhalation. During the reporting period, Israeli forces continued the systematic use of excessive force against peaceful protests organised by Palestinian, Israeli and international activists against the construction of the annexation wall and settlement activities in the West Bank.  As a result, a civilian was hit by a gas canister to the right leg, dozens suffered tear gas inhalation and others sustained bruises. In the Gaza Strip, on 05 October 2013, Israeli forces stationed along the border fence, east of al-Shuhada’ cemetery, east of Jabalia, opened fire at open areas. Neither casualties nor material damage were reported. In the context of targeting fishermen in the sea, Israeli gunboats positioned in the sea opened fire at Palestinian fishing boats 5 times on 11, 12, 13 and 21 October 2013. The full report is available online at: http://www.pchrgaza.org/portal/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=9864:weekly-report-on-israeli-human-rights-violations-in-the-occupied-palestinian-territory-10-23-october-2013-&catid=84:weekly-2009&Itemid=183 