Syria: Groups Call for ICC Referral
15 May 2014
Impunity/Accountability,
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Statement,
Syria May 15, 2014 Read in: 
French Statement by Civil Society Organizations on Need for Justice Over one hundred civil society groups from around the world issued the following statement today to urge the United Nations Security Council to approve a resolution to refer the situation in  Syria to the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court: We, the undersigned civil society groups, urge United Nations Security Council members to approve a draft resolution supported by a broad coalition of countries that would refer the situation in Syria to the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC). More than three years into a conflict that has claimed well over 100, 000 lives, according to the United Nations, atrocity crimes are being committed with complete impunity by all sides in the conflict, with no end in sight. Neither Syrian authorities nor the leaders of non-state armed groups have taken any meaningful steps to ensure accountability for past and ongoing grave human rights crimes. The failure to hold those responsible for these violations to account has only fueled further atrocities by all sides. Against this background, we believe the ICC is the forum most capable of effectively investigating and prosecuting the people who bear the greatest responsibility for serious crimes and of offering a measure of justice for victims in Syria. The latest report from the UN’s Syria Commission of Inquiry, published on March 5, also found that all sides to the Syria conflict continued to commit serious crimes under international law and held that the Security Council was failing to take action to end the state of impunity. The commission, which has published seven in-depth reports since its establishment in August 2011, recommended that the Security Council give the ICC a mandate to investigate abuses in Syria. The need for accountability in Syria through the ICC has likewise been supported by more than 60 UN member countries, representing all regions of world, including 10 of the current members of the Security Council. We urge all Security Council members to heed this call for justice. Other countries should publicly support the draft resolution and warn Russia and China against using their veto power to obstruct accountability for violations by all sides. As a permanent international court with a mandate to prosecute war crimes and crimes against humanity when national authorities are unable or unwilling to do so, the ICC was created to address exactly the type of situation that exists in Syria today. Though the court’s work can be only one piece of the larger accountability effort needed in Syria, it is a crucial first step. We therefore strongly urge Security Council members to urgently act to fill the accountability gap in Syria. The people of Syria cannot afford further disappointment or delay. Co-signing organizations in alphabetical order: 1.   Action des Chrétiens pour l’Abolition de la Torture, France 2.   Amnesty International, Benin 3.   Advocates for Public International Law, Uganda 4.   Arabic Network for Human Rights Information, Egypt 5.   Asia Pacific Centre for the Responsibility to Protect, Australia 6.   Act for Peace, Australia 7.   Arab Coalition for Sudan, Sudan 8.   Arab Program for Human Rights Activists, Egypt 9.   Arab-European Center Of Human Rights And International Law, Norway 10. Arab Foundation for Development and Citizenship, United Kingdom 11. Andalus Institute for Tolerance and anti-Violence Studies, Egypt 12. Benin Coalition for the International Criminal Court, Benin 13. Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies, Egypt 14. Campaña Colombiana Contra Minas, Colombia 15. Center for Media Studies and Peacebuilding, Liberia 16. Child Soldiers International, United Kingdom 17. Christian Solidarity Worldwide, Belgium 18. Club des Amis du Droit du Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo 19. Coalition Ivoirienne pour la Cour Penale Internationale, Cote d’Ivoire 20. Colombian Commission of Jurists, Colombia 21. Community Empowerment for Progress Organization, South Sudan 22. Conflict Monitoring Center, Pakistan 23. Congress of National Minorities of Ukraine, Ukraine 24. Comité Catholique Contre la Faim et Pour le Développement – Terre Solidaire, France 25. Comision Mexicana de Defensa y Promocion de los Derechos Humanos, Mexico 26. CSO Network, Western Kenya 27. Dawlaty Foundation, Lebanon 28. Democracia Global, Argentina 29. East Africa Law Society, Tanzania 30. Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, Egypt 31. Elman Peace and Human Rights Center, Somalia 32. Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network 33. FN-forbundet / Danish United Nations Association, Denmark 34. Franciscans International 35. Fundación de Antropología Forense, Guatemala 36. Georgian Young Lawyers Association, Georgia 37. Genocide Alert, Germany 38. Global Solutions.org, United States 39. Global Justice Center, United States 40. Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect,  United States 41. Gulf Centre for Human Rights, Denmark 42. Horiyat for Development and Human Rights, Libya 43. Humanist Institute for Development Cooperation, The Netherlands 44. Humanitarian Law Center Kosovo, Kosovo 45. Human Rights First, United States 46. Human Rights Watch 47. International Justice Project, United States 48. International Commission of Jurists, Kenya 49. International Society for Civil Liberties & the Rule of Law, Nigeria 50. International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, United States 51. International Federation of Action by Christians for the Abolition of Torture, France 52. International Center for Policy and Conflict, Kenya 53. Insan, Lebanon 54. Jacob Blaustein Institute for the Advancement of Human Rights, United States 55. Justice Without Frontiers, Lebanon 56. Kenya Human Rights Commission, Kenya 57. La Coalition  Burundaise  pour la Cour Penale Internationale, Burundi 58. Lira NGO Forum, Uganda 59. Ligue pour la Paix, les Droits de l’Homme et la Justice, Democratic Republic of Congo 60. Media Foundation for West Africa, Ghana 61. Minority Rights Group International, United Kingdom 62. National Youth Action, Inc., Liberia 63. No Peace Without Justice, Italy 64. Norwegian People’s Aid, Norway 65. Optimum Travail du Burkina, Burkina Faso 66. Open Society Justice Initiative 67. Pakistan Body Count, Pakistan 68. PAX, The Netherlands 69. Pax Christi International 70. Parliamentarians for Global Action 71. El Equipo Peruano de Antropología Forense, Peru 72. Physicians for Human Rights, United States 73. Pak Institute for Peace Studies, Pakistan 74. REDRESS, United Kingdom 75. Reporters without Borders, France 76. Rencontre africaine pour la défense des droits de l’homme (Raddho-Guinée), Guinea 77. Reseau Equitas, Cote D’Ivoire 78. Samir Kassir Foundation, Lebanon 79. Southern Africa Litigation Centre, South Africa 80. South African Institute for Advanced Constitutional, Public, Human Rights and International Law, South Africa 81. Syrian Network for Human Rights, United Kingdom 82. Syria Justice & Accountability Center, The Netherlands 83. Syrian Nonviolence Movement, France 84. Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, United Kingdom 85. Synergie des ONGs Congolaises pour la lutte contre les Violences Sexuelles, Democratic Republic of Congo 86. Synergie des ONGs Congolaises pour les Victimes, Democratic Republic of Congo 87. The International Federation for Human Rights, France 88. The Centre for Accountability and Rule of Law, Sierra Leone 89. The Association of Political Scientists, Greece 90. The Sentinel Project for Genocide Prevention, Canada 91. The Igarape Institute, Brazil 92. The Arab World Center for Democratic Development, Jordan 93. The United Nations Association of Sweden, Sweden 94. United to End Genocide, United States 95. Vision GRAM-International, Canada 96. Violations Documentation Center, Syria 97. Wake Up Genève for Syria, Switzerland 98. West Africa Civil Society Institute, Ghana 99. West African Bar Association, Nigeria 100.World Federalist Movement, Canada 101.World Federation of United Nations Associations 102. Zarga Organization for Rural Development, Sudan 