Israeli forces continue systematic attacks against Palestinian civilians and property in the occupied Palestinian territory (oPt)
19 Jul 2013
Gaza Strip,
Israel / OPT,
Press Release,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society July 19, 2013 –       A Palestinian child was wounded in the east of Beit Hanoun. –       A number of protesters suffered tear gas inhalation during peaceful protests. –       At least 9 Palestinian civilians were arrested. –       Israeli forces partially demolished a cattle barn and damaged a number of trees in the south of Hebron while arresting a number of civilians. –       Israeli forces established dozens of checkpoints in the West Bank. –       15 Palestinian civilians were arrested by Israeli forces at checkpoints. –       Of the arrested civilians, there were 8 children, including a 5-year-old child, and 2 civilians from the Gaza Strip. –       A fishing boat sustained damage by 4 bullets. –       More demolition notices were issued. –       The settlers continued their attacks against the Palestinians and their property. –       40 seedlings and 40 fruitful olive trees were uprooted in Termis’ya village, north of Ramallah. Shooting: During the reporting period, Israeli forces wounded 3 Palestinian civilians, including a child. 2 civilians were wounded in the West Bank and the third one was wounded in the Gaza Strip. In addition, a number of Palestinian civilians suffered tear gas inhalation and others sustained bruises during peaceful protests against the construction of the annexation wall and settlement activities in the West Bank. In the West Bank, 2 Palestinian civilian civilians, including a child, were wounded when Israeli forces moved into al-Nabi Saleh village, northeast of Ramallah, on 16 July 2013. During the reporting period, Israeli forces continued the systematic use of excessive force against peaceful protests organised by Palestinian, Israeli and international activists against the construction of the annexation wall and settlement activities in the West Bank.  As a result, a number of civilians suffered tear gas inhalation and others sustained bruises during peaceful protests. Protests were organized on the first Friday of Ramadan in Bil’in, Ni’lin and al-Nabi Saleh villages in Ramallah; Kufor Qaddoum village in the northeast of Qalqilia; and al-Ma’sarah village in the south of Bethlehem. In the Gaza Strip, on 14 July 2013, an 18-year-old civilian was wounded when Israeli forces stationed along the border fence, northeast of Beit Hanoun, opened fire at a group of workers collecting metal pieces in the landfill, northeast of Beit Hanoun, about 400 metres away from the border fence. As part of targeting Palestinian fishermen in the sea, on 17 July 2013, Israeli gunboats stationed off al-Waha resort, northwest of Beit Lahia, opened fire and pumped water at the Palestinian fishing boats.  As a result, a fishing boat sustained damage by 4 bullets. The full report is available online at: http://www.pchrgaza.org/portal/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=9673:weekly-report-on-israeli-human-rights-violations-in-the-occupied-palestinian-territory-11-17-july-2013&catid=84:weekly-2009&Itemid=183  