Joint Letter to ACHPR Chairperson: Don’t Provide Political Cover For Brutal Repression Of Egyptian Government
8 Nov 2018
Egypt,
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Open Letter November 08, 2018 Read in: 
Arabic Joint Letter Brussels,8 November 2018 EuroMed Rights has sent along with 64 local and international civil society organizations a letter to Ms. Soyata Maiga, Chairperson of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, to protest the Commission holding its upcoming 64th ordinary session in Egypt‏.‏ We are writing to urge you to reject the bid to hold the upcoming ACHPR 64th ordinary session in Egypt. This , if taken could tantamount to ignoring the current violations taking place in the country. Egypt, under the rule of President Sisi, is in the throes of the most widespread and brutal crackdown on human rights committed by any Egyptian government in its modern history. Reflecting this reality, the United Nations (UN) human rights system, including the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and Special Procedures, has become increasingly vocal and robust in its criticism of the human rights situation in the country. This includes recent statements that strongly denounce the recent issuance of mass death sentences for individuals who have participated in protests within the country –and a rare call by experts representing six thematic mandates of the UN Human Rights Council to “urgently respond” to the government’s “appalling” behaviour. The EU’s European External Action Service has made similar criticism. The Egyptian government’s continuous disregard to constitutional law and international human rights obligations lead to a series of appalling human rights violations (see annex attached to this letter). The judiciary has largely failed to hold to account those responsible for grave violations of international and national law and, in many cases, the courts have served as an instrument of repression for the authorities. Egyptian NGOs have documented 1,520 cases of enforced disappearance in Egypt between July 2013 and August 2018. More than 60,000 political prisoners are currently detained in Egypt, in dreadful conditions. The Egyptian NGO Committee for Justice documented at least 129 cases of death in custody in 2017 alone. Moreover, The UN Committee Against Torture’s 2017 annual report concluded “torture is a systematic practice in Egypt” fed by security forces’ impunity and high-level State acquiescence, and may amount to crimes against humanity. Read the full letter 