Silence is not an option: Call by Civil Society
3 Mar 2014
Egypt,
Impunity/Accountability,
Open Letter,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society,
Violence against Women,
Women’s rights and gender justice March 03, 2014 Read in: 
French Excellency, As civil society from around the world we express support for those struggling for a future in Egypt based on human rights and democracy.  At this critical juncture in Egypt’s history, at a time when peaceful political activists, human rights defenders and all forms of independent media in Egypt are under attack, we write to urge your delegation to work with other members and observer states of the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC) to address the grave situation of human rights in Egypt at the upcoming 25th Session of the UN HRC.   We believe that the serious and rapid deterioration of the human rights situation in Egypt requires the HRC to take a principled position of addressing this situation now, through the adoption of a resolution on Egypt. According to Egyptian and international human rights organizations, repression in the country has reached levels unprecedented since the 2011 uprising.  The security forces have embarked on a severe and comprehensive crackdown against persons  who have  dared to publicly  criticize the military-backed government, including members of the Muslim Brotherhood, supporters of deposed president Mohamed Morsi, as well as pro-democracy and human rights movement activists within the country. The current human rights situation is characterized by repeated excessive use of force, including lethal force, by the security forces, leading to the death of hundreds of protesters; increasingly severe restrictions on freedom of association, freedom of assembly and freedom of expression, as well as academic freedoms; the arbitrary imprisonment of protest leaders, university students, journalists and others; and a failure to protect vulnerable groups, including minorities. Women’s rights have been particularly affected as a consequence of the current political polarization and high levels of sexual and gender-based violence has been reported.  The effective participation of women in the public sphere has diminished due to continued impunity for gender-based violations.  Coptic Christian communities have also faced high levels of sectarian attacks particularly after 3 July 2013. The crackdown above has led to increasing instability within Egypt, and a rapidly deteriorating human rights situation.  In this context the UN HRC, should call on the Egyptian government to respect its international human rights obligations, ensure accountability for human rights violations within the country, and act in accordance with democratic principles. Read more here 