PCHR  Israeli forces continue systematic attacks against Palestinian civilians and property in the occupied Palestinian territory
5 Sep 2013
Gaza Strip,
Israel / OPT,
Migration and Asylum,
Press Release,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society September 05, 2013 –       A civilian was wounded, east of Jabalia in the northern Gaza Strip. –       2 protestors, including a child, were wounded during a protest in Bil’in village. –       Dozens of civilians suffered tear gas inhalation. –       At least 33 Palestinian civilians, including 5 children, were arrested in the West Bank. –       Israeli forces established dozens of checkpoints in the West Bank. –       4 Palestinian civilians were arrested at checkpoints in the West Bank. –       Israeli navy forces opened fire at fishermen in the northern Gaza Strip. –       Israeli forces confiscated vegetable stands along bypass road (60), north of Hebron. –       Israeli forces demolished a house and a shed “barrack” in Fasayel al-Fouqa area, northwest of Jericho. –       Israeli forces attacked 5 women during a protest against property demolition. Shooting: During the reporting period, a Palestinian child died of wounds he sustained when Israeli forces moved into Jenin refugee camp, north of the Gaza Strip, 2 weeks ago, while 2 Palestinian civilians, including a child were wounded during protests against the annexation wall. Moreover, a Palestinian civilian was wounded when Israeli forces opened fire at him east of Jabalia, north of the Gaza Strip. On 31 August 2013, Palestinian medical sources at the Specialized Arab Hospital in Nablus declared that Karim Sobhi Saleh “Abu Sbeih” (17), from Jenin refugee camp, died of wounds that he had sustained on 20 August 2013, when Israeli forces moved into Jenin refugee camp and clashes erupted between them and Palestinian children. During those clashes, a civilian was killed and 2 others, including the abovementioned child, sustained serious wounds. The child had been receiving medical treatment at the Arab Hospital, until he was pronounced dead on 31 August During the reporting period, Israeli forces continued the systematic use of excessive force against peaceful protests organised by Palestinian, Israeli and international activists against the construction of the annexation wall and settlement activities in the West Bank.  As a result, 2 Palestinian civilians, including a child, were wounded, dozens suffered tear gas inhalation and others sustained bruises. In the Gaza Strip, on 30 August 2013, Yusef Kamel Sa’d (20) sustained a bullet wound in his left thigh when Israeli forces stationed along the border fence, east of Jabalia, in the northern Gaza Strip, opened fire at him. Sa’d was about 500 meters away from the fence when he was targeted. On 02 and 03 September 2013, Israeli gunboats stationed off al-Waha resort, northwest of Beit Lahia in the northern Gaza Strip, opened fire at Palestinian fishing boats that approached the border about 2 nautical miles off the shore. The fishermen were frightened and fled back to the shore fearing of being arrested or injured. Neither casualties nor material damage were reported in both incidents. The full report is available online at: http://www.pchrgaza.org/portal/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=9774:weekly-report-on-israeli-human-rights-violations-in-the-occupied-palestinian-territory-29-august-04-september-2013-&catid=84:weekly-2009&Itemid=183 