Lampedusa tragic shipwreck: a wake-up call for the European Union?
9 Oct 2013
Italy,
Migration and Asylum,
Mobility Partnership,
Open Letter,
Readmission Agreement October 09, 2013 Open Letter to EU Interior Ministers and Commissionner for Home Affairs Dear Ministers, As the Council is set to debate the tragic events which occurred off the coast of Lampedusa, Italy on 3 October, causing the death of at least 300 people, and ahead of President Barroso’s visit to Lampedusa tomorrow, we are writing to call on the European Union and its member states to take urgent measures to prevent further loss of life. This latest tragedy occurred when a boat, which had set off from Libya heading for Italy, with more than 500 people on board, mainly from Eritrea and Somalia, caught fire and sank approximately one kilometre from the shore of Lampedusa. These events are yet another grim reminder of the tragic fate of increasing numbers of migrants who cross the Mediterranean to seek protection and a better life in Europe. This shipwreck is only the last in a long list of tragic accidents that have occurred in the Mediterranean over recent years, and the second in the space of a week. The majority of victims are people who have fled conflicts in Eritrea, Somalia, Ethiopia and, more recently, Syria and who are entitled to protection under international refugee and human rights law. It is estimated that 20,000 people have lost their lives in the past two decades while attempting to reach Europe’s southern borders from the other side of the Mediterranean. Reacting to the latest disaster, EU Commissioner for Home Affairs Cecilia Malmström pledged to step up EU efforts to prevent such tragedies and to show solidarity both towards migrants and countries experiencing increasing migration flows. Yet many of the solutions proposed – EUROSUR, increased resources for Frontex – merely promise more of the same. The EU and its member states must reflect on their own responsibilities and the contribution of restrictive, security-based migration policies to causing such tragedies. Enhanced border controls, including through the establishment of a specialised border surveillance agency, Frontex, and the elaboration of new tools, such as EUROSUR, soon to become operational, have forced more and more migrants and refugees fleeing persecution and conflict in their countries and seeking protection and a better life in Europe, to take increasingly dangerous routes, putting their lives at risk. These measures, coupled with limited opportunities for regular migration and obstacles to seeking and obtaining asylum, are among the causes of the ever increasing number of people dying on Europe’s doorstep in an attempt to reach its shores. In parallel, the EU and its member states lack an effective and coordinated approach to search and rescue operations. In the absence of clear, harmonised rules on search, rescue and disembarkation, migrants continue to be the victims of an intricate set of policies which enable states to evade their responsibilities and increase risks. While the mandates of Frontex and EUROSUR contain references to search and rescue, the “fight against illegal immigration” continues to trump such obligations. Furthermore, national laws criminalising rescue operations by qualifying them as aiding and abetting irregular immigration, contribute to private carriers failing to carry out their obligations under international maritime law, which requires them to assist boats in distress. Putting the blame for these tragedies on criminal networks and smugglers exploiting migrants’ despair is tantamount to turning a blind eye to the real causes that make the smuggling possible. Restrictive migration policies which prevent migrants and refugees from entering the EU in a regular manner allow these illegal activities to flourish, and are indirectly responsible for the human tragedies that result. It is time to put assistance to boats in distress and preventing loss of life at the top of the EU’s priorities. FIDH, EMHRN, Migreurop and AEDH call on the European Union and its member states: In the words of Jean-Claude Mignon, head of the Council of Europe’s Parliamentary Assembly (PACE), in reaction to the events in Lampedusa, “A terrible human tragedy is taking place at the gates of Europe”. We hope that another tragedy like the one we have witnessed will not be necessary for the EU and its member states to acknowledge that a radical change is needed in their approach to migration, which places preventing loss of life and respect for human rights at its core. We look forward to discussing this further with you. Yours sincerely, Karim Lahidji, President FIDH Olivier Clochard, President Migreurop Serge Kollwelter, President AEDH Michel Tubiana, President EMHRN 