Mass Criminalisation of Human Rights Defenders in Egypt – Request for Action Regarding Alaa Abdel Fattah’s case
5 Sep 2014
Egypt,
Fair Trial,
Freedom of Speech,
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Open Letter,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society,
Solidarity with Human Rights Defenders September 05, 2014 Your Excellencies, I am writing on behalf of the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) to express our serious concern about the deteriorating situation of human rights defenders (HRDs) in Egypt. In an ongoing campaign to silence civil society, many prominent human rights defenders, including Alaa Abdel Fattah, have been arrested and face hefty prison sentences. We call upon the EU and its Member States to send a mission to observe Alaa Abdel Fattah’s next hearing on 10 September to assess its conformity with fair trial standards. In our previous letter dated 21 March 2014, we condemned the arrest and continued detention of peaceful political activists and journalists, the attacks and smear campaigns against human rights organisations and the systematic crackdown on peaceful demonstrations, calling on the EU and its Members States to take urgent action to support political prisoners and human rights defenders in Egypt. A worrying example of this practice is the case of prominent human rights defender and blogger Alaa Abdel Fattah. He was arrested along with 24 others on charges under Egypt’s controversial protest law, which bans peaceful assemblies without prior approval from the authorities, paving the way for arbitrary restrictions. On 11 June 2014, Alaa Abdel Fattah and his co-defendants were sentenced in absentia to 15 years of prison and a fine of EGP 100,000 (around 10,739 euros) In a blatant violation of the right to a fair trial, Alaa Abdel Fattah was locked in a sound-proof glass cage during his last hearing on 6 August, undermining his ability to follow the court proceedings, express himself or communicate with his lawyers. The three defendants still held in custody, including Alaa Abdel Fattah, were denied bail and the hearing was adjourned until 10 September. To protest the grounds and conditions of his imprisonment, Alaa Abdel Fattah has been on a hunger strike since 19 August. We strongly condemn the continued detention of the three defendants, the repetitive postponements of their hearings and the flagrant violations of their right to a fair trial. We also reiterate our deep concern over the demonstrated lack of judicial independence and impartiality in Egypt, which raises serious concerns about the separation of powers and the rule of law in the country. We thus urge EU and Member States to take meaningful action in line with the EU Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders and the Strategic Framework and Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy with a view to putting an end to the arbitrary detention of Alaa Abdel Fattah and other HRDs in Egypt. We urge the EU to appoint high-level representatives from the EU Delegation and embassies of its Member States to conduct monthly visits to Alaa Abdel Fattah and other detained HRDs to demonstrate their support, and ensure that the conditions of detention are in conformity with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. To assess the fairness of Alaa Abdel Fattah’s trial, we also urge the EU and its Member States to send high-level observers to his next hearing, and to those of other HRDs taking place in the coming months. The finding of these trial observations should be made public, allowing for sharing of observations and experience with NGOs carrying out similar actions. Yours sincerely, Marc Schade Poulsen EMHRN Director 