Morocco: EMHRN Condemns the Harassment of Human Rights Organizations and the Repeated Violations of the Right to Freedom of Assembly
2 Oct 2014
Freedom of Speech,
Morocco / Western Sahara,
Press Release,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society October 02, 2014 Read in: 
French 
Arabic As Morocco is set to host the second World Forum on Human Rights next November, the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) calls on the Moroccan government to stop all interference with the activities of Moroccan civil society and human rights defenders. EMHRN wishes to express its deep concern at the systematic harassment suffered by the Moroccan Association of Human Rights (AMDH). Excluding previous months when AMDH endured occasional bans, between 12 July and 30 September 2014 alone, the association reported 17 arbitrary prohibitions of organisational meetings, sit-ins and public conferences, trainings and caravans. These prohibitions were never communicated in writing or accompanied by an explanation justifying each restriction. More recently, AMDH was prohibited from organising a conference on “Media and Democracy”, which was to have taken place on 27 September at the National Library in Rabat, on the pretext of a failure to observe the provisions of article 3 of the Dahir governing public assemblies, although legally constituted associations are exempt from such requirements. AMDH is not the only human rights organisation to see its activities hampered by decisions issued by departments of the Ministry of the Interior. In early September, the sixteenth youth camp organized by Amnesty International in Morocco was arbitrarily banned by the Moroccan authorities. The Moroccan League for the Defence of Human Rights was also denied permission to use the Bouhlal Centre in Rabat for a conference on human rights education. Similarly, on 27 September, a “Caravan of solidarity with the people of sub-Saharan Africa” from Rabat condemning the abuses of which the migrant population is victim in Morocco was arbitrarily blocked by the security forces on the outskirts of Tangiers. They had planned to demonstrate in the centre of the town. No explanation has been offered as to why entry into the town was refused. Restrictions are even more systematic in the Western Sahara, where for political reasons, many associations are denied legal recognition, preventing them from organising public events or manifestation. The repeated attempts by the Moroccan authorities to hinder the work of human rights defenders in fulfilling their objectives intensified following statements made by the Minister of the Interior Mr. Mohamed Hassad before the Moroccan Parliament on 15 July last year, accusing non-governmental organisations of answering to foreign agendas and compromising the reputation and security of the country. These systematic attacks on human rights organisations violate Article 29 of the Moroccan Constitution which guarantees the freedom of assembly, as well as Morocco’s international commitments, notably the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. EMHRN calls upon the authorities act to protect the right to freedom of assembly, association, and peaceful demonstration in the country, in accordance with its international commitments on human rights. 