EU and Member States: International law must apply in all aspects of cooperation with Israel
20 Dec 2013
International Human Rights Law (IHRL),
International Humanitarian Law (IHL),
Israel / OPT,
Statement December 20, 2013 Read in: 
French The EMRHN welcomes the position of Romania in the negotiation of an agreement to regulate Romanian construction workers in Israel. Romania insists that its construction workers not be employed in Israel’s illegal settlements in the occupied West Bank. This position is in line with international law; in particular the obligation of third states under international law not to recognise as lawful a situation arising from a breach of international law, not to render aid or assistance in maintaining the illegal situation and the duty to ensure compliance by all signatories, including Israel, with international humanitarian law.[1] Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT), including East Jerusalem, are a serious violation of international humanitarian law and are the source of a number of violations of international humanitarian and human rights law. This includes the appropriation of Palestinian land for settlements; the exploitation of Palestinian non-renewable natural resources; the demolition of Palestinian structures; the forcible displacement of Palestinians; the construction of a separation wall which deviates from the pre-1967 border; and movement restrictions linked to settlements and the wall. Moreover, non-Israeli workers employed in the settlements do not enjoy the protections accorded to workers in Israeli law. Israel has employed hundreds of thousands of cheap migrant labourers from various countries including Romania, under restrictive visa conditions, since the mid-1990s. Labourers in the construction and repairs sector in the illegal settlements on the West Bank work in substandard safety conditions, for low wages and long hours. Migrant workers in Israel are excluded from access to public social welfare and healthcare services, and have no legal path to regularisation or naturalisation. The EU has repeatedly stated that Israeli settlements in the OPT are illegal and are an obstacle to peace. The EU issued guidelines prohibiting any financial assistance to entities based in or operating in Israeli settlements. The EU and its Member States should move beyond statements and take swift actions to press the Government of Israel to end the construction of illegal settlements and comply with its responsibilities under international law. Other EU Members States should adopt a similar position regarding their labour and other economic activities with Israel. In addition, the EU and Member States should ensure that the illegal settlements and companies who work with them do not benefit from EU and Member State cooperation with Israel. The EMHRN welcomes the fact that certain positions have recently been taken by the EU and some Member States in this regard, but stress the need to do more to ensure respect of international law. The EU and its Member States should: [1] As stressed in the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on the Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, ICJ Rep. (2004), pp. 199-200 (para. 155-159), and  reiterated by the UN International Law Commission in its works on State responsibility. 