Violence against Women, crimes and impunity
25 Nov 2013
Impunity/Accountability,
Press Release,
Violence against Women,
Women’s rights and gender justice November 25, 2013 Regional Euro Mediterranean NGOs Conference Marriott Amman Hotel, Amman, Jordan 11-12 November 2013 On 11-12 November 2013 the regional Euro Mediterranean NGO conference titled “Violence against Women, crimes and impunity”, was organised in Amman, Jordan by the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network in collaboration with Mizan Law Group for Human Rights, Sisterhood Is Global Institute/Jordan (SIGI) and Amman Center for Human Rights Studies (ACHRS). The conference provided a platform for discussion and action on combating violence against women (VAW) and protection of women in political transitions and armed conflicts in South East Mediterranean countries, as well as during the economic crisis in Europe. It enabled 120 representatives of Euro-Med Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) to jointly analyse and strategize on how to work together in order to combat violence again Thest women and improve women’s access to protection, support as well as to enhance responses to violence against women in the Euro-Mediterranean region. The common theme was on ending impunity of perpetrators of violence against women and advocating for state accountability. Preliminary findings of the EMHRN report on Violence Against Women in the Euro-Mediterranean region, which will be launched on March 8, 2013, were presented and discussed at the conference. Participants discussed the challenges to combating violence against women and ending impunity, including the difficulties in documenting the different forms of violence, especially sexual violence, as well as how to activate the different mechanisms to combat violence, such as the Istanbul Convention, the Rome Statutes, the EU Guidelines et al and national plans and policies. They discussed the urgent need for improving victims support and rehabilitation – and the role of solidarity, networking and exchanges in this regard. They also discussed the importance of monitoring the situation of violence against women in the region. The conference concluded with adopting a statement[1] with recommendations for action addressed to States, the governments, the interim governments, as well as the transitional bodies, in the Northern, Southern and Eastern Mediterranean, Union for the Mediterranean and the European Union. These recommendations were presented and discussed with representatives of the UN, south governments as well as parliamentarians from the south in the closing session of the conference and widely distributed. To read the conference’s concept note please click here. Also available in: FR, AR To read the conference’s agenda please click here. Also available in: FR, AR To read the workshop documents please click here. Also available in: FR, AR To view the pictures of the conference please click here. 