We demand equal representation!
27 Feb 2013
Cyprus,
Economic & Social Rights,
Press Release,
Violence against Women,
Women’s rights and gender justice February 27, 2013 The Mediterranean Institute of Gender Studies congratulates the new President-elect of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. Nicos Anastasiades. In these critical times facing our country, the main focus of our new government will be to address the serious challenges brought by the economic crisis and to work diligently toward the speedy recovery of our economy. Recognizing the need for decisive and immediate decisions and actions toward this end, MIGS stresses that policy responses must stimulate growth as well as promote gender equality and the eradication of violence against women.  Losing focus of our gender equality objectives will only result in a regression of any progress made in recent years, and exacerbate inequality at all levels. Gender equality and the eradication of violence should not be construed as an additional economic burden on society but as a prerequisite for socio-economic development and a critical component of economic recovery. It is important to point out that, equality between men and women features as a necessary condition for the effective implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy, as it pertains directly to improving the quantity and quality of women’s employment, improving access to and the quality of affordable public services to children and the elderly, eliminating the pay gap and implementing measures to reconcile work and family life. In order to achieve the above, an important prerequisite is the participation of women in decision-making where we demand and expect the substantial contribution of in ensuring the equal representation of women and men in both the ministerial cabinet as well as other key political positions. A government cannot claim to be truly democratic without the equal participation of 51.3% of the population and 60% of the electorate at all levels of political and public life. Based on the recommendations submitted by our Institute during the pre-election period we expect to see equality between women and men high on the political agenda of the new government. We also look forward to close cooperation between the government and civil society on all matters related to human rights. We wish Mr. Nicos Anastasiades the best of luck in the difficult times ahead. 