In a New Israeli Escalation in the Gaza Strip, a Child is Killed and his Father and Another Three Children are Wounded
25 Jun 2012
Gaza Strip,
Israel / OPT,
Press Release June 25, 2012 On Wednesday afternoon, 20 June 2012, the Israeli Occupation Forces (IOF) killed a 13-year-old Palestinian boy, and wounded his elderly father, who is blind, and another 3 children, including a child who sustained serious injuries, when the IOF bombed a farm in the south of Gaza City where the children were playing. Since last Monday, the IOF have killed 8 Palestinians, including 3 civilians, and wounded 14 Palestinians, including civilians, mostly children. According to investigations conducted by the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights (PCHR), at approximately 15:00 on Wednesday, 20 June 2012, an Israeli warplane fired a missile at a farm located behind the college in Tel al-Hawa in the south of Gaza City. A number of the owner’s family wason a picnic on the farm atthe time. The bombing resulted in the death of Mamoun Mohammed Zuhdi al-Dam (13) from al-Shaaf neighborhood.Mamoun was playing football on the farm, which is owned by his mother,AmnaHassouna(50). In addition, Mamoun’s father, Mohammed Zuhdi Abdul Nabi al-Dam (67), who is blind, sustained shrapnel wounds in his head and neck. Another 3 children who were playing in a neighboring farm owned by Tala al-Dahshan, and who were on a picnic with their families, sustained wounds: On Tuesday, 19 June 2012, the IOF used excessive lethal force to kill 2 Palestinians in Deir al-Balah. According to investigations conducted by PCHR, at dawn on Tuesday,the IOF positioned at the border east of al-Msadar village in the east of Deir al-Balah, which is in the middle of Gaza, fired 3 artillery shells at 3 Palestinians that had tried to gain access to Israel to look for work. This resulted in the death of 2 Palestinians, whose bodies were deformed, and a third Palestinian, who was wounded. The dead are: These incidents are part of the new escalation that the IOF have started since last Monday morning, 18 June 2012. TheIOF have launched many air raids on different parts of the Gaza Strip, resulting in the death of 8 Palestinians, including 3 civilians, and wounding 14 more Palestinians, including civilians, mostly children. PCHR renews its condemnation of the above crimes and views them with grave concern, and; 