EU’s Human Rights Track Record for 2012: Has the Nobel Peace Prize failed to deliver in the Euromed?
10 Dec 2012
Press Release December 10, 2012 Read in: 
Arabic On the occasion of the International Human Rights Day, the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) calls on the European Union to act out on its Human Rights commitments towards Southern Mediterranean countries. In a declaration published today, the EMHRN addressed EU leaders to hark back at the fact that nearly eighteen months after the newly revised ENP has been devised, much is yet to be done as far as concrete and consistent measures to put democratisation and human rights –including gender equality- on top of the EU agenda. ‘Back in 2011, the Arab Spring resulted in the reshaping of the entire political landscape of the region. Yet many countries are still shaken today by reoccurring episodes of social and political unrest along with serious threats to the establishment of democracies based on the respect for human rights. The time has come on a day like this to remind the EU it has not delivered on promises to champion democracy and human rights in troubled spots like Egypt, Tunisia or Algeria amongst others. The severe deterioration of the situation in Syria, combined to the recent armed conflict between Israel and Palestinian armed factions in Gaza, is also prompting us to question the EU’s Human Rights record in the region’, said EMHRN President Michel Tubiana. Last friday, an EMHRN delegation seized the opportunity of meetings with top EU decision makers to raise issues of concern such as the volatile political situation in Egypt and threats to women’s rights in a context of mounting conservatism. ‘During our meetings with Commissioner for Enlargement and European Neighbourhood Policy Štefan Füle, EU Special Representative for Human Rights, Stavros Lambrinidis and EU Special Representative for the Southern Mediterranean region Bernardino León, we’ve acknowledged the EU’s willingness to put more emphasis on democracy and human rights both in the revised ENP and the new Human Rights Strategy[1]. However, discrepancies between what is said and what is actually done on the ground is still a matter for serious concern. It is crucial – and in the EU’s own interest – that concrete actions follow up on words if the EU wants to win back credibility in the eyes of citizens all across the region, who crave for democracy, gender equality, respect of their fundamental rights and for a dignifying existence,’ added Tubiana. Throughout these high level meetings, the EMHRN delegation reminded the EU of its commitments to implement real steps to a strong partnership with civil society and asked that priority be given in supporting independent civil society players in countries where freedom to operate independently and effectively was most undermined. Read the full text of the EMHRN Declaration: ‘EU policies towards Southern Mediterranean countries:  Implementation of the “new ENP approach” should match commitments’ Read EU Commissioner S. Füle’s declaration after the EMHRN delegation visit here [1] Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network, Position of the EMHRN in view of the forthcoming review of the European Neighbourhood Policy, and in response to the European Union Communication on “A Partnership for Democracy and Shared Prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean” and the following Conclusions of the European Council, April 2011, https://www.euromedrights.org/files/EMHRN%20Publications/EMHRN_doc_ENP_April_2011_eng_278418288.pdf; Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network, EMHRN Statement on the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), 11 October 2011, https://www.euromedrights.org/eng/2011/10/11/emhrn-statement-on-the-european-neighbourhood-policy/; Human Rights and Democracy Network, HRDN response to the adoption of the new EU human rights package by the Foreign Affairs Council on June 25, http://www.hrdn.eu/. 