PCHR : Weekly Report On Israeli Human Rights Violations in the OPT
14 Nov 2013
Gaza Strip,
Israel / OPT,
Press Release,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society November 14, 2013 –       2 Palestinian children were wounded in Hebron and Ramallah –       Dozens of civilians suffered tear gas inhalation. –       At least 46 Palestinians, including 8 children, were arrested. –       The detainees include a number of political leaders of Hamas. –       Israeli forces established dozens of checkpoints in the West Bank. –       At least 10 Palestinian civilians, including 5 children and a woman, were arrested at checkpoints in the West Bank. –       Israeli forces opened fire at Palestinian fishing boats, wounding a fishermen. –       Israeli forces confiscated a fishing boat. –       2 fishermen were detained for one day. –       Israeli forces set fire to 2 cars in Hebron. –       Israeli authorities forced a Palestinian civilian to demolish his house. Shooting: During the reporting period, Israeli forces killed 2 Palestinian civilians and wounded 7 others, including 2 children, in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. In the West Bank, in an excessive use of force, on 07 November 2013, Israeli forces killed 2 Palestinian civilians at Za’tara checkpoint, south of Nablus, and the Container checkpoint, northeast of Bethlehem, in the West Bank. On 11 November 2013, a Palestinian child was wounded by Israeli forces during a demonstration organized in Nabi Saleh village, northwest of Ramallah, in commemoration of the 9th anniversary of President Yasser.  On the same day, a child was also wounded in Hebron. During the reporting period, Israeli forces continued the systematic use of excessive force against peaceful protests organised by Palestinian, Israeli and international activists against the construction of the annexation wall and settlement activities in the West Bank. As a result, dozens of civilians suffered tear gas inhalation, and others sustained bruises. In the Gaza Strip, on 10 November 2013, a Palestinian fisherman was wounded by Israeli forces in the northern Gaza Strip. On 13 November 2013, 2 Palestinian civilians were wounded by Israeli forces in border areas in the southern and central Gaza Strip. In the context of targeting fishermen in the sea, Israeli gunboats stationed in the sea opened fire at Palestinian fishing boats 4 times, during which the abovementioned fisherman was wounded and fishing boat was confiscated.  Israeli forces also detained 2 fishermen for one day. The full report is available online at: http://www.pchrgaza.org/portal/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=9901:weekly-report-on-israeli-human-rights-violations-in-the-occupied-palestinian-territory-07-13-november-2013-&catid=84:weekly-2009&Itemid=183 