EMHRN Statement on the situation in Egypt
15 Jul 2013
Economic & Social Rights,
Egypt,
Fair Trial,
Independence of the Judiciary,
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Statement,
Violence against Women,
Women’s rights and gender justice July 15, 2013 Read in: 
French 
Arabic The events currently unfolding in Egypt are raising grave concerns. They are first and foremost the consequence of a decades-long absence of democracy. The second intervention of the armed forces took place in a context in which President Morsi’s political power, though it stemmed from an election recognised as valid both nationally and internationally, was coming up against ever larger segments of Egyptian society: President Morsi’s and his supporters’ desire to take control of all of the mechanisms of the State and of civil society contradicted the democratic ambitions of a large part of the Egyptian people. The deterioration of the socioeconomic environment and the impoverishment of the population in general have only considerably worsened the situation. The actions of the Egyptian armed forces, outside the constitutional field, open a new period in which the future of a democratic society in Egypt is at stake. It is from today, during the transition period, that the conditions for a democratic future must be established. Both legislative and presidential elections must be organised, under international observation, without any further delay than is necessary and the participation of all political forces must be accepted. The armed forces must return to their normal role – ie, the external defence of the State – and must cease to intervene in the maintenance of order. An inquiry should be launched concerning the violence used by the protestors, the army, or the security forces. The arbitrary closure of the media without due process or the banning of political parties are in no way acceptable, despite the claims of incitement to violence. Any such incitement is condemned. In general, only the Courts, as independent bodies conducting fair trials in accordance with international standards, should be called upon to hear any charges brought against individuals, media or political parties. No one should be detained because of his or her opinions. Drawing upon what already exists both in terms of standards and within the framework of the judiciary, the authority in charge of the transition period must not delay in taking all measures necessary to guarantee individual and collective freedoms as well as the independence of the judiciary. Finally, EMHRN expresses its deep concern regarding the alarming increase of sexual violence against women, in particular during the last events, and calls on the Egyptian authorities to take urgent action against these violations. In this regard, EMHRN emphasises the essential role of Egyptian civil society in the democracy-building process. Civil society’s independence and autonomy – including its financial independence and autonomy – must be recognised and guaranteed. EMHRN calls on the European Union and the governments of the Member States to provide assistance throughout this transition process and to support the actions of those who are participating in it.  