Freedom of association of groups defending minority rights in Turkey
7 Jun 2012
Report,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society,
Turkey June 07, 2012 Read in: 
French On 15-17 October, the EMHRN sent a delegation to Istanbul and Ankara to discuss and promote the findings of its latest report, Freedom Through Association: Freedom of Association of Groups defending Minority Rights in Turkey. Despite the positive reforms that have been made with respect to minorities and freedom of association in Turkey in recent years, the findings of the report highlight that NGOs working with minority issues continue to face significant obstacles – whether with respect to the limitations imposed upon them through the constitution or through the implementation of laws. To promote the findings of the report, the EMHRN delegation met with various local non-governmental organisations working on minority issues, as well as with the Human Rights Presidency, the Ministry for EU affairs, members of Parliament and the EU Delegation to Turkey. “There is no reason for Turkey, or any other country, to only partially adhere to UN or other international treaties – adherence to these treaties should be unconditional,” asserted Erol Dora, Member of Parliament for the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP), in agreement with the report’s recommendation that Turkey removes the restriction it has lodged on the ratification of international treaties regarding minority rights. Indeed, Turkey’s handling of freedom of association and minority issues still falls short of international standards. Many associations are still seen as entities that could threaten the unity of the state and thus must be closely monitored; others are forced to disband, such as LGBTT rights organisations; many association members are also arrested and detained for years – especially under the anti-terror legislation. There is, in particular, a need to ensure that state authorities apply the new legal provisions following reforms in a way that will protect and promote, rather than limit, rights and freedoms. In line with the findings, the report presents a series of recommendations for the Turkish government, as well as for the European Union and EU member states, with regard to the treatment of minorities in Turkey and their ability to associate freely in defence of their rights. Despite improvements, the report emphasizes the need for greater reform with regards to Turkey’s Anti-Terror legislation, lack of protection for minorities, and burdensome procedures to establish and maintain associations, among others. In response to the preoccupations voiced by state representatives, Wadih Al-Asmar, EMHRN Executive Committee member stated that “the government and authorities should bear in mind the positive and reinforcing relationship that exists between stability and equal rights for all citizens.” Ahead of the re-drafting of its constitution, the EMHRN calls upon the Turkish government to genuinely engage in the strengthening of the country’s democratic structure through the full inclusion of, and guarantee of rights for, the entirety of its citizens. Read the full report in English Read the full report in Turkish 