TURKEY: Human rights defender Osman Işçi must be immediately released
26 Jun 2012
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society,
Solidarity with Human Rights Defenders,
Statement,
Turkey June 26, 2012 Read in: 
French Today is the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture. With this in mind, we are a human rights organizations based in Israel. The staff, board and members of PCATI are extremely concerned about the welfare of Mr. Osman Işçi and other human rights defenders recently arrested or are under threat of arrest. We often work in cooperation with IHD and EMHRN and point out that the arrest of Mr. Işçi, an academic and human-rights-defender is unacceptable. We take this opportunity to call for his immediate release and demand from the Turkish authorities to guarantee his well being, both his physical and emotional integrity and that of the others. We remind the Turkish authorities of their obligations under both IHL and IHRL For your reference, we refer you to the press release posted below concerning the case of Osman Işçi, member of the Human Rights Association (İHD), and EMHRN Executive Committee member. We reiterate the concerns and demands as expressed in the text. JOINT PRESS RELEASE TURKEY: Human rights defender Osman Işçi must be immediately released The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) and the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation against Torture (OMCT), express their deepest concern regarding the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Osman Işçi, as well as the issuing of arrest warrants against 72 trade unionists. According to the information received, Mr. Osman Işçi, member of the Human Rights Association (İHD), and EMHRN Executive Committee member, was arrested at his home in the Ankara Province in the morning of 25 June 2012 by the anti-terrorist police forces, and brought to the Security Directorate in Ankara. Police officers said his arrest was part of vast anti-terrorist operations intended to dismantle an alleged terrorist network – the Kurdish Communities Union (KCK) – an organisation said by the authorities to be the “urban branch” of the armed Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK). These operations that started in 2009 have in fact been targeting mostly peaceful Kurdish and pro-Kurdish activists. It is also reported that there are warrants of arrest for 72 trade unionists, and that police teams have been raiding various offices of trade unions affiliated to the Confederation of public workers trade unions (KESK) in Ankara, Diyarbakır, İstanbul, Ağrı, Bitlis, Siirt, Adana, Eskişehir Provinces. Mr. Işçi is a well-known human rights activist and has focused in particular on minority rights and freedom of association and expression. He is also a member of KESK. Our organisations denounce the continuing policy of arbitrary detention and judicial harassment targeting human rights defenders in Turkey, particularly İHD members, members of trade unions, lawyers and journalists, who have been involved in advocating for a peaceful resolution of the Kurdish issue. We recall that 12 İHD members have long been suffering judicial harassment and are currently in pre-trial detention: Messrs. Muharrem Erbey and Arslan Özdemir, Diyarbakır Branch Executives; Messrs. Şerif Süren and Orhan Çiçek, Aydın Branch Executives; Ms. Zana Aksu, Messrs. Reşit Teymur and Muhsin Beydoğan, Siirt Branch Executives; Mr. Abdulkadir Çurğatay and Ms. Veysi Parıltı, Mardin Branch Executives; Doğubeyazıt Representative Şaziye Önder, Muş former Branch Chairperson Mensur Işık and Malatya Executive Hikmet Kapancı. Our organisations urge the authorities to: 