Syria: Free Prominent Rights Defenders
27 May 2014
Press Release,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society,
Syria May 27, 2014 Armed Groups Should End Harassment and Abductions A prominent human rights defender and three of her colleagues believed to be in the custody of an armed opposition group should immediately be freed, 45 civil society organizations said today. Razan Zeitouneh, Wael Hamada, Samira Khalil, and Nazem Hammadi were abducted on December 9, 2013, in Douma, a city outside Damascus under the control of a number of armed opposition groups. The armed groups exercising de facto control over Douma should release the activists if they are in their custody, or investigate their abduction and work for their release, the organizations said. The armed groups in Douma include the Army of Islam, headed by Zahran Alloush, which maintains a large armed presence in the area. Countries supportive of these groups, and religious leaders who can influence them, should also press for the immediate and unconditional release of the activists and for an end to abductions, the organizations said. For nearly six months Zeitouneh and her colleagues have been deprived of their freedom while their families worry about their fate and their communities suffer from the absence of their important work and leadership, the organizations said. The fighters exercising control over Douma have a responsibility to them and to their communities to secure their release.” A group of armed men abducted Zeitouneh; Hamada, who is Zeitouneh’s husband; Khalil and Hammadi from their office at the Violations Documentation Center (VDC) in Douma. A statement by the VDC said that “an unknown armed group” had stormed into the office, confiscated laptops and documents, and abducted the rights defenders on December 9. Since then, there has been no information on the health, status or whereabouts of Zeitouneh and her team, and no group has claimed responsibility for their abduction or made requests in return for their release. A few months before her abduction, Zeitounehan had been receiving threats, which she wrote about in the online news outlet Now Lebanon. She had also informed human rights activists outside Syria in September that she was being threatened by local armed groups in Douma. In April 2014, Zeitouneh’s family issued a statement holding Alloush responsible for her and her colleagues’ wellbeing, given the large presence his group maintains in the area. Zeitouneh, a lawyer who founded the VDC and co-founded the Local Coordination Committees (LCC), a network of civilian local groups that organizes and reports on protests, had been threatened by the government and by anti-government groups over her human rights work. Zeitouneh and the others are among a number of journalists and human rights defenders believed to have been abducted at the hands of non-state armed opposition groups in areas under their control. Their ongoing detention is a part of a wider campaign of threats and harassment against people seeking to expose abuses by armed opposition groups in Syria, the groups said. The organizations urged both government and armed opposition groups to stop arbitrarily arresting, abducting and detaining people for their peaceful, journalistic, and humanitarian activities – in line with United Nations Security Council resolution 2139, which demands the release of all arbitrarily detained people in Syria. Armed groups exercising de facto control in Douma should do all they can to facilitate the release of peaceful activists and journalists, including by mediating with groups both in and outside Douma, and end abductions in areas under their control. Abductions of human rights defenders by armed groups in Syria are an assault on the very freedoms the armed opposition groups claim to be fighting for, the organizations said. Co-signing organizations in alphabetical order: 1. Amnesty International 2. Arabic Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI) 3. Association Tunisienne des Femmes Démocrates (AFTD) 4. Dawlaty Foundation 5. Damascus Center for Human Rights Studies 6. Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies 7. Center for civil society and democracy in Syria (CCSDS) 8. Collectif des Familles de Disparus en Algérie (CFDA) 9. Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network 10. Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR) 11. Etana Syria 12. Fraternity Center for Democracy and Civil Society 13. Free Syrian Lawyers 14. Front Line Defenders 15. Freedom Days 16. Friends for a NonViolent World 17. Gulf Centre for Human Rights, Lebanon 18. Human Rights Watch 19. Human Rights Association of Turkey (Insan Haklari Derneği – IHD) 20. Hivos 21. Institute for War and Peace Reporting 22. International Media Support (IMS) 23. KISA Action for Equality, Support, Anti-racism 24. Kvinna till Kvinna 25. Kurdish Organization for Defending Human Rights and Public Freedoms (DAD) 26. Lawyers for Lawyers 27. Ligue Algérienne pour la défense des droits de l’Homme (LADDH) 28. Reporters Without Borders 29. Right to Nonviolence 30. Samir Kassir Foundation 31. Syrian Network for Human Rights 32. Syria Justice & Accountability Center 33. Syrian Nonviolence Movement 34. Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM) 35. Solicitors International Human Rights Group 36. Syrian Observatory For Human Rights 37. Syrian Organization for Human Rights (Sawasyah) 38. Syrian Kurdish Center  (S.K.C) 39. The Day After (TDA) 40. The Lebanese Center for Human Rights (CLDH) 41. The Syrian Center for Democracy and Development Rights SCDR 42. The International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 43. Violations Documentation Center (VDC) 44. World Organization against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 45. Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom 