A Child Killed and 5 Others Wounded due to the Accidental Landing of Home-Made Rockets on their Houses when Palestinian Resistance Groups Launched Rockets on Israeli Targets
21 Jun 2012
Gaza Strip,
Impunity/Accountability,
International Humanitarian Law (IHL),
Israel / OPT,
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Statement June 21, 2012 The Palestinian Center for Human Rights (PCHR) is deeply concerned about the killing of Hadeel Haddad, and the wounding of five others, as 5 home-made rockets have landed on 4 houses and an empty area of land in several parts of the Gaza Strip in the past few days.  PCHR calls upon the government in Gaza to seriously investigate these incidents, and to take necessary measures to ensure the protection of civilian life and the safety of their property. According to investigations conducted by PCHR and testimonyfrom eyewitnesses, at approximately 07:30 on Tuesday, 19 June 2012,Hadeel Ahmed Sa’eed al-Haddad (1.5) was struck in the head by shrapnelwhile she was standing in the entrance of the house of her grandfather, Sa’eed Mohammed al-Haddad, in al-Zaytoun neighborhood, east of Gaza City, when a home-made rocket landed on their house.  Hadeel was transported to al-Ahli Hospital in Gaza City to receive necessary medical treatment, but later transferred to Shifa Hospital due to the seriousness of her injuries.  The efforts made by her doctors failed to save her life.  In addition, in the same incident, Hadeel’s cousin,Zaqariya Mohammed Sa’eed al-Haddad (9), was also struck in the head by shrapnel.  As a result, he was transported to Shifa Hospital in Gaza City, where medical sources have described his injuries as moderate. The spokesman of the Palestinian Police, Chief Ra’ed al-Batniji,confirmed with PCHR’s fieldworker that Hadeeldied as a result of being hit in the head with shrapnel from a home-made rocket that landed on her grandfather’s house.  Al-Batniji added that the police had headed to the scene and initiated investigations. In BeitHanoun, at approximately 22:35 on Wednesday, 20 June 2012, a home-made rocket landed on an under-construction house belonging to Mohammed AkramShabat(24).  As a result, part of a wall inside the house was destroyed, though no injuries were reported. In Deir al-Balah, at approximately 08:00 on Wednesday, 20 June 2012, a home-made rocket exploded in the vicinity of land belonging to Abu Khattab family on Salah al-Deen Street, south of Deir al-Balah.  As a result of the explosion, Yahia Mohammed Abu Khattab’s(16)left shoulder was wounded by shrapnel, and he was transported by a PRCS’s ambulance to al-Aqsa Martyrs’ Hospital in Deir al-Balah where he received necessary medical treatment.  He only suffered from minor wounds. In Rafah, at approximately 20:30 on Tuesday, 19 June 2012, a home-made rocket landed on the house of Suleiman Abed Rabbu Abu Shabab, in al-Nasser village, southwest of Rafah in the southern Gaza Strip.  As a result, the house sustained damage and its 15 residents were terrified.  The Palestinian police said to PCHR’s fieldworker that they immediately moved into the area, where the Explosives Engineering Unit collected the remnants of the rocket. Previously, at approximately 21:50 on Monday, 18 June 2012, a home-made rocket landed on the house of ‘AzzamYusefHamad on al-Qurman Street, east of BeitHanoun in the northern Gaza Strip.  As a result, 3 of Hamad’s children were wounded: Bara’a(12) sustained wounds and bruises in the left arm and leg; and Jannat and May, (both 3) sustained bruises throughout their bodies.  Additionally, the western side of the house, windows and water network were damaged. In view of the above, PCHR, 