Egypt: The constitutional declaration and the spiraling violence in Egypt leads the country away from the path to Democracy
6 Dec 2012
Egypt,
Impunity/Accountability,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society,
Statement,
Women’s rights and gender justice December 06, 2012 Read in: 
French 
Arabic EMHRN is deeply concerned over the violence that took place yesterday between supporters and opponents of President Morsi. Opponents include representatives of various national forces protesting against the Constitutional Declaration issued on November 22nd and staging sit-ins since the day before yesterday in front of the presidential palace. EMHRN also strongly condemns security forces’ reluctance to protect protesters from the attacks of President Morsi’s supporters, and calls upon the Egyptian authorities to immediately and impartially investigate the attacks, which left 7 people dead and dozens of wounded on both sides.  EMHRN emphasizes the need to hold a public debate involving all political and civil actors in Egypt to discuss the future away from any partisanship or radicalism. The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) sent a delegation to Cairo from 20 to 24 November 2012 , to meet with Egyptian human rights organizations, European embassies, Egyptian authorities and representatives of political parties, to discuss the future of  democratization in Egypt in this context of,  increasing political schisms and continuing violations of human rights. The delegation welcomed the availability of the Egyptian representatives to meet with EMHRN. However, EMHRN found the political and human rights situation of Egypt worrying. Michel Tubiana, EMHRN President, declared that “the Revolution broke the barrier of stagnation in Egypt and there is now space for expressing political opinions. However, Morsi’s late constitutional declaration, and the decision to hurry through a referendum on the constitutional draft, alienates him from the democratic path and risk to demolish state institutions”. Egypt’s precarious institutional situation, ongoing since the ousting of former President Hosni Mubarak in February 2011, worsened after President Morsi’s ‘constitutional declaration’ on 22 November. President Morsi detains both executive and legislative powers since August 2012. With the decree known as the “constitutional declaration” he grants his own laws and decrees absolute immunity from judicial review, and directly interferes with judicial powers by dismissing the Public Prosecutor, creating a new special court and ordering to re-open already judged trials. Concluding the mission to Cairo, the EMHRN raises concerns on the following issues: The President’s decision to re-open some trials that have already been judged is a blatant violation of the independence of the judiciary, and of article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and political rights stating that “no one shall be liable to be tried or punished again for an offence for which he has already been finally convicted or acquitted”. The Egyptian society needs a genuine transitional justice process that takes into account violations before, during and after the revolution. In this regard, EMHRN notes  that Egyptian civil society organization have made concrete proposals in the a joint statement on the Priorities for human rights in President Morsi’s first 100 days in office[1]. Instead, law 96 “On the Protection of the Revolution” published by President Morsi  on 22 November 2012, establishes a special court for crimes of violence against protesters only by those who “held office under the previous regime” , while  extending the list of “crimes” the court will hear, including provisions that criminalize political speech, such as insulting the president or the military, and criminalizes the right free and peaceful assembly, such as impeding traffic or blocking the work of public institutions. This new law perpetuates the grim tradition of special courts to judge ordinary citizens, and threatens to further restrict public freedoms. Lastly, no reform of the security apparatus is in process, despite the declared will of the President and Ministry of Interior to fight torture and train police forces to better respect human rights in performing their duty. Torture and ill-treatments remain widespread, and no data is available on possible investigations of torture allegations. Instead, the trials against former ministry of interior officials and police officers for violence and killings of protesters resulted in acquittal except in one case only, where one police officer was indicted for the death of 45 protesters (at Mohamed Mahmoud protest in November 2011). EMHRN calls upon the Egyptian authorities to recall the referendum of 15 December, to urge national unity and re-open the dialogue over the process of validation of the new constitution, as the latter cannot be accomplished in the current state of civil unrest. The new Constitution should promote a democratic checks-and-balances system to avoid any return to authoritarianism. Furthermore, the Egyptian authorities should urgently undertake thorough legal and institutional reform allowing full exercise of human rights to all citizens; and put an end to impunity for those guilty of human rights violations before, during and after the revolution. EMRHN recommends the European authorities to once and for all show the same level of exigency for the implementation of universally recognized human rights in Southern Mediterranean partner countries as Egypt, as it does in Europe. This means conditioning development aid to the Egyptian government to the respect of rights and liberties and in particular of freedom of association for local and international NGOs and their financial autonomy; and to the recognition of full gender equality as the constitutional norm without reservation. Egypt is going through a transitional period where some uncertainty is normal. Nonetheless, the decisions made by President Morsi do not show the way towards democracy, and the Egyptian people are aware of it, as they have kept on protesting since 22 November. The electoral process, even if democratic, ought not to give the right to any onslaught on democracy. The EMHRN commends that there is now space in Egypt –although threatened- for the expression of political dissent. This gives hopes that democracy will emerge victorious at the end of the current political process and champion human rights and democracy. [1] Priorities for the President’s First 100 Days in Office: Reinstatement of the rule of Law, Judicial Independence, and State Neutrality Toward Religions and Faiths 