Project “Media Monitoring in Lebanon to Promote Democracy and Human Rights”
10 Dec 2012
Lebanon,
Press Release December 10, 2012 Read in: 
French The Lebanese Center for Human Rights (CLDH) organizes a workshop entitled « Media Relations & Capacity Building Training for Civil Society Organizations » on 12 December 2012 as part of its project « Media Monitoring in Lebanon to Promote Democracy and Human Rights ». About the Workshop The nature and quality of the information communicated to the media by civil society organizations working in the field of Human Rights (HR) is crucial for the improvement of the media’s role in the promotion and protection of Human Rights. Participants to the workshop will address the means of communication on HR-related information and learn how to ameliorate the information delivered to the media. About the Project The project « Media Monitoring inLebanonto Promote Democracy and Human Rights » aims at raising awareness on the role informed journalism plays in promoting and protecting Human Rights (HR). It consists of three workshops that will be given throughout the next months. 1. The first workshop targets civil society organizations working in the field of Human Rights and will be held on 12 December at CLDH premises. 2. The next two workshops, entitled « Human Rights, Ethics & Editorial Management for Journalists » target established journalists and young journalists or students graduating in journalism and will be held in 2013. Those workshops aim at strengthening journalism standards in the field of HR reporting. 3. The project will also develop a HR Monitoring Website that will function as a tool and forum for the publications of HR related articles. 4. At the end of the project, a Human Rights Award will be given during a ceremony to 5 journalists for the outstanding quality of their media product on HR. About the Lebanese Center for Human Rights (CLDH) The CLDH is a local non-profit, non-partisan Lebanese Human Rights organization based inBeirutand created in 2006. The CLDH monitors the HR situation inLebanon, fights enforced disappearance, impunity, arbitrary detention and racism. Through the RehabilitationCenterfor the victims of torture inBeirut (Centre Nassim) founded in 2007, CLDH rehabilitates the victims of torture and provides multi-disciplinary professional support for victims of torture and their families. CLDH regularly organizes press conferences, workshops and advocacy meetings on human rights issues inLebanonand collects, records and documents human rights abuses in reports and press releases. About MEPI This project is funded through the U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, Office of theMiddle EastPartnership Initiative (MEPI). MEPI supports efforts to expand political participation, strengthen civil society and the rule of law, empower women and youth, create educational opportunities, and foster economic reform throughout the Middle East andNorth Africa. In support of these goals, MEPI works with non-governmental organizations, the private sector, and academic institutions, as well as governments. More information about MEPI can be found at: www.mepi.state.gov 