International Women’s Day 2013
8 Mar 2013
Economic & Social Rights,
International Women's Day (IWD),
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Statement,
Violence against Women,
Women’s rights and gender justice March 08, 2013 Read in: 
French 
Arabic Sidelined after the Revolution: Worsening Plight of Women in Transition Countries The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) commemorates International Women’s Day. This comes in the worrying context of increased human rights violations against women and women human rights defenders in countries engaged in transitional democratic processes in the South-East Mediterranean region and in a general atmosphere of economic crisis affecting first and foremost women in the Euro Mediterranean region. The EMHRN remains concerned by the evidently cosmetic commitment from the majority of the governments of the southern Mediterranean region to protect, promote and fulfill women’s human rights and to decide and implement legal provisions and policies ensuring gender equality. The result is a deteriorating situation of women’s rights in countries going through transitional processes and an accrued impoverishment of women in Europe. While women were, and still are, pivotal during the uprisings that ousted dictators in various countries of the southern Mediterranean region, a pattern of marginalizing them is emerging from recent legislative and practical developments. The EMHRN strongly condemns the use of gender-based sexual violence against women, women human rights defenders and political activists. Violence is used as a conscious political and social strategy aiming at scaring and shaming women away from participating to the shaping of the new political system in Egypt.  Cases of sexual violence have steadily been reported over the past two years, culminating in cases of gang rape and mob harassment during demonstrations celebrating the second anniversary of the revolution[1]. The EMHRN is extremely concerned by the intense brutality used against women practicing their human rights to peaceful protest and freedom of assembly and of expression[2]. This trend is furthermore replicated in the new Egyptian constitution that doesn’t explicitly ban discrimination based on sex and the fact that no perpetrators have been prosecuted. The use of gender-based sexual violence as a weapon of war is also a worrying trend in Syria. Many reports indicate that the number of women raped while they were detained by governmental security forces, sometimes in front of their relatives, is on the increase[3]. This is in contravention with the Rome Statute that explicitly classifies rape as a war crime and as a crime against humanity. Patriarchal and traditional values render Syrian women even more vulnerable to sexual violence as both family and society cast them aside afterwards, leaving them abused, traumatized, isolated and resourceless. The deteriorating security environment in transitional countries and weak rule of law such as in Tunisia and Libya is also a worrying trend for women’s rights and gender equality. While Tunisian women are mobilizing to retain their vested rights and improve their situation in a context of political instability and rise of religious fundamentalism nurtured by the current government, Libyan women carry out their struggle for political participation to ensure women’s representation within the upcoming constitutional committee and to secure provisions in the future constitution safeguarding gender equality and outlawing discrimination based on sex[4]. Palestinian women have to bear the double burden of violence and discrimination from the occupying power and from patriarchal values and behavior within their own society. Their considerable contribution to resistance and to the cohesion of the Palestinian social fabric remains somewhat marginalized. The EMHRN remains concerned by the lack of commitment by some governments of the South Mediterranean area to grant women the same citizenship rights as their male counterparts. Indeed, the nationality laws in several countries of the region such as Syria, Lebanon and Jordan remains discriminatory towards women, preventing them to pass on their nationality to their families. Women in Europe are the first to be hit by unemployment, impoverishment, precariousness and budgets cuts in health and education caused by austerity measures decided by governments[5]. Besides, gender equality measures and policies are not perceived as a priority in a context of economic hardships and resources are diverted from women’s rights towards rescuing companies and banks. These economic austerity measures are coupled with the rise of extremist movements whose ideologies put women back into traditional family roles and whose policies are harmful to women’s sexual and reproductive health and rights. Patriarchal beliefs and practices are thus strengthened by weak rule of law, lack of will from governments, austere economic measures and the rise of religious extremism, leading to serious women’s human rights violations and increased threats against gender justice and equality. We recall international commitments made by states to the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) and to the Beijing Declaration and Plan of Action. We also recall Istanbul and Marrakech Euro-Mediterranean ministerial conclusions on the role of women in the society 2006 and 2009, the EU guidelines on violence against women and girls and combating all forms of discrimination against them[6], as well as the 2011 “renewed European Neighborhood Policy (ENP)” based on new features, including a “more for more” approach, the importance of mutual accountability between the EU and its partners, the need for partnerships not only with governments but also with civil society  and a recognition of the special role of women in reshaping both politics and society. On this basis, the EMHRN calls on: Governments, provisional governments and transitional bodies in the Southern Mediterranean: European governments[7] The European Union (EU): http://www.elaph.com/Web/news/2013/2/790260.html?entry=Egypt#sthash.WK4GkPvE.dpbs 