EuroMed Rights raises concerns ahead of EU Foreign Affairs Council meeting with President Abbas
18 Jan 2018
Israel / OPT,
Press Release January 18, 2018 As EU foreign ministers and EU High Representative Federica Mogherini are about to meet with the President of the Palestinian Authority Mahmoud Abbas, next Monday in Brussels, EuroMed Rights addressed them a letter to raise its concerns over the situation of the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT). As EuroMed Rights’ member organisations are currently documenting, the situation in the OPT is characterised by Israel’s steps to annex the West Bank and increasing authoritarian tendencies of the Palestinian Authority that threaten Palestinians’ basic rights and shrink the space for civil society. The rule of law, including the separation of powers and the independence of the Palestinian judiciary are seriously undermined. President Abbas is repressing harshly popular criticism, by restricting freedom of expression and arbitrarily arresting political and human rights activists. Commenting on the issue, EuroMed Rights’ President Michel Tubiana said: “The context in Israel/Palestine is rapidly deteriorating. We call on the EU to develop an independent policy that actively promotes respect for international law, equality and human rights, including Palestinians’ right to self-determination. Systematic human rights violations, steps towards the annexation of growing parts of the West Bank and sweeping control over Palestinians’ lives will not be reversed in the absence of a clear EU political response that goes beyond a rhetorical pushback. “Under the Palestinian Authority, the alarming 2017 Cyber Crime Law demonstrates a serious blow to freedom of expression, with the recently amended version of the law still falling short of international standards. These measures come in addition to the unwarranted control the Palestinian Authority has recently seized over the activities and funding of NGOs. The EU should raise the broader authoritarian tendencies of the Palestinian Authority with President Abbas, and urge him to ensure that Civil Society Organisations can freely operate to preserve the rule of law and respect for human rights in the OPT.”  