SYRIA Continued secret detention of Mazen Darwish and other human rights activists and prosecution of part of SCM staff before military court
25 Apr 2012
Fair Trial,
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Press Release,
Solidarity with Human Rights Defenders,
Syria,
Trial Monitoring April 25, 2012 Read in: 
French URGENT / SERIOUS CONCERNS ABOUT PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTEGRITY OF MAZEN DARWISH AND SCM DETAINEES According to recent information received from the Syrian League of Journalists on 25 April, the President of the Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM) Mazen Darwish and his colleague Hussein Gharir remain detained incommunicado and in isolation by the Air Force Intelligence in Mazza, Damascus. Information indicate that their health has seriously deteriorated. In addition, Hani Zitani, Abdelrahman Hamada, Mansour Hameed Omari have been transferred to detention facilities run by the Fourth military division, which is place under the authority of Maher Al Asad. The EMHRN is extremenly worried about the physical and psychological integrity of Mazen Darwish and his colleagues and urge the Syrian government to relase them without delay. Please find below for more recent information on the SCM case. 23 April 2012. The undersigned organizations strongly condemn the ongoing secret detention of Mr. Mazen Darwish, President of the Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM), and four of his colleagues, more than 65 days after they were arrested in violation of domestic and international law. The organizations also express their deepest concern for the criminal procedure triggered by the Military Prosecutor of Damascus against seven human rights activists working with the SCM and one visitor. Since 16 February 2012, when the Air Force Intelligence (AFI) conducted a raid at SCM premises in Damascus during which they arrested 16 persons, the Syrian authorities have refused to reveal the whereabouts of eight of them, after seven other persons were conditionally released with the obligation to report every day to the intelligence for further interrogations. On 22 April, three of the detainees who have been held incommunicado, namely Messrs. Bassam Al-Ahmad, Joan Farso and Ayham Ghazzoul, were presented to the Military Prosecutor in Damascus, who informed them that they will be prosecuted by a military court for “possessing prohibited materials with the intent to disseminate them”, a criminal offense that is punishable by six months of imprisonment according to Article 148 of the Syrian Criminal Code. The same day, four of the SCM staff members who had been released on bail, namely Mrs. Yara Bader, Mrs. Razan Ghazzawi, Mrs. Mayadah Khaleel, Mrs. Sana Zetani and a visitor to the SCM, Mrs. Hanadi Zahlout were informed that they will also be prosecuted on the same legal grounds. The eight individuals were transferred to the central prison of Adra in Damascus. Until now, it has not been possible to obtain information regarding the fate of Messrs. Mazen Darwish, Abdelrahman Hamada, Hussein Ghareer, Mansour Al Omari and Hani Zetani, who are detained incommunicado by the AFI. According to information received, the Military Prosecutor referred to “recorded material” which was in the possession of the detained activists with the intent to “call for protests” against the Government. The SCM, which enjoys UN ECOSOC consultative status since 2011, played a key role in getting out information about daily developments in Syria at a moment where international observers and journalists were virtually banned from the country. The arrest, detention and prosecution of SCM staff member appear to be aimed at stifling their voice while the Syrian Government continues to commit human rights violations that amount to crimes against humanity. The undersigned organizations remind that the Syrian authorities are responsible and accountable under international law for guaranteeing the physical and mental integrity of all detainees, including Mr. Mazen Darwish and his colleagues. Furthermore, the organizations call on the Syrian authorities to end the military criminal proceedings launched against members of the SCM, who are all civilians. The Syrian government should immediately release all persons arbitrarily detained. Alkarama Foundation Arab organization for human rights Syria ARTICLE 19: Global Campaign for Free Expression Cairo Institute for human rights studies Committee for the defense of democracy freedoms and human rights in Syria (CDF) Damascus center for human rights studies Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network FRONT LINE DEFENDERS Humanist Institute for Development Cooperation Hivos IKV Pax Christi International Media Support International Press Institute Kurdish Committee for human rights (Rased) Kurdish Organization for the defense of human rights and public freedoms (DAD) National organization for human rights in Syria (NOHR-S) Observatory for the protection of Human Rights Defenders, joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) Reporters Without Borders Syrian organization for human rights – Sawasyah Syrian human rights organization MAF 