PHR-I, Hotline for Refugees and Migrants and the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network call on the Israeli government
23 Jan 2014
Economic & Social Rights,
Gaza Strip,
Israel / OPT,
Migration and Asylum,
Statement January 23, 2014 Read in: 
French Asylum seekers in Israel have been staging mass protests against the country’s increasingly oppressive detention policies. In reaction to these protests, our organisations regret that the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) missed not only a great opportunity to seek real exchange with its refugee population and – based on an honest evaluation of their demands – correct parts of Israel’s migration policy, but continues to misguidedly brand asylum seekers as “illegal infiltrators.” Israel is home to about 53,000 African asylum seekers. According to the Ministry of Interior (MOI) 49,000 of them come from Eritrea and Sudan, countries where they would face – if returned – major human rights violations, including the risk of death and life imprisonment. In its statement the MFA claims that Israel has, in adherence to International Law, “granted protection” to these individuals. However, in reality this “protection” is nothing more than a suspension from deportation. Asylum seekers in Israel receive a “conditional release visa” which they must renew every few months and which only grants them the right to remain in the country until their deportation is possible. Meanwhile, they have no right to work, very limited access to medical or welfare services, and no housing, food or other assistance from the state. While Israel has recently begun conducting Refugee Status Determination (RSD) for Sudanese and Eritreans, only 1,800 individual asylum requests have been lodged, an opportunity that was only introduced in 2012, and of these only 250 have been examined to date. More shockingly, no Sudanese or Eritrean nationals has received refugee status, despite the fact that worldwide, 84.5%  of Eritrean asylum seekers and 74% of Sudanese asylum seekers are granted refugee status or complementary protection. The MFA claims that it balances the need to control its borders with the need to protect the human rights of those who enter. However, the entry of asylum seekers into the country almost entirely halted to less than 100 in 2013, following the construction of the border fence with Egypt. Meanwhile, the new Amendment to Israel’s Anti-Infiltration Law – passed in less than 90 days by the Knesset following the annulment of the previous 2012 amendment by the High Court of Justice – continues to blatantly violate the rights of asylum seekers. The Amendment allows for a one-year pre-trial detention period for asylum seekers who enter the country irregularly, after which they are transferred to an “open” facility run by the Israeli Prison Service. Asylum seekers have to participate in three roll-calls a day and must sleep in the camp. Missing a roll-call or working outside the facility is punishable by months of incarceration in the prisons for refugees, before they are returned to the “open” camp, which is effectively a detention centre. Detention is indefinite and judicial review of the decision is not foreseen. The Anti-Infiltration Law does not only apply to people who have crossed the border from Egypt following its enactment, but has also targeted asylum seekers who have attempted to renew their visas at the MOI in recent weeks. Meanwhile, the Ministry has also reduced the number of visas being renewed, leading to increased arrests for those who have been unable to renew their documentation. Every day, fathers receive “invitation” to the “open facility”, invitation to which they must obey. They are not allowed to bring their wives and children with them and their family members are not allowed to visit them at their new home. Israel does not deport Eritrean or Sudanese asylum seekers because returning persons to a place where their life or liberty is endangered constitutes a violation of its International obligations as stipulated in the 1951 Refugee Convention. Instead, what it aims to do with its policies is make conditions so difficult for asylum seekers that they agree to be deported to their countries of origin or third countries, even if this means endangering their life. PHR – Israel, HRM and the EMHRN call upon Israel to abide by its international obligations and provide a real protection to asylum seekers on its territory. It must put an end to its practice of indefinite detention and provide asylum seekers on its territory with a life in dignity. In particular, our organisations urge Israel to: In view of the upcoming meeting of the EU-Israel Subcommittee Migration and Social Affairs, we call on the European Union to: 