Morocco : Imprisoning a Rapper for Criticizing the Police
21 May 2012
Freedom of Speech,
Morocco / Western Sahara,
Press Release,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society May 21, 2012 ANHRI denounced the continued policy of the ruling regime in Morocco for clamping down on opinion and expression freedom the Moroccans gained during their long struggle. The rapper “Moaz Balghawat” was imprisoned for one year with fine on charges of “insulting an organized public authority” . Moaz Balghawat, renown as “The Spiteful” (al-Haqed), had been arrested since the end of March 2012 for a rap song called “dogs of the state”. In this song he criticized the Moroccan police performance and corruption in his country. As a result, Casablanca Prosecution issued an arrest warrant due to a complaint received from General Directorate for National Security. On May 11, Casablanca First Instance Court sentenced him to a one year imprisonment with a fine of one thousand Dirhams, in addition to the publication of the judgment in three local newspapers, on charges of “insulting public employees” under Chapter 263 of the Criminal Code, and “insulting the institutions of the state” under Chapter 265. Balghawat admitted the ownership of the song but denied any connection to the background images of the clip posted on YouTube as one of the images is a mocked-up photo of a policeman with a donkey’s head. And although the lack of evidence that Balghawat is the clip owner, the court ignored his defenses. His lawyer will appeal the rule. To watch the clip : http://youtu.be/3w3S1T5UOl0 Jurists and activists confirm that Al-Haqed’s arrest was for boldly and courageously criticizing the king and the ruling regime, as well for being a member of the opposing “February 20 Movement” in Morocco. This movement is responsible for demonstrations and activities claiming freedoms in the country. Al-Haqed is considered the voice of the movement that gets a lot of attention and follow ups. On September 2011, Al-Haqed he had been arrested on charges of assaulting a pro-government supporter. “Arresting a singer for criticizing the police performance shows what does it cost to exercise the rights guaranteed by the Constitution in Morocco and the fact that the Moroccan regime proves day after day that it is against fundamental rights and freedoms, despite the constitutional amendments adopted in 2011 in the name of reforming and reducing the king’s powers” ANHRI said. ANHRI demands the king of the country, “Mohammed VI”, to intervene immediately to drop that provision to show the seriousness of the Moroccan regime in protecting freedom of opinion and expression and the acceptance of political criticism. 