International Women’s Day in the Euro-med
8 Mar 2013
Egypt,
Impunity/Accountability,
International Women's Day (IWD),
Israel / OPT,
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Libya,
Press Release,
Syria,
Tunisia,
Violence against Women,
Women’s rights and gender justice March 08, 2013 Read in: 
French 
Arabic Marking the International Women’s Day, the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) says in a declaration published today that women living in South-East Mediterranean countries are seeing their rights increasingly violated, despite promises of change in the aftermath of the revolutions that shook the region. The EMHRN recalls that this commemoration comes in the worrying context of increased gender-based sexual violence against women, women human rights defenders and female political activists in the South-East Mediterranean region. Violence against women is spiralling out of control, while impunity for those guilty of assaults endures. Ruling powers in many transition countries seem to tolerate mounting religious extremism. As a consequence, women today face greater risks to be sidelined and have their rights shrink dramatically than they did before the onset of the revolutions. The EMHRN is dismayed that marking the international women’s day coincide with times of severe economic hardship where women, from both sides of the Mediterranean, are first hit. The EMHRN is particularly concerned by the cosmetic commitment of most of the governments of the southern Mediterranean region and calls for the substantive protection and promotion of women’s rights. The EMHRN also insists that governments urgently implement their commitments for gender equality, as established by international conventions they ratified, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). The EMHRN seizes this opportunity to celebrate the crucial role women played during the uprisings that ousted dictators in various countries of the Euro Mediterranean region, and deplores the current tendency to minimise and marginalise women in the region. On this occasion, the EMHRN would like to notify that its gender media guide has just been published. This guide is aimed at journalists and has the ambitious aim to correct the misconception of women portrayed either as ‘victims’ or as ‘sexual objects’ by bringing to light a more gender balanced media coverage of women in transition countries. Facts and Figures for IWD 2013: Read the full EMHRN Declaration on the International Women’s Day 2013 here  