EMHRN condemns the attack against Gaza human rights defender  Mahmoud AbuRahma
17 Jan 2012
Freedom of Speech,
Gaza Strip,
Israel / OPT,
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Press Release,
Solidarity with Human Rights Defenders January 17, 2012 Read in: 
Arabic The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) strongly condemns the attack against human rights defender Mahmoud AbuRahma, Director of the Communication and International Relations Unit at the Gaza-based NGO Al Mezan Center for Human Rights. The EMHRN calls upon the competent authorities in the Gaza Strip to investigate this attack and bring the perpetrators before justice. The authorities should also ensure that the physical and psychological integrity of Mahmoud Abu Rahma is guaranteed. Late on Friday 13 January 2012, unknown individuals attacked Mahmoud AbuRahma with sharp edges. He sustained wounds from multiple stabs in various parts of his body. Following the publication of an opinion piece in Ma’an News Agency published on 5 January 2012 under the title “The Gap between Resistance and Governance”, Mahmoud AbuRahma has received many threats on his mobile and email; including messages threatening his safety and life. This attack is the second of its kind to be carried out against Mahmoud Abu Rahma over the past two weeks. On 3 January 2012, he was attacked by masked men in the building where he lives. This attack is a clear attempt to silence Mahmoud AbuRahma and prevent him from continuing his work in support of the human rights of Palestinians and his legitimate struggle to secure a human rights culture in the Gaza Strip. Mahmoud AbuRahma has been a human and civil rights activist in Gaza for the past 15 years. The EMHRN denounces these grave violations of human rights, including freedom of opinion and expression which are guaranteed under international human rights instruments and the Palestinian Basic Law and. The EMHRN expresses its solidarity with Mahmoud AbuRahma, his family and the staff of Al Mezan Center for Human Rights.  