Open letter to the EU Heads of state and governments: ‘No More Excuses’ for Deaths at Sea: Reform Policies, Save Lives!
22 Apr 2015
Europe,
Maghreb,
Mashrek,
Migration and Asylum,
Open Letter April 22, 2015 Read in: 
French Ahead of the EU’s extraordinary summit of 23 April 2015, the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) is calling on the 28 Heads of States and Governments to urgently reconsider the proposed package of measures to tackle the humanitarian crisis in the Mediterranean. The EMHRN exhorts EU leaders to shift their focus away from surveillance, intelligence gathering and border controls towards a genuine human rights perspective – with the protection of migrants and refugees at the heart of their concerns. In a deadly context of shocking magnitude, the EMHRN deeply regrets that the 10-point plan backed up by the Joint Foreign and Home Affairs Council does nothing but translate EU’s stubbornness to tackle migration challenges through the prism of tighter security and border control. The EU’s refusal  to acknowledge and take into account the root cause of migration flows is particularly worrying, given that the proposed plan is a mere replica of the inappropriate one implemented in the wake of the October 2013 shipwreck off Lampedusa. The EMHRN calls on EU Council members to seize the opportunity of this emergency summit to react to a crisis of unprecedented magnitude by offering an equally unprecedented response to meet migration challenges. As the Mediterranean Sea is turning into the deadliest moat ever for migrants and refugees, it is urgent that European leaders engage in concrete redress at the policy level, in line with EU’s principles, rather than measures which have turned the Mediterranean into a graveyard for thousands of innocent people. Since the beginning of 2015, over 1,500 people have been reported dead or disappeared in the Mediterranean. These estimations are probably below the real figures and add up to the sad and record number of 3,200 who lost their lives at sea in 2014 (according to the IOM). If these tragedies are, sadly, nothing new, they are growing in scale. Over the past fifteen years, the EMHRN, together with other civil society organisations have steadily voiced their concerns based on documented evidence: EU’s migration policies bear a very negative impact on migrants and refugees’ rights, both in the EU – including at its external border – and beyond. In that context, the EMHRN asks that EU decision-makers commit to: While mourning these preventable deaths, the EMHRN reiterates that it ultimately lies with EU decision-makers not to pay lip service to migration challenges but seek to address them, for the sake of those men, women and children still facing the same fate in the Mediterranean. 