European Coalition to End Violence Against Women and Girls
8 Mar 2017
Europe,
Statement,
Women’s rights and gender justice March 08, 2017  On 8 March 2017, International Women’s Day This year’s celebration of International Women’s Day on 8 March comes as a new opportunity for the European Union to take action against violence against women: The European Commission has declared 2017 the European Year of focused action to combat violence against women and girls. A unique Coalition of more than 25 European-wide networks and NGOs dedicated to social justice and equality, the European Coalition to end violence against women and girls calls on the EU decision-makers to mark International Women’s Day with concrete actions. Violence against women and girls continues to be the most pervasive violation of women’s human rights in Europe and worldwide, and affects the lives of millions of women and girls. “Today, while marking the International Women’s Day, we want to break the silence around violence against women and girls. We need to speak up! How much more evidence do we need before decision makers take action? How many more women should be beaten, raped, killed, prostituted, harassed, psychologically abused, before Europe finds it unacceptable? Today, more than 25 European wide networks are joining to ask EU decision makers to listen to women’s voices and demands: Women and girls across Europe want to live a life free from violence and fear” says Edith Schratzberger-Vécsei, President of the European Women’s Lobby. The European Coalition to end violence against women and girls warmly welcomes the Malta Joint Statement of 3/02/2017: a landmark initiative where three European Institutions (European Parliament, European Commission and the Council Presidency) have jointly made a strong call for action to the Member States, asking them to ratify and fully implement the Council of Europe’s Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence (Istanbul Convention) and to approve the EU’s accession to this Convention in a meaningful way. “Violence against all women and girls is a political issue. When some countries don’t take up their responsibility to ensure safety and integrity of all women and girls, it means that they deliberately want to build societies where women’s rights are not respected, where women and girls are considered inferior and their bodily integrity is not protected”; says Anna Zobnina, chair of the European Network of Migrant Women. “The European Union should ratify the Istanbul Convention without further delay. This has also  been one of the human rights recommendations that the European Union received from the United Nations in 2015, as a key step to ensure protection of women and girls with disabilities since they are at even higher risk of violence, abuse and forced sterilisation’, says Ana Peláez, Chair of the Women’s Committee of the European Disability Forum. “The ratification by the EU of the Istanbul Convention will send a strong political signal that violence against women is not acceptable anymore. The EU Member States should ensure that the EU ratification is done as soon as possible, in the broadest way and without reservations”, adds Liuska Sanna, Director of End FGM Network.  “The signature of the Istanbul Convention by the EU will also serve to promote increased coordination policies across EU institutions and ensure a coherent approach between the EU internal policies and its external policies on the promotion of the fight against violence against women and girls, including in the EU Southern neighbourhood”, adds the President of EuroMed Rights Michel Tubiana. The European Coalition to end violence against women and girls considers that it is extremely important to acknowledge how certain women face greater risk of violence because of motives fuelled by sexism coupled with racism, xenophobia, homophobia as well as discrimination based on age, disability, ethnicity or religion. Women and girls with migrant background, undocumented migrant women, refugee women and asylum seekers, women and girls with disabilities, lesbian, transgender or intersex women, Roma women and girls, young women and elderly women, homeless women, black women, Muslim women…. Many women in Europe face intersecting forms of discrimination that prevents them from accessing justice and support and protection services, and from enjoying their fundamental rights. “The Istanbul Convention sets a comprehensive set of standards to prevent violence and to guarantee the right to every women to live free from violence. This right is not reality for millions of women and their children in Europe yet: more that 50,000 women shelter places are missing and many victims do not get appropriate protection and support! We urge Member States to support the WAVE Step up Campaign and ensure that the implementation of all the Istanbul Convention measures is done without discrimination on any ground ” says Rosa Logar, Chair of WAVE Network.  PICUM Director, Michele LeVoy adds: “This is very important to ensure that undocumented migrant women can have access to justice and reparation, which is far from being the case right now. It is critical to understand how policies in other areas – such as migration – undermine efforts to end violence against women, and in fact put women at greater risk. We need leaders who speak out in favour of the rights of all women.” Main sources: FRA survey on violence against women 2014 and other FRA surveys; Studies developed by the European Parliamentary Research Services; European Studies funded by DAPHNE and Academic and NGO studies; National surveys. ————————————————————–  Find them here. [1] Psytel, Estimation de la mortalité liée aux violences conjugales en Europe, Programme Daphne III. [2] UNIFEM 2011 [3] European Institute for Gender Equality (2014), Estimating the costs of gender-based violence in the European Union. 