EU must publicly condemn human rights violations during meeting with Egypt
20 Jul 2017
Egypt,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society,
Statement July 20, 2017 Read in: 
French 
Arabic Brussels, 20 July 2017 – Ahead of the EU-Egypt Association Council of 25 July, EuroMed Rights urges the EU to raise human rights concerns publicly with its Egyptian counterpart. We believe that this high-level meeting should be the opportunity to communicate to Egypt, and to public opinion in Europe, that the EU does not endorse Egypt’s repressive policies and fully expects that meaningful human rights and democratic reform must take place. The 17 July 2017 EU report on EU-Egypt relations noted that “considerable challenges continued as regards the rule of law, the protection of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the space for civil society” in Egypt. However, it did not reflect the seriousness of the situation, including the sharp deterioration of rights that has taken place in the past two and a half years. In June, the EU’s statement under Item 4 at the UN Human Rights Council’s 35th session was withdrawn due to vigorous opposition to critical language on Egypt and other states’ human rights record. The division amongst EU Member States is regrettable, and has signalled to Egypt that its human rights situation is not a priority anymore, after having been raised continuously under Item 4 since June 2014. In parallel, the crackdown on any form of opposition is worsening: This crackdown does not produce stability and security, quite the contrary: terrorist attacks have increased and become far more deadly. The extended state of emergency and the lack of enforcement of the 2014 Constitution prevent any peaceful avenue for political expression and lay the path for radicalism. Meanwhile, over 100 of Egypt’s Coptic Christians have been killed in terrorist attacks since December 2016. The government highlights the plight of the Copts, but does not show the will to protect them in practice. In light of this, the EU should not restrict itself to corridor diplomacy on 25 July, but publicly condemn these extremely worrying developments. The EU cannot expect to have a thriving bilateral relation with a country that eradicates its own civil society and locks up or kills any form of peaceful dissent. 