Following Ashton-Morsi meeting: EMHRN urgent appeal to withdraw the Egyptian draft NGO law
11 Apr 2013
Egypt,
Press Release,
Women’s rights and gender justice April 11, 2013 Read in: 
French 
Arabic The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) calls on the Egyptian authorities to urgently repeal the draft NGO law and adopt a law which is compliance with international human rights standards. ‘The EMHRN greets the indications that human rights, in particular gender equality and the draft NGO law were addressed during the meeting between EU High Representative Ashton and the Egyptian President Morsi on 7 April, however these talks should be followed by action and immediate withdrawal of this draft law’, said Moataz El Fegiery, member of EMHRN’s Executive Committee. In the margins of her meetings with the Egyptian President, Ashton met some representatives of civil society organisations. During this meeting, NGO representatives gave Ashton a worrying account on how severely the situation of human rights, including women’s rights, has deteriorated in Egypt in the last 10 months. They also asked her to take a clear public stance against the draft NGO law and to condition EU’s financial support to Egypt to a clear improvement of the situation of human rights, including gender equality, and in particular the adoption of an association law that complies with international human rights standards. ‘We asked for a meeting between Ashton and human rights NGOs, including women’s rights NGOs, in Egypt. Emphasizing such interaction and engagement is vital given the current climate of hostile attacks on Egyptian civil society, in particular NGOs working to promote human rights and gender equality, as their very existence is currently in jeopardy. Notwithstanding, we regret that the invitation to take part in the meeting was mainly addressed to International NGOs and was not extended to the EMHRN, nor several prominent human rights and gender equality NGOs in Egypt.”, added El Fegiery. On a final note, EMHRN is surprised that no public statement has been made about the discussions of Ashton’s meetings with President Morsi and civil society organisations. Read our PR Ashton Challenged by MEPs on Egypt: No Blank Cheque while Poor Human Rights Record! 