Unlawful Arrest of Pierre Hashash
29 Nov 2012
Freedom of Speech,
Justice and the Rule of Law,
Lebanon,
Press Release November 29, 2012 Act for Human Rights and CLDH (Lebanese Center for Human Rights) are deeply concerned by the unlawful arrest and brutality allegedly perpetrated by the military intelligence against Mr. Pierre Hashash and calls upon the Lebanese Government to investigate these alleged violations and, if proven, hold those responsible accountable. Pierre Hashash was apprehended on November 21st, 2012, reportedly with no known formal charges or arrest warrant issued against him. He is believed to have been brutally attacked by military personnel in civilian clothes and transferred to the Kobbeh military detention facility. After interrogations, – during which ill-treatment is alleged – Pierre was transferred to the Military Police premises. His sister, who was attempting to locate him in various prisons, was also reportedly physically attacked by the military. According to his family and friends, Pierre had previously received several threats due to his criticism and activities on social media outlets. ALEF – Act for Human Rights and CLDH (Lebanese Center for Human Rights) are deeply concerned by the allegations of ill-treatment and unlawful detention of Pierre Hashash. Moreover, his apprehension for criticizing the Lebanese Army Commander violates the right to freedom of expression, provided by article 19 of the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). This right is also enshrined in article 13 of the Lebanese Constitution, which also states that, as an active member of the U.N., Lebanon has a duty to abide by its covenants and the UDHR. The case of Pierre comes after a series of reported unlawful arrests and excessive use of force in policing practices by governmental institutions. The most recent one was on October 7th, 2012, in Geitawi, Achrafiyyeh which allegedly involved the LAF’s violent abuse of approximately seventy Syrian, Egyptian and Sudanese workers after alleged complaints from locals of migrant workers “harassing” females on the streets. In this case too, it seems that the services were dispensing justice themselves instead of acting as entities under the control of the Judiciary. ALEF – Act for Human Rights and CLDH (Lebanese Center for Human Rights) call upon the Lebanese Government to respect its human rights obligations, specifically the duty to protect individuals from unlawful arrest/detention and ill-treatment. Furthermore, ALEF – Act for Human Rights and CLDH call upon the Lebanese Government to investigate these alleged violations and, if proven, hold those responsible accountable. 