16 Palestinians killed, over 200 in two days in Gaza
16 Nov 2012
Gaza Strip,
Israel / OPT,
Press Release November 16, 2012 Al Mezan calls for urgent international intervention to end Israeli aggression The Israeli occupation forces (IOF) attacks on Gaza continued for the second day, claiming 16 lives and injuring at least 200 people. IOF warplanes, warships, and artillery batteries fired on hundreds of targets around Gaza, especially in the North Gaza, Gaza City, and Rafah districts. The IOF continues to fail to observe the relevant rules of international law; therefore, targeting civilians and civilian property in populated area. The number of Palestinians who have been killed has reached 16; including four children, two women and an elderly man. Over 200 people have also been injured; among whom were 59 children and 46 women. Al Mezan’s monitoring indicates that hundreds of homes have been damaged or destroyed due to IOF attacks. Al Mezan Centre for Human Rights condemns the Israeli escalation, calls for international intervention to stop it, and calls for strict respect of the rules of international law. In the evening hours of Thursday, 15 November 2012, IOF attacks killed a pregnant woman, Ghadir Shamali, 19, a girl infant, Hanin Tafish, and a two-and-a-half-year-old boy, Waleed Al-Abadla. Two other men were killed Thursday evening: Khalid Abu Nasser, 27, and Rani Hammad, 29. IOF attacks on Wednesday and Thursday morning had killed the following people: Al Mezan Centre for Human Rights reiterates its strong condemnation of the IOF aggression on the Gaza Strip; especially the attacks on civilian targets and those which fail to observe the relevant principles of international law; including attacks in civilian areas and extra-judicial assassinations. Al Mezan highlights that IOF’s attacks come under Israel’s over five years of closure and naval blockade of the Gaza Strip. The situation of basic services in Gaza has deteriorated seriously during these years; especially for the health, water and sanitation sectors. Tens of thousands of Gazans have remained displaced due to IOF destruction of property in these years and Israel’s ban on construction materials. Further destruction of property and civilian infrastructure will exacerbate this situation. International community should also ensure that Israel, who has closed Gaza’s last crossing point through which trade and humanitarian aid can be supplied, abides by its obligation not to obstruct the entry of basic materials into the Gaza Strip; including food, fuel, and other materials needed for the water and sanitation systems. International law and human rights must be respected at all times; especially during such times of heated hostilities, when they are most urgent. 