Open letter to the Director-General of the International Labour Office
12 Apr 2013
Algeria,
Economic & Social Rights,
Freedom of Speech,
Open Letter,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society April 12, 2013 Read in: 
French 
Arabic Mr Guy Ryder, Director- General of the International Labour Office Dear Mr Ryder, In view of your official visit to Algeria between 15 and 16 April, in your capacity as Director-General of the International Labour Office, the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) would like to draw your attention to the continuous violations of labour union rights together with human rights in Algeria. The EMHRN asks you to meet independent unionists who endure these violations and listen to their legitimate claims. Since 2011, the Algerian authorities have carried out a series of reforms that are far from meeting the expectations of Algerian citizens. Despite the lifting of the state of emergency, that entered into force on February 24, obstacles to freedom of association, expression, assembly and union freedoms are on the increase in Algeria. Even though the authorities are trying to meet some of the citizens’ claims in a fragmented manner, the regime is unable to maintain a true dialogue with the social forces and social movements that are more and more coordinated even in the Southern regions, trying to draw attention to their dramatic social situations. Judicial harassment against union activists, unjustified ban on demonstrations and public meetings, use of administrative obstacles are all factors affecting the registration and operation of independent unions and associations. These are considered significant barriers to the action of independent civil society in Algeria, and is in violation of the conventions of the International Labour Organization (ILO) ratified by Algeria, including Convention 87 on the freedom of association and protection of the right to organise – as the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations of the ILO had already raised in its last report in 2013. In March 2013, on the occasion of the 13th World Social Forum that was held from 26 to 30 March in Tunis, a delegation of 96 union activists and human rights defenders has been blocked at the border of Layoun and participants forbidden to leave the country while the border police could only invoke “orders” they had received to justify this decision. Just before, in February 2013, the first Maghreb Forum for the Fight Against Unemployment and Temporary Work, to be held at the labour union centre of Bab Ezzouar (neighbourhood of Algiers), was banned and the Maghreb activists from Tunisia, Morocco and Mauritania expelled. The crackdown on this meeting was condemned by many NGO and international unions among which the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC). In 2010 already, the Maghreb Social Forum to be held in Algiers was also banned by the police. In addition, union activists regularly face limitations to their freedom of assembly. On February 25, 2013 in Algiers, a sit-in decided by a group of independent unions, including the National Autonomous Union of Public Administration Staff (SNAPAP), in front of the Ministry of Labour has been prevented by a large number of policemen that forbid any grouping of at least two people to get close to the Ministry ever since that same morning. Most of the protesters, who came to demand the respect of trade union rights, were then arrested sometimes even by plainclothes policemen. In addition, the creation of several new independent trade unions in different sectors is hampered by illegal administrative practices. According to our information, the requests of seven autonomous unions (Union of Workers of the Garden of El Hamma tests, Autonomous Union of Algerian Workers Nettoiement – SNATNA, National Autonomous Union of Workers Manufacturing and Processing of Paper and Packaging – SNATFTPE , National Autonomous Union Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development – SNABADR, Autonomous Regional Union Construction Wood and its Derivatives – SRATCBD, National Autonomous Union Postmen – SNAP, Higher Teachers’ Union Solidarity – SESS), even after the inclusion of corrections requested, have been remaining unanswered by the administration for months and despite the law n ° 91-30 of 21 December 1991 concerning the creation of a union mentions a delay of thirty days for the Ministry of Labour to acknowledge “the declaration of registration “. Illegal practices of the administration may impose conditions to the registration that are not mentioned by the law. For example on April 2, the request made by the Autonomous Workers Union electricity and gas Sonalgaz (SNATEGS) was refused by the administration, which requires that the union holds its own seat before getting registered. Therefore, the EMHRN asks you during your visit to call upon the Algerian authorities to: Finally, we reiterate our call to meet independent unions who are victims of these acts of harassment in order to hear their evidence and their legitimate claims. Yours sincerely, Michel Tubiana, EMHRN President 