A Human Rights Review on the EU and Israel – Accommodating to the ‘special’ case of Israel
5 Jun 2007
Israel / OPT,
Report June 05, 2007 ‘A Human Rights Review on the EU and Israel – Accomodating to the ‘special’ case of Israel’ is the third EMHRN annual assessment of European Union (EU) compliance with its own commitments to ‘respect human rights’, ‘promote respect for human rights in third countries’, and ‘promote compliance with international humanitarian law’ in its relations with Israel. The Review examines several recent EU and Member State actions addressing violations of human rights and international humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory (oPt) or inside Israel. The Review has been produced with the backing of a coalition of Palestinian, Israeli, Arab and European NGOs. In the 2005-2006 time frame of the Review, the EU and Israel proceeded to broaden and deepen their bilateral relationship through the implementation of their European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) Action Plan. Owing to Israel’s high level of economic development it is in a position to take advantage of the broadest range of the opportunities now open to ENP countries for gaining ‘a stake’ in the EU’s internal market and participating in Community programmes and agencies. In 2005 the EU expanded its involvement on the ground through the establishment of a Border Assistance Mission at Rafah Crossing Point (EU BAM). The EU’s efforts to establish a structured dialogue on human rights under the ENP has led to a human rights dialogue with Israel that has highlighted both important likenesses and important differences. In 2006 the human rights situation in the oPt substantially worsened as Israel’s persistent refusal to respect its obligations as occupying power took on new severity following the election of a Hamas-led government of the Palestinian Authority (PA). Israel’s use of closure measures was escalated throughout the oPt, paralysing local administration and economic life, often rendering essential services unavailable to the large parts of the civilian population. In the case of the Gaza Strip, these measures took on the character of a land and sea siege, imposing scarcities of fuel, food and medical supplies. Along with these measures, Israel’s refusal to transfer the Palestinian customs and tax revenues under its control to the Hamas-led PA, or to apply them in some other manner to ensure the welfare and safety of the Palestinian population, caused a vacuum of governmental authority and lawful administration in the oPt. This left the armed groups that Israel claimed to be acting against as the only actors able to supply themselves, impose their authority and operate effectively on the ground. An international boycott of the Hamas-led PA government aggravated these problems and helped Israel maintain its own non-compliance with its basic obligations as an occupying power. Read the full review here Click here for the 2005 review Click here for the 2006 review 