Anchoring Human Rights in Renewed EU-Egypt Relations
12 Sep 2012
Egypt,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society,
Statement,
Violence against Women,
Women’s rights and gender justice September 12, 2012 Read in: 
Arabic On the occasion of the first visit of President Morsi, on 13th September in Brussels, the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) urges the EU to send a strong message to President Morsi on democratic and human rights reforms and support to civil society in this decisive time for paving the way to democratisation in Egypt. As EU-Egypt relations are resuming, it is critical to build a new partnership based on clear commitments to universal human rights, democracy and gender equality as aspired by the Egyptian people. EMHRN is calling the EU and Egyptian authorities to engage in a constructive dialogue about meaningful human rights reforms in line with the commitments of President Morsi and the revised European Neighbourhood Policy. Among key issues, EMHRN calls on the EU to: 1. Underline the important role of civil society in the building and consolidation of democracy and the rule of law. The EU should call on the Egyptian authorities to encourage and facilitate the participation of civil society organisations in the process of democratic transition, specifically in the current drafting of a new Constitution. President Morsi should fulfill his promise of reconstituting the Constituent Assembly in order to reflect the diversity of the Egyptian society. EMHRN calls on the EU to support the human rights Priorities for President Morsi’s first 100 days put forward by Egyptian human rights NGOs; 2. Express deep concerns on the marginalisation of women in the political process as well as on rising calls for moving back from women’s legal gains in past decades. The EU should urge the authorities to facilitate the establishment of a democratic legislative and constitutional framework that respects human rights, gender equality and confirms international conventions above national legislation. The EU should encourage legal reforms and institutional mechanisms securing full gender equality and the end to all forms of discrimination and violence against women; 3. Condemn threats on freedom of association, especially campaign targeting NGOs involved in the defense of human rights. The EU should urge the Egyptian authorities to immediately guarantee the rights for CSOs to act freely and access foreign funding. The EU should also ask Egypt to adopt a new association law conform to International Human Rights Standards and support the draft law on association proposed by 56 Civil Society group. 4. Raise serious concerns on rising sectarian violence and speeches inciting to religious hatred. The EU must call on the Egyptian authorities to adopt a proper policy and legal framework to fight all forms of discrimination and ensure equality and protection of all Egyptian citizens in conformity with international human rights standards, and in particular to call for that same law to be applied to all places of worship, regardless of the religion to which they belong. Egypt is facing huge challenges during its transitional period. The EU has to live up to its commitments to support legitimate democratic aspirations and human rights in the Arab world. This requires developing a genuine partnership between the EU and Egypt based on attractive political, financial and technical incentives with human rights and gender equality at its core and involving civil society in Egypt and Europe. 