A Palestinian Killed and 19 Others Wounded Due to Heavy Fire in the Gaza Strip Celebrating Mursi Winning the Egyptian Presidential Elections
25 Jun 2012
Gaza Strip,
Israel / OPT,
Press Release,
Shrinking Space for Civil Society June 25, 2012 The Palestinian Centre for Human Rights (PCHR) condemns the opening of heavy gunfire in an unjustified manner throughout the Gaza Strip yesterday, celebrating the winning of Dr. Mohammed Mursi, the Freedom and Justice Party candidate, of the presidential elections in Egypt. As a result of the heavy fire, 1 Palestinian was killed and 19 others were wounded. It should be noted that hundreds of thousands of Egyptians celebrated the winning of Dr. Mursi in al-Tahrir Square, but not a single bullet was fired there. PCHR calls upon the government in Gaza to seriously investigate the circumstances of these incidents, to prosecute the perpetrators and to take necessary measures to ensure protection of civilian lives and maintain the safety of their property. According to investigations conducted by PCHR, following the announcement of the Egyptian presidential elections’ results on Sunday, 24 June 2012, that Dr. Mursi, the candidate of Freedom and Justice Party, which is affiliated to Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood, won, demonstrators marched throughout the Gaza Strip. These celebrations included heavy and indiscriminate firing by armed persons that had joined the demonstrations. As a result, 1 Palestinian was killed and 19 others were wounded. In Rafah, Mohammed Sameer Elayan Qeshta (25) was hit by a bullet in his head while riding his motorbike near his house in al-Salam neighborhood in the south of Rafah. Qeshta was transported by a civilian vehicle to Abu Yusef al-Najjar Hospital in Rafah, but where he later died. In addition, another 5 Palestinians were wounded, including a child and a woman, as a result of the celebrations. Their wounds were described as moderate. In the northern Gaza Strip, 4 Palestinians were wounded and transported to Martyr Kamal Odwan Hospital in Beit Lahia. Their injuries ranged from light to moderate. Palestinian police sources confirmed that these persons were wounded when they were hit by bullets fired from unknown directions while they stood in front of or on the roofs of their houses. In Gaza, 10 Palestinians were admitted to Shifa Hospital with bullets wounds as a result of shots fired from unknown sources. These individuals sustained wounds throughout their bodies from bullets while they stood in front of or on the roofs of their houses. In view of the above, PCHR: 