NEPAL: Justice Denied
July 28 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.At dawn today, Jovito Palparan Jr., a retired military general, wanted on charges of kidnapping and serious illegal detention, was arrested by the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), in Sta. Mesa,...In the 39th episode of Human Rights Asia Weekly Roundup, AHRC TV reports on the recent conviction of 65 farmers in Burma. They have been imprisoned for “trespassing” on their own land. Hundreds of...In two video clips released to the public on 2 and 3 August 2014, Kritsuda Khunasaen, who was arbitrarily detained by the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO), detailed her experience while in ...Eighteen days have passed since the tragic incident where the arms of a 10-year-old boy were severed from his body by a landlord and to-date, no positive developments have been taken nor has there bee...On the 4th of August, a meeting for the families of disappeared persons, held at the Centre for Society and Religion in Colombo, was disrupted by a mob of people led by several Buddhist monks. The fam...More than a Policy, Children Need Commitment! On 10th June 2014, Pawan Korku (4 years) and Durgesh Korku (6 years) climbed into an iron drum in their house along with their toys presumably as part of ...The title of this article may rather appear weird. However, the annual report released by the Central Government year-on-year on situation of tuberculosis or TB in India is invariably titled as TB Ind...During the three days of Eid holidays about three dozens people were drowned at the beaches of Karachi, the majority drowned at a beach run by Military, its commercial outlets and Clifton Cantonment, ...In the 38th episode of Human Rights Asia Weekly Roundup, AHRC TV opens the programme with a gruesome crime against a child in Pakistan, and the ensuing failure of both law enforcement and hospital car...On Monday, 28 July 2014, an unidentified group kidnapped five-year-old Damindu Yasen Kumara. They arrived on motorcycles, with their faces covered by helmets and masks. They stabbed his parents, who s...A young Palestinian boy walks through the remains of a house targeted by an Israeli air strike near a beach refugee camp west of Gaza City. (UN Photo/shareef sarhan – 12 July 2014 ) The Asian Hu...On Sunday evening, July 27, a crowd of around 150 fanatics attacked a small, peaceful community of 17 Ahmadi families living in Arafat Colony, on the outskirts of Gujranwala district, Punjab. As a res...The fast-unto-death hunger strike of Nanda Prasad and Ganga Maya Adhikari, better known as the Adhikari couple, has reached 278 days and counting. Their only demand is an investigation and prosecution...A transitional justice process provides credibility to the peace process. Peace does not exist in vacuum, and it does not mean only an absence of war. In order to have a lasting and genuine peace, jus...by Basil Fernando The idea of the executive presidency, as found in the 1978 constitution, is now a failed idea. Almost everybody agrees that it is a failed idea. The people who are maintaining it als...by  Lakshan Dias Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), are the popular punching bag of the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL), when its actions are challenged by any individual and/or organization. Name...Today we are releasing the 37th episode of Human Rights Asia Weekly Roundup. This week we are drawing attention to how various governments are restricting the work of NGOs. Through legislation and o...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to the Inspector General of Police We reproduce below a letter sent by the Executive Director of Asian Human Rights Commission to the IGP about t...President of Myanmar, U Thein Sein, announced that the government cannot give back over 30,000 acres of paddy land that the state has been using since it was confiscated by the army two decades ago. O...‘A cold shiver runs through my veins and my body heats up every time I see a policeman’, is what Nyima Tsering, from Tsarka VDC in Nepal, said to reporters after a 29 July press conference...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367