AHRC TV: JUST ASIA, Episode 102
December 10 2015
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.by Avinash Pandey The mob bayed for the blood of juvenile convict of 16 December 2012 Delhi gang rape case. With the passage of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2015 in Raj...2015 Review: Seriously defective, policing, prosecution and justice systems obstructed progress towards “yahapalanaya” (Good Governance) Despite a welcome change of government, which started on 8t...This is Just Asia’s final episode for 2015. It begins with a report from Sri Lanka and the long struggle for justice of a torture survivor. Rohitha Liyanage was after 10 years finally able to see t...by Avinash Pandey She is not one of the faces that beamed on television screens, the faces full of emotions, such as anger, dejection, and hope. Of course, no one expected her to be amidst the crowds ...This week, JUST ASIAhighlights activities conducted by AHRC and it’s partners in the region to mark Human Rights Day, December 10. In Sri Lanka, German Ambassador Dr.JurganMorgardspoke to survivors ...The smallest coffins can be the heaviest to bear. On 16 December 2014, exactly one year ago, many Pakistani parents had to bear the pain of seeing their children die in a terrible manner. As many as 1...It seems as if the slogan of our policy makers and planners is: surrender your natural resources- we shall give you an undernourished, ailing, unequal development in return.They cause a tradeoff betwe...Basil Fernando I propose that the discussion on a South Asian mechanism for human rights should concentrate more on what such a mechanism could positively achieve, rather than on justifying why such a...Few experiences can bring more pain to families than having their homes demolished. For the urban poor in India, and across the world, this is unfortunately a recurrent event in their lives. Demolitio...Please Send the following petition by fax & email to all addresses Mr. Ban Ki Moon Secretary General of the United Nations Office of the Spokesman for the Secretary-General  United Nations S-378,...Prashant Kumar dubey 10 दिसंबर, अंतर्राष्ट्रीय मानवाधिकार दिवस प्रति, माननीय प्रधानमन्त्...Yesterday, December 10 was Human Rights Day. This is the day in 1948 when the United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. To mark this day, JUST ASIA brings you a review of the s...The Philippines sees routine investigations on targeted killings, torture, arbitrary arrests and detention, all of which end up without enough evidence to prosecute the perpetrators. When prosecutions...The world is commemorating International Human Rights Day today, 10 December 2015. However, the mood differs in Burma; the situation in the country is absolutely grim. This is despite the fact that ju...Human Rights violations remain widespread due to the failings of, and lack of reforms to, the country’s institutional framework, in particular, key institutions of the rule of law – the police, th...Who can enjoy any of the basic human rights guaranteed to them by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in Paris on 10 December 1948 through ...International Human Rights Day offers one more opportunity to streamline the discourse on human rights. The achievements in terms of the development of normative standards have been immense in the las...This year, 2015, did not start off well for Nepal. On April 25, a devastating earthquake hit the nation killing more than 9000 people, injuring thousands and destroying millions of dollars worth of pr...Today, celebrating international human rights day, the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) expresses its concern about various forms of human rights violations still occurring in Indonesia, despite t...Two elections were held in Sri Lanka in 2015, one in January and the other in August 2015. One was to elect the President, and the other was to elect members of Parliament. In both these electi...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367