PAKISTAN: A doctor is arrested on a blasphemy charge after the protest of multi-national companies
December 13 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE January 5, 2011 AHRC-OLT-001-2011   An Open Letter to Dr. Chandre Dharma-Wardana – the AHRC tells the Canada-based Sri Lankan intellectual to stop distribution of fals...The nation has suffered a great loss due to this tragic murder. A voice of sanity has been silenced. This has happened at a time when the kind of political leadership provided by Salman Taseer is most...Yesterday we published an open letter relating to false and defamatory material which also amounted to the publication of a death list. Kindly see : SRI LANKA: AHRC tells the Canada-based Sri Lankan i...We hope that wishing for a happy new year in Sri Lanka is not just mere wishful thinking. We wish: 1. That Rizana Nafeek, facing a death sentence in Saudi Arabia, will be released as soon as possible....A law student at the Sri Lanka Law College learned that one of the question papers for the final exams had been leaked. He learned this when one of his fellow students came to another and explained th...An Open Letter to the President of Sri Lanka on the fate of Rizana Nafeek     Mr. Mahinda Rajapaksa   President Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Presidential Secretariat Colom...The ghoulish killings of two Dalit girls in Moradabad, an industrial town not far away from the national capital Delhi, is yet another reminder of almost everyday recurrence of attacks on Dalit commun...On 22 December 2010, after three years and four petitions, the Federal Shariat Court (FSC) of Pakistan declared several critical clauses of the Protection of Women (Criminal Laws Amendment) Act of 200...Supreme Court (SC) affirms conviction of the accused in Abadilla murder but acquits accused in Vizconde Massacre on similar jurisprudence The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to draw the at...The 83rd Plenary Session of the Indian National Congress (INC), held in New Delhi has declared that eradicating corruption would be a priority for the INC and thus for the national government, formed ...While many rumours circulate about the suspension of the death sentence of Rizana Nafeek, the young Sri Lankan maid condemned to death for the alleged murder of an infant under her care in Saudi Arabi...The latest news by the WikiLeaks claims that India has systematically used torture to extract confessions and has allowed its armed forces to resort to brutal human rights abuses like extrajudicial ex...The simmering debate between three senior judges in India, involving the suspect in a criminal case and a former Union Minister from Tamilnadu state, Mr. A. Raja, and his alleged attempt to influence ...Sri Lankans of all faiths came together in Kandy, Nawalapitiya and Kundasale to sign petitions for the pardoning of Rizana Nafeek, the young Sri Lankan Muslim girl now in a Saudi Jail, condemned to de...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned about the possible implications of President Benigno Aquino III’s order of December 10, 2010 to the Department of Justice (DoJ) instr...According to a media report, the human rights defender monk, U Nemainda, who had been suffered from a curable skin disease for over a month died in the Mawlemyaing prison on December 8. His death is b...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) appreciates the effort taken by the Home Minister of India in undertaking a visit to Manipur. Manipur is one of the states in India with a poor human rights re...The misuse of the blasphemy laws is not restricted only with the fundamentalist Muslim groups or leaders but is being misused by multinational pharmaceutical companies as well. They take advantage of ...Over six-and-a-half years after police abducted and presumably killed human rights lawyer Somchai Neelaphaijit, no one has yet been punished. The one police officer among five accused who was found gu...Prayers were held in three Mosques in Galle for saving the life of Rizana Nafeek. Those who attended the prayers also signed a petition addressed to the King of Saudi Arabia for her pardon. A Campaign...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367