SRI LANKA: Kandy High Court sentences an accused to 20 years for rape
May 22 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is informed that District Magistrate Barwani in Madhya Pradesh state has issued a “show cause” notice to human rights defender Ms. Madhuri Krishnas...India will be evaluated at the United Nations’ Universal Periodic Review in Geneva, Switzerland today. The three countries (Troika) involved in the review are Kuwait, Mauritius and Mexico. That ...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to the President of Myanmar/Burma U Thein Sein President President’s Office Office No.18 Naypyitaw MYANMAR Dear President You will be aware ...BBC Sinhala service reported yesterday that during Magistrate’s court proceedings relating to Bharata Lakshman Premachandra’s murder, the court was informed by counsel that his daughter Hi...The High Court Judge of Kandy, Manilal Vaidyathiaka, sentenced the accused, Mr. Jeevaratnam to 20 years rigorous imprisonment and a Rs. 5000/= and further payment of Rs. 100,000/= as compensation to t...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to Dr. Hj. Neneng Hasanah Yasin, the Regent of Bekasi Dr. Hj. Neneng Hasanah Yasin Regent of Bekasi Komp. Perkantoran Pemerintah Bekasi Desa Sukam...The observations made by the Supreme Court of India in a case concerning disciplinary action against a former Major of the Indian Army contradict the Court’s own profile. Dismissing the appeal f...Basil Fernando The President of Sri Lanka has the power to frame charges and to remove the liberty of any citizen. He also has the power to return that freedom whenever he so decides. This has been br...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AHRC-STM-104-2012 May 17, 2012 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission INDIA: Institutional peril and murderous politics The assassination of Mr. T. P. Chandrashekharan ...The former Attorney General, Mohan Peiris, has been ordered to appear before the Homagama Magistrate’s Court and to reveal what he knows about the whereabouts of Prageeth Eknalilgoda, the journa...Aamir Khan is a topmost name in India’s film industry. IÂ  am not familiar at all with Indian films in recent times but I know his name, as almost everybody does. I had the opportunity to watch ...The Asian Human Rights Commission is concerned over the safety of the Bishop of Mannar, Reverend Rayappu Joseph who has a long-standing record of being a spokesperson on the democratic rights of the m...When we consider the daily reports in the electronic media, television, radio and the printed media as well as the many incidents that are brought to our attention it is blatantly clear to see that wi...The following is a comment from a reader to an AHRC Urgent Appeal on the issue of dowry deaths in India. We reproduce this short comment by the reader because it represents the general perception abou...The Asian Human Rights Commission condemns the excessive use of force and the lack of due process in the eviction of the community living in the squatter settlements in Thapathali, Kathmandu on the ba...Thai The Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to express our grief and extend our deepest condolences to the family of Mr. Amphon Tangnoppakul, who was found dead in prison custody on 8 May 2012. Amph...The Asian Human Rights Commission has had discussions with the leaders of the Ahmadis, a religious minority community of Islam, at Lahore, Punjab province. During these discussions it was found that t...