PAKISTAN: The Pakistan Lawyer&#8217;s Movement &#8212; An Unfinished Agenda
August 27 2008
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dr. Yakin Ertürk United Nations Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women C/o OHCHR-UNOG 1211 Geneva 10 SWITZERLAND Fax: +41 22 917 9016 Dear Dr. Ertürk Re: The burial of five women while We are ...The forced disappearances of political opponents by the state intelligence services continues in spite of newly elected government’s claims that the issue will be solved when the coalition partn...The Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, which consists of the Appellate Division and the High Court Division, has held that no court in the country has jurisdiction to entertain bai...The government of Bangladesh has directed its civil administration to work in collaboration with the officers of the “Joint Forces” stationed across the country. The government made the de...The current wave of violence in Orissa, India is not surprising. After all, Orissa is a state in India ruled by the Biju Janata Dal (BJD). The BJD has remained in power with the support of the Bharati...A Bench of the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh on 28 August issued a rule against the government asking the authorities to explain why the Voluntary Disclosure Ordinance 2008, u...On the eve of the anniversary of the massive nationwide protests that swept Burma last September 2007, a steady stream of cases against persons wrongfully arrested, detained and charged for their invo...The United Nations Human Rights Committee’s latest view issued in July 2008 on a communication filed by a Sri Lankan against the state of Sri Lanka holds the state to have violated article 6 of ...Muneer A. Malik   Published by Pakistan Law House A book on one of the most amazing movements in the defense of democracy, rule of law and human rights to emerge in recent times is the Pakistan L...A Bangladeshi rights group has challenged the legality of the Truth and Accountability Commission at the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, local media reported yesterday. Accordi...(The Asian Human Rights Commission reproduced below a petition from the condemned prisoners from Adiala Jail, Rawalpindi, which we received from the NNI news agency of Pakistan). To, Mr Yousaf Raza Gi...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is concerned by the reported pronouncement of the Deputy Director General, chief of the Philippine National Police (PNP), Avelino Razon Jr., that they are ship...For anyone who wonders which nation has the best police in the world, the following may give you an answer: the Korean police definitively protected at least six female protesters from committing suic...In our statement, SRI LANKA: Permanent loss of sight in one eye due to cruel and inhuman treatment, (http://www.ahrchk.net/statements/mainfile.php/2008statements/1632/) we earlier reported the permane...The Asian Human Rights Commission salutes and congratulates the people of Pakistan for their resilient and determined struggle to oust the dictator, General (Ret.) Pervez Musharraf from the post of pr...At the last Human Rights Council session a spokesman for Sri Lanka suggested to the United Kingdom that it may consider holding a referendum for having a written constitution. One wonders whether the ...The human remains of the five women who were buried alive in Balochistan province have been and the provincial government has done nothing to provide a decent burial for these victims of honour killin...Impunity is extensive in Indonesia. The murder of a prominent human rights activist is one of many cases that has made this evident to the international community. The death of Munir Thalib and the ob...Amongst the few great achievements of human kind, the establishment of the idea and the practice of fair trial is one of the best examples of civilisation’s struggle against barbarism. Centuries of ...The granting of amnesties by the president to a number of tycoons, who were convicted by the Korean courts after affording them fair trial, will have the impact of creating the impression that the exe...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367