THAILAND: Cyclone-devastated neighbour needs more help now
May 6 2008
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Asian Legal Resource Centre (ALRC) appreciates the initiative taken by the Government of India in responding to the catastrophe that has devastated Myanmar. According to India’s Ministry of ...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AHRC-PAP-005-2008 May 7, 2008 A Paper by the Asian Human Rights Commission PHILIPPINES: Christmas with a Dead Man’s Watch Abstract This article is an account of a well know...With the failure of the newly elected government to solve the crisis facing the judiciary and the restoration of the deposed judges so far, the systems of the rule of law and justice have become a moc...The absence of a witness protection law has been one of the serious defects in the control of crime as well as the elimination of gross human rights abuses in Sri Lanka. The machinery of criminal just...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) welcomes the news that Thailand has given some assistance for the people of Myanmar (Burma) in the aftermath of the cyclone that has devastated the lower part ...The decision of the Manipur state government to recruit, train and deploy Special Police Officers (SPO) in the state is a few steps backward in regaining peace in that state. The decision was made in ...News is increasingly coming from the areas outside of Rangoon about the extent of devastation in Burma wreaked by Cyclone Nargis. In the Irrawaddy Delta region in particular, the towns of Bogalay, Lap...The Asian Legal Resource Centre (ALRC) wishes to share with you the full text of a decision adopted by the UN Human Rights Committee on 20 March 2008 regarding a complaint filed under the Optional Pro...The newly elected government of Pakistan has constituted two committees for Balochistan province, one for missing persons and the other for internally-displaced persons. Of all of the countryÂ’s provi...A reply to another statement by SCOPP dated May 5, 2008 entitled response to AHRC The AHRC has engaged in an exchange of statements with Rajiva Wijesinha, the General Secretary of the Secretariat for ...by the Chairperson of the AHRC SRI LANKA: Justice and peace: a reply by the AHRC Chairperson to the Secretary The secretary general, SCOPP, Prof. Rajiva Wijesinha, has written a letter regarding sever...May 5th 2008 Mr. Lasantha Wickramatunga – The Editor The Sunday Leader Leader Publications (Pvt) Ltd. 24, Katukurunduwatte Road, RatmalanaÂ  Sri Lanka Fax : +94-75-365891Â  email :Â editor@thesu...The physical damage caused by Cyclone Nargis, which swept through Burma this May 2 and 3 is clearly enormous. In addition to the at least 350 dead and uncounted numbers of injured, hundred-year-old tr...Nirmila Deshpande, a well known peace crusader of India, died on May 1, 2008, after a long period of illness. She was 79-years-old and left behind so many followers who like her, wanted peace. From he...The following is a reply to the statement by Rajiva Wijesinha of the Peace Secretariat entitled Â‘Crudities from the Asian Human Rights Commission.Â’ Not to be diverted from the issue let us reiterate...A news item this week had the unusually welcome piece of news of a call by a group within the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna party (JVP), who refer to themselves as the moderate wing of the party, requesti...Land grabbing has been plaguing Cambodia for many years. In early March 2007, a month prior to the commune election, Prime Minister Hun Sen loudly announced a “war against land grabbers”, ...The ministry of Human Rights and Justice remains silent and stationary on a horrifying incident in April 9, that saw two lawyers, two women, another man and one child burned alive in a Karachi lawyerÂ...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AHRC-STM-112-2008 April 30, 2008 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission SRI LANKA: The Peace Chief and the Summoner’s Tale The Executive Director of the AHRC, Mr....Jagdesh Kumar, a 27-year-old Hindu, was brutally killed by Muslim workers on the charge of Blasphemy on April 8, 2008 and to-date, no official inquiries have been initiated into this most brutal act. ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367