SRI LANKA: Another case of stupid, silly and nonsensical policing &#8211; The case of Prasantha, illegal arrest, detention and torture by the Panadura police
September 2 2008
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.On the 20th September Sugath Nishanta Fernando, of Negombo who was the complainant in a bribery case and a torture case in which the allegations were against several police officers of the Negombo are...(Please note that a similar letter was also sent to the Secretary to the Ministry, Prof Rajiva Wijesinghe) September 21, 2008 Hon. Minister Mahinda Samarasinghe Ministry of Disaster Management and Hum...Prompt enquiries from a competent and independent special police unit needs to be conducted into to the assassination of Siyaguna Kosgodage Anton Sugath Nishantha Fernando, who was a complainant in a ...The Supreme Court of Nepal, during an emergency five-hour hearing of the full court on September 19, retaliated against the president of the Nepal Bar Association (NBA), Bishwa Kant Mainali, and his r...The ongoing violence in Orissa, India, reflects the current status of the rule of law in that state. The violent incidents that devastated the thin line of communal harmony in the state are the result...The government of Pakistan has not held the presenter of a popular TV program on Geo TV, accountable for stoking the already-prevalent religious hatred of Pakistan’s beleaguered Ahmadi minority,...The protest made by Prof. Yash Ghai in his written statement to the 9th Session of the UN Human Rights Council is an eye-opener. He speaks of the failure of the Cambodian government to cooperate with ...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned about the government of Nepal’s plan to deport all Tibetans living in the country to India, without valid refugee certificates. The g...The Sri Lankan government has accepted complete responsibility for ensuring the safety of internally displaced persons living in the Kilinochchi area. The UN agencies and INGOs have complied with the ...While welcoming the release of 11-year-old Pakistani-American, Muhammad Ahmad, from the murky realm of US custody in Afghanistan, the Asian Human Rights Commission is still waiting for information on ...The Asian Human Rights Commission is concerned to hear from the United States Department of Justice that an 11-year old boy, and US-Pakistani Citizen, Mohammed Ahmad, has been illegally detained in Af...The Tissainayagam case raises a fundamental question about the different kinds of criminal trials offered to the accused under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA), and Emergency Regulations as again...By recommending the impeachment of a High Court judge, the Chief Justice of India has revived a dead debate concerning the Indian judiciary. On August 2, 2008 in a letter addressed to the Prime Minist...The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information that the two children of Dr. Afia Sidiqui, who is currently in custody in the United States on charges of assault and attempting to murder me...The Balochistan police, in a bid to destroy any available evidence, have removed three of the bodies of the five women who were buried alive in Baba Kot, Jafferabad. (For details please refer to the A...The Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to inform you about View of the UNHRC in the matter of the dismissed judge, Mr. Soratha Bandaranayake On the communication bearing No. 1376/2005, in the case o...In 1993, as part of its administration of Cambodia, the UN organized an election of a new government for that country. Since then Cambodia has organized, by itself, three periodic parliamentary electi...The UN Human Rights Committee in a View expressed under article 5 (4) of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on Civil and Political Rights held that the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) has viola...Prasantha Pradeep Kumara Francis (30) is married, an electrician, a resident of No 09, 3rd Lane, Akkara 35, Ballapitiya, Horana. On 21.08.2008 at about 9:00 am Prasantha went to the Panadura Police s...The Asian Human Rights Commission has vehemently opposed and campaigned for the lifting of the emergency decree over the southernmost provinces of Thailand since it was introduced in mid-2005. Now in ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367