SRI LANKA: An acquittal not based on evidence &#8212; HC Negombo case of Lalith Rajapakse
October 14 2008
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Negombo High Court last week acquitted the accused in a torture case where a Sub Inspector of Police was charged with an offense under the CAT Act (Act No. 22 of 1994) punishable with seven years ...The deliberations of senior Indian politicians during the National Integration Council Meeting held in New Delhi on 13 October contradict India’s positions in international forums like the UN. T...The media reports alleging that it is in fact a military officer who decides the case lists in the Supreme Court of Bangladesh is a shocking revelation which sharply brings to light the militarised po...(The following letter was sent today to the following Sri Lankan authorities: Inspector General of Police, Ministry of Disaster Management and Human Rights, Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka, Natio...The High Court judge of Negombo has acquitted the accused in the torture case of Lalith Rajapakse stating that the brain injury that the torture victim claimed due to assaults inside the Kandana Polic...In the most significant blow dealt by the Supreme Court against the system of the executive presidency introduced by the 1978 Constitution, yesterday (October 8, 2008), a former president of Sri Lanka...On the occasion of the World Day against the Death Penalty, the Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to thank and congratulate the federal government of Pakistan for stepping in at the eleventh hour t...The father of two young girls will be hanged in the early hours of October 8, 2008 at Adiala jail after being convicted on a charge of murder on April 14, 1998. Mr. Zulfiqar Ali, the condemned prisone...To the recipients of communications through the AHRC network, Rizana Nafeek is a familiar name. The 17-year-old girl from a poor family from a conflict ridden area with a passport indicating her age a...According to information issued by the Ambassador for Pakistan in the United States Dr. Aafia Siddiqui, who was missing along with her three children since March 2003 and arrested by American military...A statement by army commander Lt. General Fonseka published in the National Post in Canada, saying that “I strongly believe that this country belongs to the Sinhalese, but there are minority com...Dr. W.D.L. Indunil, a young lady doctor attached to Bandagiriya Central Dispensary in the southern Hambanthota district, was shot dead on the 29th of September, allegedly by an army officer. Dr. Indun...Yesterday (September 30, 2008) at 1:30 pm an unknown person tried to enter the premises of Transparency International (TI) Sri Lanka at the address 28/1 Bullers Lane, Colombo. The TI officers obstruct...There is no universally agreed definition for the term terrorism. In the absence of a common definition, particularly when the argument – one state’s ‘terrorist’ is another sta...September 30, 2008 SRI LANKA: An Open Letter to Lawyers and Intervene to defend the lawyers of Sri Lanka against attacks, threats and intimidation The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) based in Hon...All eyes have now turned to the Bar Association of Sri Lanka as to how effective their actions will be in the aftermath of a grenade attack on the house of a senior lawyer, Mr. J.C. Weliamuna, on nigh...We reproduce below the text and title of a letter sent today by the AHRC to the High Court, the district court judge and the magistrates of Negombo September 26, 2008 Dear Sir/Madam Re: Letter to Judg...Sugath Nishanta Fernando assassinated 20th September 2008 Gerard Perera assassinated 24th November 2004 Killing a person in Sri Lanka has become as easy as a child bursting a balloon. The inquest inqu...The report released by the National Human Rights Commission of Korea (NHRCK) on September 19 after its suo motu inquiry lasting two months into the alleged human rights violations of young men consc...The alleged US arrest in July of Pakistan-US national Dr Aafia Siddiqui has left a series of unanswered questions about her missing children. With Dr Siddiqui now in US custody it is suspected that tw...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367