PAKISTAN: Balochistan – rule of law or the maintenance of law and order?
April 9 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) appreciates the observations made by the Supreme Court of India that the Indian criminal justice process will immensely benefit from crime investigating agenci...Today the AHRC releases the 25th Episode of the Human Rights Asia Weekly Roundup.  In this week’s special programme we report on the AHRC’s Partner’s Meeting, which was held last week in Hong ...The collusion between the Pakistan military and the Taliban is so strong that the military does not want to hold an operation in North Waziristan If anything flagrant is to be noticed in North Waziris...The 30 July 2013 announcement of the Congress Working Committee decision to create a separate Telangana state within the Union of India spurred other statehood demands. In Assam, ethnic groups like th...The Panadura High Court judge, Kusala Sarojani Weerawardana, found ten Presidential Security Division (PSD) officers who were accused of assaulting two famous songsters Rookantha Gunathilike and Chant...In an Indian election, campaigns are heavily dependent on the media. Yet, however risk ridden the life and livelihood of Indian media personnel may be, their security is not an issue for political par...(Note: this article was first published in the April 6, 2014 issue of the Sunday Examiner) Eleven years ago, I was in a small store with a friend in Pikit, North Cotabato, in central Mindanao. We wer...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) congratulates the people of India for their participation to elect the 16th Lok Sabha. The process has attracted, as usual, considerable media attention acros...Mr. Jinnah, could not differentiate between the rule of law and the rule by force which has resulted several military actions in Balochistan Baseer Naweed The provincial Interior Minister of Balochist...The Asian Human Rights Commission has learned about the death of Pawan, a sanitation worker who died while cleaning sewerage in Chauka Ghat, Varanasi, in the state of Uttar Pradesh. As per news report...The journalists reporting on the two conflicts, namely Taliban militancy and the Baloch insurgency are faced with double jeopardy. They walk a tight rope while reporting The recent attack on the Expre...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that Erwiana has arrived in Hong Kong to attend a series of medical examinations to support her case against her former abusive employer, Law Wan T...The Supreme Court, Pakistan Army and Balochistan government unite to shield the military perpetrators in cases of disappearances The case of the disappearance of Mr. Ali Asghar Bangulzai and the manne...A man entered a gutter to clean it and fainted in the bad air. His comrade waiting outside realized this and entered the gutter to save him. He too fainted. They both died of asphyxiation. This happen...Today the AHRC releases the 24th Episode of the Human Rights Asia Weekly Roundup.  In this week’s programme we report on the encouraging peace agreement which has been signed in Mindanao, putting ...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) welcomes the move of the Nepal government to form a taskforce that will draft new bills related to transitional justice. The expert team has been given 10 days...“He who opens a school door, closes a prison.”-  Victor Hugo, author of Les Misérables I was observing a trial in a crowded court room in Manila when, in a middle of packed bench, a pub...Litigants have approached the Supreme Court of India with manifold requests, solemn and bizarre, that ranges from seeking the court’s intervention to guarantee basic rights for the prisoners to ...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) appreciates India’s promise to protect and promote a pluralistic civil society. In a speech delivered in a parallel event during the 25th Human Rights Co...Additional session judge, Chaudhry Ghulam Murtaza, sentenced a young Christian, Sawan Masih 26, to death and fined him Rs. (PKR) 200,000/= in the same prison courtroom he has been confined in since Ma...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367