THAILAND: Is it possible to restore public faith in the DSI?
January 22 2007
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The fifty-ninth anniversary of Sri Lanka’s Independence Day was celebrated yesterday (February 4, 2007). Democracy in Sri Lanka lasted only 30 years after independence. In 1978 an authoritarian ...The former Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Mangala Samaraweera was quoted in several news agencies stating that a disappearance takes place in Sri Lanka every five hours. “It has been reported...A group of soldiers took Muhamud Arming Usoh from near his home on 30 October 2006, as he returned from work at a rubber plantation. They didn’t produce any arrest warrant or evidence, or tell h...AS-023-2007 February 2, 2007 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission PHILIPPINES: Publish report, protect witnesses & prosecute Palparan The Asian Human Rights Commission cautiously welco...Abdul Rehman, who was from a remote village in Kashmir, was considered missing for 52 days. It was on the 53rd day that his father, Gulam Rasool, learned that his son had been killed in what is known ...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is writing to you in response to reports in the Bangkok daily newspapers that the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has offered to assist the go...Indonesia signed the International Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment on the 23 October 1985 and ratified it on the 28 October I 998 by the Law N...Recent reports on investigations into the New Year’s Eve bombings in Bangkok have revealed the extent to which the rule of law is now under threat in Thailand. While the army has announced that ...AS-019-2007 January 26, 2007 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission BANGLADESH: A nation living in fear & hope Bangladesh is in a deep political and social crisis. Its president, Profess...Tomorrow, January 26 marks the 57th year of the Indian republic. The question that will be in the mind of many this Republic Day is what has become of the “tryst with destiny” spoken of by...I refer to the complaint made by Dr. Lenin Raghuvansi [please refer to your case number 5840/24/97-98] of a well planned assassination attempt on his life. The attempt was on 18.02.1998. He has given ...The legal system in Cambodia is today rife with malicious criminal lawsuits by the rich and powerful against apparently innocent persons. The suits have variously related to political parties’ m...According to an article in the January 20 edition of the Bangkok Post, the new director of the Department of Special Investigation (DSI) has committed himself to cleaning up the department, removing i...January 23, 2007 AHRC-OL-004-2007 An Open Letter to the chief of the Philippine National Police by the Asian Human Rights Commission General Oscar Calderon Chief Philippine National Police (PNP) Camp ...Why is it that judges in Pakistan seem completely unable to apply the fundamental legal principle of habeas corpus and order police or military officers to produce detained or arrested persons in cour...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is writing to you regarding the press release issued by the Philippine Information Agency on January 12 entitled, “PNP clarifies case of Herman Baria bef...A press release issued by the Philippine Information Agency (PIA) on January 12 quoted Chief Superintendent Geary Barias, director of the Police Regional Office 6 as justifying the death of Hernan Bar...On January 16 the government gazette of Bangladesh announced that the interim president, Professor Iazuddin Ahmed, signed into law the separation of the country’s subordinate judiciary from the ...The Asian Human Rights Commission is pleased to announce that we have received a letter from Mr. T.A. Mahanama Tilakaratne, Chairman of the Presidential Commission on Disappearances in response to our...AS-011-2007 January 13, 2007 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission  PHILIPPINES: Police and military’s union to investigate killing a ‘systematic cover-up’ On January 10,...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367