THAILAND: UN must demand lifting of Emergency Decree
July 1 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka–A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Chath...More than 50 elderly tenants have struggled to protect their right to livelihood since being evicted on April 30, 2010. All of them were tenants of the Gocheck traditional business market and are curr...The government of Thailand claims to be complying with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in its application of the Emergency Decree on Public Administration in Emergency Situati...In an announcement dated 29 June 2010 posted on its website, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Thailand responding to an open letter of the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) on the reported shacklin...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka – A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Thi...A news report published on June 11th from Colombo stated, “Members of the vanquished Tamil Tiger terrorist organization, Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) are posing as beggars in the citi...The Asian Human Rights Commission has received a report of the atrocious torture of a soldier by the Pakistani Inter Services Intelligence (ISI) on the false charges of working for the Research and An...Sihasak Phuangketkeow President, UN Human Rights Council c/o Permanent Mission of Thailand 5 Rue Gustave-Moynier 1202 Geneva SWITZERLAND Fax: +41 22 715-1000, 715-1002 Tel: +41 22 715-1010 E-mail:Â mi...In Philippine society where people often know everyone in their communities, torture is known to be a common practice. People know who the torturers in their locality are, and where victims are taken ...Basil Fernando For many decades now, international journalists have interpreted every story that has emerged from Sri Lanka to be some kind of war story. Some journalists have proposed that Sri Lankaâ...On the eve of the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, established by the United Nations on June 26, a bleak statement is to be made on the state of torture in Pakistan. More cases of t...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Indonesia–A woman speaks out against bad policing and tortureÂ  Mar...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC.   Bangladesh – – A woman speaks out against bad policing...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC.   INDONESIA: a human rights activist speaks out about bad policing s...As the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture is commemorated on the 26th June the Asian governments need to face up to their failure to honour their obligations to eliminate the use of to...As the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture is commemorated globally, the people of Cambodia continue to face serious problems relating to guaranteed rights against torture. As far as le...Since the last International Day in Support of Torture Victims, it is unfortunate that little concrete measures have been taken to put an end to the practice of police torture in Nepal. Even if there ...Two years and five months have passed after the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, promised the nation that India will soon ratify the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhum...Bangladesh ratified the UN Convention against Torture, and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Punishment or Treatment (CAT) on 5 October 1998. Since then the country has kept its obligation under the ...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Thailand–A woman speaks out views on the elimination of torture Ms....Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367