SRI LANKA: The sickness of the almighty criminal
April 18 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.It is hard to detect and substantiate emotional abuse of female child because of many reasons, including a clear lack of an accepted and consistent definition and least importance of the subject matte...On Tuesday, May 8, a judge in Rangoon will read the verdicts in four cases brought against a young engineer, Phyo Wai Aung, for alleged involvement in a bombing attack of 15 April 2010 that killed 10 ...Nilantha Ilangamuwa I ask no monument, proud and high, To arrest the gaze of the passers-by; All that my yearning spirit craves, Is bury me not in a land of slaves – Frances Harper Read this car...Basil Fernando “I am expected to take my oaths next year, but now I have to rethink whether an attorney could work according to his or her conscience and seek justice for the aggrieved party giv...An analysis of ongoing “abduction blueprint” in Sri Lanka JC Weliamuna* In a country that has achieved so much in literacy, education and social development, is it not indeed unfortunate that “W...Basil Fernando A few preliminary remarks At the very outset it is necessary to place the problem of criminal justice reforms in SouthAsian countries in its actual context. The existing criminal justic...The attempt by the Supreme Court of India to draw-up operative principles for the media outlining the contours of Article 19 (1) (a) of the constitution is an exercise that the Court should not ventur...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to express its deep concern at the latest developments in the establishment of transitional justice institutions in Nepal. On 19 April 2012, the major p...The Court case in relation to the disappearance of Journalist Prageeth Eknaligoda was taken up for hearing at the Appeals Court in Colombo on April 24. The hearing opened as the attorney appearing for...A President of one of the two counties almost perennially at war with each other visiting the other, what on the face of mother earth makes news that gets bigger than this? The fact that this is a Pre...Enforced disappearance has become a matter of everyday life, as torture is inevitable in the hands of the law enforcement agencies. Both disappearance and torture are the by-products of the ‘rul...Nilantha Ilangamuwa  Let each man say what he deems truth, and let truth itself be commended unto God! – Gotthold Ephraim Lessing The traditional New Year 2012 (Buddhist Era 2555/2556), which was c...Let him, though suffering in consequence of his righteousness, never turn his heart to unrighteousness; for he will see the speedy overthrow of unrighteous, wicked men. — The Laws of Manu I reca...The harassment of Ms. Sandya Ekneligoda by the government’s supporters in Geneva and by the Attorney General’s department, for joining the UN Human Rights Council Mrs. Sandya Ekneligoda was one of...Reading the speech of the prime minister and that of the home minister of India, one could easily get carried away by the thought that they are not in fact referring to India, but to some other countr...The Asian Human Rights Commission, as well as other human rights organisations have kept up a constant vigil on Lalith Kumar Weeraju and Kugan Murugan who were abducted on December 10, 2011 while enga...The presidential reference made under article 143 (1) of the constitution to the Supreme Court has to be viewed with extreme suspicion. The ostensible excuse for the reference are the 2G licences that...Abductions are seen by many as the most important problem that requires to be solved. The recent abductions of Mr. Gunaratnam and Ms. Attigala, merely highlighted the long standing problem. The concer...Referring to the reactions of the government of West Bengal to demands of public causes and justice under the leadership of Ms. Mamata Banerjee, as paranoid, would be in fact an understatement. The st...An abduction drama ended yesterday exposing so vividly the government’s involvement, not only in this particular incident but also in many of the abductions that have been taking place in Sri La...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367