SRI LANKA: A monk leads mob violence at Maligawatta with the connivance of the police
March 3 2013
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.рд╣рд╛рд▓ рд╣реА рдореЗрдВ рд╕рд╛рдордиреЗ рдПрдХ рд╕рд░реНрд╡реЗрдХреНрд╖рдг рдиреЗ┬а “рдорд╣рд┐рд▓рд╛рдУрдВ рдХреА рд╕реБрд░рдХреНрд╖рд╛ рд╕рдВрдмрдВрдзреА рдЗрдиреНрдбреЗрдХреНрд╕” рдор...The US sponsored resolution against neighbouring Sri Lanka has become a discussion point in India. Debates in the parliament and in the media are about whether India should support or oppose the resol...A Golden Opportunity to abolish self-contradictory Franchise System and Restore true Justice and Democracy in Pakistan The world has strongly and repeatedly drawn the attention of Pakistan to its self...Every year, this day represents a suitable occasion to remember the battles fought and the recognition gained, but above all it is a moment of reflection concerning all those achievements not yet acqu...The tribunal on war crimes established in March 2010 has pushed Bangladesh to extreme violence. Since 28 February, the events have taken a violent turn in which almost 100 persons including women, chi...Avinash Pandey* The decision of going naked in protest to the oppression committed on them by POSCO and its supporters must not had come easily to the women of Govindpur village of Jagatsingpur distri...A promise is a promise:┬аTime for action to end violence against women Statistics apart, India is not a safe place for women to live. The recent unfortunate incidents of rape reported from the nationa...When a business school invites persons to attend one of its functions, that too expecting the person to deliver nothing less than the keynote address, it must be taking into account many factors. Elem...рдХреЗрд╡рд▓ рдЕрдкреЗрдХреНрд╖рд╛ рд╣реА рдирд╣реАрдВ рдереА рдмрд▓реНрдХрд┐ рдЙрдореНрдореАрдж рднреА рдереА рдХрд┐ рд░рд╛рд╖реНрдЯреНрд░реАрдп рдЧреНрд░рд╛рдореАрдг рд░реЛреЫрдЧрд╛рд░ рдЧрд╛рд░рдВр...He had to die. Die, because a nation wanted him to, or so were we told by the Supreme Court of the nation. He had to die to satisfy the collective conscience of the nation, the court added for a good ...A court in Manipur yesterday has ordered the detention of Ms. Irom Sharmila Chanu, better known as the iron lady of Manipur. Detention is nothing new to this woman, most humble yet so bold, that she h...A┬аvideo┬аdepicting ill-treatment and excessive use of force by police officers has recently been released to the public. In the video, several men who were suspected of being terrorists were lying do...Swarnavahini reported a raid on a house maintained at a high rise building in Maligawatta by a mob led by a Buddhist monk, Galabodathe Yanasiri, the secretary of the Bodu Bala Sena (The Buddhist Power...Sri Lanka is now before the United Nations Human Rights Council at a time when the Council is to discuss in what ways Sri Lanka can improve the human rights situation of its people. The overall mind s...Two senior journalists were killed during the short span of 48 hours. As is usual, enquiry committees have been formed by the authorities to investigate the killings and the motives behind the inciden...After hearing the accusations of covert and overt support for sectarian terrorism and the terrorists the state institutions, like the judiciary and the army are trying to clarify their positions. Ther...Bijo Francis* Overcoming initial reluctance, the Maharashtra state police have finally registered a case in the infamous Bhandara rape and murder incident. This is a case, not much discussed in India,...At the Bar Association election this year, Mr. Upul Jayasooriya was elected with an overwhelming majority. He won by a margin of over 1,471 votes while the persons who came in second and third receive...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to Ms. Leila de Lima, secretary of the Department of Justice (DoJ) Ms. Leila de Lima Secretary Department of Justice (DOJ) DOJ Bldg., Padre Faura ...Brig. Gen. Pol. Wahyu Indra Pramugari Chief of West Sumatera Regional Police Jl. Sudirman No. 55 Padang, Sumatera Barat 25231 INDONESIA info@sumbar.polri.go.id Phone: +62 751 33416 Fax: +62 751 33416 ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367