PAKISTAN: The AHRC calls upon the Government and the United Nations to ensure impartial inquiry into the massacre of the children and the associated security failures
December 18 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Everyone knows that Pakistan’s government and military have failed to deal with the widespread terrorism in the country. All Pakistanis would agree that this problem needs to be addressed and that i...Lifting of moratorium from Capital punishment: punishing death with death The immediate reaction of the government to the killing of the children in Peshawar on December 16 has been to lift the morato...On Monday, 29 December 2014, at 9 am in the Criminal Court on Ratchadaphisek Road in Bangkok, Patiwat Saraiyaem and Pornthip Munkhong will appear before the court for the first time since being formal...Almost a week has passedsince the brutal terrorist attack on the army administered public school, in Peshawar, which killed 132 students and nine staff members including the principal – all of whom ...This week’s episode of Weekly Roundup covers events in Hong Kong, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. The episode begins with the recent carnage in Pakistan, where members of the Taliban have massacred more th...The Pakistan Government should take the military to establishment to task, for failing to protect the 141 innocent children and staff killed by the Taliban The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) une...Whatever be the outcome of the presidential election to be held on the 8th of January 2015, Sri Lanka has already entered into the deepest political crisis it has ever faced since the adoption of the ...This week’s episode of Weekly Roundup is dedicated to the 2014 Human Rights Day, and includes stories, analysis, and interviews reflecting the larger picture of the Asian Human Rights Commission’s...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission on Human Rights Day 2014 Speaking about the rule of law in Pakistan is fatuous. This is a state where “might is right” and anarchy, in its ...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission on Human Rights Day 2014 The more things change, the more they remain the same goes an adage. It holds true for hunger in Asia. Most Asian countries ap...17-year-old Malala Yousafzai became the youngest Nobel Peace Prize winner for her work promoting young people’s rights. Here she is, accepting that honour. In the name of God, The Most Beneficen...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission on Human Rights Day 2014 The second Constituent Assembly election, which was held on 19 November 2013, changed the political situation of Nepal. The Ma...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission on Human Rights Day 2014 On Human Rights Day 2014, the Asian Human Rights Commission notes the persistent pattern of state perpetrated attacks, notably...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission on Human Rights Day 2014 Fundamental human rights are not guaranteed in Bangladesh in the daily life of its people. The rights of freedom of expression...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission on Human Rights Day 2014 In the absence of thorough justice institution reforms, human rights guarantees in India will remain a mirage. The transcenden...by Basil Fernando All Indians owe a debt of gratitude to Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer, a great man, who passed away on 4th December 2014, shortly after his hundredth birthday. He stood up against the mig...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) joins millions of Asians and others across the globe to mourn the sad demise of Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer. Aged 100, Justice Krishna Iyer passed away today at...In this week’s episode of Weekly RoundupAHRC TVcovers the presentation of 2014 Right Livelihood Awards in Stockholm, Sweden. The Right Livelihood Award, also known as the “Alternative Nobe...Disappearances and extra judicial killings in the Sindh Province continues unabated; in many cases disappearances have occurred following arrest by the police and at times by plain clothed persons, pr...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned that large numbers of Madhesi activists have been arrested from different parts of Kathmandu in the lead up to the South Asian Association ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367