SRI LANKA: The politics of habeas corpus and the marginal role of the Sri Lankan courts under the 1978 constitution
April 15 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to Prof. Mizanur Rahman, Chairperson, National Human Rights Commission of Bangladesh Prof. Mizanur Rahman Chairman National Human Rights Commissio...Bangladeshi national FMA Razzak is the President of the Human Rights Development Centre (HRDC) and Editor of the Pakkhik Gonomichhil in Paikgachha of Khulna district, Bangladesh. On April 29, 2011, Ra...Malik Ayub Sumbal  No one knows about the reality and sad saga of these greenish veiled and shaved head individuals carried by their masters with a chain about their necks to get the sympathies of th...Basil Fernando The attack on FMA Razzak led by Major Mustafizur of the Bangladesh military (BANGLADESH: Army officer’s family gouges eyes and torture after kidnapping Human Rights Defender FMA Razza...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE May 3, 2011 AHRC-OLT-004-2011 An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to the Minister of Justice, Thailand Pirapan Salirathavibhaga Minister of Justice Ministry of ...The Asian Human Rights Commission calls upon all human rights organizations of the world to respond to a brutal attack on a well-known human rights defender in Bangladesh, FMA Razzak and his brother b...24 activists were among those who were extra judicially killed after their abduction by uniformed and plain clothe persons The extra judicial killings of the journalists, writers, human rights defende...At a press conference in Thailand on 24 April 2011, Somsak Jeamteerasakul and several coalitions of academics, human rights activists, and journalists released statements calling for the protection of...The popular movement against corruption in India, led by Mr. Anna Hazare and others, shares broadly, opinions of the average citizen concerning corruption. That, the reign of corruption in the country...“We cannot eat, we cannot sleep — we can only hope and that hope is fast dwindling so we pray that our loved ones will be returned to us.” On April 13, 2011 the three member bench of...Basil Fernando  Can there be development in the modern context without law? This is a relevant question in today’s context where is lot of talk of development on one hand but where there is lawless...This paper was initially published in the Law and Society Trust Review, Sep. — Oct. 2010   Basil Fernando* “LIBERTY RIGHTS AT STAKE: THE VIRTUAL ECLIPSE OF THE HABEAS CORPUS REMEDY I...The UN panel commissioned to advise the UN Secretary General on several issues relating to the period covering the end of the war with the LTTE has now submitted its report. The content of the report ...SPECIAL REPORT: Torture in the Philippines & the unfulfilled promise of the 1987 Constitution ——- An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to Atty. Fernando Cubero, Chairm...The Asian Human Rights Commission has reported on the many threats to internet publications made recently. The latest was the arrest of the Lanka-E-News editor, Bennett Rupasinghe. Rupasinghe’s ...Despite corruption being rampant in the country, India still does not have an independent and credible functioning legislative and institutional framework to deal with corruption. In addition, there a...A Joint Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission and (1) Madhya Pradesh Right to Food Campaign Support Group; (2) Bhopal Gas Peedit Mahila Udyog Sangthan; (3) Peedit Nirashrit Pension Bhogi Morc...“We have not received any communication from our daughter,” said Muhammad Nafeek, the father of Rizana, the Sri Lankan domestic worker who has been sentenced to death by a Saudi Arabian co...The continuous persecution by the Sri Lankan government of the Lanka-E-News publication reached a new stage when its editor, Bennet Rupasinghe was arrested and detained yesterday. For many months now ...Over the past four months, the Union Law Minister, Mr. M. Veerappa Moily, has been claiming that his ministry wishes to propose a law, on the ‘right’ to justice, which would guarantee just...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367