PHILIPPINES: &#8216;Communist&#8217; label on an activist is a prelude to murder
November 6 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Asian Human Rights Commission has received updated information on the situation of Mr. Sardar Shaukat Ali Kashmiri and the revocation of his citizenship by the refusal to renew his and the passpor...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned that Jean Marie Ferraris, a mining activist attached to the Legal Rights and Natural Resources Center-Kasama sa Kalikasan or LRC, has been ...The Asian Human Rights Commission has followed the case of Nyi Nyi Htun, the editor of a Karenni state-based news journal, who was charged for upsetting public tranquility by sending news reports outs...An Open Letter to the President of India For further information about AFSPA please read INDIA: AFSPA promotes armed insurgency in Manipur   Mrs. Pratibha Devisingh Patil President of India Rash...An Open Letter to His Excellency the Sri Lankan Ambassador to Saudi Arabia The Asian Human Rights Commission has sent the following letter to His Excellency the Sri Lankan Ambassador to Saudi Arabia. ...The Asian Human Rights Commission extends its congratulation to Ms. Asma Jahangir and her colleagues for their victory of different offices at the Supreme Court Bar Association elections. Her victory ...A prominent Muslim leader in Sri Lanka was reported today to have announced that prayers will be offered at the Mosque in Sri Lanka on behalf of Rizana Nafeek, a young girl who is facing the death sen...A young man has disappeared from police custody after being raped by two police officials. The police officials have been arrested after protests by the villagers but the young man has not been recove...The Asian Human Rights Commission earnestly requests the kind intervention of all persons of the Muslim faith to kindly intervene to save the life of an innocent Sri Lankan girl who went to Saudi Arab...When a country’s protection mechanism is no longer capable of protecting its own people, its own system is deeply flawed; when a society can no longer protect the people in their community, the ...Hundreds of families of disappeared persons will gather at Raddoluwa Junction at Seeduwa, Sri Lanka at the monument for the disappeared to commemorate the day. This monument was erected in 2000. In a ...Nothing can be worse for a country in the modern world than to have a bad constitution. Anybody with common sense would not find it difficult to understand that proposition. The constitution lays down...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE October 26, 2010 AHRC-OLT-011-2010 An Open Letter to President Mahinda Rajapakse Mr. Mahinda Rajapakse President Socialist Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka C/- Office of the Pres...Extrajudicial killings and custodial deaths are happening because of: Refusal of the police and judiciary to investigate; The absence of investigations is the result of breakdown of the rule of law; W...When extraordinary explanations justify extrajudicial killings   By Sofie Rordam Arbitrary arrests and extrajudicial killings are an almost daily occurrence in Sri Lanka today. The police system ...Basil Fernando The attacks on the students and rhetoric against them appear in many of the reports covering Sri Lanka today. The Minister, S.B. Dissanayake is heard over television channels talking in...*Avinash Pandey  Mahinda Rajapaksa, President of Sri Lanka was the guest of honour at the closing ceremony of the Commonwealth Games 2010, New Delhi. He presided over the extravagant ceremony that wo...SRI LANKA: How does the constitutional question affect the question of Sri Lankan identity? Basil Fernando  The question of ‘identity’ means who is a Sri Lankan? It could be spoken of pur...Rebecca Buckwalter-Poza Endemic over-simplification by internal and external actors and purposeful attempts to reframe political debates have ensured the conversation concerning Sri Lanka’s governme...When Philippine President Benigno Aquino III decided to grant amnesty to the military men charged for rebellion against the government and not to file criminal charges against an official and the poli...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367