INDONESIA: The execution of Adami Wilson &#8211; questioning the aims of the death penalty
March 18 2013
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Some in India would consider the country’s honour preserved, and finally respected, once the marines from Italy return to stand trial in India. The marines’ return is an issue, in which th...“When a dog howls at the moon, we call it religion. When he barks at strangers, we call it patriotism.” — Edward Abbey Another howler has emerged from Sri Lanka. And, neither laughin...The Minister of Health, Maithripala Sirisena, was reported as saying that 65 percent of the cases before the courts in Polunowara district concern rape, child abuse and the harassment of women. He als...No great gain than virtue aught can cause; No great loss than life oblivious of her laws. тАУ┬аTamil Kurral┬а It is not only a portrayal of the lack of will to address the issue of solving problems in...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) appreciates the proposed reforms to the criminal law in India – Penal Code, 1860; Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, and the Evidence Act, 1872. Amendments t...On March 12, 2013, the ninth anniversary of the enforced disappearance of Somchai Neelaphaijit passed. The Asian Human Rights Commission chooses to note this anniversary with continued sorrow for the ...рдЖрдк рдЦреБрдж рд╣реА рд╕реЛрдЪ рд▓реАрдЬрд┐рдпреЗ рдХреНрдпрд╛ резремрел рдЧреНрд░рд╛рдо рдЕрдирд╛рдЬ рд╕реЗ рднреБрдЦрдорд░реА рдФрд░ рдХреБрдкреЛрд╖рдг рджреВрд░ рд╣реЛрдЧрд╛? рдкрд░ рднрд╛рд░рдд...In mythology we always hear about transformations; that a frog became a prince, or a beautiful princess became an ugly hag, and the like. These stories reflect the phenomenon of transformation, which ...After refraining from executing individuals for four years, the Indonesian authorities executed a Nigerian national, Adami Wilson, on 14 March 2013. The Tangerang District Court named Adami guilty of ...In two separate incidents, two Sri Lankan monks have been attacked in India. These two attacks are a continuum to previous assaults upon Sri Lankan nationals visiting India. These incidents are crimin...Amir Murtaza In a tragic incident, the well-known social worker, educationist and development expert Parveen Rehman was brutally shot dead in Karachi on 13th March, 2013. She had been working vigorous...Based largely on a series of drawings by Nepali artist Sushil Thapa,┬аModus Operandi TORTURE┬аexposes the true horror of what takes place in police stations around Asia. Thapa, in collaboration with t...Ms. Perveen Rehman (56), worked for the betterment of the poor and neglected When a small lady weighing hardly 60 kilograms working for the betterment of poor slum-dwellers, and amongst the under-priv...The annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the Secretary-General to the Human Rights Council has been issued on F...When the case regarding the torture of Chamila Bandara Jayaratne came before the Supreme Court yesterday (March 11) the lawyer appearing for the respondent police officers, Mr. Manohara de Silva, misl...Sections 295 and 295A of the Pakistan Penal Code do not differentiate between Islam and Christianity These are just two of the photos, among many, taken during the attack on Joseph Colony, a Christian...рдмрд╛рдврд╝ рдХреА рд╕рдВрднрд╛рд╡рдирд╛рдпреЗрдВ рд╕рд╛рдордиреЗ рд╣реИрдВ, рдФрд░ рдирджрд┐рдпреЛрдВ рдХреЗ рдХрд┐рдирд╛рд░реЗ рдШрд░ рдмрдиреЗ рд╣реИрдВред рдорд╢рд╣реВрд░ рд╢рд╛рдпрд░ рджреБрд╖ре...(Photo courtesy of the Daily Express) The small incident of a quarrel between three Christian and Muslim friends during a drinking session (of alcohol) turned into the ransacking, looting and burning ...рдирд┐рдпрдореЛрдВ рдХреЗ рдкреНрд░рднрд╛рд╡ тАУ┬а2 рдлрд░рд╡рд░реА 2006 рдХреЛ рдЬрдм рд░рд╛рд╖реНрдЯреНрд░реАрдп рдЧреНрд░рд╛рдореАрдг рд░реЛреЫрдЧрд╛рд░ рдЧрд╛рд░рдВрдЯреА реШрд╛рдиреВрди рд▓рд╛рдЧ...A group of hundreds of relatives of the disappeared from Mannar and Vavuniya were to arrive on the 5th night in Colombo by buses to share with the people in the South their pathetic stories about the ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367