BANGLADESH: Attacks on non-Muslims must stop now, forever
January 13 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Hello Uncle, I am Parvati. I am from Majha village from Panna block of Panna district. The moment I said Panna, your mind must have registered the emerald mines that the place is famous for. I can per...Introduction The term sovereignty is frequently confronted with hostile claims. Human Right and Anti Corruption Movements are often challenged by various groups with different notions and ideologies o...Under the Emergency Decree on Government Administration in a State of Emergency (2005), the government of Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra decreed a State of Emergency in Bangkok and surrounding are...The parents of Shiva Shankar Das (21) who was allegedly poisoned to death are still waiting for justice and compensation after two years. Shiva Shankar had a love affair with a 20-year old woman from ...As Edward Snowden has continued to slowly release more information about the widespread intelligence gathering techniques of the National Security Agency (NSA), there have been more calls for him to b...MaganтАЩs wives Basanti Bai and Santu Bai with his youngest son Vinod рд╕реБрдкреНрд░реАрдо рдХреЛрд░реНрдЯ рдХрд╛ рд╢рд╛рдирджрд╛рд░ рдлреИрд╕рд▓рд╛ рддрдорд╛рдо рдФрд░ рд▓реЛрдЧреЛрдВ рдХреЗ рд╕рд╛р...The long marchers are threatened by the ISI to stop their march or they would be severely dealt with The participants of the long march from Karachi to Islamabad for the recovery of Baloch missing per...The AHRC releases today the 14th Episode, of the Human Rights Asia Weekly Round up┬а with special reports from India and Hong Kong. In this weekтАЩs programme we bring you a special report from India,...The rape of a foreigner in the national capital, New Delhi, has placed India in disrepute, internationally. This incident comes just a year after a similar one shook the nation. The rape of a physioth...A media house issuing adverse reports on the Taliban is attacked and three employees were killed The Pakistani Taliban, a brutal and bloody organisation, has accelerated its attacks in different parts...Dr. Govinda KC has been on an indefinite hunger strike at the Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital for 10 consecutive days after putting forth seven demands including the resignation of Dr. Sharma a...Despite the political and social changes in Burma (Myanmar) of the last two years, police and soldiers continue to enjoy impunity for the murder and torture of civilians. Despite the constant efforts ...рдкрдиреНрдирд╛ рдЬрд┐рд▓реЗ рдХреА рддреАрди рд╕рд╛рдврд╝реЗ рддреАрди рд╕рд╛рд▓ рдХреА рдкрд╛рд░реНрд╡рддреА рдЕрдкрдиреА рдмреАрдорд╛рд░реА рдХреЗ рдмрд╛рд░реЗ рдореЗрдВ рдпрджрд┐ рд╕реАрдзреЗ рдкр...рджрдореЛрд╣ рдЬрд┐рд▓реЗ рдХреЗ рд╣рд░рджреБрдЖ” рдЧрд╛рдВрд╡ рдХреЗ рдзрдореНрдореВ рдкреНрд░рдЬрд╛рдкрддрд┐” рдЕрдкрдиреА рдЧреЗрдВрд╣реВ рдХреА рдлрд╕рд▓ рдХреЗ рдЙрддреНрдкрд╛рджрди р...The Asian Legal Resource Centre (ALRC) and its sister organisation the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) are pleased to announce the online edition of a new publication: “The Law, Patriarchy ...The Military Special Command Unit 911 in Cambodia firing live ammunition at garment factory workers asking for the increase of the minimum wage has been internationally condemned. The firing led to th...Whether fully or partially responsible for a crime, whether involved or not in an offence, women in Pakistan frequently come off worst when it comes to punishment. Gender-biased practises and discrimi...The Asian Human Rights Commission has now released of the 13th episode of the┬аHuman Rights Asia Weekly Roundup. We start this episode with an extensive report from Assam, India. A government crackdow...Shame shadows Bangladesh again. Numerous attacks have been waged on the Hindu community across Bangladesh in the wake of the January 5th┬аgeneral ‘election’. Houses and business establishm...The debates so far, concerning the arrest of an Indian diplomat in the US, on charges of visa fraud, have omitted the nature of the crime the officer has committed. The crime alleged against the offic...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367