ASIA: Civil society needs to converge to protect rights
December 10 2013
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to forward this statement regarding persons who chose to join the Ahmadiyya sect of Islam and the treatment they received thereafter. It is extremely perturbin...Today, December 23, 2013, the Asian Human Rights Commission releases the 11th Episode, of the Human Asia Rights Weekly Roundup with special reports on Labour Rights from Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and In...The open debate about the denial of equality between men and women may be seen as historically recent. However, the reality of gender imbalance has been a factual data for centuries and unfortunately,...The AHRC condoles the death of Mr. Khurshid Anwar, a writer and activist reputed for his life-long struggle for upholding the rights and dignity of the downtrodden, not only in India but the whole sub...Mr. Ban Ki Moon Secretary General of the United Nations Office of the Spokesman for the Secretary-General United Nations S-378, New York, NY 10017 USA Fax: +1 212 963 7055 or 2155 An Open Letter to th...The Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to inform you that we have released the 10thEpisode of the Human Rights Asia Weekly Roundup today, December 18, 2013. In this week’s news roundup we be...Following is an extract from the Pastoral Letter of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of Sri Lanka, entitled ‘Towards Reconciliation and Rebuilding of the Nation’. In this exercise th...Democracy and human rights were taboo under the military regime until the movement of democratisation which took place in 1987 triggered the 9th Amendment to the Constitution in the country. This Amen...Over the course of 2013 the Asian Human Rights Commission has followed reports of a larger number of conflicts over land grabs and attempted grabs in Burma, or Myanmar. Some of the conflicts are over ...The case of human rights lawyer Somchai Neelaphaijit, whom police officers abducted and forcibly disappeared over nine years ago, took a new twist when the Department of Special Investigation claimed ...Following is an extract from the Pastoral Letter of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of Sri Lanka, entitled ‘Towards Reconciliation and Rebuilding of the Nation’. Even though exact s...From Karachi to Islamabad a long march has started for the recovery of missing persons from Balochistan The Voice of Baloch Missing Persons (VBMP) has started the second phase of the Long March, this ...The health of Mr. Nanda Prasad Adhikari and Mrs. Ganga Maya Adhikari, parents to a murdered son, Krishna Prasad Adhikari, is deteriorating rapidly. According to doctors at Bir Hospital, having  resum...Human Rights Report for 2013: ‘License’ to torture, kill and to silence the oppressed http://www.humanrights.asia/resources/hrreport/2013/AHRC-SPR-001-2013.pdf/ On December 9, the Asian Hu...The suspects are missing after arrest and 150 have been extrajudicially killed during the last three months of the “Karachi operation” The federal government has started an operation in Ka...The situation in Miryang seems to have been deteriorating, which has shown by the phenomenon of violence in the area, including threats and harassment followed by arrest and detention against villager...The full report is available for download at: http://www.humanrights.asia/resources/hrreport/2013/AHRC-SPR-008-2013.pdf/view Human Rights Day is being observed in Bangladesh, amidst extreme forms of ...Commemorating the 64th Anniversary of Human Rights Day, the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has released a comprehensive report, State of Human Rights in Asia 2013, covering Sri Lanka, India, N...“Food security exists when all people, at all times, have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food.” Aly Ercelan and Muhammad Ali Shah A recent publicat...The following is a translation of a statement made by Eran Wickramaratne, MP, in Parliament on December 3, 2013. Today, I am going to take the opportunity of the short time accorded to me, to speak o...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367