ASIA: Women&#8217;s views on prevention of torture-Interview 22
June 23 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Indonesia–A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture  Mar...Mr. Ban Ki-Moon Secretary General Office of the Spokesman for the Secretary General United Nations S-378 New York NY 10017 USA Fax: +1 212 963 7055 or 2155 SOUTH KOREA: NGOs facing reprisals for submi...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka–A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Mrs. ...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Nepal- A woman human rights activists speaks out against violence against...Can a sovereign in a democratic state claim the right to deny the protection of the rule of law to its citizens? This is the core issue that has come to the forefront over the dispute with the interna...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Philippines: “I just don’t trust them when it comes to invest...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Philippines: “I never thought that I would be safe in their hands...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Nepal – A woman activist speaks out against bad policing Sharmila L...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC.   Bangladesh–A woman speaks out against bad policing and tortu...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Bangladesh–A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Ms. ...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Burma (Myanmar) –A woman speaks out against bad policing and tortur...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka –A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Mrs....Noveline Education is one of the most important elements both as an indicator as well as a tool of a country’s development .Without a good education system that guarantees the future of the new gene...Rasika Sanjeewa Weerawickrama It was a devastating fact that the Korean navy ship ‘ROKS Cheonan’ sinking in the East China Sea around 9.22PM 26th March 2010. Cheonan was a Korean Navy Pohang Class...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. NEPAL: A Dalit member of the National Women’s Commission speaks in ...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. INDONESIA: Interview with a journalist on women and the justice system in...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka — A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Mrs...Abhisit Vejjajiva Prime Minister c/o Government House Pitsanulok Road, Dusit District Bangkok 10300 THAILAND Fax: +66 2 288 4000 ext. 4025 Tel: +66 2 288 4000 E-mail: spokesman@thaigov.go.th or abh...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka — A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Nim...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Nepal — A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Sabitri...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367