SOUTH KOREA: Korean style of &#8216;Watergate Scandal&#8217;?
March 30 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Indian Central Reserve Police Force has set up the world’s first all-women pipe band. In the undercover interviews conducted by The Tehelka with police officers in Delhi, the officers cl...By Amir Murtaza The International Day for Street Children was celebrated for the first time on April 12, 2011.  The success of the International Day for Street Children 2011 has provided a platform t...Some of the harshest weather conditions in the world may be experienced on the Siachen Glaciers and it is this very location that two of the bitterest enemies of the region maintain bases. The Siachen...The statement by Gujarat’s Director General of Police (Acting), Mr. Chittaranjan Singh, immediately after the conviction in the Ode riot case, ‘that the conviction is a lesson for the crit...In one of the most shameful episodes ever to be revealed the Sri Lankan government’s involvement in the ‘abduction industry’ was exposed last night (April 9) when the government took...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) condemns the recent ruthless, barbaric, and torturous murder of Mr Abdul Qudoos Ahmad, a school teacher, Ahmadi religious group of Islam. The AHRC calls on the...Mr. Premakumar Gunarathnam the leader of the JVP dissident group and Ms. Dimuthu Attigala a member of the same group are reported to be missing from yesterday night. According to a report, published t...The Asian Human Rights Commission has received the very sad news that a young student set himself on fire for want of a new school uniform in Shabquadar, Pakhunkha province. The tragic story is a remi...By Nilantha Ilangamuwa  Directions and instructions are determinations of action which have an influence upon a number of minor circumstances too numerous and unimportant for general laws. — Ca...From the history of the media in South Korea, the government of the military dictatorship controlled media as well as newspapers and instructed them as to what should be posted and broadcasted. There ...The Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to express its concern toward the scrapping of the provision prohibiting amnesty for human rights violations in the Bills establishing the Truth and Reconcilia...The criminal justice system of Sri Lanka is in decline. Across the country numerous reports document that illegal arrests and detention continues to happen indiscriminately. The Asian Human Rights Com...In the streets of Metro Manila, it is common to see photographs or posters of missing persons posted on walls and electricity poles, with details of the missing person and how to contact the relatives...After the case of Mr. Kim Jong-Ik, a victim of illegal surveillance by the Prime Minister’s Office and exposure by a former official of the Office (for details: AHRC-STM-066-2012), more illegal...Nilantha Ilangamuwa “Hope is the only good that is common to all men; those who have nothing else possess hope still” – Thales of Miletus The Government of Sri Lanka announced just thre...Due to increasing international concerns over corruption, well established systems in the developed countries often become a model for other countries to adopt. Meanwhile, much research has been made ...The Fisherfolk community in Pakistan is considered the poorest of the poor, dwelling in slum settlements along the 1129 kilometres coastline with no basic amenities. A high level of poverty prevails i...The Fisherfolk community in Pakistan is considered the poorest of the poor, dwelling in slum settlements along the 1129 kilometres coastline with no basic amenities. A high level of poverty prevails i...Bangladesh celebrates the 42nd year of its independence at the moment while the nation is found to be still debating over the truths of its history related to the war of independence. The country has...Two cases in Burma’s courts that recently have attracted some public attention reveal aspects of a legal system being cynically manipulated, aspects that afford strong guarantees for the continu...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367