NEPAL: नेपाली दलित आन्दोलन : धेरै संघर्ष न्यून उपलब्धि
September 30 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.In a landmark criminal judgment involving abuse of power by the police, a Special Additional Sessions Court in Calicut not only acquitted the accused framed by the errant cops in Sundari Amma murder c...Malala Yousafzai; the epitome of the fight against religious oppression of women The Asian Human Rights Commission takes the greatest pleasure in congratulating Malala Yousafzai on the occasion of bei...The police raid on the Nehru Place office of Forward Press is a deplorable attack on freedom of expression. The Forward Press, a progressive magazine aimed at marginalised and underprivileged sections...The right to a fair trial is a universally recognized human right, enshrined in international law in both the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (the “UDHR”) and the International Covenant on C...by Laksiri Fernando “Autobiography is about change; it narrates a series of transformations. This is an expectation we bring to any autobiographical text.”  –  Carolyn Barros When I picked...A tribute by Bushra Khaliq Well done, Malala! Every Pakistani is proud of you. Today you have made our head high. After Dr. Abdus Salam, Malala is second person who has shown other side of Pakistan an...Here are the headlines for this week’s episode of AHRC TV’s Weekly Roundup: Calm before another storm in Hong Kong? Government and student leaders agree to talks. UPDATE: THE GOVERNMENT HAS CANCEL...To date, no credible investigation into the disappearance of Prageeth Eknaligoda has taken place. Prageeth Eknaligoda disappeared on 24th January 2010 and to this day there has been no credible invest...During the last two weeks, a video showing a policeman beating a young woman on a public road in Ratnapura, Sri Lanka, has generated heated discussion in the media. Reactions shown in the media and in...State fails once again to protect blasphemy convict, injured by prison guard In a latest incident on 25 September 2014, a 71-year old prisoner who was awarded the death sentence in a blasphemy case wa...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned about the ongoing detention without charge of Patiwat (last name withheld) and Pornthip (last name withheld), who are being held in relati...In this week’s episode of the Weekly Roundup , AHRC TV covers the tragic news of the death of Nanda Prasad Adhikari, following a 333-day hunger strike in Nepal. His wife, Ganga Maya, continues her f...by Jack Clancey During this past week, Central was occupied by thousands of demonstrators, as was Admiralty, Wanchai, Causeway Bay, and other parts of Hong Kong. The key question being asked is: What ...According to information provided by Protection International to the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), human rights defenders and other members of the Klong Sai Pattana community in Surat Thani pr...There is more heartbreak for the family, friends, and supporters of the Adhikari couple.  On September 22, after 333 days of a hunger strike, Nanda Prasad Adhikari has died. His wife, Ganga Maya, rem...Vilbur Larch of Global Health and Human Rights Show (USA) talks with Basil Fernando, On the 29th of September Vilbur Larch of the Global Health and Human Rights Show talked with Basil Fernando about t...वि.सं. १९९७ मा बाग्लुङगका भगवत सर्वजित विश्वकर्मालगायतले सुरु गरेको छुवाछु...Ms. Phyu Hnin Htwe, a 23-year-old, member of the All Burma Federation of Student Unions (ABFSU) from Yadanabon University, Mandalay has been falsely implicated in the abduction of two Chinese workers ...In this week’s episode of the Weekly Roundup, AHRC TV is pleased to announce that Basil Fernando, the Asian Human Rights Commission’s Director for Policy and Programme Development, will be awarded...Following is a poetic response to ASIA: Wounds in the souls of the members of disappeared people’s families can never be cured, which appeared yesterday (September 26, 2014) by John Joseph Clanc...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367