SRI LANKA: Needed &#8212; A Ministry of Truth
March 6 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The murder of an Indian Police Service officer Mr. Narendra Kumar on 8 March in Morena district of Madhya Pradesh has again brought to light the criminal nexus between the mining mafia operating in th...The government of Bangladesh on Monday blanked out three satellite television channels – Ekushey Television, Bangla Vision and Islamic TV – almost an hour before the leader of the opposition Beg...The people of Bangladesh are living in a tense situation prior to a mass rally in Dhaka on March 12, 2012 called by the opposition parties against the ruling regime. The opposition political parties, ...The situation in Pakistan grows worse for the religious minority groups on a daily basis. The security and law and order situation has become so chaotic that the authorities seem to have no control ov...INDIA: GHE fear at New Delhi Reading the proposed draft resolution mooted at the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) concerning human rights in Sri Lanka, one cannot help wonder why India di...Freedom of expression is one of the essential pre-requirements for the practice, protection and promotion of democracy. If we are to speak of a democratic Pakistan we need to examine, whether the medi...After intense public pressure the police have revealed that they have identified the culprits behind the assassination of a mother and daughter at Kahawatta which took place one month ago. The failure...After Carefully consideration of the draft resolution, Promoting Reconciliation and Accountability in Sri Lanka, submitted to Human Rights council of Sri Lanka, the Asian Human Rights Commission is of...On 18 February, a 40-year-old woman, Dhegani Mahato was accused of having made one of her family members sick by casting a spell by a local shaman. She was set on fire and killed by her family members...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission on the occasion of International Women’s Day International Women’s Day is being observed in Bangladesh like many other parts of the world. ...In October 2011 a 28-year-old woman Sumlut Roi Ja, who is the mother of 14-month-old girl, was abducted and allegedly gang-raped by the military. She was residing in Hkai Bang village, Momouk District...Bushra Khaliq Rape victim blaming has its roots in all societies and causes are surely riddled in the culture. Stigmatization of the rape victim, multiple social and legal inequities and absence of su...At Kahawatte, representatives from several religions met and addressed a press conference on the issue of insecurity relating to the women living in this area. Ten women have been raped and killed in ...The women’s international day on March 8 is generally celebrated throughout the country with enthusiasm and jubilation to assert the achievement of the rights gained by women through their conti...In three separate open letters issued today, the Asian Human Rights Commission and Advocacy Forum have urged the leaders of the Nepali Congress, the Communist Party of Nepal (UML) and the United Commu...Today, the world’s largest democracy along with the rest of the world would celebrate international women’s day. The media will reproduce public statements and the promises made. Instituti...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission on the occasion of the International Women’s Day Today marks the International Women’s Day, a day to reflect on the gains achieved by women...A Superintendent of Prisons, the highest ranking officer in the prisons system, having affiliations with a banned Islamic group, has burnt two places of prayer (mosques) and a church inside the jail p...“…..you dislike doctrines, you have a horror of systems, as for principles, you deny that there are any in political economy; therefore we shall call it your practice — your practice without...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission and Advocacy Forum to the Chairman of (UML) Communist Party of Nepal Mr. Jhalanath Khanal Chairman Communist Party of Nepal (UML) Central Office M...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367