ASIA: Thorough police reform a prerequisite to end the culture of torture
June 25 2013
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.As the allegations of illegal interference by the National Intelligence Service (NIS) in the presidential election held in December last year drew increasing attention from the public, a search and se...On 2 July 2013 the House of Representatives enacted the law on mass organisation through a vote at the Plenary Meeting. Out of 361 members of parliament who attended the session, only 50 refused the l...Mr. Wanninayaka has complained to the police authorities that on June 24 some officers visited his house and made inquiries about him. Later at around 2:30 pm on the same day, two officers went to the...The Constitution of India explicitly states that the right to life, equality, education, and to participate in elections as fundamental rights. When these rights are violated, the Indian system does n...рдорд╣рд╛рддреНрдорд╛ рдЧрд╛рдВрдзреА рдЧреНрд░рд╛рдореАрдг рд░реЛрдЬрдЧрд╛рд░ рдЧрд╛рд░рдВрдЯреА рдпреЛрдЬрдирд╛ рдХреЗрд╡рд▓ рдПрдХ рдЖрд░реНрдерд┐рдХ рдЧрддрд┐рд╡рд┐рдзрд┐ рдирд╣реАрдВ рд╣реИ. рдЗр...The National Food Security Bill (NFSB) has been the center of much debate since it was introduced in Parliament by the UPA government in December 2011. One of the most persistent arguments against a f...The country has entered into political turmoil. It is because of a series of allegations of illegal interference by the National Intelligence Service (NIS) in the Presidential election, held in Decemb...рдкреНрд░рд╛рдХреГрддрд┐рдХ рдЖрдкрджрд╛рдПрдВ рдмрддрд╛ рдХрд░ рдирд╣реАрдВ рдЖрддреАрдВ, рди рд╣реА рдЕрдХреНрд╕рд░ рдЙрдирдХрд╛ рд╕рдЯреАрдХ рдкреВрд░реНрд╡рд╛рдиреБрдорд╛рди рдХрд░ рдкрд╛рдирд╛ рд...A Joint Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission and┬аOdhikar A survivor of torture, relatives of a survivor and of two victims of death, who were tortured to death in police custody, have share...The acting Chief Justice of Sindh provincial High Court, Justice Maqbool Baqar, was attacked and seriously injured this morning in a bomb blast by the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP). The convoy of th...International Day in support of Torture victims Rights-based organizations, HR defenders vow to synergies efforts to combat Torture LAHORE:(26th┬аJune 2013):“The large scale instances of torture...A Christian lawyer has been threatened with dire consequences if he continues to provide legal assistance to three Christian women who were stripped naked and paraded on the street by the henchmen of ...The United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture observed around the world on June 26 serves as a sober reminder of the reality that this ugly side of humanity is still very much ...рдордзреНрдп рдкреНрд░рджреЗрд╢ рдореЗрдВ рджреЗрд░реА рд╕реЗ рд╣реБрдП рднреБрдЧрддрд╛рди рдХреА рдХреБрд▓ рд░рд╛рд╢рд┐рдпрд╛рдБ рдЬрд┐рд▓реЗ рдХрд╛ рдирд╛рдо рд╡рд░реНрд╖ (рд░рд╛рд╢рд┐ рдХрд░реЛреЬ ...Every year, people around the world observe the UN International Day in Support of Torture Victims (generally referred to as the Anti-Torture Day) to reassert that torture must be eliminated. In Pakis...Click here to watch our video presentation The following is a series of reflections by experts, of what has gone wrong in Asia, that despite attempts, torture continues to exist in most Asian states. ...An Open Letter by the Asian Human Rights Commission to the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Ms. Navy Pillay on the occasion of UN International Day In Support of Victims of Torture Ms. Navanethem...A Joint Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission,┬аthe Cambodian Human Rights Action Committee (CHRAC), the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC), Transcultural Psychosocial...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission on the occasion of the International day in support of victims of torture. On the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, the Asian Human R...INR 17, or approximately 30 cents in USD, is what an average poor spends a day in rural India. Their urban friends are no better off either; they have to content with spending INR 27 for seeing a day ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367