INDIA: AFSPA may be pious, but India is not a theocracy Lt. Gen Jaswal
July 12 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.In times of serious repression such as the situation that Sri Lanka is faced with now, the courts are the citizen’s last resort. If the citizens are intimidated from seeking redress from the courts ...Sixth months after the disappearance of her husband, Prageeth Eknaligoda, Sanya Ekaneligoda and her son held religious ceremonies at the famous Kalli Amma Kovil, a Hindu temple at Modara, Colombo on 2...On two occasions the United Nations Human Rights Committee has viewed that the GoSL has abused contempt of court laws The Human Rights Committee of the United Nations has found that the Supreme Court ...Nepal’s politics is reeling under frequent changes but the alarming governmental lethargy regarding the issue of caste-based discrimination seems to be a constant, barely affected by the evoluti...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Nishanthi, 42 is a housewife with two children and a husband who works as...Mr. Mohammad Iqbal Awan, who was kept in an army torture cell by Inter Service Intelligence (ISI) officials for five years, announced that he will commit suicide along with his wife and child on Augus...Bihar is one of India’s most impoverished states; it is also India’s most lawless region. From the point of view of crime it has reached the Situation where many local citizens are leaving...Avinash Pandey* Rarely do individual tragedies reflect all that is wrong in a society. Even rare are occasions where their implications go beyond the lives of the individual, his family, or the neighb...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. A Retired Lady Police Sergeant Talks About Policing In Sri Lanka Seetha K...This week an incident was reported from Eppawala where a couple and their two children, a son and daughter between 14 -15 years of age were murdered in the most brutal fashion. Their bodies were found...The two prominent Baloch political leaders have been assassinated within three days by unknown assailants riding on motorbikes. It is alleged by the political and nationalist groups of the province th...The endless chain of cases that are being filed against Sarath Fonseka, a Sri Lankan citizen and a Member of Parliament who is also known as the most vocal opponent of the ruling regime, is a mockery ...The incident reported from Kerala state about the attack upon a college professor by a gang of eight persons on 4 July in Moovatupuzha, is yet another wakeup call for India. A criminal gang attacked P...SSP Angunawala (Rtd) who served the department for thirty six and half years commented on the reasons for the degeneration of the police department in a taped interview given to Janasansadaya, a human...The purpose of reforms should be to eradicate the defects that exist at present, in the police. The main defects are that the system of criminal investigations is based on primitive methodologies and ...The purpose of reforms should be to eradicate the defects that exist at present, in the police. The main defects are that the system of criminal investigations is based on primitive methodologies and ...Avinash Pandey The Kashmir valley in India has witnessed more than 15 deaths in June alone, all of them caused by Indian security forces firing upon the protesting crowds. These crowds were comprised ...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka–A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Saran...Rana Maqbool Ahmed is a former Inspector General of Police of Sindh province and has been accused of the torture of and conspiracy to kill President Zadari when he was imprisoned in 1999. Rana has bee...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka–A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Chath...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367