PAKISTAN: The judiciary must stop playing the ghost of Musharraf
March 2 2009
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.It was reported on Sunday, March 8 that according to the Prime Minister of Thailand, Abhisit Vejjajiva, the arrested director of the independent news agency Prachatai is entitled to make a complaint i...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  AHRC-STM-053-2009  March 9, 2009 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission PHILIPPINES: “Guilt by relation” renders due process meaningless On March 4, 20-y...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  AHRC-STM-052-2009  March 8, 2009 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission PAKISTAN: Conditions for women are more precarious on International Women’s Day 2009 Mu...According to an announcement issued today on the website of Prachatai, one of the few independent and outspoken media outlets operating in Thailand,  “On March 6, at 3 pm, seven police officers...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is informed that Guria, a human rights organisation working in Uttar Pradesh against human trafficking is waiting for police assistance since the past four hou...Bhagalpur, a district in Bihar state, has once again shot into notoriety for public violence. Yesterday, a mob lynched three persons at Ratanpur Bazar area of Bhagalpur. The victims of this violence b...A fundamental rights petition has been filed by two lawyers against the Inspector General of Police and 12 other police officers. This petition will be argued before the Supreme Court today (5th March...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  AHRC-STM-048-2009  March 04, 2009 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission PAKISTAN: Order an honour killing – become a minister The Asian Human Rights Commissi...In 1991 two accords were concluded to end the war that had ravaged Cambodia for so many years. These accords assigned the UN to keep the peace, organize the election of a new government and administer...Several events which have taken place in recent weeks remind us of the deepening of the crises in the region. In Bangladesh, in The Bangladesh Rifles (BDR) 55 officers, Seven civilians including two o...The reports that appeared yesterday in the Indian media quoting ‘informed sources’ that the Tamil Nadu state police has decided not to produce detainees in courts exposes the extent to whi...A three-member bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan has declared two leading politicians of the country, Mr. Nawaz Sharif and Mr. Shahbaz Sharif, as ineligible to hold parliamentary positions. Mr. N...The world was reminded of the tragic paradoxes that take place daily in Pakistan, when a young journalist was kidnapped and executed last month while covering a march for peace. Mr. Musa Khankhel, jou...Three prisoners were killed within the premises of the Negombo prison last week. One of the prisoners shot two others with a pistol he had in his possession. Thereafter, he climbed into a tree and ann...Three prisoners were killed within the premises of the Negombo prison last week. One of the prisoners shot two others with a pistol he had in his possession. Thereafter, he climbed into a tree and ann...The non-commissioned officers of the Bangladesh Rifles (BDR) have revolted against their commanding officers of the Bangladesh Army. Officers from the regular army head the BDR under deputation. The r...The judiciary in South Korea had made some humiliating decisions under political influence during military dictatorships in the past. Some judges who collaborated with the then-government by judging i...Thousands of peasants from different parts of the Sindh province are on a long march demanding amendments in the Sindh Tenancy Act, 1950. The demand is to obtain equal status for the peasants while th...The recent incident of violence between a faction of lawyers practicing at the Madras High Court and the Tamil Nadu local police is one more incident that exposes the appalling state of rule of law in...Mr. John Solecki, who heads the United Nation’s refugee agency UNHCR’s Quetta office in Pakistan, was abducted on 2nd February, 2009, by a militant group, fighting for political autonomy o...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367