INDONESIA: Stop persecution against the right to freedom of expression and opinion
June 5 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to sincerely thank the Prime Minister of Belgium M Charles Yves Jean Ghislaine Michel and his administration for taking serious note of the Urgent Appea...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) on the occasion of International Day in Support of Victims of Torture India is the only country in Asia that has during the past seven decades r...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) on the occasion of International Day in Support of Victims of Torture Torture remains a serious problem in Indonesia, even after 18 years of pol...A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) on the occasion of International Day in Support of Victims of Torture On occasion of the International in Support of the Victims of Torture 201...The events that unfolded this week shockingly foretells the story of the very rapid collapse of the secular state in Sri Lanka. Although, the events around which a new melodrama unfolded in Sri Lanka ...READ Report on Independence of Judges and Lawyers  READ Report on Torture The Asian Human Rights Commission strongly endorses the reports of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the independen...By Sanjeewa Weerawickrama [1] The history of torture has been from time immemorial. Today and in the future torture is a reality in many countries. To solve a problem there may be multiple approaches....The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is alarmed by the Nepal police’s unjustified use of force and arbitrary arrests of protesters in various Tarai districts. The AHRC also condemns the acts of ...This week Just Asia begins with Pakistan, which observed World Day Against Child Labor on June 12. Despite official fanfare and praise, child labour continues to increase in the country, and child r...On June 9, it was reported that 26-year-old law student, M Stalin, had been tortured by the police in Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh. On his way to drop his family members at the bus station, he was picke...The theme for the 2017 World Day Against Child Labor is to protect children from child labour in conflicts and disasters. “The world aims for the elimination of child labour by 2025, under the susta...by Sanjeewa Weerawickwama The population of Sri Lanka is 20.97 million (2015) people. Some 1.84 million are migrant workers. The number of Dengue Fever affected individuals in 2015 was 29, 777. In 201...The Supreme Court of Pakistan’s acquittal of a man accused of blasphemy 11 years ago is a breath of fresh air amidst the country’s suffocating patronage of religious extremism and mob justice. The...This week Just Asia begins with Save the Children’s new report ‘Stolen Childhoods’ in Sri Lanka. Launched on June 1, the report explores a unique index presenting the major reasons why childhood...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) congratulates Chief Justice (CJ) Sushila Karki for successfully completing her term before retiring on 7 June 2017 due to her age. Before leaving her office, s...The current government in Pakistan has proven to be a bane on freedom of expression as more journalists are reportedly being attacked. Six months into the year, 2017 and 2 journalist have already lo...By Sanjeewa Weerawickrama Criminal offenses such as thefts, rapes, homicides, assaults and kidnappings should be investigated according to existing laws. A criminal investigation is team work where mu...A former judge of Rajasthan High Court, Mr. Mahesh Chand Sharma, has claimed that a peacock does not mate with a peahen to breed, and it was because of this quality that it was declared India’s ...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has become aware that persecution against people who exercise their right to freedom of expression and opinion is very widespread in Indonesia. The violations ...Women in Pakistan continue to be prey to jirgas, a parallel justice system held by the influential and landed aristocracy. Rape victims and their parents are forced by jirgas to make out of court sett...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367