ASIA: Women&#8217;s views on prevention of torture &#8211; Interview 9
June 15 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.INDIA: Interview with Sanajabi, a homemaker Mrs. Raj Kumari Sanajaobi is a homemaker and represents the ordinary women in Manipur state, India. She lives in Singjamei Chingamakha Yanglem Leikai, Manip...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Pakistan–A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Ms Tar...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka — A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Sis...Basil Fernando* On 23 May 2010, police officers, including a woman police constable reportedly tortured and abused a mother and her 12-year-old son in Rajouri Garden Police Outpost in Delhi. It is rep...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. INDONESIA: Interview with a human rights lawyer Putri Kanesia is a human ...The Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to inform you about the following invitation to consultancy services. The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) and the Asian Legal Resource Centre (ALRC) invit...Avinash Pandey Samar* On 23 May 2010, police officers, including a woman police constable reportedly tortured and abused a mother and her 12-year-old son in Rajouri Garden Police Outpost in Delhi. It ...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka — A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture B. ...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka — A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Tha...Today, the Union Home Ministry, the Chief Ministers of Manipur and Nagaland and a handful of Naga and Meitei nationalists are celebrating the 61st day of their successful enforcement of an indefinite ...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Burma — A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Novelin...Indonesia — A woman speaks out against policing system Answer Styannes is a law graduate from University of Indonesia. She was been involved with civil society issues and has worked for The Comm...Julia Lemétayer The Pakistani people are increasingly vulnerable to food insecurity because of the government’s bad governance and its lack of political will to tackle hunger. According to the Glob...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka — A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Ino...Kalutara is situated around 35 kilometers from Colombo and is one of the centres of the Sinhala Buddhist heartland. What happened to a mother and her 17-year-old daughter in this place where the ̵...Sri Lanka — A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture   Sandamani Munasinghe, a Sri Lankan Attorney-at-Law, has worked as an advisor to the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka (H...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AHRC-STM-096-2010 June 8, 2010 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission INDIA: Bhopal judgment symbolises decayed justice in a deficient democracy The recent judgment del...The Asian Human Rights Commission welcomes the ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention against Torture, Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Pu...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Sri Lanka — A woman speaks out against bad policing and torture Har...“Arresting, assaulting and killing have become fun activities for the police”.  Tiran Kumara Bangala Arrachi–Ravaya The most recent case to be reported is from the Kottawa Police St...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367