WORLD: Update &#8211; Dispute regarding CCS Elsuma (Pvt) Sri Lanka &#8212; legality and morality of a European company acting in third world
August 6 2007
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Asian Human Rights Commission pays tribute to the former Attorney General, Mr. K. C. Kamalasabeyson, PC whose passing away in India was reported in the newspapers today. Mr. Kamalasabeyson, during...An attempt by the military regime in Pakistan to impose an emergency is generating considerable fear in the country. The military regime seems to be nervous about the serious changes that have resulte...August 9 is the international day of the indigenous people.  Several indigenous communities might not be even aware of such a day being celebrated to acknowledge, respect and protect their culture an...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is writing to you with regards to the recent arrest and charging of six workers’ rights advocates in Myanmar, with which you are already familiar. The si...Where can one sell a wife, or a daughter? Sale of women and children is not a unique practice attributable to a specific geographical region. It is practiced across the globe, but mostly in clandestin...There are many expressions of fear from many quarters about the possibility of another contempt of court action in Sri Lanka. Earlier the United Nations Human Rights Committee has made recommendations...(We refer to our earlier statement on this dispute which may be found at http://www.ahrchk.net/statements/mainfile.php/2007statements/1136/. We are in receipt of a reply (by email) from a subsidiary ...(We reproduce below the decision of the Sri Lanka Medical Council (as received) regarding a complaint made against a Judicial Medical Officer for his failure to carry out a proper medical examination ...A female passenger in a public bus was found bleeding from her thighs and the fellow passengers took her to hospital. At the hospital, the doctors who examined the lady found that she was wearing a ch...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is writing to you in response to a press release issued by the Public Relations Department of Thailand dated 23 July 2007 in which it is stated that during a c...The Inspector General of the Bangladesh Police, Nur Mohammad, was quoted in various national newspapers on 22 July 2007 as accepting the poor reputation of the force and extent of political interferen...The Asian Human Rights Commission is seriously concerned about the developments relating to CCS Elsuma (Pvt) Ltd based at Daluwakotuwa, Kochchikade (near Negombo) which has blatantly disregarded an ag...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is writing to you today further to your press release of 25 April 2007, issued together with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar...I am writing this on behalf of the Asian Human Rights Commission to raise an issue regarding a problem of policy which is affecting the capacity of the Sri Lankan government to provide legal assistanc...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  AS-177-2007 July 25, 2007 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission THAILAND: Unintelligible computer “law” passed under junta’s watch On 10 June 2007 ...Caste based discrimination is the Indian variant of apartheid.  For decades Indians have been separated and divided according to the caste hierarchy. In spite of several laws and even Constitutional ...Last week an Inspector of Police (IP) and a Police Constable (PC) who were accused of torturing a 25 year-old woman, Angalin Roshana Michael, were sentenced to seven years of rigorous imprisonment and...It has been two months and a few days since the new state administration took charge in Uttar Pradesh. The Chief Minister has openly declared that her government would not tolerate any form of caste b...His Excellency the Hon. Mr. Mahinda Rajapakse President Socialist Democratic Republic of  Sri Lanka C/- Office of the President Temple Trees, 150, Galle Road Colombo 3 SRI LANKA Fax: +94 11 2472100 /...After a man in Mettaya, upper Burma, assaulted U Than Lwin on 15 June 2007, he ran for cover in the local office of the Union Solidarity and Development Association (USDA), a government-organised mass...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367