THAILAND: Refusal to address forced disappearances continues unabated
February 8 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to the Asahi Kosei (M) Sdn. Bhd. Company Mr. Takeshi Nishitsuji — President Asahi Kosei (M) Sdn. Bhd. Lot 3377, Jalan Perusahaan Utama, Tama...Devarathnam Yogendra ( 28 ) is the complainant in a bribery case against IP Wijesuriya of the Hatton Police Station, who has been indicted on a charge of obtaining bribes. This charge has been filed o...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has consistently reported in the recent weeks on the issue of the government’s refusal to take action on the incitement to murder and civil disobedience ...Basil Fernando For the last 20 years I have been living in Hong Kong. Here over 98% of the population is Chinese. I belong to the small minority which includes many other races and will try to illustr...Last week, the Attorney General (AG) agreed to withdraw charges of murder and the causing of grievous hurt against four people who had been accused and charged before the Colombo High Court. The accus...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AHRC-STM-028-2011 February 8, 2011 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission INDONESIA: Religious violence result of authorities consent in past cases The Asian Human Righ...The phenomenon of forced disappearance is not well understood outside of the countries in which it takes place. Imagine that police take your spouse or relative without observing any protocol for arre...The human rights movement of Pakistan is heartened by the directives of the five-member-bench of the Supreme Court to the Inspectors General of Police (IGPs) to furnish full details of the cases of mi...Sri Lanka will be celebrating its independence from the British Empire on February 4, 2011. The lamentation that independence has not meant a great deal to the people of Sri Lanka is commonly heard. H...The attempt by the military government of Burma to introduce a law which is entitled Public Military Service Law is quite disturbing. The assessment of the move by the military regime which has now ...A case of blasphemy has been registered against 17-year-old Syed Samiullah, an intermediate student and resident of Mujtaba Colony Malir Halt. The charge was registered in the Shahrah-e-Noor Jahan Pol...A Joint Statement by the Commission for the Disappeared and Victims of Violence (KontraS) in Indonesia and the Asian Human Rights Commission   On December 23, 2010 the International Convention fo...The Asian Human Rights Commission has once again written to the Western Embassies in Saudi Arabia to request their intervention in the case of Rizana Nafeek. Following is the text of the letter: Your ...A group of 85 persons have been in detention in Bangkok since December 14, 2010 despite the fact that they are already registered as asylum seekers with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refuge...On 21 January 2011 at the Criminal Court on Ratchadaphisek Road in Bangkok, representatives of all parties involved in the criminal proceedings in the case of the 12 March 2004 forcible disappearance ...The premises of Lanka E-News, a well know website which has suffered several attacks in recent times has been set on fire in the early morning of January 31. According to reports the equipment and the...Basil Fernando There have been a number of developments in the human rights and international justice fields over the past 5-10 years. However, some very serious problems in the field of human rights ...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AHRC-STM-017-2011 January 27, 2011 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission INDIA: US can help Indians in seeking justice A ‘default order’ issued by a Distri...FOR PUBLICATION AHRC-ART-010-2011 January 27, 2011 An Article by the Asian Human Rights Commission PHILIPPINES: Defects in legal practice and legal aid for the poor Correspondence with a public attorn...With sentences between 9 and 12 months imprisonment for disobeying orders, a military court in Jayapura, Papua gave an outrageous verdict on January 24, 2011 in a case of severe torture. Tuanliwor Kiw...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367