INDIA: Chief Ministers&#8217; conference should not be an opportunity wasted
January 5 2009
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Asian Human Rights Commission has received further details in the case of Ms. Zarina Marri, a 23-year-old schoolteacher from Balochistan province, who has been held incommunicado in an army tortur...A letter has been written by six US ambassadors in their personal capacities to expressing their concern over the deterioration of the situation in the country and urged him to take steps to re-establ...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  AHRC-STM-018-2009  January 21, 2009 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission SRI LANKA: Justice Mark Fernando – an appreciation Justice Mark Fernando, who becam...The assassination of Lasantha Wickramatunga and his last powerful message has given rise to a discussion on the state of freedom of expression in Sri Lanka. A local group, Vikalpa, has published onlin...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  AHRC-STM-016-2009  January 14, 2009 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission BANGLADESH: End the politically chosen ‘disposable’ attorney and prosecutorial...Munir Mengal, the managing director of a Balochi language television channel, was arrested by the state intelligence agencies on 4 April, 2006, at the Karachi International Airport and held in a milit...Prosecution in the Philippines  http://www.article2.org/mainfile.php/0701/307/ When the five senior public prosecutors, including the chief of the Office of the Chief State Prosecutor (OCSP), were pl...Large crowds gathered to attend the funeral of the well-known journalist and editor, Lasantha Wickramatunga and protest against his assassination. Many participants wore black arm bands and scarves an...Ms. Zarina Marri, a 23-year-old schoolteacher from Balochistan province, was arrested in late 2005, and has been held incommunicado in an army torture cell at Karachi, the capital of Sindh province. S...The assassination of Lasantha Wickramatunga, a veteran investigative journalist and the editor of the Sunday Leader, who has exposed corruption and abuse of power by the Rajapakse regime, has sparked ...The Asian Human Rights Commission, which two days ago raised the alarm on the possibility of more political assassinations in Sri Lanka is saddened by the confirmation of this within less than 48 hour...The Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) is a political party that has contested elections harnessing the Dalit votes. The BSP’s woman leader, Ms. Mayawati, a dalit herself, has been claiming that her part...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to once again draw your attention to the complaint of five men, known as the Abadilla Five, for violation of rights which the Commission on Human Rights...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to draw your attention to the complaint of five men, known as the Abadilla Five, pending before your office. The case, which bears Case No. OMB-P-C-0412...The enquiry into the murder of four traders at Khalid Bin Waleed road, PECHS of Karachi-Sindh province has revealed ‘criminal negligence’ on the part of the police officers. The murder hap...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) congratulates the new state government of Jammu and Kashmir setup under the leadership of the Chief Minister Mr. Omar Abdullah. By their overwhelming participa...The massive attack on the Sirasa TV station brings gloomy predictions of things to come in the very near future to a country which is already bedeviled by lawlessness, violence and corruption. The lea...The internal security of a country is not an abstract concept. It involves wide-ranging issues, including but not limited to, domestic security and civil defense, societal security and safety, and eme...Early this morning (January 6, 2009), a group of armed men forcibly entered, attacked and caused serious damage to the MBC-MTV Transmission Station at Pannipitiya. This TV station is popularly known a...The defeat of terrorism calls for the shift of attention in resolving lawlessness, corruption and the loss of authority of the public institutions of democracy.  The government’s declaration th...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367