SRI LANKA: Sri Lankan NPC probe into top police a critical test of its credibility
December 20 2004
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.As Sri Lanka attempts to deal with the aftermath of the tsunami, the critical issue in the minds of everyone who wants to help, within the country and outside, is the function of the State as protecto...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) shares the grief of those faced with one of the worst natural catastrophes of recent times by way of the tsunamis that devastated several countries such as Ind...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) shares the concerns expressed by the Secretary General of the United Nations in his statement on the human rights situation in Nepal. Time and again the AHRC h...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE December 24, 2004 AS-68-2004 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission The initial arrest in torture victim Gerald Parera’s murder case The initial arrest in Gerald ...According to the latest news, the National Police Commission (NPC) of Sri Lanka has received documentation based upon sources in the ministry of defence on 22 police officers allegedly having close li...Gerald Perera was shot one month ago in broad daylight, while traveling to work in a bus.  This was an event that received maximum publicity in all media. The nation was shocked that the victim of on...The immense killing and insecurity tearing Nepal apart are no longer a secret. War-torn Nepalese are fleeing daily to save themselves from atrocities committed by the state security forces and Maoist ...Signs of recent days are that the government-appointed inquiry into the October 25 mass killing in southern Thailand is about to end with a whitewash. Worrying reports suggest it is likely to conclude...On the 21 November 2004, Gerald Mervin Perera, victim of a well-known torture case was shot as he was travelling to work in a bus in the early hours of the morning.  In his pocket was the summons iss...Around two hundred Nepalese are now have been witnessed to be crossing the border into India every hour, escaping the atrocities of both government and Maoist troops. Clearly, the violence in Nepal is...It emerged over the weekend that there had been some kind of deal to keep a former Sri Lankan government minister out of jail on contempt of court charges, but it fell through. Reaction to the jailing...As we commemorate International Human Rights Day on December 10, 2004, the state of human rights in most countries of Asia is very bleak. Without serious efforts to defend these principles, life in a ...It has now been eighteen days since the shooting of Gerald Perera in broad daylight, while he was travelling to work on a bus. Gerald died three days later, on November 24th, from the injuries that he...There is much evidence that shows that in Sri Lanka, which already suffers from the endemic use of torture, the authorities are failing to take steps to eliminate this abhorrent practice, in line with...The proposal now being discussed within the government of Thailand to introduce a national security law allowing prolonged detention without judicial recourse is an invitation for national disaster. S...The assassination of the High Court Judge Sarath Ambepitiya took place on the 19th of November. To date, no one has owned up to the responsibility for the failure to provide security to the Judge, who...Several newspapers reported on 29 November 2004 that the Bar Association of Sri Lanka has taken a stand to instruct lawyers not to appear for those persons accused of the murder of a Colombo High Cour...In romantic notions where they world is divided between good guys and bad guys, the underworld is responsible for crimes, and the police are responsible for fighting back. A black world of criminals i...It is now five days since the shooting of Gerald Mervin Perera, who died yesterday, November 24. However, as yet there have been no arrests. Nor have there been any reports of progress in investigatio...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) announces with great shock and sadness that Gerald Mervin Perera, who was due to give evidence in court against seven police officers accused of torture, passe...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367