SRI LANKA: Destructive effects of racial nihilism
March 25 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.On an almost daily basis the Asian Human Rights Commission receives complaints related to the practice of torture and ill-treatment by the police in Sri Lanka. From January to November 2011 the AHRC i...Nilantha Ilangamuwa “Those whom God wishes to destroy, he first deprives of their senses.” – Euripides The government has about an year to improve governance in terms of human rights...By Qurat Mirza I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted, and every hill and mountain shall be made low, the rough places will be made plain, and the crooked places will be made straig...The statement issued by the External Affairs Ministry, ‘explaining’ the country’s position regarding the United Nations’ resolution on promotion, reconciliation and accountabil...The successful United Nations Resolution on reconciliation and accountability should pave the way for a new period of commitment to cure the wounds of a long conflict, caused upon individuals as well ...The National Human Rights Commission is a specialised statutory body mandated to protect, promote and fulfil human rights. Set up by virtue of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, the NHRC is the...There is serious doubt regarding whether the investigation on unlawful surveillance allegedly involving the presidential secretary for civil affairs can be independent and impartial, since the prosecu...By Nilantha Ilangamuwa Our lives are spinning out from world to world; the shapes of things are shifting in the wind. What do we know beyond the rapture and the dread?- Stanley Kunitz* “They finishe...Nilantha Ilangamuwa  Only a fool tests the depth of the water with both feet. – African proverb The entire country, not just its diplomatic missions, is in a dilemma today. This has its roots ...The value of the rupee came down to 131 for a US dollar. This is the highest point reached relating to the value of a rupee ever. In all likelihood, it will go up further even though by artificial mea...Basil Fernando A preliminary Remark on Possible Objections to A Conversation on Rule of Law And Democracy In Sri Lanka I realize at the very outset that a conversation on rule of law and democracy in ...The Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to condemn in the strongest possible terms the decision of the government, made on February 27, 2012, to recommend the withdrawal of nearly 425 criminal cases....By Nilantha Ilangamuwa Speech after long silence; it is right, All other lovers being estranged or dead, Unfriendly lamplight hid under its shade, The curtains drawn upon unfriendly night, That we des...The suicide of police officer, P G Haridath, on 15 March 2012 brings again to the limelight, issues that adversely affect criminal investigations in India. Haridath was an Additional Superintendent of...(A discussion on the current abductions and the debate at the Human Rights Council on accountability and reconciliation) Basil Fernando Tolstoy wrote a great short story entitled ‘What men live ...Despite heavy criticism from inside and outside the country (AHRC-STM-041-2012), South Korean police have been arbitrarily arresting and detaining rights activists and villagers in Gangjeong village w...What the London based Channel 4 is showing the World again on Sri Lanka is not a new phenomenon for this country. This kind of barbaric knavery has a long history. At that time those victims were alon...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that a city prosecutor in San Fernando, Pampanga, had dismissed the complaint of torture by five torture victims against a police colonel and other...The national debate regarding India’s position about the proposed resolution at the United Nations Human Rights Council concerning Sri Lanka is limited to a Tamil view of the issue. The views ex...The judiciary is that branch of the state which adjudicates on conflicts between state institutions, between the state and the individual and between individuals. The judiciary is independent of both ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367