BANGLADESH: A lady parliamentarian obstructs investigation into rape of a nine year old girl
August 18 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AHRC-STM-174-2010 August 19, 2010 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission BANGLADESH: A lady parliamentarian obstructs investigation into rape of a nine year old girl A ...One of the most disturbing features of modern times is the claim of some security agencies of their right to decide on the death sentence and assertion of their right to carry it out. Such claims impl...A military tribunal made its decision against General Fonseka finding him guilty of the charge of being engaged in politics while in military service. The Tribunal made the decision without respect to...It is reported in the Pakistani media that intentional breaches were made in the protective embankments at Ghospur and Thorhee bands, Sukkur district, Sindh province in order to protect the agricultur...The Right to Know the Fate of Relatives What was the fate of Prageeth Eknaligoda? What Prageeth Eknaligoda’s wife and children are asking is this very elementary right: The Right to Know the Fate of...As Prageeth Eknaligoda remains a matter of concern the principles of international law relating to the right to truth is a relevant issue. we reproduce below the General Comment on the Right to the T...This is a narrative of the husband of the victim, a 17 year old woman with a two month old child, who was subjected to the horrible experience of being beaten about 100 times with the hard centre stem...The negligence of the authorities and improper mechanisms to deal with natural disasters has put the lives of millions of people in peril after the heavy rains in Pakistan. As a result the lives of th...The Nepal Army announced on 14 July that an internal inquiry had found Major Basnet ‘innocent’ of the torturing to death of Maina Sunuwar. The details of the enforced disappearance, tortur...The Nepal Army announced on 14 July that an internal inquiry had found Major Basnet ‘innocent’ of the torturing to death of Maina Sunuwar. The details of the enforced disappearance, tortur...After the arrest of Sakvithi many persons from the more affluent sections of Sri Lankan society are demanding the money which they have invested in his illegal business. This raises many issues regard...There are times when children are wiser than the adults. We live in such a time. Today’s children know more about the problems of climate as a man-made problem. They worry about it, talk about i...For several decades now the Sri Lankan people have been exposed to extraordinary acts of separation, large scale forced disappearances, extrajudicial killings, torture, illegal arrest and detention. T...An Open Letter to the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) Professor Manfred Nowak Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment...*Avinash Pandey Thinking about tragedies, especially manmade ones, is a subversive process bursting with its inherent dangers. It makes one go numb, outrages the self and at times fills one with the d...The fear of arbitrary use of contempt of court charges has a negative effect on legal profession and legal process. Twice United Nations Human Rights Committee (UNHRC)has commented on this issue relat...An interview conducted by the Asian Human Rights Commission. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the AHRC. Philippines–I usually encourage crime victims to go to the police,...Basil Fernando A mother burned the mouths of two children who were crying for food. The two children were girls, one and half and five years old. The mother has been arrested and is presently in reman...WISE — Women’s International Shared Experience Project – travelled to Karachi, to work with women from throughout the Sindh area who have been raped, sexually assaulted or domestically ...*Mr. Avinash Pandey The recent verdict of the Bombay High Court in the Khairlanji massacre case convicting all the accused to life imprisonment could have been a welcome one and gone a long way in res...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367