PAKISTAN: Child labour is an issue of human and social development and has to be tackled in its actual context
June 12 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Life like hell in the place like heaven — Mountainous region As a right to food activist for the last five years, I had a dream to travel to the Karnali region, a mountainous area while doing fi...A Governance Analysis of Frequency Allocation & TV Rights in Present Sri Lanka Frequency Allocation — A Grand Corruption? Understanding the State capture by Kleptocrats does not require a de...On 12th June 2002, the International Labour Organization (ILO) initiated the World Day against Child Labour. The day is celebrated with a view to focus on efforts to minimize and eventually eliminate ...Upon arriving in Germany, I saw that the roads are very clean, quiet with very little traffic jam. At that moment, my expression was, “Wow!” This is a developed country, and everything is ...Like every other activity, the impact of human rights works is bound in space and time. As in every other social activity, human rights works is bound to historical circumstances. From these factors t...The former Attorney General, Mohan Peiris, last November told the United Nations CAT Committee that he knew personally, through a reliable source that Prageeth Eknaligoda was living in a foreign count...Today, June 4, in the Daily Mirror on line edition the police spokesperson, SP Ajith Rohana is quoted as saying “Generally as a practice torture never takes place in Lankan Police stations.̶...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to Mr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, President of the Republic of Indonesia   Mr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono The President of Indonesia Jl. Veteran...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to His Excellency, the President of the Socialist Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka His Excellency the Hon. Mr. Mahinda Rajapaksa President Sociali...A cursory look of Pakistani newspapers and television channels clearly tells that violence against children is increasing very rapidly in our society.  Within a last couple of week, the print and ele...inggris versi   Pernyataan bersama KontraS, SETARA Institute, Asian Human Rights Commission, International Center for Transitional Justice, Persekutuan Gereja Indonesia dan Protection Internation...Indonesian A Joint Statement by Kontras, SETARA Institute, Asian Human Rights Commission, International Center for Transitional Justice, Indonesian Church Fellowship and Protection International Kontr...A Joint Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission Phnom Penh, 30th May 2012– We, Cambodian and International civil society organizations represented in this statement, condemn the use of ar...Munasinghe Prasadika Sandamani LLB(Col), Attorney at Law Introduction Sri Lanka suffered enormously from the conflict between the government and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Elam (LTTE) for more tha...The political debate that followed the murder of Mr. T. P. Chandrashekharan in Kerala provided a unique opportunity for reformation of the policing system in the state. However, none in the state, not...Bangladesh’s State Minister for Home Affairs Mr. Shamsul Haque Tuku has advised the journalists to keep a ‘safe distance’ from the country’s police while both the journalists a...We reproduce below a news item that appeared in the Asia Tribune. The article describes the pathetic plight of Rizana Nafeek, who may be beheaded at any time. Ever since the initial verdict of the Daw...The Asian Human Rights Commission is shocked by the total disregard for fair trial by the Phnom Penh municipal court, which summarily sentenced 13 women activists who engaged in peaceful demonstration...Once again journalists have been physically attacked in Bangladesh. The attack happened on Monday night, 28 May 2012, at the office of BD News24.Com, an online bilingual national news portal of the co...In a surprising move the Chief Justice of Pakistan, Iftikhar Chaudhry has shown his inclination towards the imposition of Emergency Regulations in the province of Balochistan. In the cases of disappea...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367