PAKISTAN: Sindh high court adjourns AHRC petition on the abduction of eight women and four children by police to March 19
February 17 2009
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The newly elected Government of Bangladesh led by the Bangladesh Awami League has announced its decision of withdrawing “politically motivated” cases that are pending before the courts acr...On 26 January, 2009 a 21-year-old girl was covered in petrol by her husband and her in-laws and burned to death. Mrs. Bisma Bibi, resident of Chak number 86, NB Sargodha, Punjab, had been married to o...A group of domestic helpers from Sri Lanka interviewed last week in Hong Kong expressed views which are representative of hundreds of thousands of migrant workers, as well as those aspiring to be migr...The constitutional petition No. D-2417/2008, regarding the eight women and four children who were made hostages by the police of four districts of Sindh province, for the surrender of a robber was hea...Very recently three different communities living in three different provinces have organized occult ceremonies to seek help from supernatural forces to seek justice and protection from land grabbing. ...Is there a relation between the residents of the Gaza strip and the Indians? Other than for the fact that the Government of India supports the Palestinian cause, there is no apparent connection betwee...In a follow up development of the arrest of four teenagers and a man on blasphemy charge the representative of the Punjab provincial government, Mr. Syed Saqlain Shah, a member of the National Assembl...The alleged killers of a number of people, including a 70-year-old man, have been released from remand prison on the orders of another civilian. The man who arranged their release is the brother of a ...The Asian Human Rights Commission welcomes the statement made by ten UN experts on the 9th February, 2009 expressing deep concern at the suppression of criticism and unabated impunity.  In the first ...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has closely followed with growing concern the increasing number of lese-majesty cases being filed against people from all walks of life in Thailand for written...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is writing to you in your capacity as the Director of Internal Security under the Internal Security Act 2008 to protest in the strongest terms a recent report ...The federal government has imposed section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC), in Islamabad, the federal capital of Pakistan, for a period of two months. This has been done in the face of possi...Soldiers attached to the Frontier Constabulary (FC) of the Pakistan Army have attacked a wedding party on the night of February 3, killing 13 persons including the bride and groom, the wedding officia...The 61st celebration of the Day of Independence of Sri Lanka takes place tomorrow amidst almost universal complaints within the country of the failures of governance at all levels. In 1931 Sri Lanka h...An 18-year-old girl, Ms R, of Pathan Mohalla, Mithiani, Tehsil and district Naushahro Feroz, Sindh province, trafficked to a family through marriage, has been raped by her father-in-law and other male...The Inter Services Public Relations (ISPR), a public relations department of the armed forces of Pakistan denied the allegations that Ms. Zarina Marri (23) was in a military torture cell and used as a...Five persons belonging to the Ahmadi sect of Islam, four of them children, have been arrested for desecrating the name of the last prophet of Islam (peace be upon him), and charged under a law that ca...The Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to inform you about the following YouTube presentations: A Reading of Lasantha Wickramatunge¡¦s final article in several parts in both English and Sinhala: ...In order to diminish the number of unemployed persons and reactivate domestic economy, the president Mr. Lee Myung-bak has made a policy to booster construction work. At the moment, about 300 areas ha...The Asian Human Rights Commission has received further details in the case of Ms. Zarina Marri, a 23-year-old schoolteacher from Balochistan province, who has been held incommunicado in an army tortur...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367