PAKISTAN: Do women have the right to live in Islamic societies &#8211; when the protector becomes the violator
June 12 2013
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is demanding an explanation as to why the police did nothing to prevent Manila Mayor, Alfredo Lim, from interrogating and torturing a rape suspect in full view...In India, death has a myriad ways to prey on hapless children and sniff the life out of them. Often, it has rather trustworthy accomplices: the union and state governments. Take but one way it strikes...тАЬOut of 4835 Members of Parliament and Members of the Legislative Assembly analysed, 1448 members or 31% have declared criminal cases against them in a self sworn affidavit filed with the Election C...India prides itself as a government тАЬof the people, for the people, and by the peopleтАЭ, worthy of praise for being a rare model of democracy in the region. Yet, the government is criticised as the...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to the Sri Lankan Inspector General of Police The Asian Human Rights Commission has written to the Inspector General of Police in order to bring t...“The next day at 9 am the same three police officers took him back to the Crime Branch and told him to sign a document which was already prepared. He signed it due to fear of further ill-treatme...The Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to forward to you the announcement from the May 18 Memorial Foundation, Gwangju, South Korea regarding applications for the May 18 Academy 2013. The detailed i...There is an ongoing debate about the Right to Information (RTI) Act in India, and the proposed amendments to the scope and extent of that legislation. It is tempting to express one’s sentiments ...Last week the Asian Human Rights Commission reported the incident of the torture of a well-known interior decorator, Mr. Madawala Maddumage Don Aruna Nilupul Indika (39), of Mahagedara, Devala Road, W...“It was in her fate to die this way”, these shameful words were said by a mother after she threw acid on her own daughter. These are the words used commonly by many families in Pakistani s...The Deputy Inspector General of Police (DIG) Vass Gunawardena is now in remand custody while an inquiry into the conspiracy to murder a businessman for pay is ongoing. Even as he is being interrogated...During the first four months of the year 2013 no restraint was observed on the part of the military in their actions. Abductions by unknown persons, disappearances and extrajudicial killings continue ...On 8 June 2013 the Myanmar Journalists Network hosted a press conference in Rangoon about the imprisonment without right to defence of at least seven persons who have been actively opposing the Letpad...рд╕рд░рдХрд╛рд░ рдиреЗ рдирдпреЗ рд╕рд╛рд▓ рдореЗрдВ рджреЗрд╢ рдХреЗ рдЪреБрдирд┐рдиреНрджрд╛ 20 рдЬрд┐рд▓реЛрдВ рдореЗрдВ рдЕрднреА 7 рд╕рд╛рдорд╛рдЬрд┐рдХ рд╕реБрд░рдХреНрд╖рд╛ рдпреЛрдЬрдирд╛рдУрд...From the early ages in Pakistan women have lived in a society which is anti-women where they are treated as unwanted creatures. Pakistan is a country where violations against women are the highest and...The police allegedly demanded Rs. 500,000/= for the release of a young man but as the amount was not paid on time he was tortured severely which resulted in his death. A young man of 18 years died in ...Several police officers from the Karandeniya police illegally arrested Chandila Padmakumara Gurusinghe of Kiripedda, Babuwo Kanda, Karandeniya in Galle District, apparently on the instigation of a cin...An Open Letter from the AHRC to the President of Sri Lanka: Stop the use of chili by the police during interrogations (The following letter was sent to His Excellency, President Mahinda Rajapaksa) His...The Council of Islamic Ideology in Pakistan held a meeting on May 29, headed by Maulana Sherani, and warned that if the blasphemy laws are amended, the country’s minorities will be unsafe, but h...Mr. MMD Aruna Nilupul Indika (39) of Welipenna, Kalutara District, was illegally arrested and severely tortured. Chili was applied onto his eyes and genitals. On 27 May 2013, he was arrested and tortu...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367