THAILAND: Public Seminar on 10th Anniversary of Somchai Neelapaijit’s Enforced Disappearance
February 28 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.On 11 March 2014 a presidential commission of inquiry into the latest violence in the far west of Burma, or Myanmar, presented its findings. According to the commission, which is the latest in a serie...A girl commits suicide by self-immolation after her rapists bribed the police to release them. The state institutions remained as silent spectators The Asian Human Rights Commission has received infor...While the alleged fabrication and concealment of evidence by the National Intelligence Service (NIS) is gaining more weight in a case of Mr. Yu who is on trial, charged with violation of National Se...Today the AHRC releases the 21th Episode of the Human Rights Asia Weekly Roundup. In this week’s programme we continue our International Women’s Day coverage of stories from around Asia ...An Article by the Asian Human Rights Commission on Women’s International Day Dowry system and related violence is a product of patriarchy that in turn needs to be understood, unloaded and unpack...Every Pakistani is well aware of terrorism, unemployment, inflation, injustice, forced labour, disappearances, blasphemy against minorities, discrimination against women, custodial deaths, torture and...An Article by the Asian Human Rights Commission released on the occasion of International Women’s Day One of the rare positive impacts of armed conflict on gender relations is the increased move...International Women’s Day 2014  A pact with the Taliban will destroy what little freedoms remain for women The shadow of darkness shrouds Pakistan. In a country that already has a repressive at...The AHRC releases today the 20th Episode, of the Human Rights Asia Weekly Roundup  In this week’s programme we bring you coverage of the following stories from across Asia.  As we approach Intern...By Avinash Pandey At 218 in 2013 and 237 in 2012, one would expect a national outrage on the unusually high number of body bags returning to India from Qatar. One would think especially so, for the fa...Last week the U.S. Embassy denied entry permits to Nepalese police officers as they have been stationed at police stations that have alleged track records of human rights violations during the insurge...On 10 February, 2013 a young writer and teacher, Ms. Majoni Das working at a private educational institute in the town of Jorhat, located in the eastern Indian state of Assam, went missing. All that h...The historic long march of the Baloch family members of missing persons ended in Islamabad after covering 2800 kilometers. The 20 member’s contingent of long march created history in the sub-con...A mother and her two daughters were found dead in Seoul on February 26. According to the media, they committed suicide due to poverty. The mother had been working in a restaurant for a living since th...An Announcement of the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) and Justice for Peace Foundation (JPF) in Thailand forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission THAILAND: Public Seminar on 10th Anni...An Open Letter from the daughters of Chhori Maiya who want to know whereabouts of their mother. They want justice to be served now! It has been two years since Chhori Maiya Maharjan disappeared. She w...In India, another controversy has erupted concerning yet another spiritual guru. The exception however is, this time, it is a god-woman from the southern state of Kerala. Otherwise, the script is an o...The AHRC releases today the 19th Episode, of the Human Rights Asia Weekly Roundup In this week’s programme we bring you coverage of the following stories from across Asia. In news from Pakista...The social media in Nepal was flooded with a photo share which showed three young boys tied to a bamboo pole on 22 February 2014. Three small boys aged 11 to 14 were caught stealing some mushroom pack...The report by the Director General of Police (DGP), Mr. K. S. Balasubramanian, in the southern state of Kerala to the government, that most of the police officers of the rank of Sub-Inspector of Polic...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367