PAKISTAN: A teenage Nobel Prize nominee leads the struggle for the education of girls
November 23 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Farzana Ali Khan Violence against women is a major health and human rights concern in Pakistan. Women can experience sexual, physical or mental abuse throughout their life cycle, in infancy, childhood...Farzana Ali Khan SWAT: Despite losing the Nobel Peace Laureate prize, Malalai Yousafzai, a grade 8 student from Gulkada, Mingora is determined to fight for the education of girls and fulfill the noble...Farzana Ali khan A change in society is improbable as inadequate educational facilities for girls and the low level of industrial development make life difficult for women while stringent laws make Pa...On the occasion of the celebration of the 97th birthday of Justice V R Krishna Iyyer, the Asian Human Rights Commission joins with others to congratulate him and to express appreciation for a lifetime...A Joint Statement by the Faith Based Network on West Papua (FBN), Franciscans International (FI), and the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) Geneva, 3 November 2011 Following last month’s viol...On Monday, the three major political parties of Nepal agreed that the bills forming a Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) and a Commission of Inquiry on Disappearances (CID) would be adopted by ...The meeting of the Sri Lankan delegation with the CAT Committee took place earlier. Kindly see our comments on those meeting of the 8th and 9th November. It is now a suitable moment to take an ove...The forced conversion of women from the Hindu community to Islam in Sindh province has become very common. The malicious campaign is in full swing by the religious seminaries, the Madressa and their m...The disappearances and extrajudicial killings continue and not a single day goes by without the abduction and murder of activists. The family members of disappeared persons who were holding a protest ...The Asian Human Rights Commission strongly condemns the government cabinet’s decision to recommend that the President grants amnesty to Balkrishna Dhungel and wishes to add its voice to that of ...The government decision to call for registration of websites that publish any material relating to Sri Lanka has come under severe criticism from local journalists and other concerned persons and grou...The second day of the 47th Session on Sri Lanka at the CAT took place yesterday (November 9, 2011). For our comments on the first day please see here. At this session the Sri Lankan delegation was re...Baseer Naweed Miss Uzma Ayub, a single mother, who was repeatedly raped whilst being held captive by an army soldier and three police officials during an entire year, is currently seven months pregnan...Yesterday (November 8, 2011) the government delegation gave the state report relating to the questions raised by the Committee against Torture (CAT) at the 47th Session of the CAT Committee. Mr. Mohan...Kishali Pinto-Jayawardena  Central to any discussion on accountability in Sri Lanka is recognition of the fact that what happened in Nandikadal in May 2009 during the last stages of the fighting betw...We have received a rather strange comment on our previous statement Duminda Silva is above the law by a Mr. Rohan Salgadoe which we quote below: Please note. This picture might hurt and make the fam...The Ansar Burney Trust announces that it will take responsibility for providing medical treatment to the victim for the safe delivery of the child and their protection In the case of 16-year-old Uzma ...A senior surgeon belonging to the Ahmadiyya sect of Islam has been missing since October 30, 2011. He was traveling in a car with his son of eleven years. The car was found abandoned far away from his...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to the Chief Minister of Orissa Chief Minister Mr. Naveen Patnaik Through the office of the Principal Secretary Home Department, Government of Ori...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to the Chief Minister of Orissa Chief Minister Mr. Naveen Patnaik Through the office of the Principal Secretary Home Department, Government of Ori...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367