THAILAND: Regularization of torture following coup
October 15 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.On 30th October 2014, the High Court of Colombo imposed the Death Sentence on eight persons found guilty of charges of drug trafficking. The allegations against them were that at the time of arrest by...We have completed two years of publishing our groundbreaking initiative on torture, Torture: Asian and Global Perspectives. It was inaugurated in April 2012. Since then, thousands of people have rapid...by Avinash Pandey Photo Courtesy M. Srinath, The Hindu No, the man pictured here has not entered the gutter as part of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s much hyped Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, or “clean In...This week’s episode of Weekly Roundup covers the issue of disappearance. The episode begins with a recent development in Sri Lanka where posters are appearing that criticize the annual commemoration...Today, AHRC TV releases its milestone 50th episode of Human Rights Asia Weekly Roundup. In this episode, AHRC TV interviews participants from the 3rd annual meeting of the Asian Alliance Against Tortu...by Basil Fernando It must have been somebody’s idea that judicial independence in Sri Lanka must be destroyed. When the idea was first generated we do not know. It is possible that it arose more or ...A Divisional Bench of the Lahore High Court (LHC) upheld the death penalty of a Christian woman convicted of Blasphemy by a Sessions’ Court in 2010. Ms. Aasia Bibi, was a mother of five. She was...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) strongly condemns the Manila City government for its apparent outright neglect to improve conditions at the Reception and Action Center (RAC), a public child c...The government of Pakistan  through its regulatory body, the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) has banned a local television channel, the “ARY News” and has arbitrarily suspe...The recent escalation in atrocities committed on Dalits is surprising even for Bihar, a province notorious for crimes against members of the community. The only things worse than the state’s failure...by Basil Fernando On the 19th October 2014 BBC Sinhala Service broadcast, the United National Party Member of Parliament Ranjan Ramanayake, complained that there was a plan to assassinate him due to h...Torture: Asian and Global Perspectives a path breaking initiative in the discourse of torture prevention wishes to inform our readers of the launching of its new website. The websitewww.torturemag.org...भारत के कैलाश सत्यार्थी और पाकिस्तान के मलाला दोनों को बच्चों के अधिकार और श...by Danilo Reyes (Note: this article was first published in the October 12, 2014 issue of the Sunday Examiner) Poverty reflects a failure of the government not the person. Seven years ago, my first cou...by Basil Fernando As the possibility of an election has become a “hot topic” of the day, with it has emerged the problem of the 1978 Constitution and the system of the Executive Presidency, as a s...In this week’s episode of the Weekly Roundup, AHRC TV brings you special coverage of the third annual Asian Alliance Against Torture & Ill-Treatment (AAATI) conference that took place recently. ...by Avinash Pandey They did not speak Kannada, the language of the state they live in. They, therefore, were “legitimate” targets of violence in a city that has benefitted the most from India’s s...The Power of Protest (a poem dedicated to youngest Nobel Laureate Malala Yousafzai ) by Basil Fernando Right Livelihood Laureate This protest comes From Mother earth- like the rush of water falling fr...As public complaints have begun to emerge about the use of excessive force by some officers of the Hong Kong Police, it is quite in order, to recall the law on the crime of torture in Hong Kong. There...On 10 October 2014, the independent online media outlet Prachatai reported on three instances of torture of persons held in military and police custody which have taken place since the 22 May 2014 cou...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367