INDIA: Allegation of corruption by Sub-Inspector of Police Mr. Vijayan of Thrissur Traffic Police Station; request for inquiry
April 26 2006
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Why is a police officer the director-general of Thailand’s Department of Special Investigation? The DSI was established under the Ministry of Justice so that it would not be subject to direct co...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) notes that the Government of Indonesia is bidding for membership within the United Nations Human Rights Council. Elections are to be held on May 9, 2006. Indon...A statement made by Sri Lanka’s Chief Justice, Sarath N. Silva at a recent public meeting is causing many comments, both public and private, on the state of the judiciary and rule of law in the ...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is monitoring India’s candidacy to the United Nations Human Rights Council with interest. India, along with the other 17 candidates from Asia that are vy...On April 24, the government of Thailand submitted the country’s candidacy for the new UN Human Rights Council. The election of the council’s first members is planned for May 9. The electio...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE May 4, 2006 AS-096-2006 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission NEPAL: Momentum is key in ensuring positive change toward peace, development and human rights in Nepal Th...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) welcomes the move by the Indian government to draft a new Police Act, thus replacing the old act of 1861. The committee constituted for this purpose in Septemb...FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE May 3, 2006 AS-092-2006 A Statement by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) INDONESIA: Flawed state institutions unable to uncover Munir’s killers Close to two years af...AHRC-OL-012-2006 May 3, 2006 Open letter to the Minister of Constitutional Affairs and the Chairperson of the Law Reform Commission Dear Sir & Madam, Re: Proposed bill of rights The Asian Human Ri...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that over recent months, members of various Cambodian security forces have in separate incidents shot and injured young women in Phnom Penh, shot d...On 28 April 2006 the Municipality of Phnom Penh issued a ban on peaceful demonstrations that three trade unions had planned to celebrate International Labour Day on May 1. The trade unions–the I...On the 1st May, 1993, R. Premadasa, the executive president of Sri Lanka, was killed in a massive bomb blast while participating in the May Day public activities.  The blast also killed and injured m...Since it was reported on April 26 that General Sonthi Boonyaratglin admitted that the Thai army and police are using “blacklists” to hunt for alleged insurgents in the south, discussion ha...first seriously injuring two of the family members, leaving permanent injuries on one and thereafter fabricating charges against the victims themselves by filing a case, 73456 MC, at the Teldeniya. ...This is to bring to your notice that the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka, which is your counterpart in that country, has ceased to function as the time of office of the earlier commissioners, cha...The parliament of Nepal will meet tomorrow, April 28, 2006, for its first meeting since King Gyanendra of Nepal was pressured into re-establishing it as a result of weeks of massive popular protests i...I am writing to you to express our concern about the information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) that a group of private stage carriage operators in Thrissur district has formed a...There have been many disappearances in Pakistan’s political history. The present disappearances are occurring in the Sindh and Balochistan provinces of the country, largely by law enforcement ag...The speeches by the King of Thailand to the Supreme Court and Administrative Court judges on 25 April 2006 have with good reason been reported all around the world. Among his remarks, he told the judg...As the violence has escalated within the last few days and the lives of many are affected by the actions of all sides, the issue that comes to the forefront is the absence of any human rights monitori...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367