ASIA: Weekly Roundup, Episode 69
April 17 2015
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.by Avinash Pandey  Gajendra Singh, a farmer from Rajasthan hung himself from a tree in the middle of a political rally against the Union government’s indifference to the plight of peasants. His sui...In this week’s Roundup, AHRC TV begins in The Philippines, where three rights activists have been killed and two others wounded in separate incidents in the month of March. This is a sign of contin...The largest commercial city of Pakistan, Karachi, since the past few years has been the hub of extra judicial killings where the law enforcement agencies i.e. the police and Pakistan Rangers enjoyed i...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has initiated a series of articles on the proposed Prevention of Electronic Crime Act, 2015; this is the first article in the series. The Bill has draconian p...An Open Letter from the Asian Human Rights Commission to the Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi  Shri Narendra Modi Prime Minster Government of India Room No. 148 B, South block,  New Delhi...A revolt has been organized by few irresponsible politicians through a campaign to stop investigations into allegations of bribery and corruption. The latest name to be added to the list of those who ...The 2006 amendment to the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, clearly states that truth is a valid defence against contempt of court proceedings in India. This Act, number 6 of 2006 of the Indian Parliament...Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar, a social reformer and jurist, is the father of the Indian Constitution. Ambedkar, however, is better known and revered for his lifelong work against caste-based discrimination, w...The Asian Human Rights Commission has documented that an increasing number of peaceful protesters are being arrested and jailed under the Peaceful Assembly and Peaceful Procession Act. Citing the main...Two persons, Mohsin Ali and Kashif Khan Kamran, have been in the illegal custody of Pakistan’s security agencies since 19 September 2011, i.e. for nearly four years now. They have not been produced ...In this week’s episode, AHRC TV covers stories from Indonesia. The programme begins with the latest in the decade-long fight for justice for slain human rights defender Munir Said Thalib: the nami...A 17-member bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan has passed an order whereby all executions awarded by the recently established military courts are stayed until pendency of a writ petition filed by ...