Former U.S. Sen. Rod Grams dies of cancer at age 65
10/09/2013
Rod Grams, the Minnesota news anchorman who went on to serve in the U.S. House and the U.S. Senate, died Tuesday of cancer. He was 65. Grams had entered hospice care at his home in early September. Even in his last weeks he was active politically, and wrote a fundraising letter for Empower Minnesota, a super PAC that was formed in 2012 to raise money for Minnesota Republican congressional candidates. State Rep. Kurt Zellers,  a Republican from Maple Grove who’s running for governor next year, said: State House Minority Leader Kurt Daudt said: “Senator Grams was not just a friend and neighbor, but he was a dedicated public servant that will be greatly missed in Minnesota. He was a strong leader for our state, and a mentor to me and many other candidates, legislators and public officials over the years.” Minnesota DFL Chair Ken Martin said: “Sen. Grams exemplifies how in Minnesota, people from humble beginnings can step up, get involved in politics and make a difference. He will be remembered for his years of service to our state.” And Pete Dross, director of policy and development for the Center for Victims of Torture, located in St. Paul, added a reminder of a little-known Grams achievement: “Senator Grams worked closely with the late U.S. Senator Paul Wellstone to achieve passage of the Torture Victims Relief Act in 1998. This important legislation provides much-needed financial assistance for both domestic and international programs to treat survivors of torture.” Grams had been an anchor at KMSP-TV news before getting into politics in the 1990s. He beat incumbent Democratic Congressman Gerry Sikorski in the 6th District race, then won the open U.S. Senate seat in 1994 when Republican Dave Durenberger didn’t seek re-election. Six years later, Grams was defeated by Mark Dayton, who also served just one term in the Senate. Grams and his wife, Chris, later bought radio stations in the Little Falls area. Political Agenda Grams, who is in hospice care, has authored a fundraising letter for a super PAC formed to raise money for Minnesota GOP congressional candidates. Political Agenda Grams, a former television anchor, served one term in the U.S. House and one term in the U.S. Senate. Joe Kimball, formerly of the Star Tribune, reports on state politics and St. Paul City Hall. That’s too bad.R.I.P. Rod. That’s too bad. R.I.P. Rod. You must be logged in to post a comment. Eric Black Ink It’s clearly time to rename the Environmental Protection Agency Eric Black Ink Cohen hearing: Republicans unite in attempt to discredit him; few blockbusters surface Eric Black Ink Bernie Sanders and the ‘Geppetto Checkmark’ Eric Black Ink Expect to see the S-word beaten to a pulp by Election Day 2020 Become a MinnPost sustaining member.  More It’s clearly time to rename the Environmental Protection Agency Everything you need to know, for now, about Minneapolis’ Upper Harbor Terminal project Living near — and spending time in —  urban parks and other green spaces linked to better mental health At the Museum of Russian Art: ‘The Body in Soviet Art’ Expect to see the S-word beaten to a pulp by Election Day 2020 Bernie Sanders and the ‘Geppetto Checkmark’ As Minnesota State looks to the future, an identity crisis is rekindled It can take 6 years for new parents to get a good night’s sleep again, study finds Beyond diversity: Trainer Eddie Moore on moving to the next level of engagement ‘So many people are dying’: Rural Minnesotans struggle to access opioid addiction treatment MinnPost is a nonprofit, nonpartisan enterprise whose mission is to provide high-quality journalism for people who care about Minnesota. Donations and pledges totaling $25,000 or more have been made by each of the families and foundations listed. For a list of all donors by category, see our most recent Year End Report. MinnPost | 900 6th Avenue SE | Minneapolis, MN 55414 | 612.455.6950 