U bioethics mainstay to retire
05/04/2016
Thank you for visiting theday.com. To continue reading this premium story, you need to become a member.
			Click below to take advantage of an exclusive offer for new members: $1 for 12 weeks — OR — $2 for 26 weeks Already registered? Login
					Not registered? Register here.
No, thank you. Published April 10. 2016 12:01AM  Curt Goering, the executive director at the Center for the Victims of Torture, will give a presentation at 6 p.m. Tuesday, April 12, at Connecticut College’s Blaustein Hall. Goering will present “The Story Behind the Syrian Refugee Story – The Need for Rehabilitative Care during Humanitarian Crises.” The Center for the Victims of Torture provides comprehensive care for victims of government-sponsored torture, conducts research and training, and undertakes policy efforts to commit the U.S. and other governments to work against torture and to aid torture survivors. A reception begins at 5:30 p.m.; all are welcome to attend. A dinner follows immediately after the presentation for a limited number of guests. To make a reservation for dinner, call (860) 912-5718. What's the deal with Marty, the Stop & Shop robot? Wrong-way crash shuts part of Interstate 95 in Stonington Coast Guard leaders respond to self-harm incidents among cadets Grandma poses for photo on iceberg, needs rescue when she floats out to sea Former Conn College student charged with 7 counts of felony voyeurism Southeastern Connecticut taps social media to find influence School regionalization bills draw ire at Capitol hearing The two Mystics: Groton outshines Stonington Brutal Arctic air mass is about to spread over U.S.; in Northeast by Tuesday Samuelson injures back in UConn's 83-61 win over Houston WiredZone: Waterford vs. NFA in ECC DI Final GameDay Preview: St. Bernard vs. Stonington in ECC Div. 2 Final 2019 All GameDay Team WiredZone: St. Bernard vs. Stonington in ECC DII Final GameDay preview: Waterford vs. NFA in ECC Div. 1 final More questionable spending by CMEEC uncovered in audit School regionalization bills draw ire at Capitol hearing What's the deal with Marty, the Stop & Shop robot? House investigators demand security clearance documents from Trump Respect for Trump? Sorry, not happening 