The U.S. Committed Torture. Was it Worth It?
08/02/2011
How many Americans remember Sgt. Joseph Darby, the soldier, who
while serving in Iraq revealed photographs showing other members of
his company torturing prisoners at Abu Ghraib? As a result, he and
his family received death threats, apparently from supporters of
the Bush-Cheney torture policy. This policy was revealed to
Americans and the world suddenly because of Darby’s whistleblowing.
Despite the threats, he has said that he doesn’t regret turning in
those photographs to authorities. There was also, as I have reported, Air Force Col. Morris Davis,
a former chief prosecutor of the Guantanamo Bay military
commissions. He publicly insisted, before ultimately resigning in
protest in 2007, that he would not allow introduction of evidence
extracted from waterboarding. They were not alone. As Jameel Jaffer, deputy legal director of
the ACLU, and Larry Siems, head of PEN American Center’s Freedom to
Write Program, reveal in “Honoring Those Who Said No” (New York
Times, April 27): “Throughout the military, and throughout the government, brave
men and women reported abuse, challenged interrogation directives
that permitted abuse, and refused to participate in an
interrogation and detention program that they believed to be
unwise, unlawful and immoral.” And unconstitutional. Also, there were FBI agents in the field
who came upon torture inflicted by CIA agents and Special Forces
officers on suspects. Alarmed, these agents notified FBI Director
Robert Mueller. This and more is documented from official
government content the ACLU has obtained. The truth about these war crimes against our laws and our
treaties is covered in Administration of Torture (Columbia
University Press, 2009), by the ACLU’s Jameel Jaffer and Amrit
Singh. It’s a book that will be a permanent resource for future
historians of this country — although it is utterly ignored
by President Barack Obama and Attorney General Eric Holder. Confronting President Obama directly with his often-stated
refusal “to look backward,” a letter was sent to the White House on
June 16, signed by the ACLU, Amnesty International (USA), Center
for Victims of Torture, Human Rights First, Human Rights Watch,
National Religious Campaign Against Torture, Open Society
Foundations, PEN American Center, Physicians for Human Rights and
John Whitehead’s The Rutherford Institute. Their letter reminded President Obama that during his remarks at
the National Archives in May 2009, he actually said that “all too
often our government made decisions based on fear rather than
foresight” — and “during this season of fear, too many of us
— Democrats and Republicans, politicians, journalists and
citizens — fell silent.” As silent as the president is now. Then came this starkly unwelcome challenge to our commander of
the rule of law: “We are writing to you now to urge you formally to
honor the soldiers and public servants who, when our nation went
off course, stayed true to our nation’s most fundamental
ideals. “Honoring these brave men and women would be important in any
circumstances, but it is especially crucial now because some have
used your administration’s success in locating Osama bin Laden to
reopen the debate about torture and to propose that the United
States should once again adopt torture as a method of gathering
intelligence.” After all, as ACLU spokesman Josh Bell reminded me, President
Obama, speaking at the National Archives, said of waterboarding and
other such interrogation methods: “They did not advance our war and counterterrorism — they
undermined them.” So now, President Obama, how can you not — addressing We
the People and the world — publicly honor these brave,
forgotten patriots who insisted, and still do, on fighting for the
values that distinguish Americans from much of the rest of the
world? If Obama has the guts to bring these contemporary Minutemen out
of the shadows, this letter to him by the ACLU, et al., emphasizes
that: “Recognizing those who opposed the violation of the most
fundamental humane treatment standards would send a message to
current government personnel across all agencies that they have a
personal responsibility to ensure that torture prohibitions are
upheld.” With the 2012 elections getting ever closer, I do not expect
Democrats in office, or striving to get there, to urge their leader
to break his silence. This should, however, be a stirringly
patriotic opportunity for Republicans to awaken national
consciousness to such full-fledged Americans as a military lawyer I
came to know, who was representing a Guantanamo Bay prisoner about
to go before a military commission. Lt. Cmdr. Charles Swift was assigned by Department of Defense as
defense counsel at Guantanamo Bay for Salim Ahmed Hamdan (a former
driver for Osama bin Laden). When he first entered his client’s
cell, Swift told me Hamdan said: “What are you doing here? There’s
no justice here.” In response, Swift brought the case of Hamdan — charged
with conspiracy to commit terrorism — all the way to the
Supreme Court, which ruled in the case of Hamdan v.
Rumsfeld (2006) that the military commission trying Hamdan
indeed violated the U.S. Uniform Code of Military Justice and the
Geneva Conventions, which this country’s leaders signed in
1949. Swift was eligible, in any case, for promotion but was twice
turned down under the “up or out” military promotion system that
commands retirement for officers passed over twice. Charles Swift
told me he learned of his involuntary retirement two weeks after
Hamdan was cleared by our highest court. President Obama, how about belatedly recommending that the
National Constitution Center confer on Swift his much deserved
Liberty Medal? That would surely be a confirmation to the world of
what American values truly are. If you won’t, what are your values?
It’s time we know them. Receive periodic updates on Cato research, events,
            and publications. See our full list of email newsletters Cato Institute
            1000 Massachusetts Ave, NW
            Washington, DC 20001-5403 Privacy Policy Contact Us Media Contact 