Mental health symptoms count among the barriers that refugees must overcome
10/17/2011
Forty years ago, in response to the “boat people” crisis, Canada’s private refugee sponsorship program was born. How Ontario’s health care system might look in the wake of Christine Elliott’s proposed revamp. Many who attended an open house hosted by Sidewalk Labs on Saturday said they were enthusiastic about the company’s plans for the high-tech Quayside district, though privacy concerns about use of personal data remain. ‘Sense of chaos’ seen around government’s response, but Scheer’s tactics also come under scrutiny. Three teens were hurt in the single-car crash early Saturday morning on the QEW/403. Fifty-seven per cent say opinion of Trudeau “worsened,” while 59 per cent say the situation will impact their vote in the federal election. Should there be a public inquiry? Might Justin Trudeau kick out Jody Wilson-Raybould? Would the PCs or NDP have done the same thing? Chantal Hébert asks and answers four key questions. Conservative leader Andrew Scheer and NDP leader Jagmeet Singh wrote Trudeau jointly Friday to ask him to recall MPs next week so the Commons could hold the government to account for its actions. Trudeau will tour the country promoting his climate-change plan, instead. Canadians should worry more about job losses here and turmoil south of the border, and less about the spat between Justin Trudeau and his former attorney general, Heather Mallick writes. Jaime Watt and Robin V. Sears, two top political fixers, give their view of the Prime Minister’s reaction so far to Jody Wilson-Raybould’s testimony and what should come next. From rambunctious girl to Attorney General, here’s a look at the Indigenous B.C. MP who took aim at one of Canada’s oldest business-political relationships. A group of former federal and provincial attorneys-general are asking the RCMP to investigate alleged political interference from the Prime Minister’s Office on the prosecution of SNC-Lavalin. On day one of the SNC-Lavalin scandal, the prime minister said he did not “direct” former attorney-general Wilson-Raybould on the case. Now, he says he “completely disagree(s)” with her characterization of events. Here’s a timeline of his comments so far. The new, canoe-shaped Odeyto student centre is meant as a home away from home. ‘We have become a beacon in North York.’ With no thaw expected till mid-March, Toronto snow-clearing machines will remove snow and ice (and snow encased in ice) from the sidewalks and roads. The work comes with the warning of “friendly towing.” For all the hysteria, there appears to be no answer to how many of these videos actually exist or who’s behind them — but it has police and parents’ attention. Recent high-profile Toronto retrials demonstrate that every trial is different, even when the basic allegations and evidence don’t change. Peel Regional Police say a call came in Saturday afternoon that a person had fallen from an edge near Etobicoke Creek, just south of Pearson airport. Sidewalk Labs has long touted the innovations as a way it believes it can transform communities — including the swath of prime land known as Quayside that it hopes to develop with Waterfront Toronto. Accused killer Kamal Hassan admitted he re-enacted the a double murder, but only to placate Kwasi Skene-Peters in order to prevent him from becoming his third victim. Toronto police charge 44-year-old Kevin Proulx, one day after York Region announced that he had been arrested in separate sex assault investigation. Liberal MP Celina Caesar-Chavannes released a statement on Twitter today saying she will not be seeking re-election in October in her riding of Whitby, Ont. and that it was a “personal decision” based on a number of factors. The federal Department of Justice is giving the go-ahead for an extradition case to proceed against Meng, who is wanted in the United States on fraud allegations. How the premier distinguishes between his private wants and the public’s needs matters much more than his desire for a set of hot wheels, Martin Regg Cohn writes. Announcement Friday from the long-serving MP from British Columbia came just a day after Murray Rankin, the NDP MP for Victoria, said he also would not seek re-election to the House of Commons in October. Ontario school boards are warning of larger class sizes — and even layoffs — after the provincial government urged them to freeze hiring. Lawrence MacAulay takes over as veterans affairs minister, the fifth since the Liberals took office in 2015, and the tenth since 2009. As outrage over the latest case spread across the nation, Argentine women flooded social media with photos of themselves as 11-year-olds, posted with the hashtag #NiñasNoMadres, which means “girls, not mothers.” At the Conservative Political Action Conference outside Washington this week speaker after speaker sketched out a dark vision of America’s future under the “socialism” they dubiously claimed the Democratic Party has now adopted. New research from the Better Business Bureau has found that in 2018 Canadians lost more than $22.5 million to romance scams. A beaver wandering near a Sobeys parking lot in Lower Sackville with an injured tail was kept safe by RCMP officers until a wildlife organization showed up. Critics say that recent comments from UCP MLA Jason Nixon don’t go far enough to condemn the practice Students with the Divest Dal campaign celebrated after a small change to the university’s investment principles last month, but they say it still isn’t good enough and intend to keep pushing for complete divestment from companies with major carbon assets. The president of the Halifax firefighters union supports the NDP’s proposed changes to cancer coverage, but the Liberal labour minister says he’s already looking into updating workers’ compensation and that the NDP bill is “haphazard.” Queer Black leaders discuss the phrase that’s been made popular by shows like Rupaul’s Drag Race. The former attorney general’s version of the SNC-Lavalin affair was credible, assiduously presented and had the ring of truth to it, Royson James writes. Unfortunately for us, this city is home to the loudest chorus of tax whiners you’ll find just about anywhere, Edward Keenan writes. The way the “Golden Girls of Port Perry” live makes a lot sense considering the state of the GTA housing market, writes Edward Keenan. Donald Trump and North Korea’s Kim Jong Un were “in love.” But love isn’t enough for a nuclear peace deal, writes Tony Burman. There is plenty of irony in a First Nations woman trying to teach the prime minister, and in fact all politicians, a lesson about Canadian law, Tanya Talaga writes. Public Safety Minister Ralph Goodale said his new bill would waive the $631 application fee and remove the usual five-year waiting period after a conviction before an application will be accepted. Star Edmonton reporter sniffed and smoked his way through a CannaReps sommelier course. Lawyer says a 2017 court ruling permitting a dispensary to sell medical marijuana to licensed patients trumps provincial law. Toronto fans raise the Scotiabank Arena roof with ovation for John Tavares, two nights after Islanders fans targeted the former captain. The all-star centre picked up three points, and the Leafs have won four of five before heading west. Coach Nick Nurse sees greater intensity at this point in the season that years past, and traces it to the addition of veteran Marc Gasol. Johnny Walker says he dislocated his left shoulder while doing the Worm at UFC 235. Manchester City put more pressure on Liverpool in the EPL race, winning 1-0 against Bournemouth to move into first place, ahead of the Reds’ Merseyside derby against rival Everton on Sunday. The listing and sale details of recently sold GTA properties On good advice, New York-based Anthony Bonsignore brought in a professional interior designer, Kyle O’Donnell, owner of Gramercy Design, to refashion a dated two-bedroom loft apartment into the bachelor pad of his dreams. The private members’ bill would amend the provincial planning act to prevent municipalities from using bylaws to prohibit seniors from co-living. Local researchers worked with experts across the Pacific to determine the fish was an elusive Mola tecta, a species discovered only two years ago. The World Health Organization says antibiotic resistance is currently one of the biggest threats to global health, food security and development. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau announced Thursday that Canada will be part of a NASA-led project to establish an outpost for lunar exploration as part of a revitalized national space program. According to new data, deferiprone, used to treat hereditary blood disorders such as thalassemia, poses serious health risks. And doctors say hospital administrators were told about the risks years ago. Earlier this year another medical journal corrected two flawed articles by the former head of the Hospital for Sick Children’s Motherisk program. The dinners, sometimes three-course meals at upscale restaurants, “are basically marketing evenings,” says director of medical education programming for Canada’s family physicians. Katherine Helmond, who received seven Emmy Award nominations for her roles in television comedies like Soap and Who’s the Boss?, died Feb. 23 at her home in Los Angeles. She was 89. Retired musician Richard Armin didn’t just dislike Green Book, this year’s Best Picture winner at the Oscars. He calls it “a complete lie.” Depp claims in the new paperwork that Heard’s allegations of domestic abuse are “an elaborate hoax,” TheBlast.com reported Friday. Most important, depression is treatable, which is why people need the support of loved ones and, often, of professional therapy as well, to recover their sense of well-being. Around the United States, a handful of daycare and early childhood education centres are serving vegan food to very young children. And this is why. The Real Estate Council of Ontario, Humber College and NIIT Canada are offering a new training program with a learning path that mirrors the flow of a real estate transaction, writes Joe Richer. The only way through this unmistakably challenging time is to parse the difference between true self-care and the “hey girl, go get your nails done” brand of self-care that is pushed on women most of the time. Finally, a bronzing powder made specifically for darker complexions 