Involuntary Prayer
01/08/2018
The Trump administration is completely reshaping America's refugee program A poster linking Ilhan Omar to 9/11 was spotted in the West Virginia statehouse, sparking outrage Watch Trump go 'off script' at CPAC Bernie Sanders kicks off his campaign for 'government which works for all of us, not just the 1 percent' Canada approves a U.S. extradition request for Huawei's CFO, angering China ISIS is expected to soon lose its last piece of territory U.S. will reportedly end large-scale military drills with South Korea Trump says his Scottish golf course is good for America's relationship with the U.K. The Trump administration is completely reshaping America's refugee program In 2017, President Trump aggressively scaled back America's refugee program, capping the number of people fleeing persecution who can enter the U.S. at 45,000 per year, the lowest number in more than three decades. Judging by the first three months of the fiscal year 2018, though, the number of refugees allowed into the U.S. will be well below that cap, The Wall Street Journal reports. So far, only 5,000 refugees have been admitted. A State Department spokesperson protested drawing conclusions from the number of refugees processed so far, saying refugees are not admitted at a steady pace over the course of the year and that it is too soon to estimate how many will be accepted by the end of 2018. Critics, though, point to the Trump administration's new policies, including heavy restrictions on admissions from 11 countries including Iran, Iraq, and Syria, which together accounted for 40 percent of refugees in the recent years. "It's enormously discouraging and dispiriting, and it is another reflection of this administration's march away from the principle of humanity," said Eric Schwartz, the former head of the refugee program under President Barack Obama. The Trump administration's policies have already resulted in a shifting landscape, with 29 percent of refugee admissions in the 2018 fiscal year coming from Bhutan, a nation of less than a million people. And while in recent years more than 40 percent of all admitted refugees identified as Muslim, just 14 percent did in this fiscal year, which began in October 2017. Jeva Lange A poster linking Ilhan Omar to 9/11 was spotted in the West Virginia statehouse, sparking outrage A poster linking Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-Minn.) to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks spotted in the West Virginia statehouse sparked outrage on Friday. The poster showed a photograph of Omar beneath the an image of the attacks, arguing that the newly elected congresswoman, a Muslim and a refugee from Somalia, was "proof" that Americans have forgotten Sept. 11.  This poster is in your Capitol on a booth sponsored by @WVGOP “When someone shows you who they are, believe them” pic.twitter.com/4k566ztHWo — (((Mike Pushkin))) (@pushkinforhouse) March 1, 2019  The image was first spread by Mike Pushkin, a Democratic member of the West Virginia House of Delegates, who said someone saw the poster and sent him a picture of it. "I thought it was racist and it was wrong," Pushkin said. The poster eventually led to an altercation between some Democratic lawmakers and the House's sergeant-at-arms, who was accused of making an "anti-Muslim" remark and subsequently resigned. Pushkin said no Republican lawmakers condemned the paper, The Washington Post reported. But several responded to the incident by arguing that it was a matter of free speech. Tim O'Donnell Watch Trump go 'off script' at CPAC It was a rough week for President Trump — he failed to secure a deal with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un in Vietnam and his former personal lawyer testified against him before Congress. But he was back in his element at the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) in National Harbor, Md. on Saturday, speaking before a raucous crowd. The president acknowledged early in his remarks that he was going off script because "this is how I got elected," and, "if we don't go off script, our country is in big trouble." Go off script he did. When Trump first appeared, he gave the American flag standing on stage a hug. Topics meandered throughout — from trade with China and the Green New Deal to Hillary Clinton and William McKinley. He even lamented how he has to convince his childhood friends to call him "Donny", instead of "Mr. President." Trump also used his time on stage to criticize the media and Special Counsel Robert Mueller's Russian election meddling investigation, as well as to praise political allies like Rep. Jim Jordan (R-Ohio) and Rep. Mark Meadows (R-N.C.). Watch the speech below. Tim O'Donnell  Bernie Sanders kicks off his campaign for 'government which works for all of us, not just the 1 percent' Senator Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) officially launched his presidential campaign in his hometown of Brooklyn on Saturday. "Thank you all for being part of a political revolution which is going to transform America," he told a crowd of supporters. "No, no, no, it is not Bernie, it is you. It is us together," Sanders continued as the crowd began chanting his name. "And I want to thank you for being part of a campaign which is not only going to win the Democratic nomination, which is not only going to defeat Donald Trump — who is the most dangerous president in modern American history — but with your help we are going to transform this country and finally create an economy and a government which works for all of us, not just the 1 percent." Sanders announced his candidacy for the 2020 Democratic primary in February and is scheduled to make his next campaign stop in Chicago on Sunday, where he is expected to discuss how his upbringing and education shaped his political views. Other major Democratic candidates include Rep. Tulsi Gabbard (D-Hawaii) and Sens. Elizabeth Warren (Mass.), Kamala Harris (D-Calif.), Cory Booker (D-N.J.), Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.), and Kirsten Gillibrand (D-N.Y.). Watch the live stream of Sanders' launch rally below. Bonnie Kristian  Canada approves a U.S. extradition request for Huawei's CFO, angering China Canada is stuck in the middle of an argument between the United States and China and, for now, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's government is sticking with its neighbors to the south. The Canadian government approved a U.S. extradition request for Meng Wanzhou, the chief financial officer of Chinese tech giant Huawei, on Friday. The decision drew ire from Beijing — the Chinese embassy in Ottawa relayed that the government is "utterly dissatisfied" and "firmly opposes" the decision. Meng, who was detained in December in Vancouver, is accused of lying to banks about Huawei's dealings with Iran in violation of U.S. sanctions placed upon the country. China believes the accusations are part of a U.S. political stunt to hurt a potential competitor to U.S. tech companies. Although the Canadian government approved the request, it could be years before Meng is sent to the U.S. since Canada's justice department allows many decisions to be appealed. Meng is due in a Vancouver court on March, when a date will be set for her extradition hearing. Tim O'Donnell ISIS is expected to soon lose its last piece of territory The U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) said on Saturday they are close to expelling the Islamic State from its last bastion of territory in Baghouz, Syria. The battle is expected to over "soon," said Mustafa Bali, the head of the Kurdish-led SDF's media office. This round of fighting began on Friday after the last remaining civilians evacuated Baghouz, leaving only ISIS fighters in the territory. Most of the evacuees were women and children — they were separated from the men, who were taken in for interrogation. An estimated 10,000 civilians have evacuated the territory since Feb. 20, many of them hailing from other countries, Al Jazeera reports. An SDF victory would be significant, per Reuters, as ISIS once held a large swath of territory in the region. But the insurgents are expected to remain a guerrilla threat despite losing their last stronghold. Tim O'Donnell U.S. will reportedly end large-scale military drills with South Korea The U.S. military will no longer conduct large-scale drills with South Korea, NBC News and The Wall Street Journal reported Friday, each citing two unnamed defense officials. Instead of major annual exercises, the officials said, U.S. and South Korean forces will cooperate on smaller, less costly training projects. "The U.S. has identified ways to mitigate potential readiness concerns by looking at required mission tasks versus having to conduct large-scale exercises," one official told NBC. The large-scale exercises were suspended last year after President Trump promised to stop the "provocative" war games during his first summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un in Singapore. Another set of drills was canceled in October to further diplomatic progress with Pyongyang. Bonnie Kristian Trump says his Scottish golf course is good for America's relationship with the U.K. President Trump started his Saturday on Twitter with an announcement that his golf course in Scotland is super nice and also totally great for America's ties with the United Kingdom:  Very proud of perhaps the greatest golf course anywhere in the world. Also, furthers U.K. relationship! https://t.co/3xTzzJH6Iq — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 2, 2019  The immediate context of Trump's tweet is his loss of a 2015 court battle with Scotland over plans for a new offshore wind farm. Trump unsuccessfully sought to block construction of the turbines, arguing they would spoil the view from his golf course. On Thursday, a court ruled Trump's company must pay for the Scottish government's legal fees incurred in the suit, so yeah, the U.K. probably is pretty happy about the golf course right now. More broadly, the tweet is a reminder Trump chose not to divest ownership of his businesses when he took office, and he has continued to promote his properties as president. As Trump has noted, divestment is not legally mandatory, though it was customary for modern presidents. Trump's decision has been subject to considerable scrutiny, including a lawsuit alleging he has violated the Constitution's emoluments clause — which bans the president from accepting gifts from foreign heads of state absent congressional consent — by doing business with foreign governments. Bonnie Kristian 