The Torture Report: Voices of Outrage
12/13/2014
Supported by Letters To the Editor: Re “Architects of C.I.A. Interrogation Drew on Psychology to Induce ‘Helplessness’ ” (front page, Dec. 11): As president of the largest association of American psychologists, I and my fellow members are outraged, saddened and pained that two psychologists allegedly devised and engaged in brutal interrogation methods. They inappropriately and with disastrous effect tried to apply a classic model of learned helplessness to torture detainees. Regardless of whether it is an effective interrogation technique, torture is unethical, abhorrent and morally reprehensible. That two psychologists and their company allegedly received $81 million from this perversion of psychological science is shocking, and another reason psychologists as a group are horrified. The two psychologists identified in the Senate committee report are not members of the American Psychological Association and are therefore beyond the range of our ethics enforcement program. But regardless of their membership status, if the allegations are true, they should be held accountable for inexcusable violations of ethical principles and legal standards. There is no place in the field of psychology for people who are not respectful of human dignity and committed to human rights. NADINE J. KASLOW President American Psychological Association Washington, Dec. 12, 2014  To the Editor: Re “C.I.A. Director Rebuts Report, Calling Interrogators ‘Patriots’ ” (front page, Dec. 12): As someone who spent 31 years as a Central Intelligence Agency operations officer (1951-82), I speak in support of what John O. Brennan, the C.I.A. director, tried to do on Thursday. He reminded us that the C.I.A. works for the executive branch of the government and that the agency had been ordered by President George W. Bush to become both jail keeper and interrogator of suspected terrorists, things it had never done before. In addition, the Bush administration’s attorney general, Alberto R. Gonzales, aided by the Justice Department lawyer John C. Yoo, constructed a legal framework allowing “enhanced interrogation techniques” to be applied to selected prisoners, and asserting that these techniques, including waterboarding, did not amount to torture. Mr. Brennan’s remarks raise the question of why the C.I.A. was ordered to do these things in the first place. During my career, including service in wartime Vietnam, the agency worked against torture, and I personally saw repeated evidence that humane interrogation produced far better results than torture, which sowed only confusion, shattered lives and bitter feelings. The painful answer to the question of “why” is that President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney, having failed to prevent 9/11 in the first place, lost faith in America’s ability to deal traditionally with the crisis that occurred on their watch, and ordered actions to be taken that are alien to the basic nature of our country. The question must be asked: Why did we lose faith in ourselves, and what can be done to prevent that from happening again? DONALD P. GREGG Armonk, N.Y., Dec. 12, 2014 The writer is a former United States ambassador to South Korea.  To the Editor: Re “Brazil Releases Report on Past Rights Abuses” (news article, Dec. 11): Even with the passing of time, confronting the past use of torture and cruelty is a critical step in preventing these abuses in the future. Despite the appalling facts that come to light, without the strength and resiliency of torture survivors like those in Brazil it is not always possible to uncover the dark truths needed to help societies move on. Until the release of the Senate report on torture by the Central Intelligence Agency, we did not have an accounting of the unlawful, brutal and deceptive C.I.A. torture program. The United States should have long ago been leading the way in reckoning with the horror the government carried out in our name. Accountability must always be pursued to bring perpetrators to justice. With the C.I.A. torture report now in hand, President Obama and Congress should work together to ensure that the prohibition against torture and cruelty — in law and practice — is firmly in place. They must act to make certain that the United States government never resorts to torture and cruelty again. CURT GOERING Executive Director Center for Victims of Torture St. Paul, Dec. 12, 2014 Advertisement 