Bicycles get second life thanks to caring volunteers
11/20/2013
Please log in, or sign up for a new account and purchase a subscription to continue reading. Please log in, or sign up for a new account to continue reading. Thank you for Reading!
 We hope that you continue to enjoy our free content. Clear skies. Low -12F. Winds WNW at 10 to 15 mph.. Clear skies. Low -12F. Winds WNW at 10 to 15 mph. Updated: March 2, 2019 @ 9:16 pm Owner Jim Muellner is phasing out his Just Two Bikes business to focus on the ReCyclery. – Photo Debra Neutkens These bikes were collected by Hugo girls as a service project for RIOT (Righteous Invasion of Truth), a faith-based group that meets twice a month.— Photo by Debra Neutkens  Owner Jim Muellner is phasing out his Just Two Bikes business to focus on the ReCyclery. – Photo Debra Neutkens These bikes were collected by Hugo girls as a service project for RIOT (Righteous Invasion of Truth), a faith-based group that meets twice a month.— Photo by Debra Neutkens  WHITE BEAR TOWNSHIP — The donation of 33 used bicycles was a win-win for two groups: Some service-oriented youth who did the collecting and some service-oriented adults who did the repairing. The important word here is service. The collection took place last month when a dozen dedicated girls spent an evening canvassing Hugo neighborhoods collecting bikes for the ReCyclery, a house-turned-bicycle repair shop in the township. One girl’s grandfather, Lynn Kapaun, volunteers at the bike shop. The girls range in age from eighth grade to high school and belong to a faith-based group called RIOT, which stands for Righteous Invasion of Truth. They meet in the Hugo home of Jill Dumas twice a month for Bible study and do community service projects throughout the year. The bike drive was a recent service event. Once the bikes were collected, the owner of the ReCyclery, Jim Muellner, transported them to the small yellow house on Stillwater Street. He lived next door to the once neglected house, a former low-income rental property, and purchased it when the opportunity presented itself. Muellner actually intended to burn the house down but a closer inspection revealed potential for a storage and repair place, so he tore out the walls and started recycling bicycles. A familiar name around town, Muellner owns Just Two Bikes, a business that has merged with ReCyclery. Muellner also founded Smarte Carte and got into biking big-time in 1993 after he sold the White Bear Lake company. He has bicycled from one coast to the other twice and circled the periphery of the United States. Those treks are behind him now, he said, because he just doesn’t have the time. Muellner and a crew of about eight volunteers gather every Tuesday to repair and refurbish hundreds of donated bicycles. Once the bikes are streetworthy, they are donated to organizations like Solid Ground, St. Andrew’s Church, Karin (a group aiding Southeast Asian immigrants) and the Center for Victims of Torture in St. Paul. The last group is a fairly new recipient and illustrates how far-reaching “our little bike program” is, Muellner said. He told the story of a man who lived in solitary confinement for years in an Iraqi prison during Saddam Hussein’s reign. When the man got asylum in Minnesota, he received a recycled bicycle. The man said he was overjoyed to be in a country where “he can ride east, west, north or south and when he gets tired, lay down in the grass and look at the sky,” Muellner related. Neighbors, too, are happy to have the ReCyclery in the house instead of its former inhabitants. The address was well known to sheriff deputies before Muellner bought it. Criminal activities were so bad, in fact, people nearby were planning to move out until Muellner assured them he would purchase the house. Now those same neighbors cut the grass and rake the leaves to show their appreciation. ReCyclery is a “feel-good project,” said the township resident, “but it takes a lot to keep the place going. It keeps us old guys off the street.” ReCyclery is located at 1785 Stillwater St. in White Bear Township. If you wish to donate a bicycle, contact Jim Muellner at 651-402-4880 for pickup. The shop also repairs bikes. Your comment has been submitted.  Reported There was a problem reporting this. Log In Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article. The snow and icicles look pretty, but could result in the formation of ice dams which can cause roof damage and water leakage. 