Representatives Smith And Jayapal Introduce Legislation To Reform Deeply Flawed Immigration Detention System
10/03/2017
Politico Rated the #1 political newsletter by political professionals. Sign up for POLITICO Playbook today. By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time. By  JAKE SHERMAN,  ANNA PALMER and  DANIEL LIPPMAN 09/09/2017 10:23 AM EDT Presented by NEIL KING, former Wall Street Journal reporter (@NKingofDC): “Ran into John Boehner at Trattoria Alberto, his DC hang out. ‘The nation needs you.’ ‘Oh God no,’ he said, radiantly sipping his merlot.” HHS Secretary Tom Price was at a separate table at the restaurant. BULLETIN -- JONATHAN MARTIN and ALEX BURNS on A1 of the Saturday NYT: “[R]epublicans [fear] a wave of retirements going into next year. Representative Dave Trott of Michigan is considering retiring, and another Michigan Republican, Fred Upton, may retire or run for the Senate, according to multiple party officials.” http://nyti.ms/2xW3R7t Good Saturday morning. THE NEW NARRATIVE -- “GOP struggles to control its own agenda,” by Burgess Everett, Seung Min Kim and Kyle Cheney: “President Donald Trump's flirtations with Democrats and fixation on divisive campaign promises have paved the way for hazardous, rolling deadlines over the next six months on spending, the debt ceiling and immigration. “The debt and spending bill approved by Capitol Hill on Friday averted imminent fiscal disaster, but it's added more misery for a Republican Party whose agenda has floundered even with unified control of Washington for the first time in a decade. It's also given Democrats significant leverage to imperil tax reform, the GOP's best hope at a major legislative victory. “Rather than dictating the agenda of Capitol Hill, Republican lawmakers oftentimes find themselves at the whims of a capricious White House, Democrats in the minority and a calendar that's getting increasingly packed ahead of campaign season next spring. Speaker Paul Ryan predicted in January that tax reform, Obamacare repeal and a border wall would all be done by now. Instead, Obamacare repeal may be completely dead at month’s end, there are just broad strokes on tax reform and many Republicans oppose the border wall being pushed by their own president.” http://politi.co/2xcx548 **SUBSCRIBE to Playbook: http://politi.co/2lQswbh LOST IN THE SHUFFLE of this week: OMB Director Mick Mulvaney was thrashed by his former House Republican colleagues yesterday in a closed door meeting, GOP lawmakers called Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin a Democrat and scoffed at his requests and Gary Cohn is still on the outs with President Donald Trump. Those are the three people most intricately involved in tax reform, which the White House wants done by the end of the year. PRESIDENT TRUMP is at Camp David this weekend. He has a cabinet meeting this afternoon. -- @realDonaldTrump at 8:56 p.m.: “Churches in Texas should be entitled to reimbursement from FEMA Relief Funds for helping victims of Hurricane Harvey (just like others).” AP at 8:45 a.m. -- “MIAMI (AP) - Weather forecasters say eye of powerful Hurricane Irma likely to hit Florida Keys, SW Florida, and Tampa area on Sunday.” FRONT PAGE SATURDAY -- FLORIDA EDITION -- SUN SENTINEL: “WE’RE WAITING: South Floridians braced for impact of powerful storm heading our way” http://bit.ly/2wOmE70 … NAPLES DAILY NEWS: “PREPARE OR EVACUATE” http://bit.ly/2xcXn63 … THE VILLAGES DAILY: “It’s Decision Time” http://bit.ly/2gSkWuO … MIAMI HERALD: “Despite Irma leaning left, S. Fla. still at ‘extreme’ risk” http://bit.ly/2tWCScR IRMA HEADS TO FLORIDA -- “After raking Caribbean, dangerous Irma targets Florida,” by AP’s Anika Kentish and Michael Weissenstein in St. John’s, Antigua: “After battering Cuba early Saturday and leaving more than 20 dead across the Caribbean, a dangerous Irma is taking aim at south Florida with winds nearing 160 mph (257 kph) as another hurricane follows close behind. Irma regained Category 5 status overnight, then dropped back to Category 4 early Saturday as thousands of people in the Caribbean fought desperately to find shelter or escape their storm-blasted islands and more than 6 million people in Florida and Georgia were warned to leave their homes. Wind speeds early Saturday were about 155 mph.” http://bit.ly/2jcjkx0 -- MIAMI HERALD: “The Lower Keys will likely take a direct hit from Hurricane Irma, one of the most powerful hurricanes on record, Sunday morning before the ferocious storm roars up Florida’s west coast. Where Irma ultimately makes landfall on the mainland remains uncertain because of the storm’s angle to the coast, National Hurricane Center forecasters said in their early Saturday update. But Irma’s fierce center could near Tampa Bay, which has not been struck by a major hurricane since October 1921, when the population was about 10,000, said hurricane center spokesman Dennis Feltgen. About 4 million people now live in the low-lying area.” http://hrld.us/2faXt4G -- “Jose, nearing Category 5 status, threatens second blow to islands already ravaged by Irma,” by WaPo’s Anthony Faiola in Cabaret, Haiti, and Lindsey Bever and Andrew deGrandpre in Washington: “Hurricane Jose, a powerhouse tropical cyclone barreling northwest toward the Caribbean islands already hammered by Irma, is now ‘almost a Category 5’ storm, officials said. … A hurricane warning is in effect for Barbuda and St. Martin, both of which were obliterated by Irma, as well as for Anguilla and St. Barthelemy, also known as St. Barts. The island of Antigua is under a hurricane watch. Once it passes the northern Leeward Islands, Jose is projected to hook north and steadily lose muscle. It will, however, likely throw off tropical-storm strength weather felt Saturday night in the British and U.S. Virgin Islands, which also sustained heavy damage during Irma.” http://wapo.st/2wRuTN8 THE PROBLEM THAT WON’T GO AWAY -- “Trump Team Prepping Aggressive Options for North Korea,” by NBC News’ Carol Lee and Courtney Kube: “The Trump administration is readying a package of diplomatic and military moves against North Korea, including cyberattacks and increased surveillance and intelligence operations, after the nation’s sixth and largest nuclear test, according to senior White House and Pentagon officials. The U.S. may also propose a U.N. Security Council resolution mandating the inspection of ships arriving or leaving the reclusive state ... “President Trump is also seriously considering adopting diplomatically risky sanctions on Chinese banks doing business with Pyongyang and upgrading missile defense systems in the region ... In addition, the administration is not ruling out moving tactical nuclear weapons to South Korea should Seoul request them ... though many consider such a move a nonstarter. It would break with nearly three decades of U.S. policy of denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula.” http://nbcnews.to/2eU5ZrJ -- “Fuji TV: Trump calls President Moon a ‘beggar’ during phone call with Japanese PM”: “U.S. President Donald Trump allegedly disparaged South Korean President Moon Jae-in as acting ‘like a beggar’ with his calls for dialogue with North Korea. The remarks were supposedly made in a telephone conversation with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, the Japanese network Fuji TV reported on Sept. 7. According to the network, Trump made the disparaging remarks about Moon to Abe in a telephone conversation on Aug. 29, after North Korea test-launched a missile that passed through Japanese airspace. Trump was also quoted as asking Abe ‘not to tell anyone’ about the need for military pressure on North Korea.” http://bit.ly/2wgrNAk -- “Trump review leans toward proposing mini-nuke,” by Bryan Bender: “The Trump administration is considering proposing smaller, more tactical nuclear weapons that would cause less damage than traditional thermonuclear bombs — a move that would give military commanders more options but could also make the use of atomic arms more likely. A high-level panel created by President Donald Trump to evaluate the nuclear arsenal is reviewing various options for adding a more modern ‘low-yield’ bomb, according to sources involved in the review to further deter Russia, North Korea or other potential nuclear adversaries.” http://politi.co/2wPcVgL A message from Everytown for Gun Safety: After our supporters drove over 200,000 messages and calls, and held over 200 in-district meetings with representatives, the House voted Wednesday to #UpdateBackgroundChecks. It was the first major gun safety legislation passed in either chamber of Congress in 20 years. Now it’s the Senate’s turn — will they listen to the American people? Learn more here. INSIDE THE WEST WING -- “Kelly’s deputy annoys Trump aides with rigid style,” by Annie Karni: “Chief of staff John Kelly’s no-nonsense deputy, Kirstjen Nielsen, has been working in the White House for only five weeks. But in her short tenure, the new sheriff’s No. 2 has already helped set a new tone in the West Wing that was described by more than 10 senior administration officials and outside advisers to the president as one that can be dismissive and lacking in collegiality. These people worry that Nielsen — who now occupies former chief strategist Steve Bannon’s old office — is at risk of squandering the morale boost that accompanied the arrival of the four-star general and the hope for a fresh start. “Nielsen, who served as Kelly’s chief of staff at the Department of Homeland Security before moving with him to the West Wing, routinely cancels meetings with senior officials if someone shows up late, multiple aides said. Phone calls often go unreturned. ... Nielsen has been greeted by an especially vociferous backlash from a group of people who say they are not simply bridling at a new structure. Some Trump loyalists even refer to Nielsen behind her back as ‘Nurse Ratched,’ a reference to the malevolent head nurse in ‘One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest,’ who coldly presides over a mental hospital.” http://politi.co/2jckIjc -- MAGGIE HABERMAN and GLENN THRUSH: “It is Ms. Nielsen who sends out the emails announcing internal policy and planning meetings that now contain a clipped addendum — ‘principals only’ — with a stern warning that any subordinates who wander in will be immediately ejected. She is also responsible for keeping Mr. Kelly’s no-fly list of aides he deems to be unfit to attend serious meetings, the most prominent of whom is Omarosa Manigault, the former “Apprentice” star with an ill-defined job and a penchant for dropping into meetings where she was not invited. “Throughout the White House, the circle of decision-making is shrinking, leaving staff members accustomed to wandering in and out of meetings — and the Oval Office — in a sour mood. And the feelings are not confined by the gates of the executive compound. Outside Trump advisers, accustomed to getting their calls briskly returned, are complaining that their phones have gone silent since Mr. Kelly took over six weeks ago.” http://nyti.ms/2eN1dZs -- “Cohn doubles down on tax reform as rumors swirl about his West Wing status,” by Nancy Cook, Ben White, Josh Dawsey and Daniel Lippman: “Rumors of Gary Cohn’s demise in Donald Trump’s White House have swirled for weeks. But Cohn is intent on remaining with the administration to finish tax reform — though it’s unclear how long he would stay beyond its passage ... He’s aware that he may have killed his chances for Fed chair with critical comments after Charlottesville. ... A Cohn friend who spoke to him at a party in D.C. on Thursday night said he was ‘in a great mood’ and ‘highflying’ after the president cut a deal on Wednesday with Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi to raise the debt ceiling. “Cohn has long advocated for the president to work more closely with Schumer, one New York source who knows both men said, since they’re both New Yorkers who aren’t fierce ideologues and like to make deals. ... Cohn’s reaction [to Charlottesville] irritated the president and created distance between them. They haven’t spoken privately since then. Cohn also made some disparaging remarks about the way the White House functions under the president to friends in the Hamptons in August that found their way back to Trump and further exacerbated their working relationship.” http://politi.co/2wgssSi THE LATEST ON THE RUSSIA PROBE -- “Mueller gives White House names of 6 aides he expects to question in Russia probe,” by WaPo’s Carol D. Leonnig, Ros Helderman and Ashley Parker: “Special counsel Robert S. Mueller III has alerted the White House that his team will probably seek to interview six top current and former advisers to President Trump who were witnesses to several episodes relevant to the investigation of Russia’s meddling in the 2016 election, according to people familiar with the request. “Mueller’s interest in the aides, including trusted adviser Hope Hicks, former press secretary Sean Spicer and former chief of staff Reince Priebus, reflects how the probe that has dogged Trump’s presidency is starting to penetrate a closer circle of aides around the president. … “Mueller has notified the White House he will probably seek to question White House counsel Don McGahn and one of his deputies, James Burnham. Mueller’s office has also told the White House that investigators may want to interview Josh Raffel, a White House spokesman who works closely with Trump son-in-law Jared Kushner. White House officials are expecting that Mueller will seek additional interviews, possibly with family members, including Kushner, who is a West Wing senior adviser, according to the people familiar with Mueller’s inquiry.” http://wapo.st/2jcLuYw -- “White House communications director Hope Hicks retains lawyer in Russia probe,” by Annie Karni and Eliana Johnson: “White House communications director Hope Hicks has retained a personal attorney, as the special counsel’s investigation into the Trump campaign's ties to Russia is expected to heat up this fall. Hicks, 28, has hired Robert Trout, a highly regarded attorney and founder of the firm Trout Cacheris & Janis, according to multiple sources familiar with the hire. Trout is a veteran of the Justice Department. He is also a former assistant U.S. attorney in Baltimore.” http://politi.co/2xjfWXa PENCE BACK TO THE HOOSIER STATE -- “Pence to travel to Indiana to push tax reform, pressure Sen. Joe Donnelly,” by Matt Nussbaum: “Vice President Mike Pence will travel to his home state of Indiana later this month to make the case for tax reform and put pressure on Democratic Sen. Joe Donnelly, who is up for reelection in 2018 in the deeply conservative state. Pence is slated to make the trip on Sept. 22, according to a senior administration official.” http://politi.co/2xSFd6P MEDIAWATCH -- “Eric Bolling Out at Fox News,” by Yashar Ali in HuffPost: “Fox News has parted ways with host Eric Bolling, the network confirmed Friday, just over a month after an exclusive HuffPost report revealed Bolling sent inappropriate text messages to current and former female colleagues. News of the departure comes after two HuffPost reports revealed a pattern of inappropriate behavior by Bolling, who co-hosts ‘Fox News Specialists.’ Fox News will cancel the program, it said in a statement. ‘Eric Bolling and Fox have agreed to part ways amicably,’ the network said. ‘We thank Eric for his ten years of service to our loyal viewers and wish him the best of luck.’”  http://bit.ly/2gRZVk3 -- “Chris Christie in talks to be cable news contributor after leaving office,” by CNN’s Hadas Gold and Oliver Darcy: “New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie’s possible career as a sports broadcaster may not have panned out, but he might still have a shot at a television gig. Christie has had conversations with both MSNBC and CNN about possible contributor deals after his term ends, according to three sources with knowledge of the talks. ... Christie is not in talks with Fox News.” http://cnnmon.ie/2vMzwXC PHOTO DU JOUR: A man walks along the beach in Daytona Beach, Fla., at sunrise ahead of Hurricane Irma's landfall on Sept. 8 | David Goldman/AP Photo WALL STREET-WASHINGTON AXIS -- “Jamie Dimon ventures beyond Wall Street to have a say in Washington,” by Reuters’ Pete Schroeder and David Henry: “JPMorgan Chase & Co Chief Executive Jamie Dimon is starting to look like Corporate America’s shadow president. The 61-year-old banker has made more than a dozen trips to Washington so far this year to press a broad agenda with a range of influential policymakers, people who attended the meetings or are familiar with his schedule said. Dimon has already visited the nation’s capital four times as much as he does in a typical year. His ramped-up presence comes after taking the helm of the Business Roundtable, a lobbying group that represents CEOs of large U.S. companies, in December. ... “The frequency of his trips, and the wide range of policies he has been discussing, have started chatter among power brokers in Washington and on Wall Street about how much energy Dimon is devoting to issues beyond JPMorgan. At times, they said, Dimon carries himself more like someone running the country than someone running a bank.” http://reut.rs/2wPD3YU STEVE BANNON TO CHINA -- NYT’S MARK LANDER: “Next week, he plans to travel to Hong Kong to deliver a keynote address at an investor conference, where he will articulate his call for a much tougher American policy toward China. CLSA, the Hong Kong brokerage firm that invited Mr. Bannon, is owned by a politically connected Chinese investment bank, Citic Securities. People close to Mr. Bannon said he met recently with Henry A. Kissinger, the elder statesman who opened a diplomatic channel to China in 1972, to exchange views about the relationship with Beijing. Mr. Bannon said he admires Mr. Kissinger and has read all his books, but none of that swayed him from his preference for confrontation over diplomacy.” http://nyti.ms/2wPpIQt MOSCOW WATCH -- “New Russian envoy describes ‘warm’ meeting with Trump: agencies” -- Reuters: “Russia’s newly installed ambassador to Washington said on Friday that he had a warm and constructive meeting with U.S. President Donald Trump, Russian news agencies reported. ‘I was received by President Trump, I presented my credentials. For my part I said that we are looking forward to an improvement in the relations between our two countries,’ Tass news agency quoted the ambassador, Anatoly Antonov, as saying. ‘President Trump received me in a warm and friendly way ... The atmosphere was very genial, constructive and welcoming. At least, that was my personal feeling,’ Russia’s RIA news agency quoted Antonov as saying.” http://reut.rs/2eUIAqh -- “Document details scrapped deal for Trump Tower Moscow,” by CNN’s Gloria Borger and Marshall Cohen: “Around the time presidential candidate Donald Trump was touting his real estate dealings at a Republican primary debate, a proposal was in the works to build a Trump Tower in Russia that would have given his company a $4 million upfront fee, no upfront costs, a percentage of the sales, and control over marketing and design. … [T]he deal [also] included the opportunity to name the hotel spa after his daughter Ivanka. An internal Trump Organization document from October 2015, obtained by CNN on Thursday, reveals the details of a 17-page letter of intent that set the stage for Trump’s attorney to negotiate a promising branding venture for Trump condominiums, a hotel and commercial property in the heart of Moscow. “Trump signed the document later that month, according to Michael Cohen, his corporate attorney at the time. The document CNN obtained does not have Trump’s signature because it is a copy of the deal that Cohen brought to Trump to sign. Cohen pulled out of the arrangement three months later as the project failed to get off the ground.” http://cnn.it/2jaQuwI ... See the document http://cnn.it/2wfDLtZ A message from Everytown for Gun Safety:  We urge the Senate to follow in the House’s footsteps and update background checks, and create a safer America for us all. Learn more here. CLICKER – “The nation’s cartoonists on the week in politics,” edited by Matt Wuerker – 15 keepers  http://politi.co/2xSY8ON GREAT WEEKEND READS, curated by Daniel Lippman: --“The Trials of a Muslim Cop,” by Rachel Aviv in The New Yorker: “Bobby Hadid joined the N.Y.P.D. after 9/11, to protect his new country. But when he questioned the force’s tactics, his life began to erode.” http://bit.ly/2wQisTD --“Blood Brother,” by Sarah Smarsh in VQR: “The buyers are corporations with names like BioLife, Biotest, Octapharma. Plasma brings thirty, fifty bucks a pop depending on how often you go and how much you weigh. ... The more plasma given, the more points and the higher status they attain—bronze, silver, gold. If you’re away too long, they want you back.” http://bit.ly/2faBJ8Y --“Fifty-one inches,” by The Houston Chronicle’s Mike Hixenbaugh, David Hunn and Mark Collette: “Terror, heartbreak and heroism as five souls brave the worst storm in U.S. history.” http://bit.ly/2eUSsjs --“A Traumatic History,” by Edgar Jones in Spiked Online: “During the First and Second World War, you were expected to be resilient, you were expected to be well. And if you were traumatised, you were considered a bit unusual and potentially vulnerable. Today, we’ve almost gone full circle, and forgotten about the resilient side. Because, in actual fact, most people will not suffer from PTSD if exposed to a terrifying event.” http://bit.ly/2fadbwG (h/t ALDaily.com) --“Etiquette and the Cancer Patient,” by Ted Rheingold on Medium: “The further out you are from the inner circle the more thoughtful you have to be to find out ways to help. The primary caregivers are too overwhelmed to find tasks for each person that offers help. Understand that the family may be overwhelmed with offers of help and doesn’t have the time to give thoughtful declines. Take a non-answer as a No and don’t belabor the situation by making the offer repeatedly.” http://bit.ly/2xSTGzw (h/t TheBrowser.com) --“The bit bomb,” by Rob Goodman and Jimmy Soni in Aeon Magazine: “It took a polymath to pin down the true nature of ‘information’. His answer was both a revelation and a return.” http://bit.ly/2jdpk8G --“Comfort Woman,” by Erika Krouse in Granta: “I showed up and lied to people, which is illegal for attorneys but not for private investigators – not for me. I pretended to be a triathlete; I pretended to be a wealthy donor; I pretended to have breast cancer. It felt strange to lie to people’s faces – wrong, until I discovered that they actually believed me.” http://bit.ly/2gScSqj --“Anatomy of terror: What makes normal people become extremists?” by Peter Byrne in The New Scientist: “It takes more than religious fanaticism or hatred to make someone take innocent lives, but recognise the true roots of ISIS-inspired terror and they can be addressed.” http://bit.ly/2eUtm4z --“The Resegregation of Jefferson County,” by Nikole Hannah-Jones in the NYT Magazine: “What one Alabama town’s attempt to secede from its school district tells us about the fragile progress of racial integration in America.” http://nyti.ms/2eMWarJ --“How the Meat Industry Thinks About Non-Meat-Eaters,” by Joe Pinsker in The Atlantic: “The people who oversee the plants are the ones [trade publication] Meatingplace is intended for. The ads in it are, to say the least, different than those in general-audience magazines. There is one for the PTL-2600 Corndog Machine, an apparatus that can put out 16,000 corndogs per hour (‘Corndogs don’t grow on trees … they’re produced on the PTL-2600’).” http://theatln.tc/2xVnrRc (h/t Longreads.com) --“If Unilever Can’t Make Feel-Good Capitalism Work, Who Can?” by Thomas Buckley and Matthew Campbell in Bloomberg Businessweek: “The $170 billion corporate empire has been trying to prove corporations can do well by doing good. Can the idealism survive in an age of cost-cutting?” https://bloom.bg/2gRjrK3 --“Shelter and the Storm,” by Katherine Boo in the Nov. 28, 2005 issue of The New Yorker: “Katrina’s victims come to town.” http://bit.ly/2wq3p2D --“Disaster Aversion,” by Rivka Galchen in the Oct. 2009 issue of Harper’s: “The quest to control hurricanes.” http://bit.ly/2xW5Ok7 --“Theater of War,” by Jessica Hatcher-Moore in the Atavist Magazine: “He traveled to some of the world’s most dangerous places to disarm militias, negotiate with gangs, and defy terrorists. But Bill Brookman was just a clown.” http://bit.ly/2gU5ZZj (h/t Longform.org) SPOTTED: Paul Manafort awaiting a flight from DCA to LGA on Friday morning -- pic of him scratching his head and looking straight ahead into our tipster’s camera http://politi.co/2eUS5p6 ... Rep. Lee Zeldin (R-N.Y.) yesterday on Southwest flight 1360 from BWI to Islip on Long Island TRANSITIONS – OBAMA ALUMNI -- Michael Greenwald has joined Tiedemann Wealth Management as SVP, where he will work in both the D.C. and Palm Beach offices of the firm. He served as the first U.S. Treasury attaché to Qatar and Kuwait and left Treasury this July. ... David Cohen, former CIA deputy director, and Mike Connor, former deputy secretary at Interior, have joined WilmerHale as partners. ... Jones Day has hired DOJ alums Benjamin Mizer and Shirlethia Franklin. Mizer will be part of the firm’s issues and appeals practice as a partner, while Franklin will be of counsel in the business and tort litigation practice. ... Wajahat Ali, a contributing NYT op-ed writer, has started a new initiative called Voices of Change, Voices of America: American Muslim Media Training, which “aims to empower 120 American Muslims to reclaim their narrative in public discourse and in the media.” ... Scott Roehm, the VP of programs and policy at the Constitution Project, is joining the Center for Victims of Torture as its new Washington director. BIRTHDAYS: Jonathan Cohn, HuffPost’s senior national correspondent … Eric Draper ... Sen. Chris Coons (D-Del.) (hat tip: Eric Wall) ... Matt Boyle, Breitbart’s Washington political editor, who celebrated in Las Vegas on Friday (h/t Alexandra Preate) … Kelly Schwartz (hubby tip: Roy) ... Matt Bai, national political columnist at Yahoo News … journalist David Freedlander … Aimee Steel ... CAP senior fellow Glen Fukushima … Michael B. Greenwald, former U.S. Treasury attaché to Qatar and Kuwait and now SVP at Tiedemann Wealth Management, is 34 (h/t Morgan Ortagus) ... Quincey Grieve ... Laura Cash (h/t Claude Marx) … former Rep. Glenn Nye (D-Va.) … Bill Sparks ... Christina Wagner ... Augusta Mellon, on the comms team for Bloomberg Media, is 3-0 (h/ts Ashley Bahnken) ... Ebony Meeks ... Emily Daly ... Ron Dotzauer ... Rachel Rizzo, research associate at the Center for a New American Security (h/t John Hudson) … Kara Voght of Politico and The Atlantic ... AP’s Matt Lee … Dwayne Carson ... Rob Biederman, cofounder and CEO of Catalant Technologies ... ... Dr. Judith Rodin, former president of The Rockefeller Foundation and UPenn president ... Jason Denoncourt ... Henrique Ferreira ... Katelyn Israelski ... ABC News contributor Tara Setmayer Love (h/t Kurt Bardella) ... Nawaid Ladak ... Twitter’s Greg Maxson ... Dan Brandt ... Javelin’s Vanessa Oblinger, who celebrated with cake and champagne with her colleagues at the office yesterday (h/t Keith Urbahn) ... Ryan Wegman ... Jordan Bloom ... Allan Dodds Frank ... Diego Sanchez Gallardo ... Chris Cooks … former Rep. Buck McKeon (R-Calif.) … DOJ’s Michael Harper ... Wendy Oscarson Kirchner ... Cherie Harder, president of The Trinity Forum ... Jeff Weintraub ... Steve Raikin ... Karen Fawcett … Andrew Morin … Sophie Kurz-Cosgrove (h/ts Teresa Vilmain) THE SHOWS by @MattMackowiak, filing from Austin: -- CNN’s “State of the Union”: Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) -- CBS’s “Face the Nation”: Sen. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) … Rep. Michael McCaul (R-Texas). Panel: Jeffrey Goldberg, David Nakamura, Susan Page and Kori Schake -- NBC’s “Meet the Press”: Pre-empted for live coverage of Hurricane Irma -- ABC’s “This Week”: Guests to be announced -- “Fox News Sunday”: FEMA Administrator Brock Long … Rep. Jim Jordan (R-Ohio). Panel: Brit Hume, Mo Elleithee, Gillian Turner and Juan Williams -- Fox News’ “Sunday Morning Futures”: Key West, Florida Mayor Craig Cates … Rep. Ron DeSantis (R-Fla.) … Newt Gingrich … Miami Beach, FL Mayor Philip Levine … Carl Higbie … Don Peebles … Palm Beach, Florida deputy town manager Jay Boodheshwar. Panel: Ed Rollins and Mary Kissel -- Fox News’ “MediaBuzz”: Erin McPike … Susan Ferrechio -- CNN’s “Inside Politics”: Guests to be announced -- CNN’s “Fareed Zakaria GPS”: Guests to be announced -- CNN’s “Reliable Sources”: Guests to be announced -- Univision’s “Al Punto”: Alejandro Roldan … Rep. Luis Gutierrez (D-Ill.) … White House Director of Policy and Interagency Coordination Carlos Diaz Rosillo … “United We Dream” executive director and co-founder Cristina Jimenez and immigration attorney Ezequiel Hernandez … former HUD Secretary Henry Cisneros … Bianca Jagger … Cecile Richards -- C-SPAN: “The Communicators”: AEI Center for Internet, Communications & Technology Policy visiting scholar Mark Jamison, questioned by Reuters’ David Shepardson … “Newsmakers”: Rep. Mark Walker (R-N.C.), questioned by Bloomberg News’ Anna Edgerton and Politico’s Sarah Ferris … “Q&A”: Open the Books founder and CEO Adam Andrzejewski -- Hearst / Sony’s “Matter of Fact” with Soledad O’Brien: Rep. Ruben Kihuen (D-Nev.) … Rep. Jim Banks (R-Ind.) and Rep. Raja Krishnamoorthi (D-Ill.) … Steve Ellis … report on Pennsylvania nuns who built an outdoor chapel on land they own to stop a natural gas pipeline … report on the NOAA pilots who gather flight data about hurricanes. -- Washington Times’ “Mack on Politics” weekly politics podcast with Matt Mackowiak (download on iTunes, Google Play, or Stitcher or listen at http://bit.ly/2omgw1D): Texas Tribune CEO Evan Smith. SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook http://politi.co/2lQswbh... New York Playbook http://politi.co/1ON8bqW … Florida Playbook http://politi.co/1OypFe9 ... New Jersey Playbook http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v … Illinois Playbook http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook http://politi.co/2bLvcPl ... Brussels Playbook http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... London Playbook http://politi.co/2xfDPuK … All our political and policy tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX By Jack Shafer By John McCormack By Zachary Karabell By Ken Adelman © 2019 POLITICO LLC 