Sen. Patrick Leahy Speaks Out Against Torture
07/08/2013
 High school students visit Georgetown Law on February 13. Live debate & discussion presented by Georgetown Law’s Institute for Technology Law & Policy Just before U.S. President Donald Trump arrived in Vietnam for a summit with North Korean leader Kim Jung Un — the second such summit since June 2018 — the experts came to Georgetown Law for a conference on “The Continuing Threat of Nuclear Weapons.” March 8 event organized by Georgetown Law’s Institute for Constitutional Advocacy & Protection and Checks & Balances When Georgetown Law launched what is now called the Georgetown Climate Center in February 2009, the future for action to fight climate change could not have looked brighter. Each year, Georgetown Law welcomes students from more than 70 countries. But it’s not very often that international J.D. or LL.M. students extend an invitation to the president of their country to come to Georgetown for a visit. On February 12, Professor Jane Aiken (LL.M.'85) was installed as the inaugural Blume Professor, a chair made possible through the extraordinary generosity of Bruce (L’80) and Ann Blume (Parents ’08, ’20). The Blumes recently committed $10 million… During the fall semester at Georgetown Law, Allegra Kauffman (L’19) spent a lot of time downloading apps and playing games she found on Google Play, the app store for the Android operating system. Sandra Bland, who died in prison after being arrested for a traffic violation. Aiyana Stanley-Jones, a seven-year-old shot and killed by police during a raid. Renisha McBride, shot and killed by a homeowner when she knocked on the door of a house. Black women in America have lost their lives, and have been subjected to other horrific injustices, just as men have been. Yet America does not often remember their names. Visiting Professor M. Tia Johnson — a former assistant secretary for legislative affairs at the Department of Homeland Security who teaches national security — doesn’t see teenagers in her classes very often. But Visiting Professor Charisma Howell, the director of Georgetown Law’s Street Law program, is used to teaching high school students. Highlighting a historic human rights decision in India’s Supreme Court, the U.S.-Japan Partnership, foreign policy and much more, the Center for Asian Law is keeping Georgetown informed on important legal developments across the globe.  Read feature stories on our Supreme Court Institute, Street Law Clinic, and the new Blume Public Leadership Institute. 