Rights in Exile
12/01/2018
Online Tactical Mapping Tool equips human rights activists to take strategic action The Tactical Mapping Tool equips activists to collaboratively expand their understanding of relationships and develop strategic and effective action. Launched by New Tactics in Human Rights, a program of the Center for Victims of Torture, the Tactical Mapping Tool makes it possible for individuals, groups or entire organizations to work collaboratively, streamlining the path to change. Available in English and Arabic, the tool allows activists to work cooperatively on a secure platform to assemble a database of key actors; assess where those actors sit on a spectrum from ally to opponent; analyze targets for effective intervention; and track and plan direct action. Users also enter background information on individuals and relationships intersecting with their issue, and save reports to log a “tactical history,” eliminating the risk of loss of knowledge when a member of the group departs—a critical component, given that turnover of staff at organizations and burnout among activists remain high. For more information, click here. Jadaliyya launches interdisciplinary Refugee and Migrants Project e-zine page The Refugees and Migrants Project (RAMP) page of Jadaliyya is designed to encourage a contemporary re-conception of the movement of people, within and between states. The temporal emphasis highlights that refugees and migrants, by definition, can only exist in a world defined by state sovereignty over borders; borders that allow some to pass and others not, which congealed only 150 years ago. RAMP seeks to use a multi-disciplinary approach to examine a range of issues including law, citizenship, borders, rights, politics, cities, the arts, and history. The purpose of this initiative is to encourage the development of literature on refugees and migrants that includes them not merely as objects of study, but as subjects defining their lives. Doing so seeks to enhance our understanding of the local and global structures that make up our lives, our advocacy for refugee and migrant rights, the development of better policies, and our ability to reframe narratives about refugees away from seeing them as crises, burdens, or problems. In launching this page, the Refugees and Migrants Page Editors present a series of articles and resources, available here. The Minimalist Theme designed by The Minimalist | Powered by Tumblr 