Curt Goering on Torture Politics & Precedents
03/30/2017
The St. Paul-based Otto Bremer Trust has announced first-quarter grants, many of them for general operating support, totaling nearly $8 million to nonprofit organizations working in Minnesota, North Dakota, and Wisconsin. Minnesota organizations receiving general operating support grants include Aitkin County CARE, Inc. ($35,000), which provides transportation, home services, and Meals on Wheels to senior citizens living independently in the county; the Central Minnesota Task Force on Battered Women ($75,000) in Saint Cloud, which provides comprehensive services for women and children experiencing domestic violence; and the Center for Victims of Torture ($50,000), which provides mental health first aid, psycho-education, and parenting support to the Somali community in St. Cloud. Wisconsin organizations receiving general support grants include the Chippewa Valley Health Clinic ($35,000), which provides services to low-income and impoverished adults and is moving to a new facility; the Riverfront Activity Center ($50,000) in La Crosse, which provides support services for youth and adults with disabilities; and the St. Croix Valley Restorative Justice Program ($30,000) in River Falls, which works to identify and prevent risky behaviors among the region's youth. North Dakota organizations receiving general operating support grants include Charles Hall Youth Services ($75,000) in Bismarck, which provides residential foster-care programming for high-risk adolescents and teenagers in community-based care; Hope Center Devils Lake ($100,000), which provides services for homeless men, women, and children in the area; and the North Dakota Association of Nonprofit Organizations ($60,000) in Bismarck, which works to strengthen the state's nonprofit sector through advocacy, training, networking, and leadership development activities. "We continue to respond to a diversity of programs and needs throughout the region," said OBT co-CEO and trustee Daniel C. Reardon. "These grant recipients are making a positive impact in their communities and we are pleased that we can support the good work they do." 32 Old Slip, 24th Floor
New York, NY 10005 (212) 620-4230 Copyright © 2019 Foundation Center, All Rights Reserved 