University of Dayton to Celebrate 20 Years of Human Rights Studies, 70 Years of U.N. Declaration
11/21/2018
DAYTON, Ohio — The University of Dayton will celebrate the 20th anniversary of the University's human rights studies program and 70th anniversary of the United Nations' Universal Declaration of Human Rights with a pair of free, public events Thursday, Dec. 6, featuring a current U.S. State Department official and the editor-in-chief of top academic human rights journal Human Rights Quarterly. A panel of UD human rights studies alumni will discuss "Human Rights Practice and Profession: From the Classroom to the Field" from 3:30 to 5 p.m. Panelists include Anamaria T. Karrels, a foreign service officer with the U.S. Department of State; Kata Lucas, a researcher with the non-governmental organization Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, who focuses on topics of gender-sensitive transitional justice in post-conflict settings; labor attorney McLean Johnson; Laura Getz, a bilingual community support specialist for the Center for Work, Education and Employment; and Mike Schulz, executive director of Mission of Mary Cooperative. "The University of Dayton has a rich history in human rights education, starting one of the nation's first undergraduate human rights program in 1998 and one of the nation's first bachelor's degrees in human rights studies in 2008," said Natalie Hudson, director of the University of Dayton's human rights studies program. "We're happy our alumni can help celebrate and offer advice to our future human rights practitioners." Former U.N. Special Rapporteur on Torture Juan E. Méndez and Bert Lockwood, distinguished professor of law and director of the Urban Morgan Institute for Human Rights at the University of Cincinnati, will be panelists discussing "Educating Future Generations in Human Rights During Challenging Times" from 6:30 to 8 p.m. "For 70 years, the U.N. Universal Declaration of Human Rights has been the guiding document for our field," said Shelley Inglis, executive director of the University of Dayton Human Rights Center who most recently spent 15 years with the United Nations. "We are fortunate to have such an esteemed panel who will offer our students a glimpse of what they'll face in their careers." Both events, as well as a free, public reception between the events, also are supported by the Dayton Council on World Affairs and the Dayton International Peace Museum. They will be in the Auditorium at Daniel J. Curran Place located at 1700 S. Patterson Blvd. RSVP for the events at go.udayton.edu/hrc. The University of Dayton human rights studies program and Human Rights Center have organized local, national and international conferences and developed partnerships to perform research and advocate for the rights of the vulnerable and exploited — children, women, migrants, refugees and trafficked persons. Highlights include: For more information about the University of Dayton Human Rights Center and human rights studies program, visit go.udayton.edu/hrc and go.udayton.edu/humanrights. For more information or interviews, contact Shawn Robinson, University of Dayton associate director of news and communications, at 937-229-3391 or srobinson1@udayton.edu. 