Can The Use of Torture Be Eradicated?
06/25/2016
Copyright © 2019 ALM Media Properties, LLC. All Rights Reserved.  Browse All ➝ All Law Topics ➝ Browse All ➝ Browse All ➝ Sham Aldhaher, a Syrian child born last year without an eye who has received approval to receive emergency surgery in Spain. ((Handout)) To view this content, please continue to Lexis Advance®. Continue to Lexis Advance® Not a Lexis Advance® Subscriber? Subscribe Now Why am I seeing this? LexisNexis® is now the exclusive third party online distributor of the broad collection of current and archived versions of ALM's legal news publications. LexisNexis® customers will be able to access and use ALM's content by subscribing to the LexisNexis® services via Lexis Advance®. This includes content from the National Law Journal®, The American Lawyer®, Law Technology News®, The New York Law Journal® and Corporate Counsel®, as well as ALM's other newspapers, directories, legal treatises, published and unpublished court opinions, and other sources of legal information. ALM's content plays a significant role in your work and research, and now through this alliance LexisNexis® will bring you access to an even more comprehensive collection of legal content. For questions call 1-877-256-2472 or contact us at customercare@alm.com An Exclusive Preview of Milbank's New Hudson Yards Offices New York Law Journal Jonathan Boies, Son of Litigator David Boies and Early Firm Recruit, Dies The American Lawyer At Selendy & Gay, One Year Tells the Tale of a Big Law Spinoff The American Lawyer Meet Gibson Dunn’s New Cheesemaking, Instagramming, Yoga-Touting, Millennial Recruiter The American Lawyer Jonathan Boies, Son of Litigator David Boies and Early Firm Recruit, Dies New York Law Journal Lean Adviser Legal "Sequencing then, is everything.  The four stages of Lean Law, which were borrowed from Strategic Management, are set out in the same order. ..." Learn More Presented by BigVoodoo From Veritone Understand the true nature of Artificial Intelligence and how it can benefit your law firm by helping you improve productivity, reduce mountains of data and breeze through eDiscovery with audio and video evidence. Download Now › From Quovant Start optimizing your legal spend with these four tips to control costs. Download Now › From AbacusNext Disaster down-time could cost your law firm hundreds of thousands of dollars in revenue. This paper outlines key considerations and best practices to use in devising your disaster recovery plan. Download Now › With this subscription you will receive unlimited access to high quality, online, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry. This is perfect for attorneys licensed in multiple jurisdictions or for attorneys that have fulfilled their CLE requirement but need to access resourceful information for their practice areas. View Now Our Team Account subscription service is for legal teams of four or more attorneys. Each attorney is granted unlimited access to high quality, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry along with administrative access to easily manage CLE for the entire team. View Now Gain access to some of the most knowledgeable and experienced attorneys with our 2 bundle options! Our Compliance bundles are curated by CLE Counselors and include current legal topics and challenges within the industry. Our second option allows you to build your bundle and strategically select the content that pertains to your needs. Both options are priced the same. View Now CLE Center  → Dynamically explore and compare data on law firms, companies, individual lawyers, and industry trends. Legal Compass includes access to our exclusive industry reports, combining the unmatched expertise of our analyst team with ALM’s deep bench of proprietary information to provide insights that can’t be found anywhere else. Legal Compass delivers you the full scope of information, from the rankings of the Am Law 200 and NLJ 500 to intricate details and comparisons of firms’ financials, staffing, clients, news and events. Legal Compass  →   March 07, 2019 - March 09, 2019
                Girona Annual forum for the world's leading trust and estate litigators. March 27, 2019 - March 28, 2019
                London Conference for leaders of independent law firms from around the world, chaired by Charles Martin, Macfarlanes' senior partner. March 27, 2019 - March 29, 2019
                Newport Beach, CA Unites the most senior and elite advisors to HNWIs and UHNWIs to discuss the most timely and concerning issues across the Americas Browse More Events  → webseminar Sponsored by: NAM (National Arbitration and Mediation)
                        |
                February 13, 2019 Date: Thursday, March 21, 2019

Time: 2:00 p.m. EST |11 a.m. PST

Cost: Complimentary

Sponsored by: 



 

 

 

High… webseminar Sponsored by: Zapproved
                        |
                January 28, 2019 Date: Tuesday, March 12, 2019

Time: 2:00 p.m. EST | 11 a.m. PST

Cost: Complimentary

Sponsored by:  




 

 

 

Everyone… webseminar Sponsored by: NAM (National Arbitration and Mediation)
                        |
                November 05, 2018 DATE: Wednesday, November 28, 2018 

TIME: 2:00 pm EST / 11:00 am PST

COST: Complimentary

Sponsored by:  



 

 

 

Conversation… Webcasts  → Long Island, New York, United States Premier Long Island boutique firm will pay NYC salary for an experienced corporate attorney with sophisticated securities experience and exc... Long Island, New York, United States Premier Nassau boutique seeks an experienced litigator with a sophisticated insurance defense background and strong credentials. Professiona... Long Island, New York, United States Premier Nassau firm will pay NYC salary for a mid to senior level real estate generalist with sophisticated transactional experience and exc... Lawjobs  → 02/25/2019
                  NYLJ Web AARONSON RAPPAPORT FEINSTEIN & DEUTSCH, LLP IS PLEASED TO ANNOUNCE JONATHAN A. MEISTER HAS BECOME A MEMBER OF THE FIRM 02/25/2019
                  NYLJ Web SALENGER SACK KIMMEL & BAVARO are pleased to announce Robert E.SCHLEIER,JR. as a partner in the Firm 02/22/2019
                  TAL Web PORTER WRIGHT MORRIS & ARTHUR Announces that Chicago-based Butler Rubin Saltarelli & Boyd LLPhas merged into Porter Wright Morris & Arthur LLP, Expanding our firm's reach to eight locations across the country. Professional Announcements  → As part of your digital membership, you can sign up for an unlimited number of a wide range of complimentary newsletters. 
        Visit your My Account page to make your selections. Get the timely legal news and critical analysis you cannot afford to miss. 
        Tailored just for you. In your inbox. Every day. Privacy Policy Copyright © 2019 ALM Media Properties, LLC. All Rights Reserved. 