The Mental Costs of Being a Refugee in America
11/30/2016
OUR PICKS: James L.W. West III, internationally recognized authority on the works of F. Scott Fitzgerald, will give the second annual McDermott Fitzgerald Lecture with the theme “Editing Mr. Fitzgerald.” West has spent nearly his entire academic career since 1970 tracing the details of Fitzgerald’s complex biography and verifying his extensive bibliography (including five novels and 150 short stories). He is a biographer, book historian, scholarly editor and Edwin Erie Sparks Professor of English at Penn State University. He serves as overall series editor of the Cambridge Edition of the complete works of F. Scott Fitzgerald. The lecture, presented by Fitzgerald in St. Paul, is held in memory of the organization’s founder, Richard P. McDermott, who restored and lived in Fitzgerald’s birthplace on Laurel Avenue in St. Paul. The University of Minnesota professor established a fund before his death to celebrate the history and artistic work of Fitzgerald and preserve his legacy. Free. 7 p.m. Saturday, Nov. 5; University Club, 420 Summit Ave., St. Paul. Related Articles


			Rescheduled Eggers, Alkhanshali talk is set for Wednesday		




			Trump claims Cohen book would prove ex-aide a liar		




			Raymond Strom’s debut novel captures the lives of young people in small-town Minnesota		




			Children’s book authority Leonard Marcus will be on hand for opening of U exhibit		




			Fitzgerald’s childhood friend is topic of FitzFirst series, in this week’s literary events		

JESSIE CHANDLER: Reads from her mysteries. 6 p.m. Wednesday, Nov. 2; Hudson  Area Library, 700 First St., Hudson, Wis., presented by Chapter2Books of Hudson, Wis. FOOD AND BOOKS: Beth Dooley, author of “In Winter’s Kitchen: Growing Roots and Breaking Bread in the  Northern Heartland,” and Beatrice Ojakangas, whose book is “Homemade: Finnish Rye, Feed Sack Fashion, and other Simple Ingredients from My Life in Food,” chat about food and sign their books. 11 a.m. Saturday, Nov. 5; Golden’s Lowertown,  275 E. Fourth St., St. Paul. GREG HEWETT: Professor of English at Carleton College celebrates publication of his fifth poetry collection, “Blindsight,” in which he writes about nostalgia, aging, cowboys and porn stars, Greek heroes and mathematics. 7 p.m. Friday, Nov. 4; Quatrefoil Library, 1220 E. Lake St., Mpls. RICK OLLERMAN: Signs copies of “Mad Dog Barked.” Noon Saturday, Nov. 5; Once Upon a Crime, 604 W. 26th St., Mpls. CHARLIE QUIMBY: Author who divides his time between Minnesota and Colorado introduces his new novel, “Inhabited,” sister novel to “Monument Road,”  about a man who lives in a tent and thinks Thomas Edison invented the Reagan presidency, and a woman who sells pricey houses while serving on the homeless commission. 7 p.m. Thursday, Nov. 3; Common Good Books, 38 S. Snelling Ave., St. Paul. READING WITH HOPE: Reading from “It Starts with Hope: Writing and Images of Hope,” with some proceeds pledged to Center For Victims of Torture. Readers include co-editor Ted Bowman and poets Grey Watson and Norita Dittberner-Jax, with others to be announced. 7 p.m. Thursday, Nov. 3; SubText Books, 6 W. Fifth St., St. Paul CHRIS SANTIAGO: Assistant professor in the English department at the University of St. Thomas and winner of the fifth annual Lindquist & Vennum poetry prize gives a launch reading for his collection “Tula.” A first-generation Filipino American, Santiago is fascinated by the familiarity and mystique of language. After becoming the father of two boys, Santiago began exploring place, home, masculinity and immigration in his poetry. 6 p.m. Thursday, Nov. 3: Guthrie Theater, 818 Second St. S., Mpls. THREE POETS: Marsha de la O, Phil Taggart and Mary Kay Rummel read from their work. 7 p.m. Wednesday, Nov. 2; SubText Books, 6 W. Fifth St., St. Paul. TOUGAS/BODEEN: Shelley Tougas gives a launch reading for “Patron Saint of Junior Bridesmaids” and SA Bodeen reads from “Trapped,” third in her Shipwreck Island series. 6 p.m. Thursday, Nov. 10, Hudson Area Library, 700 First St., Hudson, Wis., presented by Chapter2Books. RICHARD A. THOMPSON: Minnesotan gives a launch reading for “Demon in the Hole.” 7 p.m. Tuesday, Nov. 1; Once Upon a Crime, 604 W. 26th St., Mpls. As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here. 