Face-to-face with Dr. Steven Miles: Tracking doctors who torture
08/07/2013
Twin Cities Daily Planet (https://www.tcdailyplanet.net/?p=177085) You've found a goof!

We've recently cut over to our new site and right now we're experiencing some problems with the links. Try using the search function to find what you are looking for. We'd appreciate your help, please complete and submit the form below. march, 2019  Event Type : All All Art Business Causes Classes Comedy Community Event Conference/Institute Dance Discussion Education Exhibit Faith/Religion Based Fashion Film Food Forum Free Event Fundraiser Housing Job Fair Literature Music Networking Performance Photography Poetry Politics Protest/Action Puppetry Religious Self Care Speakers/Lectures Storytelling Technology Theater Visual Art Volunteer Opportunity Workshop Youth mon tue wed thu fri sat sun - - - - 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 8jan - 8juljan 87:00 pmjul 8Somali Weaving Workshop Learn traditional Somali dances, like the Jaandheer, in a workshop led by the Somali Museum Dance Troupe. Meaning big leap or step, Jaandheer originates in northern Somalia and more Learn traditional Somali dances, like the Jaandheer, in a workshop led by the Somali Museum Dance Troupe. Meaning big leap or step, Jaandheer originates in northern Somalia and is danced at most Somali weddings and festive occasions. The Somali Museum Dance Troupe studies and performs traditional dances from all regions of Somalia. Comprised of teens and young adults from the greater Twin Cities area, the troupe has performed for countless corporate, private and public events across Minnesota, North Dakota, Virginia, Ohio, and Texas. This dance workshop is appropriate for all ages and is offered in conjunction with the exhibit Somalis + Minnesota. Support for this program has been provided by the Marney and Conley Brooks Fund. 345 W. Kellogg Blvd.
St. Paul, MN 55102 Map 651-259-3015
boxoffice@mnhs.org January 8 (Tuesday) 7:00 pm - July 8 (Monday) 8:00 pm CST Minnesota History Center 345 W. Kellogg Blvd. St. Paul, MN 55102 Minnesota History Center651-259-3015 boxoffice@mnhs.org CalendarGoogleCal  7feb - 7marfeb 77:00 pmmar 7"Grace Jones: Bloodlight and Bami" Film Screening Each month through March, watch a different thought-provoking film and engage in community discussion afterward around topics in history that resonate today. In February, view the 2017 film Grace Jones: Bloodlight more Each month through March, watch a different thought-provoking film and engage in community discussion afterward around topics in history that resonate today. In February, view the 2017 film Grace Jones: Bloodlight and Bami about the iconic singer and actress. This film series is a partnership between the Minnesota Historical Society, the Film Society of Minneapolis St. Paul, and the Capri Theater. This program is made possible by the Legacy Amendment’s Arts and Cultural Heritage Fund through the vote of Minnesotans on Nov. 4, 2008. 2027 W. Broadway Ave.
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55411 612-643-2024 February 7 (Thursday) 7:00 pm - March 7 (Thursday) 9:00 pm CST Capri Theater 2027 West Broadway Avenue  Minneapolis, MN Minnesota History Center651-259-3015 boxoffice@mnhs.org CalendarGoogleCal  14feb - 7marfeb 147:00 pmmar 7Love Comics Love Comics
Presented by Minneapolis Musical Theatre 
This campy live-action comic book musical is inspired by the romance comics of the 1940s and 50s. Four hapless romantics fall in and out of more February 14 (Thursday) 7:00 pm - March 7 (Thursday) 10:00 pm CST Bryant-Lake Bowl Theater 810 West Lake St., Minneapolis MN February 15, 2019 7:00 pm Bryant Lake Bowl CalendarGoogleCal  15feb - 8marfeb 157:00 pmmar 8Love Comics Love Comics
Presented by Minneapolis Musical Theatre 
This campy live-action comic book musical is inspired by the romance comics of the 1940s and 50s. Four hapless romantics fall in and out of more February 15 (Friday) 7:00 pm - March 8 (Friday) 10:00 pm CST Bryant-Lake Bowl Theater 810 West Lake St., Minneapolis MN Bryant Lake Bowl CalendarGoogleCal  2mar9:00 am- 1:00 pmCTUL Annual Pancake Brunch Fundraiser We are thrilled to announce that we have completed our $1.65 million Raise Worker Voice Capital Campaign! We are so grateful for your support over the last two years and more We are thrilled to announce that we have completed our $1.65 million Raise Worker Voice Capital Campaign! We are so grateful for your support over the last two years and humbled by the way community members deepened their commitment to CTUL to make our work possible. Over the past two years, we’ve resourced a new Leadership Institute with Inquilinxs Unidxs to train workers and renters as organizers, supported a deeper incorporation of the arts in our organizing, funded payments for our new building on Chicago Avenue, and created space for a strategic planning process to discern our next directions. To celebrate the completion of the Raise Worker Voice Capital Campaign and two years of impactful work, join us for the Annual Pancake Brunch Fundraiser on March 2, 2019! The brunch will be at a NEW LOCATION — Holy Trinity Lutheran Church 2730 E 31st St., Minneapolis, MN 55406 — from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Entrance will be on a sliding scale of $5 to $15. Our campaign goal for this year’s pancake brunch is to sign up 50 NEW monthly recurring donors to sustain our work past the end of the capital campaign. Click on the tickets link above to sign up! We look forward to being in community together, sharing delicious food, and building our work forward. Join workers in the fight for a seat at the table on March 2nd at the Pancake Brunch. (Saturday) 9:00 am - 1:00 pm CST Holy Trinity Lutheran Church 2730 E 31st St, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55406 El Centro de Trabajadores Unidos en Lucha/Center of Workers United in Struggle CalendarGoogleCal  2mar10:00 am- 1:00 pmHmong Americans for Justice:1st Annual Social Justice Celebration Date and Time
Sat, March 2, 2019
10:00 AM – 1:00 PM CST
Add to Calendar


Location
Hmong Village more Date and Time
Sat, March 2, 2019
10:00 AM – 1:00 PM CST
Add to Calendar Location
Hmong Village – Conference Room
1001 Johnson Pkwy
Saint Paul, MN 55106
View Map Hmong Americans for Justice (HAJ) is a nonprofit that was founded in 2015 by Hmong American community organizers working for education, economic and racial justice. Mission Statement: To secure economic, social, and educational equity for Hmong Americans. We have an exciting program lined up of Hmong elected officials and an amazing keynote speaker who will share thoughts on civic engagement and leadership in the Hmong community. Awards and recognition will also be given to individuals who have led strong progressive initiatives in the Hmong American community. We have sponsors who will be tabling at the event, too. First Panel of Hmong elected officials will start at 10:40AM.
Second Panel of Hmong elected officials will start at Please RSVP on the eventbrite:
https://www.eventbrite.com/e/hmong-americans-for-justice-annual-meeting-tickets-55416723913. Questions and concerns: email hmongamericans4justice@gmail.com. (Saturday) 10:00 am - 1:00 pm CST Hmong Village - Conference Room 1001 Johnson Pkwy Saint Paul, MN 55106 Hmong Americans for Justice (HAJ) CalendarGoogleCal  NAOMI IIZUKA’S THE LAST FIREFLY NSPIRED BY TRADITIONAL JAPANESE THEATER, THIS MODERN AND FANTASTICAL PLAY NOW INSPIRES THE NEXT GENERATION OF THOUGHTFUL, CITIZEN ARTISTS 

Theater Mu and SteppingStone Theatre for Youth team up for their more NSPIRED BY TRADITIONAL JAPANESE THEATER, THIS MODERN AND FANTASTICAL PLAY NOW INSPIRES THE NEXT GENERATION OF THOUGHTFUL, CITIZEN ARTISTS Theater Mu and SteppingStone Theatre for Youth team up for their second co- production with Naomi Iizuka’s THE LAST FIREFLY, directed by Daisuke Kawachi, as a means to continue their commitment to engage the next generation of theater artists and enthusiasts. THE LAST FIREFLY will run March 21 – April 7, 2019 at SteppingStone Theatre. Theater Mu continues its PAY AS YOU ARE ticket pricing in order to keep tickets as accessible as possible. ASL interpreted and audio described performances are available on select dates. Individual tickets are now on sale online at theatermu.org/lastfirefly, by calling 651.789.1012, or by emailing info@theatermu.org. For group sales and matinees, contact SteppingStone Theatre at 651.225.9265 SYNOPSIS It begins with light and a flash. Then comes a sound, a pulse, a beat, a crash like a giant hammer smashing through the sky. The fantastic story of Boom, the child of Thunder, is a mythical adventure about discovering one’s inner strength. After being forced out of the home at the hand of a cruel stepfather, Boom sets out on a journey of self-discovery where battles against forces of nature are courageously fought. Along the way, Boom encounters conflicts with animals of an enchanted forest. This epic tale combines Japanese fairy tales and folklore to create an exciting theatrical experience for young audiences. After assistant directing last year’s THE PRINCESS’ NIGHTINGALE, Daisuke Kawachi is now set to direct this year’s Mu-SteppingStone co-production. “Naomi’s beautiful writing and the way she plays with the conventions of Kabuki give me so much to work with,” says Kawachi. “I’m most excited to utilize our extraordinary ensemble of young actors to generate scene shifts and to create practical magic in the tradition of the kuroko.” Kabuki refers to the traditional Japanese style of theater that utilizes highly stylized movements and extraordinary staging and costuming, while kuroko refers to the supposedly “invisible” actors who create the special effects on stage. In her script, Iizuka leaves a note explaining the inspiration drawn from the conventions of Kabuki theater. She adds, “I am an American playwright living in the beginning of the 21st century. I am a product of many traditions. The traditions of Kabuki are meant to be a starting point. What happens next is up for grabs.” And that is exactly what Kawachi and the production team will do. Executive and Artistic Director of SteppingStone Theatre for Youth, Mark Hauck, is thrilled to be co- producing THE LAST FIREFLY. “Iizuka doesn’t shy away from the frightening, or the downright silly, realities children face as they make the journey toward discovering their power and place in the world.” Kawachi echoes this sentiment, “At its core, this is a story about going on a journey of self-discovery that allows Boom to stand up to an abusive stepfather. It’s also about how stories can give people strength. The transformative nature of theater pushes Boom forward and ultimately allows him to triumph.” The transformative nature of theater is what leads the two Twin Cities art organizations towards each other. SteppingStone has committed itself to fostering the development of students through the art making process while Theater Mu’s mission has always been to celebrate and empower the Asian American community through theater. THE LAST FIREFLY marks the second production in Mu’s goal to more purposefully engage families and young audiences. Together, the two theaters serve over 45,000 Minnesotans a year, and the intent of the co-production is to diversify the stories of youth theater and cultivate the next generation of thoughtful, citizen artists. Says Assistant Director, Sara Ochs, “Supporting young people’s love of the arts is deeply important to me because my first experiences onstage occurred when I was a teen – the same age as many of our cast members. That work had a lasting impact on my life. I look forward to sharing this powerful experience with the talented young people in our cast and crew.” “So many young people struggle to figure out who they are, what special magic they bring to the world”, says Hauck, “THE LAST FIREFLY embraces this question and takes us on a fantastical journey that speaks to children and adults alike.” The cast of THE LAST FIREFLY includes Eva Allinder, Julia Biddlecome, Sakura Callahan, Gabi Del Moral*, Sarah Freeby, John Lutterman, Yeej Moua, Isabella, Shapland, Will Spangrud, Annika Wade, Shina Xiong, Tristan Xiong, Gregory Yang, and Jade Yang The creative team for THE LAST FIREFLY includes Daisuke Kawachi (Director), Sara Ochs (Assistant Director), Lizzie Strief* (Stage Manager), Emiko Hinds (Assistant Stage Manager), Sarah Brandner (Set Designer), Tony Stoeri (Lighting Designer), Dameun Strange (Sound Designer), Meghan Kent (Costume Designer), Abbee Warmboe (Props Designer), and Annie Enneking (Fight Director). *Denotes member of Actors Equity Association ABOUT THE PLAYWRIGHT Naomi Iizuka’s plays include 36 VIEWS, POLAROID STORIES, ANON(YMOUS), LANGUAGE OF ANGELS, ALOHA, SAY THE PRETTY GIRLS, TATTOO GIRL, SKIN, AT THE VANISHING POINT, CONCERNING STRANGE DEVICES FROM THE DISTANT WEST, LAST FIREFLY, CITIZEN 13559, and WAR OF THE WORLDS. Her work has been produced by Guthrie Theater, Actors Theatre of Louisville, The Children’s Theatre Company, The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Huntington Theatre Company, Berkeley Repertory Theatre, Geva Theatre Center, Portland Center Stage, The Public Theater, Campo Santo and Intersection for the Arts, Dallas Theater Center, The Next Wave Festival at Brooklyn Academy of Music, Soho Repertory Theatre and Edinburgh International Festival. Her work has been workshopped at Sundance Theatre Lab, Midwest PlayLabs, New Works Now at The Public Theater, Performance Space 122, Manhattan Theatre Club and Seattle Repertory Theatre. Her plays have been published by Theatre Communications Group, Smith and Kraus Publishers, Inc., Heinemann, Playscripts, TheatreForum and American Theater. Ms. Iizuka is a member of New Dramatists and the recipient of a Joyce Award, a PEN/Laura Pels Award, an Alpert Award, a Whiting Writers’ Award, a Stavis Award from the National Theatre Conference, a Rockefeller Foundation MAP grant, an NEA/TCG Artist-in-Residence grant, a McKnight Fellowship, a PEN Center USA West Award for Drama, Princeton University’s Hodder Fellowship and a Jerome Fellowship. She is the head of the graduate MFA Playwriting program at the University of California, San Diego. ABOUT THE DIRECTOR Daisuke Kawachi is a Minneapolis based director. He primarily works with new plays. His work has been seen at Playwrights’ Center, Guthrie Theater, Steppingstone Theatre, Theater Mu, Open Eye Figure Theater, and the Minneapolis Fringe Festival. PERFORMANCE SCHEDULE Weekend Performances March 22 – 7:00 PM March 23 – 3:00 PM March 24 – 3:00 PM March 29 – 7:00 PM (Audio Described) March 30 – 3:00 PM March 31 – 3:00 PM (ASL Interpreted) April 5 – 7:00 PM April 6 – 3:00 PM April 7 – 3:00 PM Student Matinees March 21 – 10:00 AM March 22 – 10:00 AM March 27 – 10:00 AM March 28 – 10:00 AM, 12:00 PM April 4 – 10:00 AM, 12:00 PM April 5 – 10:00 AM TICKET INFORMATION Mu strives to voice the stories of the Asian American community, and in order to bring performances to those communities whose stories they tell, Mu is committed to being as accessible as possible. PAY AS YOU ARE ticket pricing asks those who routinely pay $20 for children’s theater tickets to choose to pay that; it is the actual fair market value of the ticket. If an audience member needs to pay less, they can choose to do so – as little as $5 per ticket. Theater Mu is a proud member of the Twin Cities Theatres of Color Coalition – along with New Native Theatre, Pangea World Theater, Penumbra Theatre, Teatro Del Pueblo – as well as the Consortium of Asian American Theaters & Artists. Month Long Event (march) CST SteppingStone Theatre 55 Victoria St N, Saint Paul, Minnesota 55104 Theater Muinfo@theatermu.org
755 Prior Ave North, Suite 107 St. Paul, MN 55104 CalendarGoogleCal  NAOMI IIZUKA’S THE LAST FIREFLY NSPIRED BY TRADITIONAL JAPANESE THEATER, THIS MODERN AND FANTASTICAL PLAY NOW INSPIRES THE NEXT GENERATION OF THOUGHTFUL, CITIZEN ARTISTS 

Theater Mu and SteppingStone Theatre for Youth team up for their more NSPIRED BY TRADITIONAL JAPANESE THEATER, THIS MODERN AND FANTASTICAL PLAY NOW INSPIRES THE NEXT GENERATION OF THOUGHTFUL, CITIZEN ARTISTS Theater Mu and SteppingStone Theatre for Youth team up for their second co- production with Naomi Iizuka’s THE LAST FIREFLY, directed by Daisuke Kawachi, as a means to continue their commitment to engage the next generation of theater artists and enthusiasts. THE LAST FIREFLY will run March 21 – April 7, 2019 at SteppingStone Theatre. Theater Mu continues its PAY AS YOU ARE ticket pricing in order to keep tickets as accessible as possible. ASL interpreted and audio described performances are available on select dates. Individual tickets are now on sale online at theatermu.org/lastfirefly, by calling 651.789.1012, or by emailing info@theatermu.org. For group sales and matinees, contact SteppingStone Theatre at 651.225.9265 SYNOPSIS It begins with light and a flash. Then comes a sound, a pulse, a beat, a crash like a giant hammer smashing through the sky. The fantastic story of Boom, the child of Thunder, is a mythical adventure about discovering one’s inner strength. After being forced out of the home at the hand of a cruel stepfather, Boom sets out on a journey of self-discovery where battles against forces of nature are courageously fought. Along the way, Boom encounters conflicts with animals of an enchanted forest. This epic tale combines Japanese fairy tales and folklore to create an exciting theatrical experience for young audiences. After assistant directing last year’s THE PRINCESS’ NIGHTINGALE, Daisuke Kawachi is now set to direct this year’s Mu-SteppingStone co-production. “Naomi’s beautiful writing and the way she plays with the conventions of Kabuki give me so much to work with,” says Kawachi. “I’m most excited to utilize our extraordinary ensemble of young actors to generate scene shifts and to create practical magic in the tradition of the kuroko.” Kabuki refers to the traditional Japanese style of theater that utilizes highly stylized movements and extraordinary staging and costuming, while kuroko refers to the supposedly “invisible” actors who create the special effects on stage. In her script, Iizuka leaves a note explaining the inspiration drawn from the conventions of Kabuki theater. She adds, “I am an American playwright living in the beginning of the 21st century. I am a product of many traditions. The traditions of Kabuki are meant to be a starting point. What happens next is up for grabs.” And that is exactly what Kawachi and the production team will do. Executive and Artistic Director of SteppingStone Theatre for Youth, Mark Hauck, is thrilled to be co- producing THE LAST FIREFLY. “Iizuka doesn’t shy away from the frightening, or the downright silly, realities children face as they make the journey toward discovering their power and place in the world.” Kawachi echoes this sentiment, “At its core, this is a story about going on a journey of self-discovery that allows Boom to stand up to an abusive stepfather. It’s also about how stories can give people strength. The transformative nature of theater pushes Boom forward and ultimately allows him to triumph.” The transformative nature of theater is what leads the two Twin Cities art organizations towards each other. SteppingStone has committed itself to fostering the development of students through the art making process while Theater Mu’s mission has always been to celebrate and empower the Asian American community through theater. THE LAST FIREFLY marks the second production in Mu’s goal to more purposefully engage families and young audiences. Together, the two theaters serve over 45,000 Minnesotans a year, and the intent of the co-production is to diversify the stories of youth theater and cultivate the next generation of thoughtful, citizen artists. Says Assistant Director, Sara Ochs, “Supporting young people’s love of the arts is deeply important to me because my first experiences onstage occurred when I was a teen – the same age as many of our cast members. That work had a lasting impact on my life. I look forward to sharing this powerful experience with the talented young people in our cast and crew.” “So many young people struggle to figure out who they are, what special magic they bring to the world”, says Hauck, “THE LAST FIREFLY embraces this question and takes us on a fantastical journey that speaks to children and adults alike.” The cast of THE LAST FIREFLY includes Eva Allinder, Julia Biddlecome, Sakura Callahan, Gabi Del Moral*, Sarah Freeby, John Lutterman, Yeej Moua, Isabella, Shapland, Will Spangrud, Annika Wade, Shina Xiong, Tristan Xiong, Gregory Yang, and Jade Yang The creative team for THE LAST FIREFLY includes Daisuke Kawachi (Director), Sara Ochs (Assistant Director), Lizzie Strief* (Stage Manager), Emiko Hinds (Assistant Stage Manager), Sarah Brandner (Set Designer), Tony Stoeri (Lighting Designer), Dameun Strange (Sound Designer), Meghan Kent (Costume Designer), Abbee Warmboe (Props Designer), and Annie Enneking (Fight Director). *Denotes member of Actors Equity Association ABOUT THE PLAYWRIGHT Naomi Iizuka’s plays include 36 VIEWS, POLAROID STORIES, ANON(YMOUS), LANGUAGE OF ANGELS, ALOHA, SAY THE PRETTY GIRLS, TATTOO GIRL, SKIN, AT THE VANISHING POINT, CONCERNING STRANGE DEVICES FROM THE DISTANT WEST, LAST FIREFLY, CITIZEN 13559, and WAR OF THE WORLDS. Her work has been produced by Guthrie Theater, Actors Theatre of Louisville, The Children’s Theatre Company, The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Huntington Theatre Company, Berkeley Repertory Theatre, Geva Theatre Center, Portland Center Stage, The Public Theater, Campo Santo and Intersection for the Arts, Dallas Theater Center, The Next Wave Festival at Brooklyn Academy of Music, Soho Repertory Theatre and Edinburgh International Festival. Her work has been workshopped at Sundance Theatre Lab, Midwest PlayLabs, New Works Now at The Public Theater, Performance Space 122, Manhattan Theatre Club and Seattle Repertory Theatre. Her plays have been published by Theatre Communications Group, Smith and Kraus Publishers, Inc., Heinemann, Playscripts, TheatreForum and American Theater. Ms. Iizuka is a member of New Dramatists and the recipient of a Joyce Award, a PEN/Laura Pels Award, an Alpert Award, a Whiting Writers’ Award, a Stavis Award from the National Theatre Conference, a Rockefeller Foundation MAP grant, an NEA/TCG Artist-in-Residence grant, a McKnight Fellowship, a PEN Center USA West Award for Drama, Princeton University’s Hodder Fellowship and a Jerome Fellowship. She is the head of the graduate MFA Playwriting program at the University of California, San Diego. ABOUT THE DIRECTOR Daisuke Kawachi is a Minneapolis based director. He primarily works with new plays. His work has been seen at Playwrights’ Center, Guthrie Theater, Steppingstone Theatre, Theater Mu, Open Eye Figure Theater, and the Minneapolis Fringe Festival. PERFORMANCE SCHEDULE Weekend Performances March 22 – 7:00 PM March 23 – 3:00 PM March 24 – 3:00 PM March 29 – 7:00 PM (Audio Described) March 30 – 3:00 PM March 31 – 3:00 PM (ASL Interpreted) April 5 – 7:00 PM April 6 – 3:00 PM April 7 – 3:00 PM Student Matinees March 21 – 10:00 AM March 22 – 10:00 AM March 27 – 10:00 AM March 28 – 10:00 AM, 12:00 PM April 4 – 10:00 AM, 12:00 PM April 5 – 10:00 AM TICKET INFORMATION Mu strives to voice the stories of the Asian American community, and in order to bring performances to those communities whose stories they tell, Mu is committed to being as accessible as possible. PAY AS YOU ARE ticket pricing asks those who routinely pay $20 for children’s theater tickets to choose to pay that; it is the actual fair market value of the ticket. If an audience member needs to pay less, they can choose to do so – as little as $5 per ticket. Theater Mu is a proud member of the Twin Cities Theatres of Color Coalition – along with New Native Theatre, Pangea World Theater, Penumbra Theatre, Teatro Del Pueblo – as well as the Consortium of Asian American Theaters & Artists. Month Long Event (march) CST SteppingStone Theatre 55 Victoria St N, Saint Paul, Minnesota 55104 Theater Muinfo@theatermu.org
755 Prior Ave North, Suite 107 St. Paul, MN 55104 CalendarGoogleCal  © Copyright 2019, Twin Cities Enterprise This site built with Project Largo from INN and proudly powered by WordPress. Back to top ↑ 