What the Senate Preserved in Blocking the SAFE Act
01/21/2016
OUR PICKS:  Lawyer Annie Sovcik found him patiently sitting in the interview room, a Syrian refugee in his early 40s, a family man who shared with her at the start his love for playing soccer until the world came crashing down on him. For the next hour or so, Hassan (not his real name) recounted a tale of horror after civil war broke out several years ago. Though apolitical, he was stopped at a Syrian military checkpoint in his village of Deraa and for no reason hauled off to a nearby prison. This is what he said transpired during his 40 days in captivity: His fingernails were removed with pliers. He passed out after a power drill was used to punch a hole through his leg. He was repeatedly beaten, cursed at and asked strange questions. One of them was “Do you want to be president of Syria?” He escaped his hell after a sympathetic prison staffer hid him among a pile of dead bodies to be taken out of the prison. He lost 80 pounds. When he finally got home, his wife did not recognize him. The family fled to Jordan soon after. The once-athletic man now walks with a “horrible limp,” Sovcik told me. “How can human beings treat each other this way?” he asked at one point in the interview. Why indeed. Hassan was among scores of Syrian and Iraqi refugees and torture survivors interviewed by Sovcik and fellow human rights attorney Marie Soueid. Both work for the St. Paul-based Center for Victims of Torture out of its Washington, D.C., office. The two lawyers traveled to Jordan and documented heart-wrenching testimonials that perhaps one day will serve as evidence to hold people accountable for human rights and torture violations. FLASHBACKS, NIGHTMARES Some stories are detailed in “Reclaiming Hope, Dignity and Respect,” a sobering 44-page report written by the two lawyers and released this week. CVT staff in Jordan has provided mental health, physical therapy and other services to 3,036 Iraqi torture survivors and family members since 2008 and 1,829 Syrian refugee clients since 2011. The Jordanian government estimates it has received nearly 1 million refugees from Iraq and Syria in recent years. Most of the Syrian survivors blamed the Syrian military regime for arbitrarily kidnapping and torturing them. As Hassan told Sovcik, they were not looking for any information. Just to torture. Iraqi clients interviewed often said they were targeted for sectarian reasons, either by unknown perpetrators or local militias, according to the report. “Virtually no armed groups, government or opposition, are absolved of torture in Iraq,” the lawyers write in the report. “CVT’s clients describe perpetrators ranging from the government, to Shia militias such as Jaysh al Mahdi, Asaib Ahl Al Haq, Kataib Hezbollah and Al Hashd al Shaabi, to Sunni militants such as the Islamic State of Iraq, a precursor to today’s ISIS.” Flashbacks, nightmares, depression, anger and other post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms are among the ills survivors grapple with while facing an uncertain future. A Jordanian policy that frowns upon employing or offering jobs to refugees has added to the angst. TORTURED, SHE DREAMS OF BECOMING A LAWYER One of the more disturbing accounts involves “Kareem,” a young Syrian photographer who snapped pictures at opposition demonstrations but claimed no affiliation. He told the interviewers his wife and son were kidnapped by Syrian military officers, and soon after he was taken to a house with several rooms. He was then forced to watch the gang rape of his wife, who later took her own life. His young son died after one of the abductors cut his throat. Imprisoned, he was electrocuted, suspended from a ceiling, burned with cigarettes and beaten as his torturers demanded information about opposition rebels. He was released after a friend paid off his captors. Kareem “had scars all over his body after he was tortured,” the report authors wrote. “His psychological suffering has also been severe. He continues to suffer from flashbacks and wishes he had died before he had to see all of the torture and killing that happened.” “Faten,” a young Iraqi woman and mother of Sabean heritage, left an indelible mark on Soueid. She is among a generation of Iraqis who have known only war in their lifetimes, from the start of the Gulf War conflict to the 2003 invasion of Iraz and now the sectarian chaos that has forced many to flee to Jordan and other parts of the Middle East. Two of her brothers and a sister were kidnapped and tortured. Her father was warned in a letter to convert or leave Baghdad by members of Asaib Ahl El Haq (League of the Righteous), a Shia paramilitary group. Two years ago, group members entered Faten’s home, tossed her around, struck her then months-old son and forced her husband to turn over his gold. Her 3-year-old daughter was unharmed, though she witnessed the home invasion. “(Faten) became emotional speaking about what happened to her siblings, her son and father,” Soueid recalled. She was struck by Faten’s desire not to abandon her dream of becoming a lawyer in spite of the family’s refugee status. Taking English lessons, for example, means as much to her as the basic necessities that are hard to come by at the refugee camps. “It’s a way for her to take control of her life and make decisions for herself,” Soueid said. STILL HOPEFUL That resiliency in the face of horrid, scarring experiences was a common thread among many of the refugees the CVT lawyers interviewed. “In nearly every client interview, after describing the violence, torture and displacement conditions that they and their families faced, clients would invoke God and reiterate their gratefulness for not being in a worse situation,” the report said. “Furthermore, many describe living on the prospect of hope. Despite their current situation, they talk about still being hopeful for receiving an education and having a bright future.” Sovcik hopes the stories detailed in the report and its recommendations — from providing greater assistance to torture survivors to advocating for a political solution to the conflicts — “encourages greater political and human will to welcome Syrian refugees and provide some people with new opportunities and new lives.” “Americans who are maybe afraid of terrorism or afraid of the risk to bringing in refugees can also maybe feel less afraid by having more of a connection with the individuals we are talking about,” she said. Ruben Rosario can be reached at 651-228-5454 or at rrosario@ pioneerpress.com. Follow him at twitter.com/nycrican. To read the Center for Victims of Torture report, go to: http://tinyurl.com/jlssmxf. As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here. 