Trump signs executive order limiting refugee entry from 11 countries
10/24/2017
Watch CBSN Live By Pamela Falk Updated on:  October 19, 2017 / 10:11 PM
      / CBS News UNITED NATIONS -- In addition to 582,000 Rohingya refugees who have poured into Bangladesh camps since late August, a UNICEF report released Thursday says that 12,000 children are leaving Myanmar weekly, where cholera infection is increasing. "Many Rohingya refugee children in Bangladesh have witnessed atrocities in Myanmar no child should ever see, and all have suffered tremendous loss," UNICEF executive director Anthony Lake said, adding that basic services such as food, safe water and sanitation are in short supply. Christopher Tidey, communication specialist, told CBS News, "We see children under 5 years old coming across the border severely malnourished, and 60 percent of the arrivals are children." Next week in Geneva, UNICEF -- the U.N.'s children relief fund -- is sponsoring an international pledging conference, calling for $434 million. Lake tells the story of the catastrophe that is unfolding in Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh, where he visited earlier this month: "I heard from some of these children and women. They told stories of horror and loss. Of murder. Of rape. Of villages burned to the ground." "Two of the children I met shared pictures they had drawn of what they had witnessed across the border -- helicopters attacking villages. Soldiers shooting boys as they play football in the fields," Lake said. The report details the desperate plight of the over half million Rohingya refugees who have fled intense violence in neighboring Myanmar, and who are adding to the 211,000 others who fled in previous cross-border influxes. "The magnitude of the challenge is daunting," Lake said. "We have received bone-chilling accounts from those who fled -- mainly women, children and the elderly," U.N. Secretary General Antonio Guterres told the Security Council in late September, when a team of U.N. aid workers were denied entry. The mass exodus began when an ethnic Rohingya insurgent group attacked police posts in Burma, also known as Myanmar, sparking a brutal crackdown by the country's military and security forces, accused of razing scores of villages in what U.N. officials have said amounts to "ethnic cleansing." U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said, earlier this week, that Myanmar's military leadership should be held accountable for the atrocities being carried out against the Rohingya Muslims. Recent refugees have also said the Rohingya were being starved in a bid to make them leave. U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Nikki Haley met with U Thaung Tun, National Security Advisor of Myanmar, to discuss the urgent refugee crisis in Myanmar in mid-October and appealed for "the safe, dignified return of all those displaced as quickly as possible and called for humanitarian access to all affected by the violence." On Thursday, the International Rescue Committee said that almost half a million refugee children are in urgent need of assistance and said that the  "total number of refugees could top 1 million -- the fastest mass exodus the IRC has seen since Rwanda." While applauding the statements by Tillerson and Haley, the President of Refugees International, Eric Schwartz, called for the U.S. to "press -- not occasionally but repeatedly and at the highest levels -- for the Myanmar military to cease all violations of human rights ... and call for unfettered access for humanitarian organizations to Rakhine State." UNICEF's Bangladesh Representative, Edouard Beigbeder painted the picture of the crisis, which is growing more severe by the day: "Living in the open, with food, safe water and sanitation in desperately short supply, the risk of waterborne and other diseases is palpable." First published on October 19, 2017 / 9:27 PM © 2017 CBS Interactive Inc. All Rights Reserved. Pamela Falk is CBS News Foreign Affairs Analyst and an international lawyer, based at the United Nations. The winter storms may affect nearly the entire U.S. this weekend A Democratic delegate alleged the Republican sergeant at arms said in an argument over the poster that "all Muslims are terrorists," the sergeant at arms later resigned The suit said Depp has suffered financial losses because of the accusations Clark, 22, was shot while holding a cellphone that police said they thought was a gun Subaru is recalling 1.3 million vehicles in the U.S. because the brake lights may not illuminate properly A Democratic delegate alleged the Republican sergeant at arms said in an argument over the poster that "all Muslims are terrorists," the sergeant at arms later resigned President Trump condemned the special counsel's Russia investigation and accused Democrats of having a fringe socialist agenda He predicted he would win the nomination and then defeat President Donald Trump He faced a storm of criticism from those who viewed his comments as demeaning to women His attorneys argued in a sentencing memo filed Friday that the sentencing range of 19 1/2 to 24 years in prison is "clearly disproportionate" to his offenses as a first-time offender Osama bin Laden's son is now believed to be around 30 The lawsuit was filed against three people and four companies based in China 87 beluga whales and 11 orcas have been held in cruel conditions since last summer This "dinner plate"-sized tarantula dragged away an opossum for supper — the first time it's ever been caught on camera "Face the Nation" moderator Margaret Brennan answers five key questions about the Hanoi summit and the prospect of future talks between President Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un The suit said Depp has suffered financial losses because of the accusations Smith, who's best known for his portrayal of Prince Philip in Netflix's "The Crown," portrays the incendiary photographer in a new biopic The 83-year-old Rock & Roll Hall of Famer is recuperating in Memphis The rapper beat Garth Brooks' record from 2018 by three people, according to the rodeo Scott Rudin has faced criticism for moving to block community theaters from adapting Harper Lee's classic novel SpaceX launches unpiloted crew ship on historic test flight The lawsuit was filed against three people and four companies based in China A 7-foot sea creature that washed ashore in Southern California has been identified as a hoodwinker sunfish, a recently identified rare species thought to live in the Southern Hemisphere This "dinner plate"-sized tarantula dragged away an opossum for supper — the first time it's ever been caught on camera Actresses Jennifer Lawrence and Mary Elizabeth Winstead are among the celebrities who've said they were victims Texas has more than 56,000 children with non-medical exemptions A new report from UNICEF warns that cases of the vaccine-preventable disease are surging around the globe In recent months, multiple drugmakers have recalled medications after tests revealed traces of carcinogens The skin-like silicon patches attach to the chest and foot proved just as reliable as traditional electrodes, according to a new study The study finds new moms lose an average of 62 minutes of sleep a night, while dads only lose about 13 minutes Subaru is recalling 1.3 million vehicles in the U.S. because the brake lights may not illuminate properly The winning numbers for the March 1 drawing were: 29, 33, 39, 60, 66 and Mega Ball 21 The lawsuit was filed against three people and four companies based in China Insurers for CEO Tim Sloan, his predecessor and other executives will foot the latest bill from 2016 scandal The new Form 1040 is one page with just 23 lines, but for many taxpayers, the challenge will be Schedules 1 through 6 Clark, 22, was shot while holding a cellphone that police said they thought was a gun Federal agents found tens of thousands of Native American artifacts in his home in South Lake Tahoe, California, prosecutors said Actresses Jennifer Lawrence and Mary Elizabeth Winstead are among the celebrities who've said they were victims Chinedu Okobi, 36, was unarmed when he died after being Tased by San Mateo County Sheriff's deputies in October Jassy Correia was last seen early Sunday celebrating her 23rd birthday with friends at a Boston nightclub Copyright © 2019 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved. 