Loneliness and Memories, Syrian Refugees Struggle in Safe Spaces
01/11/2016
OUR PICKS:  A drop-in center for homeless teens in downtown and a program to screen St. Paul students for vision problems were among the couple hundred nonprofit organizations that received funding in the final grant round of the year from several large St. Paul foundations. The St. Paul Foundation, F. R. Bigelow Foundation and Mardag Foundation this week announced 135 grants totaling nearly $3.5 million, their third grant distribution this year to nonprofits and projects across Minnesota. Otto Bremer Trust announced grants of $8.4 million grants to 142 organizations in three states. Since 2007, the SafeZone Drop-In Center in downtown St. Paul has seen the number of homeless teens who stop by for a meal or for help finding a place to live increase 75 percent, to about 70 or 80 youth per day. St. Paul Foundation and the affiliated Bigelow and Mardag groups gave a combined $60,000 to Face to Face, which runs the drop-in center, to help it move from its Lowertown location to a new space in Metro Square, at Seventh and Robert streets. Other recipients of grants from St. Paul, Bigelow and Mardag include: — The American Indian Family Center on St. Paul’s East Side received $130,000 to start a parent support group and mentoring program for young mothers of toddlers and preschool-age children. The center offers culturally specific services for women during pregnancy and the first year of their child’s life and runs early learning and family education classes for 5-year-olds but lacked services for parents in the intervening years. — Center for Victims of Torture received a total of $100,000 to continue providing mental health services for Karen refugees from southeast Asia through a recent collaboration with HealthEast Roselawn Clinic. — Catholic Charities of St. Paul and Minneapolis received a total of $100,000 for a pilot program to help several agencies in the east metro coordinate their efforts to house single homeless adults. Otto Bremer Trust, which was created by the founder of Bremer Bank in 1944, distributes grants in communities where its banks are located in North Dakota, Minnesota and Western Wisconsin. It has given away more than $35 million this year, and recent recipients include: — The Cookie Cart, a Minneapolis youth development organization that trains young people to bake and sell cookies, received $300,000, which will be used in part to help open a site in St. Paul. — The Phillips Eye Institute Foundation in Minneapolis received $250,000 to screen students in St. Paul Public Schools for vision problems and to purchase eyeglasses and pay for necessary surgeries for children whose parents cannot afford them. Other large grants from Bremer included $150,000 each to the Neighborhood Development Center in St. Paul and Neighborhood House in St. Paul. — Christian Cupboard Emergency Food Shelf in Woodbury received $72,000 and Emma Norton Services in St. Paul received $120,000, both for operating expenses. Full grant lists can be found at ottobremer.org and mnpartners.org. Maja Beckstrom can be reached at 651-228-5295. As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here. 