For Torture Survivors, 100 Days of Fear and Anxiety
04/27/2017
Cloudy early with some clearing expected late. A few flurries or snow showers possible. Low 22F. Winds light and variable.. Cloudy early with some clearing expected late. A few flurries or snow showers possible. Low 22F. Winds light and variable. Updated: March 2, 2019 @ 8:05 pm Ethan DeWitt / Sentinel Staff Fadia Najib Thabet is back on the campus of SIT in Brattleboro after returning from Washington, D.C., where she received an international award. Ethan DeWitt / Sentinel Staff Fadia Najib Thabet is back on the campus of SIT in Brattleboro after returning from Washington, D.C., where she received an international award. BRATTLEBORO — Fadia Najib Thabet remembers well the day Yemen’s civil war arrived at her doorstep. It was March 2015. Thabet, a Yemeni humanitarian activist, was living in Aden, a major port city near Somalia and the Arabian Sea. Long involved in refugee assistance in her country, she was meeting that day with high-ranking officials of the Yemeni army for a workshop. Then the phone call came: evacuate the building. For months, the Houthis, a Shiite tribe, had been fighting for control over the country, taking over Yemen’s capital Sana’a to the north the previous September and ousting the newly elected Yemeni government. Now Houthi fighters were 30 minutes outside Aden, pressing their battle south in the hopes of capturing the port city, a crucial strategic point. “If you control the capital and Aden, you control the whole country,” Thabet explains. Thabet knew she had to choose: stay in Aden with her family and continue her work, or flee the city under threat. She chose to stay, dedicating her focus to advocate for child survivors no matter who controlled her city, as the war took a complex, and deadly, turn. Recently, those efforts were recognized. On March 29, Thabet, a graduate student at SIT Institute in Brattleboro, received the International Women of Courage Award for the six years she spent standing up for young victims of war, and documenting their predicaments to the United Nations. First lady Melania Trump presented the award, praising Thabet and 12 other recipients for the “extraordinary story of courage” each had. Then the women went on a tour of cities around the U.S., ending in Los Angeles last week. Now, Thabet is back in Brattleboro, resuming her studies in peace-building and conflict transformation. She came to the U.S. in 2016 through a Hubert Humphrey Fellowship at the University of Minnesota, and arrived at SIT in January through the school’s Global Scholars program, which gives full scholarships to immigrants and refugees. Today, she plans to continue her studies, graduate next year and head back to the Middle East. “I’m going to work in war zones,” she said this week from a paneled room on the SIT campus. “I will focus on how we can get more young women into peace talks.” It’s perhaps an unsurprising decision. Thabet has been fighting for humanitarian causes in Yemen for years. After graduating with an engineering degree from the University of Aden in 2010, she worked with refugees in the port city for years, first by compiling databases at an office computer and then by helping people directly on the ground. The immigrants would arrive by boat, often fleeing conflict in Somalia via Ethiopia. Thabet, working with the Danish Refugee Council, would document their conditions, and help them settle in. She focused on children, often the victims of maiming, abuse and loss. “My work was on the ground: I met the parents, I met the kids, I interviewed those people myself,” she said. “On the ground, you can reflect to your organization what’s going on (better than in reports and statistics alone).” Then the Houthis came, and the job changed dramatically. Young men, not organized under any formal army, took to the streets to fight back, but the city still fell. Many, including Thabet’s co-workers, left the city for safer areas in other parts of the country. Thabet stayed, carrying on the work. And she watched as the war within her country began to escalate. Aden, through skirmishes, switched hands between the Houthis and the government several times in months. (Today it remains in government hands again.) And bigger players began to enter the conflict — Iran on the side of the Houthis, Saudi Arabia and the U.S. on the side of the displaced government — each using the war as a proxy for a region-wide political schism. Through it all, Thabet saw the casualties up front. She saw children, abducted, abused, recruited to fight by the Houthis. She saw the airstrikes by Saudi and American planes, the families displaced and separated. And she saw fingers fly, as foreign media outlets focused articles on the damage done by planes by the “coalition” led by Saudi Arabia — ignoring, Thabet believes, the equal damage carried out by Houthi fighters. Thabet never saw the conflict through political stripes. She just documented the abuse, fairly and impartially, compiling reports and passing them to the U.N. And she engaged in proactive initiatives to stop children from being engulfed in the conflict. One campaign, called “hold the pen and not the gun,” involved presentations to 2,500 children to dissuade them from joining militants and terrorists, according to a CBS News report. The work carried heavy risks. When the Houthis had control of Aden, life was always uncertain. Snipers attacked civilians in the street; rockets destroyed homes indiscriminately. Thabet had to look over her shoulder constantly, making sure her face was fully covered before leaving the house. But she says the decision to stay was a natural one. “I was the only one left in my organization, (but) I felt an obligation to work,” she said. “It was about seeing this kind of injustice happening to the kids and not doing anything.” Finally though, in 2016, Thabet decided to study in America. She had already received a scholarship and study visa to the U.S. before the war came to Aden, but had deferred it when the conflict escalated. Now, her mother and brother were urging her to go, reminding her of the work she put into her application. She took a 12-hour bus out of the city, passing through treacherous terrain dotted with Houthi landmines, unsure she would make it or see her family again. Eventually, after a month of travel, she came to Minnesota, taking classes and applying her experience to work with the American Refugee Committee in Minneapolis and the Center for Victims of Torture in St. Paul. Molly Henry of St. Paul, an international recruiter and volunteer coordinator at the Committee, said Thabet’s work in Yemen intersected perfectly with the organization’s goals. Thabet, with her knowledge of the region and fluent Arabic and English, was able to help the gender-based violence and protection technical adviser develop a child survivor tool kit and case management guide for Syria, Henry said. “The word that comes to mind when I think of Fadia is fearless and tenacious,” Henry said. “She’s just going to keep doing what she believes in, and that shows through in her work.” Nancy Pearson, training manager at the Center for Victims of Torture’s New Tactics in Human Rights program, said the center is “incredibly proud” of Thabet’s award. “She is a courageous and amazing woman,” Pearson said in a statement provided by the organization’s spokeswoman. At SIT, Thabet says her studies have given her new tools to take back to her work. She gained her experience from the field; the academic perspective, she says, has proven valuable. And amid a political divide over the future of similar refugees in the U.S., she urges others to take from her story a lesson in open-mindedness. “My message is: don’t (focus on) one single story,” she said. “We are not all doing the same thing. My story is completely different from your story. My achievement and failure is completely different from yours. And we went through a lot.” Ethan DeWitt can be reached at 352-1234, extension 1439, or edewitt@keenesentinel.com. Follow him on Twitter at @EDeWittKS Sorry, there are no recent results for popular commented articles. 