Mental-health and psychosocial support should be integrated into humanitarian responses
06/26/2014
Thank you to MinnPost for bringing local awareness to the mental health needs of Cambodians (“Cambodia suffers from an appalling mental health crisis,” June 18). I was particularly gratified to see the author reference the Transcultural Psychosocial Organization (TPO Cambodia) as one of the largest organizations in the mental health sector in that country. Since 2005, the St. Paul-based Center for Victims of Torture has partnered with TPO Cambodia to assist it with providing high quality mental health services to torture survivors in three critical areas: mental health treatment and healing; monitoring and evaluation to show the impact of the mental health services; and organizational development. This work is made possible through the financial support of the United States Agency for International Development and the American people’s support. Created to respond to the psychological needs of Cambodians that resulted from years of war and violence, TPO Cambodia provides care for those suffering from ongoing trauma-related mental health challenges, including anxiety, depression and post-traumatic stress disorder. They are part of a growing movement of 140 torture survivor rehabilitation centers around the world who are working to provide effective multidisciplinary services to torture survivors. Particularly in areas of war and unspeakable atrocities, more must be done to better integrate mental health and psychosocial support in humanitarian responses during and after crises. This is especially true for torture and war trauma survivors whose early detection of mental health disorders and treatment is vital to their recovery. By making mental health and psychosocial support a global priority, nations can take a giant step toward breaking cycles of decades-long violence and strengthening and improving the lives of so many. Pam Kriege Santoso is a staff member of The Center for Victims of Torture.MinnPost welcomes original letters from readers on current topics of general interest. Interested in joining the conversation? Submit your letter to the editor. The choice of letters for publication is at the discretion of MinnPost editors; they will not be able to respond to individual inquiries about letters. You must be logged in to post a comment. It’s clearly time to rename the Environmental Protection Agency Everything you need to know, for now, about Minneapolis’ Upper Harbor Terminal project Living near — and spending time in —  urban parks and other green spaces linked to better mental health At the Museum of Russian Art: ‘The Body in Soviet Art’ Expect to see the S-word beaten to a pulp by Election Day 2020 Bernie Sanders and the ‘Geppetto Checkmark’ As Minnesota State looks to the future, an identity crisis is rekindled It can take 6 years for new parents to get a good night’s sleep again, study finds Beyond diversity: Trainer Eddie Moore on moving to the next level of engagement ‘So many people are dying’: Rural Minnesotans struggle to access opioid addiction treatment MinnPost is a nonprofit, nonpartisan enterprise whose mission is to provide high-quality journalism for people who care about Minnesota. Donations and pledges totaling $25,000 or more have been made by each of the families and foundations listed. For a list of all donors by category, see our most recent Year End Report. MinnPost | 900 6th Avenue SE | Minneapolis, MN 55414 | 612.455.6950 