Torture Healing Exists and Must Continue to Exist
06/26/2017
By Other Voices In hiring 15,000 new ICE (Immigration & Customs Enforcement) workers to fill and staff U.S. detention centers, Donald Trump must take full responsibility for not creating a U.S. criminal class comparable to World War II German concentration camp guards and workers. As immigrant detainees increase, more reports of ICE mental and physical cruelty surface. Two respected organizations (The Center for Victims of Torture, and the Unitarian-Universalist Service Committee) produced a scholarly report called "Tortured and Detained -- Survivor Stories of U.S. Immigration Detention," exposing conditions in late 2013. They are worse today. Dangers of hiring ordinary citizens to positions giving them arbitrary powers to punish persons under their control have been dramatically demonstrated in two historic studies: The 1961 Milgram Experiment and the 1971 Stanford Prison Experiment. Basically, the studies made this point: Culture largely determines actions of its members. This is to say: Leadership values and leadership practice determine how most members of any organization--city police departments, banks, the EPA or ICE--will perform. To date, Trump's leadership values display massive unilateral judgmental authority with expectation of total obedience, and a disappointing absence of human empathy. We should thank our personal gods that we're not innocent castaway immigrants seeking sanctuary in America today. Walter S. Nicholes,World War II veteranMember, Veterans For Peace, Chapter 39, NEOH Shaker Heights Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our
            User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and
            Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18). © 2018  Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved (About Us).
            The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the 
            prior written permission of Advance Local. Community Rules
            apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site. Your California Privacy Rights Ad Choices 