The Quiet Epidemic of Mental Disorders in Refugees
02/16/2016
OUR PICKS: The Scandinavian-rich Midwest can rest assured that the United States will have ambassadors to Norway and Sweden.  The Senate on Friday approved those ambassadors, and two others, after months of delay, mostly due to Republican presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas putting a hold on the nominations to protest the Obama administration’s nuclear deal with Iran. The nominations passed via voice vote after Cruz removed his hold on them, with his spokesman saying that his objections to the Iranian deal now are well known. Minneapolis lawyer Samuel Heins will take over the Norway ambassador duties. Heins has a long legal career in the state’s largest city after graduating from the University of Minnesota. He also has been a leader in the American Civil Liberties Union Minnesota chapter, founded Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights and co-founded the Center for Victims of Torture. Iran native and Californian Azita Raji will be the ambassador to Sweden. She is a philanthropist and former international business leader. The Senate also approved ambassadors to Trinidad and Tobago and Luxembourg during a brief Friday session. Under Senate rules, a single senator may hold up a nomination, as Cruz did for these nominees of President Barack Obama. Sen. Amy Klobuchar, D-Minn., regularly delivered Senate floor speeches decrying the hold. The United States has been without a Norway ambassador 869 days. Klobuchar led the effort to derail Obama’s first Norway ambassador after he did not do well in confirmation hearings and said he never has been to Norway. Obama then picked Heins. Raji’s nomination was held up 478 days. Klobuchar said Friday’s Norway and Sweden ambassador confirmations “will reaffirm our nation’s longstanding relationship with these two key European allies. Minnesota is home to more people of Norwegian heritage than anywhere except Norway itself, so it is only fitting that the new ambassador hails from our state.” The senator recalled her floor speeches encouraging confirmation. “I vowed to go to the floor every day until this got done and request action,” she said. “I was running out of Norwegian and Swedish facts and stories so this is a welcome development.” Sen. Al Franken, D-Minn., said that the ambassador posts have been unfilled too long. “Our nation shares a strong bond with both countries, and nowhere is that more evident than in Minnesota, which has the largest Scandinavian population in the country,” he said.     As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here. 