When fatigue becomes a concern
09/30/2018
  Seek medical attention in case of persistent fatigue. Shutter Stock Be careful not to simply write off fatigue as lack of rest or being too busy, especially when your fatigue persists for a prolonged period despite taking off time to rest, relax and get enough sleep, because fatigue has many causes.Getting consistent sleep for about seven to eight hours of sleep is, according to Kizito Wamala, a clinical psychologist at Centre for Victims of Torture, the first thing you should do. However, if you continue feeling fatigued, this is a cause for concern.Causes Fatigue is associated with a decreased ability to get around and be active without becoming exhausted or running out of breath. When the heart is not able to function at its optimum level, then increased activity means compromised delivery of blood and oxygen to the tissues, thus being fatigued.“Diabetes is one of the most common causes of fatigue. If this is the case, someone will also likely have symptoms of excessive thirst, excessive urination, and increased hunger, says Wamala, adding that, “Slow thyroid activity is associated with symptoms that include unexplained weight gain, sleep problems, dry skin, constipation and sensitivity to cold.” Being depressed can cause symptoms of fatigue. However, there would also be changes in mood, low appetite, and loss of interest in most activitiesDeficiency of essential minerals and vitamins such as iron, zinc, magnesium and Vitamin D can also cause fatigues. Taking of supplements with these may be the solution to your problemWamala says, “Hormonal imbalances leading to irregular periods, signs of early menopause, change in sex drive, or any other unclear symptoms that seem related to your hormones can cause fatigue among most women.” SolutionsEstablish a consistent sleep pattern, limit daytime naps if you do not fall asleep until late at night and take a warm bath before you sleep. Wamala recommends cutting out stimulating drinks such as alcohol or coffee close to bed time and keeping screens such as televisions, smartphones, and tablets out of the bedroom if possible. In addition, stopping the use of these electronic devices an hour or two before bedtime will go a long way in improving your sleep. These screens and such devices emit excess light, and the stimulation they provide may contribute to sleep problems.He advises people to detoxify or try to lose weight as well as modify diets to avoid inflammatory foods is important. “Purple and red foods are very good. To boost energy, use turmeric, ginger and rosemary to reduce any potential inflammation in the body. Correct any food deficiencies such as magnesium and omega 3 fatty acids.” Get enough rest and sleep, exercise, drink enough water and avoid stimulants and energy drinks. Many find themselves using energy drinks, or coffee to remain alert, alcohol, sugar or even medications, especially if they have tried to rest and not gotten any relief. These give you a false sense of energy but can cause dependence and even addiction. What to eat “Purple and red foods are very good to boost energy use turmeric, ginger and rosemary to reduce any potential inflammation in the body. Correct any food deficiencies such as magnesium and omega 3 fatty acids.”  Business people who were transporting perishable products like oranges, mangoes, fish and other Herbert Ayesigye was shot twice in the stomach by the thieves who looted an unspecified amounts 