Two CIA Contractors Are Being Sued for Torture and 'Human Experimentation'
10/13/2015
Supported by Letters To the Editor: Re “Fear Arrives in South Carolina Long Before Any Actual Syrians” (front page, Sept. 26): If South Carolina doesn’t want Syrian refugees, then please send them to Connecticut. I work with a refugee resettlement agency in New Haven, and for the last month my phone has been ringing off the hook with calls from people and groups from all over the state, offering to welcome Syrian refugees. We are confident that our government will thoroughly screen all refugees — as it has done in the past — before they are invited to resettle here. We have told our governor, members of Congress and the White House to triple the number of refugees normally sent to Connecticut. We will welcome these courageous people with open arms, and we are confident that they will become wonderful neighbors and outstanding citizens. CHRIS GEORGE  Executive Director IRIS (Integrated Refugee and Immigrant Services) New Haven To the Editor: I read with great interest David Miliband’s Sept. 22 Op-Ed article, “How the U.S. Can Welcome Refugees,” and, not surprisingly, found myself nodding in agreement with his eloquent argument. The Center for Victims of Torture has worked closely with the International Rescue Committee, and I deeply respect the great work it does. I concur that the steps to successfully welcoming refugees must be multifaceted, including security check oversight, funding for housing, the empowerment of employment and educational opportunities for children of refugees. I would add one more critical component to Mr. Miliband’s exceptional list: appropriate and ample rehabilitative services and mental health care for refugees who have survived torture. Last year, a heartbreaking 58 percent of our clients in our international direct services programs reported surviving torture. It stands to reason that many refugees now landing in Europe and those who will eventually resettle in the United States have also endured torture. Resettlement is vital. But without holistic post-arrival services, survivors of torture will struggle to achieve control of their lives and build confidence in their futures. CURT GOERING Executive Director The Center for Victims of Torture St. Paul Advertisement 