Ruben Rosario: Some understanding for the Cleveland kidnapping victims
05/10/2013
OUR PICKS:  They escorted the alleged monster of Cleveland into an Ohio courtroom Thursday, May 9. He was in manacles, wearing a jail-issued blue jumpsuit. If the depraved evildoer described in the kidnapping and rape charges were in a drawing, it would depict a fang-toothed, horrible-looking, once-human, deformed creature, both in physical appearance and inner soul. I expected Gollum from Lord of the Rings. Instead, as is often the case in real life, we got a regular-looking middle-aged man, his head bowed now that he was the one in captivity. That’s what real monsters look like. They come in all colors and from all walks of life, sometimes a stranger but most often a relative or family friend or acquaintance. And the better we inform our kids about that, the better they can detect them and fend them off. The days ahead will shed more light on how Ariel Castro kidnapped two teens and a 20-year old woman from 2002 to 2004 and held them captive in his boarded-up home in a poor neighborhood for more than a decade until one of them escaped and called police. Some will ask how he exerted such dominance for so long without detection. There will be shortsighted questions about why these women didn’t summon help earlier. Others wonder aloud why police, who searched for these victims over the years, missed this convicted batterer and this house of horrors right under their noses. BOSNIA, SYRIA AND HERE Erin Morgan, due to her life’s work, knows most of the answers to these questions. Her focus is what happens now to help heal these three young women. Morgan is a marriage and family therapist who also serves as an international services clinical adviser at the Minneapolis-based Center for Victims of Torture. Her work and expertise have taken her to refugee camps in armed-conflict regions across the globe and to intimate, gut-wrenching contact with torture victims. Many were long-term captives — men, women and children — who were raped and subjected to physical and psychological torture that scarred them for life. Abducted children forced to serve as soldiers and to kill, sometimes even their own parents and siblings. Young girls and woman repeatedly raped and giving birth to their captors’ children. Captives forced to do inhumane things to others as a way to shame them and keep them under control and afraid to leave. Morgan and others have seen this depravity, from Bosnia to Iraq and Uganda to Syria. That is why Morgan was not at all surprised by the dynamics of the case unfolding in Cleveland. “Nope. Not one ounce of surprise,” said Morgan, a suburban Milwaukee native who also worked with domestic-violence victims and abused and neglected children in Georgia and other locales. “It’s always sad and disappointing to learn about things like this,” she added. “The challenge is convincing people that this just does not happen somewhere else and to other people.” TRAUMA BONDING EXPLAINED Morgan sees strong parallels linking the plight and experiences of the victims in Cleveland to the clients served by the torture center here and across the globe. The so-called “Stockholm syndrome” is undoubtedly at play in the Ohio incident. The phrase, a much-researched phenomenon in social science and psychology, was coined by the late criminologist Nils Bejeret in connection with a 1973 attempted bank robbery and hostage drama in the Swedish capital. During the six-day standoff between the two robbers and police, some hostages not only bonded with their captors but also criticized cops for how they handled the situation. The robbers surrendered without injury or loss of life, and one of them later forged a lifelong friendship with one of his captives. Trauma bonding is now a more accepted and much broader terminology used in psychology to explain the sometimes unexplainable machinations in play between captor and captive. “There develops a strong attachment and identification with a person who has now become your primary caretaker and in total control of keeping you alive,” Morgan explained. That dependence on survival could lead a captive to do things to please the captor that many would find reprehensible or in violation of morals or spiritual beliefs. LOVING A RAPIST’S CHILD Morgan stresses that we must look upon captives as true victims before we pass judgment on them. Essentially, there but for the grace of God go I. Her thoughts and desires rest squarely on what will probably turn out to be a long recovery to help the three women in Cleveland not only cope with their victimization, but to overcome it. It’s not easy, Morgan said, because there are family reunification dynamics; also, at least one of the women may have borne her captor a child and suffered several miscarriages as a result of rapes through the years. Morgan has come in contact with rescued female torture victims struggling with the emotions that surround giving birth to their rapists’ children. In some cases, because of gang rapes, they don’t even known the identity of the father. In other cases, likely the one now playing out in Cleveland, they know exactly who the father is. Two options usually emerge, Morgan said in her dealings with torture clients: “They harbor so much resentment that they make arrangements to have someone else rear the child” or they overcome the sexual assault “and find a place in their heart” to love and care for and raise the child. “I have learned that human beings in these situations are incredibly strong and resilient,” she said. “The recovery (of the Cleveland victims) will take some time.” The women will have to confront their own behavior in captivity, she said. “Hopefully, they will receive the support to be able to pull apart the pieces of their ordeal and extricate the mental gymnastics they needed to do to keep themselves alive.” Ruben Rosario can be reached at 651 228-5454or email at rrosario@pioneerpress.com. Follow him on Twitter @nycrican. As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here. 