U.S. Must Send Clear Message to Egypt on Human Rights
05/09/2016
Thank you for visiting theday.com. To continue reading this premium story, you need to become a member.
			Click below to take advantage of an exclusive offer for new members: $1 for 12 weeks — OR — $2 for 26 weeks Already registered? Login
					Not registered? Register here.
No, thank you. Published April 17. 2016 12:01AM  As executive director of the Center for the Victims of Torture, Curt Goering oversees an international staff that provides comprehensive help – physical, emotional and psychological – for the victims of government-sponsored torture. His group also conducts research to document institutional torture and work with the United States and other governments to address it. Last year the organization assisted 160,000 victims of torture. You can imagine Goering’s dismay when he hears a leading candidate for president – we are talking about Donald Trump – endorsing the concept of resuming waterboarding and “much worse” to try to gain information from suspected terrorists. “It is very disturbing that you have a candidate running for the top office in the land espousing something that is illegal under U.S. policy and international law,” said Goering. “When you see politicians who are playing on this fear (of terrorism) … and exploiting it to try to make themselves more popular and trying to project themselves as leaders, it is very troubling.” And it surrenders the moral high ground, sending the message that the United States is no different from some African or Mideast despot when it comes to using cruelty to extract information. Studies suggest that torture is in fact ineffective. U.S. leaders must be emphatic and united in rejecting torture and its euphemistic counterpart, “enhanced interrogation techniques.” Last Tuesday, Goering addressed a meeting of the Southeast Connecticut World Affairs Council at Connecticut College. I am a member. Much of his talk focused on Syria and the massive migration the civil war has caused. He said Syria and the government of President Assad “is guilty of torture on an industrial scale.” One police military photographer alone, who was smuggled out of the country, provided photographic evidence of 7,000 deaths in Syrian prisons from torture or starvation, he said. Goering told the story of a Syrian nurse who was tortured, including being raped multiple times. Her “crime,” he said, was quitting her job at a hospital because she could not live with orders prohibiting her from treating wounded rebels aligned with forces opposed to Assad. Syrian inquisitors dragged the woman from her home and interrogated her for days, asking about her sympathies for the rebels and what information she had about them. She had none. Another man, Goering said, suffered physical deformity after being tortured in what appeared to be a case of mistaken identity. Goering told his audience that the number of displaced people across the Middle East and large swaths of Africa is larger than at any time since World War II. Currently about 60 million people are on the move, he said, 20 million refugees who fled their homeland because of war, persecution or social upheaval, and another 40 million who have been internally displaced. About 42,000 people are being displaced daily, four times the number just a few years ago. Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq, Sudan, Nigeria and Eritrea face the greatest upheaval, said Goering. The continuing war, though slowed by a partial ceasefire, has displaced about half the Syrian population, including 4.6 million living in camps in Turkey. Distressed by the horrible living conditions, hundreds of thousands are now seeking refuge in Europe, causing a crisis there. The United States has played only a small role in taking in Syrian refugees, Goering noted, with many states refusing to accept refugees for fear of embedded terrorists. He called such fears unfounded. “The U.S. has a very intensive screening system in place, with multiple levels of review,” Goering said. The scale of the suffering described by the speaker is hard to comprehend. Goering said his organization copes by focusing on helping one person at a time. There is hope, at least, in that. Paul Choiniere is the editorial page editor.  What's the deal with Marty, the Stop & Shop robot? Grandma poses for photo on iceberg, needs rescue when she floats out to sea Former Conn College student charged with 7 counts of felony voyeurism School regionalization bills draw ire at Capitol hearing Brutal Arctic air mass is about to spread over U.S.; in Northeast by Tuesday Coast Guard leaders respond to self-harm incidents among cadets Mashantuckets' new top lawyer has impressive resume House investigators demand security clearance documents from Trump Police logs - March 2, 2019 Nolan goes to Hartford WiredZone: Waterford vs. NFA in ECC DI Final GameDay Preview: St. Bernard vs. Stonington in ECC Div. 2 Final WiredZone: St. Bernard vs. Stonington in ECC DII Final 2019 All GameDay Team Unsung heroes of local history More questionable spending by CMEEC uncovered in audit School regionalization bills draw ire at Capitol hearing What's the deal with Marty, the Stop & Shop robot? House investigators demand security clearance documents from Trump Analysis: Cohen hearing stokes touchy topic of impeachment 