Trump administration cuts refugee numbers
09/17/2018
Watch CBSN Live By Kylie Atwood September 17, 2018 / 6:59 PM
      / CBS News The Trump administration plans to admit a maximum of only 30,000 refugees in 2019. Although this would be the lowest refugee cap in U.S. history, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, when making the announcement at the State Department Monday afternoon, called the new figures "expansive." He added that they should "not be viewed in isolation" because the U.S. is the world's most generous nation when it comes to humanitarian assistance. Pompeo suggested that maintaining that high level of U.S. humanitarian assistance was related to the new cap, which he also said "serves the national security interests" of the US. The Trump administration has long said that it would need to move resources to address the backlog in asylum seekers, and Pompeo referenced this, calling it a "daunting challenge." He said there are over 800,000 asylum cases pending. In 2019 the U.S. plans to process 280,000 asylum seekers. The vetting process for refugees is extensive. It generally takes 18-24 months, and there are many layers. Despite the long vetting, Pompeo believes the system under the Obama administration was "defective." And he cited the example of a border crosser affiliated with ISIS who had made it through the asylum process. With humanitarian crises worldwide – in places like Syria, Yemen, South Sudan and Myanmar – there are currently unprecedented refugee flows, which are expected to continue next year. That means this shrinking of the U.S. refugee admittance number is a major blow to many refugee organizations. "U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo's announcement of a refugee ceiling of 30,000 is appalling, and it continues this administration's rapid flight from the proud U.S. tradition of providing resettlement to those fleeing persecution around the world," wrote Eric Schwartz, the President of Refugees International. "It is unacceptable that the United States is asking governments like Turkey, Jordan, and Uganda, among many others, to provide safety for literally millions of refugees, while the administration, in turn, announces the lowest refugee ceiling in U.S. history." The cap itself is not the only factor in determining how many refugees are let into the U.S. Last year's refugee cap was 45,000. But by the end of August the U.S. had only let in 19,899 refugees, meaning that the U.S. will not hit its cap. They are unlikely to even reach half the maximum figure by the end of September. First published on September 17, 2018 / 6:59 PM © 2018 CBS Interactive Inc. All Rights Reserved. A Democratic delegate alleged the Republican sergeant at arms said in an argument over the poster that "all Muslims are terrorists," the sergeant at arms later resigned The suit said Depp has suffered financial losses because of the accusations The winter storms may affect nearly the entire U.S. this weekend Clark, 22, was shot while holding a cellphone that police said they thought was a gun Subaru is recalling 1.3 million vehicles in the U.S. because the brake lights may not illuminate properly A Democratic delegate alleged the Republican sergeant at arms said in an argument over the poster that "all Muslims are terrorists," the sergeant at arms later resigned President Trump condemned the special counsel's Russia investigation and accused Democrats of having a fringe socialist agenda He predicted he would win the nomination and then defeat President Donald Trump He faced a storm of criticism from those who viewed his comments as demeaning to women His attorneys argued in a sentencing memo filed Friday that the sentencing range of 19 1/2 to 24 years in prison is "clearly disproportionate" to his offenses as a first-time offender Osama bin Laden's son is now believed to be around 30 The lawsuit was filed against three people and four companies based in China 87 beluga whales and 11 orcas have been held in cruel conditions since last summer This "dinner plate"-sized tarantula dragged away an opossum for supper — the first time it's ever been caught on camera "Face the Nation" moderator Margaret Brennan answers five key questions about the Hanoi summit and the prospect of future talks between President Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un The suit said Depp has suffered financial losses because of the accusations Smith, who's best known for his portrayal of Prince Philip in Netflix's "The Crown," portrays the incendiary photographer in a new biopic The 83-year-old Rock & Roll Hall of Famer is recuperating in Memphis The rapper beat Garth Brooks' record from 2018 by three people, according to the rodeo Scott Rudin has faced criticism for moving to block community theaters from adapting Harper Lee's classic novel SpaceX launches unpiloted crew ship on historic test flight The lawsuit was filed against three people and four companies based in China A 7-foot sea creature that washed ashore in Southern California has been identified as a hoodwinker sunfish, a recently identified rare species thought to live in the Southern Hemisphere This "dinner plate"-sized tarantula dragged away an opossum for supper — the first time it's ever been caught on camera Actresses Jennifer Lawrence and Mary Elizabeth Winstead are among the celebrities who've said they were victims Texas has more than 56,000 children with non-medical exemptions A new report from UNICEF warns that cases of the vaccine-preventable disease are surging around the globe In recent months, multiple drugmakers have recalled medications after tests revealed traces of carcinogens The skin-like silicon patches attach to the chest and foot proved just as reliable as traditional electrodes, according to a new study The study finds new moms lose an average of 62 minutes of sleep a night, while dads only lose about 13 minutes Subaru is recalling 1.3 million vehicles in the U.S. because the brake lights may not illuminate properly The winning numbers for the March 1 drawing were: 29, 33, 39, 60, 66 and Mega Ball 21 The lawsuit was filed against three people and four companies based in China Insurers for CEO Tim Sloan, his predecessor and other executives will foot the latest bill from 2016 scandal The new Form 1040 is one page with just 23 lines, but for many taxpayers, the challenge will be Schedules 1 through 6 Clark, 22, was shot while holding a cellphone that police said they thought was a gun Federal agents found tens of thousands of Native American artifacts in his home in South Lake Tahoe, California, prosecutors said Actresses Jennifer Lawrence and Mary Elizabeth Winstead are among the celebrities who've said they were victims Chinedu Okobi, 36, was unarmed when he died after being Tased by San Mateo County Sheriff's deputies in October Jassy Correia was last seen early Sunday celebrating her 23rd birthday with friends at a Boston nightclub Copyright © 2019 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved. 