Haspel confirmation hearing for CIA chief put off until May
04/18/2018
President Donald Trump nominated the CIA's deputy director, Gina Haspel, to take over for Mike Pompeo at the intelligence agency. If confirmed, Haspel would be the CIA's first female director.   | Carolyn Kaster/AP Photo By ELANA SCHOR 04/18/2018 02:52 PM EDT Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman Richard Burr (R-N.C.) said Wednesday that Gina Haspel's confirmation hearing will take place next month, additional time that could help the CIA director nominee assuage bipartisan concerns about her record on brutal interrogation practices. President Donald Trump nominated Haspel last month, but her paperwork formally arrived in the Senate just this week. Senators in both parties are continuing to press the CIA to reveal more details about Haspel's involvement in the George W. Bush-era "enhanced interrogation techniques" program, in which she played a key role in the use of harsh tactics tantamount to torture on detained terrorist suspects. Story Continued Below Burr said in a brief interview Wednesday that he would wait to hold Haspel's confirmation hearing until after a recess scheduled for the last week in April. That allows the Trump administration more time to schedule in-person meetings for the nominee, who has served as the CIA's deputy director since last year. The agency has not indicated what, if any, new information it intends to share with senators about Haspel's record. A daily briefing on politics and cybersecurity — weekday mornings, in your inbox. By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time. While Haspel continues making the rounds in the Senate, Mike Pompeo, the current CIA director picked to become secretary of State, is on track for a confirmation vote in the full Senate as soon as next week. Securing his confirmation before getting to work on hers also would benefit a Trump administration stretched thin by multiple confirmation pushes happening at the same time. Liberal groups are determined to bring down Haspel over her involvement in the Bush administration's harsh treatment of detainees. The nonprofit Center for Victims of Torture released a letter on Wednesday signed by more than 50 Virginia state officials and advocates urging Sens. Mark Warner (D-Va.) and Tim Kaine (D-Va.) to oppose Haspel. Missing out on the latest scoops? Sign up for POLITICO Playbook and get the latest news, every morning — in your inbox. By Jack Shafer By John McCormack By Zachary Karabell By Ken Adelman © 2019 POLITICO LLC 