Responding To Today’s Global Refugee Crisis: How Will History Judge Us?
09/19/2016
OUR PICKS: We’re headed into the fall/winter publishing season, and Minnesota authors have given us a bounty of exciting books in all genres. Here’s a list to help you remember your favorite author has a new book ready for you. (Author readings and/or publication dates are in parenthesis.) “The Annie Year” by Stephanie Ash (Unnamed Press): In this debut novel, Tandy Caide is beguiled by the new vocational agricultural teacher at the high school, who’s a lot more attractive than her slovenly husband. This is the story of Tandy’s journey to self-discovery the year the high school students are performing the musical “Annie.” (6:30 p.m. Oct. 22, SubText Books, 6 W. Fifth St.,
St. Paul) “The Crepe Factor” by Laura Childs (Berkley Prime Crime): Fourteenth in the best-selling scrapbook mystery series by Gerry Schmitt, writing as Childs, featuring Carmela Bertrand, owner of Memory Mine scrapbooking shop in New Orleans. She and fashionista friend Ava walk into another adventure when the reviewer for a food blog is stabbed with a serving fork and the police are suspi-cious of a restaurateur who is Carmela’s old flame. (Noon Oct. 8, Once Upon a Crime, 604 W. 26th St., Mpls.) “Escape Clause” by John Sandford (Putnum’s): John Camp, writing as Sandford, will make readers laugh and turn pages fast with the ninth in his Virgil Flowers series. Flowers, who used to work for Lucas Davenport (of Sandford’s Prey books) is tall, lean, with too-long hair and a nose for suspects. In this involving caper, he’s investigating the theft of two endangered tigers from the Minnesota Zoo. As usual, his unorthodox way of working leads everyone, including his colleagues, to call him “that F—ing Flowers.” (7 p.m. Oct. 18, Barnes & Noble, HarMar Mall, 2100 N. Snelling Ave., Roseville; noon Oct. 19, Barnes & Noble, 801 Nicollet Mall, Mpls.; 7 p.m. Oct. 19, Once Upon a Crime, 604 W. 26th St., Mpls.) “The Heavens May Fall” by Allen Eskens (Seventh Street Books): A murder case told from two opposing perspectives, featuring three characters from the author’s book club favorite “The Life We Bury.” (6 p.m. Oct. 4, Water Street Inn, Stillwater; 7 p.m. Oct. 26, SubText Books, 6 W. Fifth St., St. Paul; 7 p.m. Nov. 22, Magers & Quinn, 3038 Hennepin Ave. S., Mpls.) “The Innkeeper of Ivy Hill” by Julie Klassen (Bethany House): Winner of a Minnesota Book Award and three Christy awards, Klassen is the top name in inspirational Regency fiction. When Jane Bell’s husband dies, Jane becomes the reluctant owner of Ivy Hill coaching inn and needs help from her mother-in-law. Then two men from her past return. (December) “A Notion of Pelicans” by Donna Salli (North Star Press): A 100-year-old fieldstone church on a windblown bluff above Lake Superior, named for an encounter with a flock of pelicans, leaves Lavinia with the notion that the church still draws inquisitive souls to its pews. Their stories have been tucked away for years: a pastor’s wife wants a honeymoon, a professor has harebrained ideas, a business owner is in everyone’s face and a young actress struggles with a real-life decision. (Sept. 19) “Gap Life” by John Coy (Feiwel and Friends): Author of numerous picture books and middle-grade novels tells the story of a young man who isn’t comfortable at the college his father attended and feels pressured until he meets a girl taking a gap year who gets him a job at a home for developmentally disabled adults, and he learns more about himself and others than any university could teach him. (November) “Ice Out” by Mary Casanova (University of Minnesota Press): Companion to this best-selling author’s 2012 novel “Frozen,” this book picks up the story of Owen Jensen, Sadie Rose’s love interest in the previous book. Set during Prohibition in northern Minnesota (the author lives in Ranier), Owen wants to start an auto dealership, but he gets a loan from a Chicago businessman with the wrong kind of connections and finds himself deep on the wrong side of the law. (Oct. 4, Common Good Books, 38 S. Snelling Ave., St. Paul; noon Oct. 8, Valley Bookseller, 217 Main St., Stillwater) “Naming the Stars” by Susan Koefod (Curiosity Quills Press): Sixteen-year-old Mary-Louise comes home to find she no longer exists — she’s absent from family photos, her bedroom is a linen closet and her possessions are gone. The only person who can see her is Fish, a swimming instructor hiding from a troubled past who sees a different person in Mary-Louise. They find an old photo of Pearl, a beautiful young woman, who exactly resembles the girl Fish sees. The truth about Pearl’s identity is the key to discovering why Mary-Louise has disappeared and why Fish can’t help her. (2 p.m. Sept. 17, Amore Coffee, 879 Smith Ave., West St. Paul) “The Secret of Goldenrod” by Jane O’Reilly (Carolrhoda): In this debut novel, Trina and her father move into an abandoned Victorian mansion that might be haunted. Then, she finds a doll that belonged to the little girl who lived in the house a century ago. (October) “I Had a Comrade” by Paul M. Sailer, foreword by Doolittle Raider Col. Richard E. Cole (Loden Books): Traumatic experiences of some men who fought in World War II and how their comradeship affected them and their families. (Available now) “Genghis Khan and the Quest for God: How the World’s Greatest Conqueror Gave Us Religious Freedom” by Jack Weatherford (Viking): Unlike the Christian, Taoist and Muslim conquerors who came before him, this 13th-century leveler of cities who terrorized nations gave his subjects freedom of religion; by the author of “Genghis Khan and the Making of the Modern World.” (November) “Ray & Joan” by Lisa Napoli (Dutton): Subtitled “The Man Who Made the McDonald’s Fortune and the Woman Who Gave It All Away,” this is the story of Ray Kroc and his wife, Joan, one of Minnesota’s premiere philanthropists. Their story, which began in St. Paul, is also about the impact of Kroc’s drinking and the vast number of organizations to which Joan donated. (November) “The Thunder Before the Storm: The Autobiography of Clyde Bellecourt” by Clyde Bellecourt as told to Jon Lurie (Minnesota Historical Society Press): An intimate narrative of this AIM founder’s childhood on the the White Earth Reservation, his journey through the prison system and his “confrontation politics” waging war against entrenched racism, by a founder of the American Indian Movement. He writes of his battles with drug addiction, his clashes with other AIM leaders, his experiences on the Trail of Broken Treaties and at Wounded Knee, and the cases of Leonard Peltier and murdered AIM activist Anna Mae Aquash. (Nov. 4, Minneapolis American Indian Center, 1530 E. Franklin Ave., Mpls., time to be announced) “This Is Where I Am: A Memoir” by Zeke Caligiuri (University of Minnesota Press): The author, who has been incarcerated for almost 20 years, tells of growing up in the Powderhorn neighborhood of Minneapolis, which was labeled “Murderapolis” when he was 18, how he was drawn to drug dealing and the first time he went to jail. (October) “We’re in America Now: A Survivor’s Stories” by Fred Amram (Holy Cow! Press): A Jewish man’s memoir about his family’s flight from Nazi Germany and their arrival in America, where he finds he didn’t leave the war behind him in Europe, where many relatives died in the Holocaust. He writes about how it continues to touch his life and the lives of his children and grandchildren. “Canoe: A Natural History in North America” by Mark Neuzil and Norman Sims (University of Minnesota Press): A wide-ranging history, from the original native dugouts and birch-bark canoes to the lightweight carbon-graphite crafts of the 21st century. (7 p.m. Nov. 17, Common Good Books, 38 S. Snelling Ave.,St. Paul) “Caring for Creation: The Evangelical’s Guide to Climate Change and a Healthy Environment” by Mitch Hescox and Paul Douglas (Bethany House): Exploration of the climate debate and how Christians can take the lead in caring for “God’s creation,” including practical ideas for improving our environment. Hescox leads the Evangelical Environmental Network; Douglas is a meteorologist with 35 years of TV and radio experience and an entrepreneur. (Available now) “The Ford Century in Minnesota” by Brian McMahon (University of Minnesota Press): How the Ford Motor Company transformed Minnesota over the past 100 years, including the oldest Ford dealership in the world in
St. Cloud, the Model T assembly in the world’s tallest automobile plant in Minneapolis, a three-story structure in St. Paul and the 125-acre parcel in St. Paul that was active until its 2011 closure. (December) “Bar Yarns and Manic-Depressive Mixtapes: Jim Walsh on Music From Minneapolis to the Outer Limits” (University of Minnesota Press): Minneapolis-based writer, journalist, columnist and songwriter distills 30 years of his music writing, including some from the Pioneer Press, with a tour of the Twin Cities’ most celebrated music venues past and present and the voices of such stars as Prince, Britney Spears, the Ramones, the Gear Daddies and more. (7 p.m. Nov. 16, Magers & Quinn, 3038 Hennepin Ave. S., Mpls.) “Unzipping the Parka: Stories of Minnesotans Doing Very Un-Minnesotan Things” by Brian Landon (Wrong Turn Books): Eleven stories of romance going awry in the North Star State, including “Fifty Shades of Grand Marais.” (Sept. 26, Barnes & Noble, 710 County Highway 10, Blaine) “The Field” by Tim Nolan (New Rivers Press): Poetry of everyday life, from funerals and graduations to sky and wind in spring, cemeteries, talking and the Red Wing Correctional Facility. (October) “It Starts With Hope,” edited by Betsy Brown and Ted Bowman (Nodin Press): Original writing and images of hope donated to the St. Paul-based Center for Victims of Torture in celebration of the organization’s 30th anniversary. (Available now) “Kinds of Snow” by Su Smallen (Green Writers Press): Author of six other collections of poetry, Smallen believes there is a specific sound that comes from poetry in the Midwest, “sweet plain chant — language direct, unvarnished, luminous — a kind of gratitude shot through the work for the beauty of the place.” And one of the things that looms large is snow, which she ponders as the great Midwest element. Smallens’ collection “You This Close,” written during a residency with the St. Croix Watershed Research Station, uses imagery from the river and its creatures. (Dual publication party 7 p.m Oct. 24, The Republic, 221 Cedar Ave. S., Mpls.) “The Moment’s Only Moment” by Emilie Buchwald (Nodin Press): Co-founder and former publisher of Milkweed Editions and publisher of Gryphon Press writes of the imperative to be awake and aware during one’s passage through time, to live a life that’s fully inhabited, a life that seeks meaning and kindles memories. (7 p.m. Sept. 16, the Loft, 1011 Washington Ave. S., Mpls.) “Threnody” by Juliet Patterson (Nightboat Books): The collection’s title originates from the Greek “therenos,” (“wailing”) and “oide” (“ode”), words that the author uses to examine the beauty and violence of our present ecological movement. (October) “Unbearable Splendor” by Sun Yung Shin (Coffee House Press): Winner of an Asian American Literary Award for “Skirt Full of Black” uses poetry as essay, exploring issues of identity (Korean, American, adoptee, mother, Catholic, Buddhist) and interest (mythology, science fiction, Borges, Sophocles). (October) “Before Morning” by Joyce Sidman, illustrations by Beth Krommes (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt): Sidman, winner of a Newbery Honor and two Caldecott Honors, and Caldecott-winner Krommes bring to life the wish of a small child who wants the too-busy world to fall silent so her family can revel in the freedom and peace snow brings. (Oct. 4, Common Good Books, 38 S. Snelling Ave., St. Paul) “Monkey With a Tool Belt and the Maniac Muffins” by Chris Monroe (Carolrhoda Books): Gigantic maniac muffins are on the loose, and Chico Bon Bon and his tool belt have to stop a crumbly disaster. “Sachiko: A Nagasaki Bomb Survivor’s Story” by Caren Stelson (Carolrhoda Books): Six-year-old Sachiko Yasui survived the 1945 bombing of Nagasaki, and this book chronicles her long journey to peace after watching her family die. The author traveled to Nagasaki to interview Sachiko five times. (7 p.m. Oct. 19, Common Good Books, 38 S. Snelling Ave., St. Paul.) “Wonderfall” by Michael Hall (Greenwillow Books): Author and illustrator of “My Heart Is Like a Zoo” follows a single tree through the changing seasons, using 15 combined words (such as thankful + fall = thankFALL) that underscore the themes and concepts of the season. Full spreads at the back of the book offer information about the featured animals as well as the science behind squirrels, acorns and saplings. (Available now) Related Articles


			Def Leppard, Kanye West, Sia and more will pound this fall with sound		




			For fall moviegoers, there’s Redford in Minneapolis … and these tasty titles		




			Theater in the Twin Cities is everywhere with a bevy of new fall shows		




			From ‘Gridiron Glory’ to Martin Luther, fall exhibits are ripe with variety		




			A fall slate of dance performances to move you		




			Cantus, Chanticleer and a crawl are a few of this fall’s classical offerings		




			Pat Metheny, Herb Alpert, other familiar faces jazz it up this fall		

Club Book: Cara Black, Sept. 20, Ramsey County Library-Roseville, 2180 N. Hamline Ave.; Lucie Amundsen, Sept. 26, Anoka County Library-Rum River, 4201 Sixth Ave., Anoka; Charlotte Rogan, Sept. 28, Carver County Library-Chanhassen, 7711 Kerber Blvd.; Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni, Oct. 12, Scott County Library-Prior Lake, 16210 Eagle Creek Ave. S.E., Prior Lake; Candice Millard, 7 p.m. Oct. 17, Hennepin County Library-Southdale, 7001 York Ave. S., Edina; Terry McMillan, Oct. 18, Arlington Hills Public Library, 1200 Payne Ave., St. Paul; Lily King, Oct. 25, Stillwater Public Library, N. 224 Third St., Stillwater; Sy Montgomery, Nov. 2, R.H. Stafford Library, 8595 Central Park Place, Woodbury; R.T. Rybak, Nov. 14, Galaxie Library, 14955 Galaxie Ave., Apple Valley. Free. Pen Pals: Anna Quindlen, Sept. 22; Billy Collins, Oct. 13; Lee Child, Feb. 16; Elizabeth Strout, March 30; James McBride and the Good Lord Bird Band, May 11. At Hopkins Center for the Arts, 1111 Mainstreet, Hopkins. Most programs are sold out. Call 612-543-8112 or go to supportHCLIB.org/pen-pals for information. UMN English Writers Series: Nami Mun, Sept. 28, Weisman Art Museum, 333 East River Road, Mpls.; Simone Muench, Oct. 5, Weisman Art Museum; Claudia Rankine in conversation with Marilynne Robinson,
Oct. 19, Ted Mann Concert Hall, 2128 Fourth St. S., Mpls.; Mark Slouka, Nov. 9, Weisman Art Museum. Free. As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here. 