Lecture covers ‘story behind the story’ of Syrian refugees 
04/10/2016
Through our global membership, we fight to eradicate torture and offer health-based rehabilitation services to help torture victims rebuild their lives. I was six years old when my family was murdered. I was in my first year of school, and everyone was afraid. IRCT member, Committee for prevention of Torture (CPT), has helped hundreds of torture survivors seek justice. In June 2017, IRCT member Restart participated in the official opening of a specialised unit at the central court that will examine detainees for signs of torture. The IRCT is the world’s largest membership-based civil society organisation specialised in the field of torture rehabilitation. Read more... We are a membership organisation Present in 74 countries Supporting delivery of rehabilitation Fostering research and sharing knowledge Advocating against torture We are the largest membership-based civil society organisation workinig in the field of torture rehabilitation. See our members  In December 2017, the IRCT Council approved the IRCT's Theory of Change and a revised strategic plan for the period 2018-2020 Thanks to Judith Weinstein and everyone at Heartland Alliance Marjorie Kovler Center for this blog. The scenario Organizations have long recognized the power of media to engage individuals in their mi...   The journal seeks to enhance the understanding and cooperation in the torture field through diverse approaches. Denmark Vesterbrogade 149,  Building 4 3rd floor 1620, Copenhagen V Tel: +45 44 40 18 30| Fax: +45 44 40 18 54              
              Email: irct@irct.org Belgium European Affairs Office, Rue du Trône 60, 1050 Bruxelles Tel: +32 2 230 15 04| Fax: +32 2 230 15 49              
              Email: irct@irct.org Subscribe to get updates about the IRCT. Copyright © 2005-2019 IRCT | All rights reserved This website is owned by the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims, hereafter referred to as "IRCT”. Use of personal information The IRCT supports the rights of individuals to maintain privacy of personal data. The IRCT does not collect any personal information about users, except that which is knowingly and specifically supplied to us by the user. Unless stated otherwise, when users are on the IRCT website, any personal information given by them remains with IRCT alone. We will not provide any of the users’ personal information to other parties unless this is necessary to provide users with services or goods that were specifically asked by them. For example, our online donation service is provided by a partner company and this is stated on our donation page. IP addresses IP addresses (the Internet address of a computer) are logged to track a user's session while the user remains anonymous. We use this data for statistics and to analyse certain trends, such as which parts of our site users are visiting and how long time they spend there. We do not link your IP addresses to anything personally identifiable to you. The IRCT uses the information we collect about you to facilitate our understanding of our web visitors and to be able to send communications that you have subscribed to or that may be considered of interest to you. Question or comments If you have any questions or comments about our privacy practices, please contact us at webmaster@irct.org. This website is owned by the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims, hereafter referred to as "IRCT”. Liability While every effort has been taken to ensure that all details are correct, the IRCT cannot accept any responsibility for the accuracy of information contained on this website, nor for the consequences of any actions taken or not taken as a result of this information. The IRCT assumes no liability for any loss or damage as a consequence of the material published on this site or its use by third parties, regardless of whether this is due to errors in or to inappropriateness of the material, or for other reasons. Listing of a company, service, organisation or product on this web site does not in any way imply endorsement. Reasonable efforts have been made at the time of publishing each page to exam the contents of each organisation and publication linked to on this web site, but no responsibility is taken for the contents contained on such links. Links The IRCT welcomes the construction of links, where relevant, to this site, provided that the link is directly connected to the IRCT web address. Such links may not be used for advertising or similar purposes. If a link is created, IRCT's webmaster (email: webmaster@irct.org) must be informed. Links to third party sites The IRCT’s website provides links to other Internet sites for the convenience of users. The operation and content of such third party web sites is beyond the IRCT’s control. The IRCT does not endorse in any manner whatsoever or accept any responsibility for the content or other material that may be contained on such web sites, the use of such web sites, or any products or services advertised on or sold through any such web sites. Copyright It is permitted to copy material from this Internet address - either electronically or on paper - provided that The IRCT is stated explicitly as the source. Comments to this site The IRCT, through its webmaster, would appreciate to be informed of any errors found in this site. Suggestions for improvement and comments are also welcome. By continuing your visit to this website, you accept the use of cookies in accordance with our privacy policy. Yes I accept 