Some good news after a rough time
11/07/2018
Have an existing account? Already have a subscription? Don't have an account? Get the news Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about After so many nasty political ads and recent tragedies, we need something to lighten our spirits. A link has been sent to your friend's email address. A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's
                                        community rules.
                                        Please read the rules before joining the discussion. Linda Larson(Photo: Times photo)Buy Photo It’s two days past the election, and four days after we’ve “fallen back” out of Daylight Savings Time. Many of us will have headaches, literally and figuratively. After so many nasty political ads and recent tragedies, we need something to lighten our spirits. Today’s column is all about good news. The saying, “When the student is ready, the teacher appears,” is true for me. I hold in my handAnne Lamott’s new book, "Almost Everything: Notes on Hope." The prelude of the book says Lamott began this book as a list to her grandson and niece of what she believes to be true. I’ve skipped ahead to the end (don’t judge me!) to the last paragraph, which follows: “Against all odds, no matter what we’ve lost, no matter what messes we’ve made, no matter how dark the night, we offer and are offered kindness, soul, light, and food, which create breath and spaciousness, which create hope, sufficient unto the day.” Yes, dark moments happen, but we can create light or accept light when it’s given. The first piece of good news comes from Sunday’s St. Cloud Times. The Center for Victims of Torture will open a satellite office in St. Cloud. The center will offer classes, therapy and other mental health services for the Somali community. In other good news, on Nov. 1, members of the St. Cloud community came together to show their support for Jewish Americans after the Pittsburgh shooting at Tree of Life synagogue. People who attended included community members and faith leaders, as well as St. Cloud State President Robbyn Wacker,St. Cloud Police Chief William Blair Anderson and St. Cloud Mayor Dave Kleis.Monica Segura-Schwartz, an organizer for Create CommUNITY, said, “We know that in the darkest hours of humanity,light shines the brightest when we come together in love and support and speak out together against such atrocities.” There’s good news for rural Central Minnesota, too. A recent three-year grant from the Health Resources and Services Administrationwill expand mental health services to Richmond, Eagle Bend, Melrose and more.Now patients can video chat, for example, with a professional. Statistics show that 1 in 4 people may have depression, 1 in 8 anxiety. For those who are not able to travel, this will bring help to them. For news a little further from home,Mutts Canine Cantina in Fort Worth, Texas,is offering a new internship; a Puptern. Get paid $100 an hour to pet puppies. OK, it’s only four hours a week for six weeks, but what a great idea! At the end of last month, October Books (a small bookstore in Southhamptom, England)needed to move to a new location and asked for volunteers to move its inventory. They hoped 100 people would help, but 200 people showed up, including people who happened to be passing by. They created a 500-foot-long human chain, passing books from the old location to the new. My final bit of good news comes from the West Coast.A humpback whale was in distress, caught in a net. Supported by friends, fisherman Sam Synstelientook a dangerous leap, jumping from the boat onto the back of the whale. He cut the rope, and the whale swam away safely. All of these examples show that we humans are capable of creating humpback whale-sized goodness. This is the opinion of Linda Larson, an Avon resident. She is the author of "A Year in My Garden" and "Grow It. Eat It," which won the national Ben Franklin Award. Her column is published the second Thursday of the month. She welcomes comments at notes4linda@hotmail.com. 