Grow your capacity: community support, media news, legal services, more
11/20/2018
Creating a Thriving Anacostia River Corridor APACC member Building Bridges Across the River has a new website: The new website features the various BBAR projects: 11th Street Bridge Park, THEARC, THEARC Theater, Bridge Park Plots/THEARC Farm, and Skyland Workforce Center. Feed the Hood Project and Winter Clothing Drive, December 8: The National Black United Front’s project is looking for volunteers for this important community event. DC Public Library needs your input: Libraries play an important role in the community; they provide respite for people of all ages, meeting space, learning and networking opportunities, and more. Residents have a valuable perspective on how libraries are doing in meeting needs and where there is opportunity to improve. Take this perspective and inform the future of branch libraries as DCPL plans to create a Library Facilities Master Plan, a framework to ensure future investments in DC Public Library buildings align with community needs. DCPL is providing a variety of opportunities for community input, including focus groups, surveys and community meetings. Focus groups will start in early December; to participate, email email community.feedback@dc.gov or call (202) 640-5295 by November 30. News from DCRTV: “7's News Director To Leave - 11/13 - Mitch Jacobs announced today that he’s leaving his post as news director for DC's Sinclair-owned ABC affiliate, Channel 7/WJLA . . .” Franchising 101, November 26: Offered by the Small Business Resource Center (SBRC), this free workshop will consider the range of basic information to help you make a decision about whether franchising is for you. Free Immigration Legal Advice & Referral Clinic, December 14: The D.C. Bar Pro Bono Center's clinic, which takes place at the Consulate of Honduras (1990 M St NW, Suite 104), is for anyone who has questions about their immigration status, whether or not it is related to an executive action. Clinic staff will take all walk-in clients who arrive during clinic hours, and all language needs will be accommodated. Here’s the English language flyer (PDF); additional language flyers, other information, and language interpretation (including sign language) requests should be directed to Anastasia Sendoun, anastasia@ayuda.com or (202) 243-7315. D.C. Bar Pro Bono Center's Free Advice and Referral Clinic, December 8: Individuals living on low incomes can meet one-on-one with an attorney for free legal advice on any civil legal matter governed by DC or federal law: bankruptcy/debt collection; civil rights; consumer law; employment law; family law; health law; housing law; personal and property damage; probate; public benefits (SSDI/SSI, etc.); and tax law. Although the attorney will not be assigned to represent you, you may receive important information about your legal situation. For more information, visit www.lawhelp.org/dc; to request an interpreter, call the Legal Information Help Line, (202) 626-3499. After selecting your language, press 5 for all other inquiries, press 3 for information about the free legal clinic, and then press 9 to leave a message with the information requested. 501(c)(3)(b)(s): Deprogramming for Organizational Growth debunks the myths of the nonprofit sector. Topics include board  development and collaboration. Who's behind the podcasts? Zoot Velasco, MBA, CFRE and the Gianneschi Center for Nonprofits at Cal State Fullerton Mihaylo College of Business. (r/nonprofit) The New Tactics in Human Rights Tactical Mapping Tool  (TMT) is a step-by-step tool to help activists better and more  comprehensively understand relationships and pathways toward change. The two-minute video on the home page explains and briefly demonstrates the power of the tool. NTEN's online groups have been recommended in r/nonprofit as a way to be active online with peers. Nonprofit Happy Hour  is a Facebook group where nonprofit pros gather for support, to share  important information, get advice, and ask questions. (r/nonprofit) Dr. Gloria Horsley, founder of the Open to Hope Foundation, an open  community where people can find hope after loss, offers advice and  tactics about engaging Gen Z in Gen Z: What You Need To Know About The Newest Generation Of Donors And Volunteers. 6 Must-Haves for Your Nonprofit Website (Nonprofit Hub) Online Resource Guide for Nonprofits includes image and video, project management, and content management, among other tool categories. #Volunteer Managers: do you have these 4 personas on your teams? Great insight from BigFundIdeas: https://t.co/EOQ7zATr3C #nonprofit pic.twitter.com/UCJ6s591nz Member engagement trouble? Here are 5 Habits of Super Engaging Membership Leaders from Joy of Membership https://t.co/3PQXvy3Xgz #nonprofit pic.twitter.com/GboxZemodO A is for Art Auction 🎨 check out which each letter of the alphabet stands for in our #fundraising infographic: https://t.co/z5JJ8BhyrI  follow apacc members on twitter 