Syria’s Mental Health Crisis 
08/01/2014
One day in June, I sat in an Istanbul coffee shop with a Syrian source. He’s a young man in his 20s, a former activist who has, over the course of the war, fled from Damascus to Beirut and Amman before settling in Turkey’s largest city — a dusty urban sprawl whose mayor has reportedly said he intends to round up Syrian refugees and forcibly return them to border camps. The uncertainty of the journey had exhausted my friend, as had the realization that his once-solid support network is now scattered from Dubai to the United States. Referring to Syrians, he said, “The entire country needs therapy.” That Syria is facing a mental health crisis is nothing new. Since the early days of the conflict in 2011, medical professionals and international NGOs working along the Turkish, Jordanian and Lebanese borders — home to millions of refugees — have asserted that mass displacement, daily violence and the death of loved ones are leading to a mental health epidemic among Syrians. Curt Goering is the executive director of the Minnesota-based Center for Victims of Torture, which has an office in Jordan and has been working with Syrian refugees there and along the border. Last month, he told me that “those in serious need [of mental health care]… run in the hundreds and hundreds of thousands.” Officials from the International Medical Corps, which has done extensive work with refugees in Syria and along its borders, said in an interview that based on a nearly 6,000-person caseload sampling from Syrians there, 31 percent have severe emotional disorders. Within this categorization, 20 percent have depressive disorders like anxiety and 6 percent suffer from bipolar disorders. Schizophrenia, at 10 percent, was the most common form of psychotic illness across the region. Inka Weissbecker, IMC’s global mental health and psychosocial advisor, said that in conflict situations, common mental disorders like anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder tend to increase to 15 to 20 percent, from the 10 percent commonly pre-existing in the population. Aya Mhanna, a Beirut-based psychologist who has been working with Syrian refugees for the past two years through organizations like UNICEF and World Vision, told me that the most prevalent illnesses are not just PTSD but depression and anxiety. There’s also acute stress, caused by everything from a lack of money to living cheek-to-jowl in overcrowded refugee camps. When left unchecked for long periods of time these ailments – easy enough to treat in their infancy – run the risk of developing into schizophrenia or borderline personality disorder, psychiatric illnesses whose costly treatment requires medication, therapy or even hospitalization. On July 22, Mhanna told Syria Deeply, the website of which I am managing editor, that of the 172 Syrian media activists she has treated since October 2013, seven have killed themselves. Goering described “the sheer physical brutality of what people have been through in a torture cell” as paving the road to these types of mental illness – people strung up with their hands chained behind their backs, the extraction of fingernails, and detainees folded in half and put in a tire – a trademark regime tactic. Earlier this month, his team in Jordan met with a young Syrian girl who was so traumatized by the violence she had seen that she had lost her ability to speak. He told me she’s just one of the many children who have seen their parents abused in front of them and “come away feeling powerless,” wetting their beds, unable to sleep. Annie Sparrow, a public health expert and Assistant Professor of Global Health and Deputy Director of the Human Rights Program at New York’s Mount Sinai Hospital, has made a number of trips to Syria and the border region, working with the displaced. She told me they showed a very high level of grief and loss; two-thirds of those who’ve fled have had their homes damaged or destroyed and 13 percent have lost a family member. “The level of loss and trauma that is far higher than anyone else I’ve ever worked with,” she said. Now the question facing Sparrow, Goering and the global mental health community is how to reverse the tide of mental illness among Syrian refugees. Experts say the answer lies in increasing group treatment, training local doctors to understand and be more sympathetic to mental health needs, and – perhaps most importantly – in creating a “new normal,” rebuilding refugees’ lives to provide stability. This begins with easing the listlessness and boredom that mark the Syrian refugee experience. Recommendations call for teaching women – who, the United Nations said, are now the heads of household in 25 percent of refugee families – basic skills like cooking and sewing, allowing them to support their families and returning routine and structure to daily life. Children who have been traumatized need education (the U.N. has estimated that 2.5 million Syrian youth face restricted access) and, Sparrow said in our interview, “safe places with structured activity with people who are skilled to work with children. Kids miss their friends. You need to offer them places where they can build friendships again.” This kind of restructuring and development is critical to raise self-esteem, to make refugees feel safe and emotionally supported, and allow them to talk about their feelings and concerns. Those needs, Mhanna told Syria Deeply, are best addressed in support groups where they talk to peers – and where they feel if they are really depressed, they will be heard by social workers and psychologists. Enter the need to train physicians already working on the border, namely local Syrians, Lebanese, Jordanians and Turks. “To be sustainable, [the training] has to be far more indigenous,” Goering told me, with a sigh. “But there’s little existing capacity in this region to do that.” My experts maintained that these rebuilding initiatives could be more helpful than therapy in easing the despair felt by refugees who have been left with very little agency over their own lives. Last September, a family that had just fled Hama for the southern Turkish city of Kilis huddled in an abandoned shop, the mother and father sweeping the floor to make it livable while their five young boys kept watch over their things, hastily packed into crates for the trip across the border. When Sparrow approached, the parents were mortified – hospitality runs in Syrians’ blood, yet here they had no coffee or tea to offer her, no sitting area. Their humiliation that day reinforced the notion that the Syrian mental health crisis – in which once-proud people with jobs and lives find themselves with nothing – requires a new approach. After all, she told me, “Most men would much rather have their driver’s license back than go to therapy.” Karen Leigh is the managing editor of Syria Deeply, a single-topic news site focusing on stories and commentary about the Syrian conflict.  This blog expands on Nicholas Kristof’s twice-weekly columns, sharing thoughts that shape the writing but don’t always make it into the 800-word text. It’s also the place where readers make their voices heard. Enter my contest for poems about our times and the Trump presidency.Read more… Several states have moved in recent months to strengthen their laws against child marriage. Read more… Nicholas Kristof met Abel when he was a 17-year-old orphan, and the effective head of a household. I caught up with him 7 years later. Read more… The availability of sanitary products isn’t simply a matter of budget lines and purchasing orders. It has to do with power. Read more… Liu Xiaobo died with dignity and honor, his principles intact. Everybody else, not so much.Read more… Why wait for governments or established charities when you can start an NGO in your basement? Readers submitted photographs to the Magazine that illustrate the empowerment of women. Nicholas Kristof talked to the Magazine about how educating girls can help fight poverty. Follow Advertisement 