Brattleboro graduate student, a humanitarian activist, honored for her work with child victims in Yemen
04/14/2017
Have an existing account? Already have a subscription? Don't have an account? Get the news Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about St. Cloud school board recognizes benefactors, volunteers and organizations for service A link has been sent to your friend's email address. A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's
                                        community rules.
                                        Please read the rules before joining the discussion. The St. Cloud school district is the 15th-largest district in Minnesota, serving a population of over 99,000 residents throughout four counties.
    Wochit St. Cloud school district(Photo: St. Cloud school district) What do a Somali grocery store, an auto body shop and "Doug the Science Dude" have in common? They were all nominated for their contributions to St. Cloud school district this year. The St. Cloud school board hosted the eighth annual Partners in Education Awards on Tuesday night at Apollo High School. The event recognized individuals and organizations who support the school district. This year's nominations included benefactors, volunteers and organizations. Tami DeLand, district spokeswoman, said the awards honor the "gracious contributions (the award-winners) have made to public education and student success." Nominations came from staff at district schools and programs, as well as area organizations. Benefactors recognized include Jubilee Worship Center, Lions International and Mogadishu Meat and Grocery Story. Volunteers recognized include Barey Aden, Leon Birr, Rose Burgraff, Brad Dale, Diana Fenton, Kathy Frank, Lori Johnson, Chris Klein, Dennis Klein, Shaya Kraut, Sue Kulzer, Cheryl Pennington, Doug "Doug the Science Dude" Petersen, Ruth Schultz, JoAnn Thorson and Rosemary Younk. Organizations recognized include Center for Victims of Torture, Chartwells Schools Dining Services, Clearview Forest Committee, Dr. Potter Bigs on Campus Mentoring Initiative, Jugaad Leadership Program, Paramount Center for the Arts, Peters Auto Body, Sanneh Foundation Dreamline program, St. Cloud VA Health Care System Voluntary Services, St. Cloud Youth Commission, United Athletic Club, and Waite Park Police Department. To see past award-winners and learn more about volunteering for the district, visit isd742.org/volunteer. Follow Jenny Berg at www.facebook.com/sctimesjenny and on Twitter @bergjenny. 