Two children maimed in ISIL attacks treated in Minnesota
10/06/2016
Tony Schwartz gave the National Immigration Law Center the $55,000 he made in royalties in recent months from The Art of the Deal A different kind of deal. Tony Schwartz, the co-author of Donald Trump‘s 1987 book The Art of the Deal, says he’s given away the hefty royalties he’s earned in the recent months of the billionaire businessman’s campaign for the presidency, according to The Washington Post. Schwartz announced the $55,000 donation to the National Immigration Law Center from the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., Tuesday. Further, Schwartz said, the Law Center will share the donation with four other civil rights organizations, including Muslim grassroots movement MPower Change, reported the Post.  The royalties from the ’80s book increased as Trump clinched the GOP Presidential nomination, Schwartz told the Post, noting that the income “suddenly became, for me, blood money.” “It just feels wrong,” he asserted, explaining that he wanted to help groups that he believes have been targeted by Trump. Schwartz also revealed that he and Trump split the book royalties evenly, and speculated that the 70-year-old also earned $55,000 from The Art of the Deal since April. RELATED VIDEO: Does Donald Trump Rattle You? He has publicly slammed Trump in recent months, telling Good Morning America in July that he regrets writing the book. Echoing the comment to The New Yorker, Schwartz elaborated, “I feel a deep sense of remorse that I contributed to presenting Trump in a way that brought him wider attention and made him more appealing than he is.” Schwartz previously donated his royalties from the earlier part of Trump’s campaign to the National Immigration Law Center, Human Rights Watch, the Center for the Victims of Torture, the National Immigration Forum and the Tahirih Justice Center. PEOPLE.com may receive compensation when you click through and purchase from links contained on
                      this website. If you have opted in for our browser push notifications, and you would like to
                  opt-out, please refer to the following instructions depending on your device and
                  browser. For turning notifications on or off on Google Chrome and Android
                  click here, for Firefox
                  click here, for Safari
                  click here and for Microsoft's Edge
                  click here. 