"The magnitude of the challenge is daunting" in the crisis of Rohingya children, UNICEF says
10/20/2017
Already a subscriber?
Log in or Activate your account. On your next view you will be asked to: Subscribe today for unlimited access Subscribe today for unlimited access SAVE 50% Cancel anytime ✓ Unlimited articles on any device ✓ Skip article surveys SUPER SALE: $3 for 3 months of Digital Plus Then $2.49 a week. Cancel anytime. ✓ E-Edition PDF of newspaper ✓ Unlimited access on any device ✓ Skip article surveys Already a subscriber? Log in or Activate your account. Sorry, your subscription does not include this content. Please call 866-735-5631 to upgrade your subscription. © 2019 Lee Enterprises Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy A few flurries possible early. Cloudy. High near 25F. Winds NNW at 5 to 10 mph.. Cloudy skies early, followed by partial clearing. Low -2F. Winds NW at 5 to 10 mph. Updated: March 2, 2019 @ 7:40 am Jandal Reporter Ali Jandal, a La Crosse native who is studying to become a doctor and worked with refugees in Amman, Jordan, this past summer, insists that displaced people are not “stereotypical, sick-looking victims who take and do not give back.” Jandal Jandal said he learned the opposite is true during his volunteer stint this summer in Jordanian refugee camps through the Center for Victims of Torture (www.cvt.org), which is based in St. Paul. “The CVT is all about sustainability, giving people a chance,” Jandal said in a phone interview. “I say La Crosse is home, and I mean that,” said the son of Daoud and Lina Jandal of La Crosse. He attended Hintgen Elementary School, Longfellow Middle School and Central High School, where he excelled in long-distance running in track and in cross-country. “But I have another home in Amman,” said Jandal, who is attending medical school at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. “My extended family lives there, and I have great memories from the plethora of childhood summers there. I went to Amman because I wanted to give back to it.” Jandal credits La Crosse schools and medical school with instilling in him the desire to serve others. “I do that in Wisconsin when I can, through volunteering and free clinics and so on, but this summer was my chance to give back to my other home,” he said. “Jordan is a stable country surrounded by instability, so it accepts a lot of refugees,” he said. The evacuees who gravitate to Jordan form a virtual melting pot of exiles, from Palestinians, Iraqis, Syrians and Yemenis to South Sudanese and Darfurians, Jandal said. “This summer was my chance to help to help my community abroad,” he said. “The Syrian refugees are the largest of our time.” More than 657,000 Syrians had been registered as refugees in Jordan by March, according to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, although reports indicate that more than 1.5 million Syrians are in Jordan, counting those who are not registered. As a second-year medical student, Jandal said he did not have the skills to help refugees with PTSD and other illnesses associated with conflict, so he volunteered in the data and management department. “I used data collected to measure the effectiveness of the therapy the providers were giving, and I tried to discover areas of improvement,” he said. Although Jandal became acquainted with people who had been tortured and/or raped and are recovering with the help of the Center for Victims of Torture, he cannot talk about their cases in detail because that could place them in danger of retaliation. “They do therapy in groups — counseling sessions with 10 or so people at a time, and they do that so that the refugees can support each other. They do a very good job of that, too. “In CVT, the bulk is group healing,” Jandal said. “They can and they will get better, with group conversations. Psychologically, they get back into being a part of society.” As they rebound, the refugees are eager to help others, he said, adding, “Many times, those who have experienced the worst gave back the most. Even though they are damaged, they give back.” Jandal’s ability to speak both English and Arabic provided an advantage, he said, adding, “I was able to increase the understanding between the groups.” Often, actions as simple as being polite and smiling were almost as healing as medicine, Jandal said, recalling a positive interaction with one refugee in particular. “I had the sense that nobody had been kind to him in a long time,” he said.  Reporter Mike Tighe is the Tribune newsroom's senior citizen. That said, he don't get no respect from the cub reporters as he goes about his duly-appointed rounds on the health, religion and whatever-else-lands-in-his-inbox beats. Call him at 608-791-8446. Whenever Mike Tighe posts new content, you'll get an email delivered to your inbox with a link. Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items. Your comment has been submitted.  Reported There was a problem reporting this. Log In Keep it Clean. Please avoid obscene, vulgar, lewd,
racist or sexually-oriented language.
PLEASE TURN OFF YOUR CAPS LOCK.
Don't Threaten. Threats of harming another
person will not be tolerated.
Be Truthful. Don't knowingly lie about anyone
or anything.
Be Nice. No racism, sexism or any sort of -ism
that is degrading to another person.
Be Proactive. Use the 'Report' link on
each comment to let us know of abusive posts.
Share with Us. We'd love to hear eyewitness
accounts, the history behind an article. Already a subscriber?
Log in or Activate your account. 