UMN Law Prof. Ní Aoláin Appointed to UN Human Rights Post
07/26/2017
OUR PICKS: When Dr. Neal Holtan retired last month after 29 years as medical director at St. Paul-Ramsey County Public Health, the county board called attention to his compassionate care, advocacy for immigrant health and work to mentor medical residents about the “unique role of local public health.” A news post on the county’s website explains that he was a member of a small volunteer medical team sent in 1979 to the war-torn Thai-Cambodian border by the American Refugee Committee. Holtan’s experience caring for sick and starving refugees there “convinced him of the need to change medicine and public health to improve the care of the thousands of new immigrants who began arriving in Minnesota starting in the 1970s,” according to the post. What’s next? The doctor — who also was the founding physician of the St. Paul-based Center for Victims of Torture — plans to concentrate on writing and speaking on medical history. His histories of 22 former staff members and patients at the Anoka State Hospital, going back to 1949, the post says, have been accepted for presentation at a national meeting of the Oral History Association.  Twenty-five young African leaders commemorated Nelson Mandela International Day on Tuesday by volunteering at the Books For Africa warehouse in St. Paul. On the day, named for the late South African leader and dedicated to service in his honor, they sorted and packed books for the organization and got a briefing on its mission to end the book famine in Africa. Books for Africa has shipped more than 38 million books to 49 countries since its founding in 1988. The volunteers are attending a six-week institute at the University of Minnesota’s Center for Integrative Leadership at the Humphrey School of Public Affairs. Their fellowship program, run by the U.S. State Department, brings a group of 1,000 young African leaders to the United States each year. The Humphrey School says in a statement that its participation in the program — offering leadership and management training and networking opportunities with Minnesota government officials, nonprofits and corporations — is in its fourth year.  Volunteers and the value of their contributions get a nod in the 2016-17 annual report just released by Minnesota Landmarks, the nonprofit that preserves and manages Landmark Center in downtown St. Paul. Its 80-member-strong Volunteer Association provided more than 6,400 hours of volunteer time, with a value of $155,000, according to the report. Volunteers assisted with community programs, staffed a Visitor Information Center and the Landmarket Gift Shop and led more than 150 tours during the year. And from June 2016 through May 2017, the facility welcomed more than 235,000 people to concerts, festivals, book talks and history and other programs presented by Minnesota Landmarks and the building’s 15 resident arts organizations, the report says.  An east metro man whose life revolved around music, according to his Pioneer Press obituary, was a member of the World Drum Corps Hall of Fame. Richard Maki, who died in May, also was a veteran teacher in our St. Paul Public Schools, retiring in 2000 after 35 years with the district. He played with the Minnesota Brass Drum and Bugle Corps for more than 60 years, and the organization says on its website that the Minnesota Brass Alumni Facebook page “exploded with tributes to Dick as news of his passing spread.”  We’d be remiss in not offering a word of congratulation to Tracy K. Smith, named last month as poet laureate of the United States — and to her publisher, Minnesota’s Graywolf Press. Smith, director of creative writing at Princeton University, is “the poet that we need as poet laureate right now,” Graywolf Executive Editor Jeff Shotts said in a statement that called her appointment an inspiring choice. She won the Pulitzer Prize in 2012 for a collection of poems, “Life on Mars.” A report in the Pioneer Press — noting that Smith alludes throughout the book to her father, an engineer who worked on the Hubble Space Telescope — quoted lines that recall its initial malfunction: “The first few pictures came back blurred, and I felt ashamed For all the cheerful engineers, my father and his tribe. The second time, The optics jibed. We saw to the edge of all there is — So brutal and alive it seemed to comprehend us back.”  St. Paul’s “library on wheels,” the Bookmobile, is celebrating 100 years of service to the community this year. We’ve noted on these pages that the vehicle — providing library access to people who wouldn’t otherwise have it at senior housing facilities, after-school programs and other stops — is the last such “library on wheels” in the metro area. Billie Young’s “A Noble Task,” the history of our library system, includes mention of “Library Liz” — a Ford that in three years in the 1920s delivered 1.5 million books and traveled 25,000 miles.  Further, page by page, sharp turns and all, Opinuendo sayeth not. As you comment, please be respectful of other commenters and other viewpoints. Our goal with article comments is to provide a space for civil, informative and constructive conversations. We reserve the right to remove any comment we deem to be defamatory, rude, insulting to others, hateful, off-topic or reckless to the community. See our full terms of use here. 