Galway human rights academic identifies clear violation of basic human rights at Guantánamo Bay
08/24/2017
   Minneapolis Parks Foundation hires Paul D. Bauknight Jr.
February 8, 2019 - Minneapolis Parks Foundation has hired Paul D. Bauknight Jr., as the first project implementation director. Carolyn Engeberg joins Minnesota Orchestra
February 4, 2019 - Carolyn Engeberg has joined the Minnesota Orchestra as vice president of advancement. Previously, Carolyn was at the Saint Paul Foundation. Nancy Baldrica joins Fraser as Vice President, Chief Marketing Officer
February 4, 2019 - Nancy Baldrica joined Fraser, Minnesota’s largest and most experienced provider of autism and early childhood mental health services, as vice president, chief marketing officer. Baldrica’s responsibilities include being a champion of the Fraser brand, implementing a marketing and communications strategic plan that supports the organization’s goals and increasing brand awareness. St. Stephen's Human Services hires Scott Redd as Executive Director
January 23, 2019 - St. Stephen’s Human Services, a nonprofit human service agency providing street outreach, shelter, and housing programs to individuals and families experiencing homelessness in Hennepin County, has announced the selection of Scott Redd as its new Executive Director. Animal Humane Society hires Heather Larson as Director of Veterinary Center Operations
January 23, 2019 - Animal Humane Society has hired Heather Larson as director of veterinary center operations.  Formerly, Heather was in cataract and lasik sales and management at Whiting Clinic. The Friends of the Saint Paul Public Library Confirms Five New Board Members for 2019
January 23, 2019 - The Friends of the Saint Paul Public Library has elected five new trustees to its board of directors. The new members are Roberta Downing (Minnesota Department of Human Services), Candace Gislason (Allina hospice), Duchess Harris (Macalaster College), Jim Pearson (Xcel Energy), and Scott Zastoupil (Saint Paul and Minnesota Foundations). Dean Orton to Transition into Role of CEO and President of Twin Cities PBS
January 22, 2019 - The Board of Trustees of Twin Cities PBS (TPT) has recently complete a comprehensive national search for a new CEO and president, and has decided to set in place a nine-month plan to transition its current chief operating officer and senior vice president, Dean Orton, to assume that role. Robert C. Ballard Appointed to Board of Directors for the National Scholarship Providers Association
January 16, 2019 - Robert C. Ballard, president & CEO of Scholarship America, has been appointed to the Board of Directors for the National Scholarship Providers Association (NSPA), the nation’s largest network and resource specifically designed to support the needs of professionals in the scholarship industry. Scholarship America was one of the founding members NSPA. The Center for Victims of Torture Welcomes New Board Chair and Members
January 15, 2019 - The Center for Victims of Torture (CVT) announced the election of Shamila Behal, Frank Kendall, Dr. Valeriana Moeller and Dr. Mary M. Tjosvold to its board of directors. The new members begin their terms in March. In addition, Richard Senese steps into the role of board chair in March. Nancy Feldman has completed her term as chair and will remain on the board. Elysa Voshell named Executive Director of Minnesota Center for Book Arts
January 14, 2019 - Minnesota Center for Book Arts (MCBA) has announced that Elysa Voshell will be its next executive director. Elysa Voshell will lead a new era of community engagement and sustainability for the internationally-recognized book arts organization. Voshell joins MCBA from Venice Arts, a nonprofit media arts organization in Venice, CA. Jaclyn Swords joins Youth Frontiers
January 14, 2019 - Youth Frontiers has hired Jaclyn Swords as the new Director of Marketing and Communications.    Scott Pollock named Senior Director of Programs and Public Engagement at the American Craft Council
January 10, 2019 - The American Craft Council is pleased to announce that Scott Pollock will be its new senior director of programs and public engagement. This is a new position for the organization, and Pollock will assume the role on January 22.  Allison O'Toole named Chief Executive Officer of Second Harvest Heartland
January 10, 2019 - Second Harvest Heartland - one of the nation's largest, most efficient and most innovative hunger relief organizations - announced that it has named Allison O'Toole as its new chief executive officer. O'Toole joins Second Harvest Heartland after serving as the senior director of state affairs at United States of Care and prior to that was the CEO of MNsure. Quinn Swanson joins Happy Dancing Turtle as Executive Director
January 9, 2019 - Quinn Swanson has been chosen executive director for Happy Dancing Turtle, a sustainability focused organization located in Pine River.  Ecumen names new CEO - Shelley Kendrick
January 9, 2019 - Darrell Tukua, chairman of Ecumen’s Board of Trustees, announced today that Shelley Kendrick, currently Ecumen’s senior vice president of operations and chief operating officer, has been appointed to succeed Kathryn Roberts as president and CEO, effective Feb. 4, 2019. Ecumen, established in 1862, is one of the country’s largest nonprofit senior housing and services providers. Rebecca Lucero named Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Human Rights
January 4, 2019 - Rebecca Lucero was recently announced the next Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Human Rights by Governor Tim Walz.  Rebecca has been the public policy director at the Minnesota Council of Nonprofits for two years.  "Rebecca has a passion for gender and racial justice, and of course nonprofit partnerships, so will now bring her creativity and positive spirit to a new forum," says MCN executive director Jon Pratt. Camp Odayin Promotes Brooke Byrd
January 3, 2019 - Brooke Byrd was named program director at Camp Odayin.  PROP Development Director and Eden Prairie Minister Receives Award for Interfaith Work
December 20, 2018 - Pastor Mary Margaret Brown, minister and development director at PROP, recently received the Building Bridges award from the Islamic Resource Group of Minnesota for her work creating interfaith understanding and breaking down stereotypes. Canvas Health hires Hilke Riechardt-Martinez as Chief Financial Officer
December 20, 2018 - Canvas Health recently hired Hilke Riechardt-Martinez as its new chief financial officer (CFO). As CFO, Hilke is responsible for all accounting services, financial services, human resources, information technology, property management, procurement, billing and receivables for the parent company as well as all subsidiary companies. Emily Seddon hired at Metropolitan State University as Development Director
December 20, 2018 - Emily Seddon was hired to fill the new role of Development Director at Metropolitan State University. She is eager to work with university alumni and friends to support current students and fill area workforce needs.  Susie Emmert named Vice President and Chief Advocacy Officer at Lutheran Social Service of Minnesota
December 20, 2018 - Susie Emmert has been named vice president and chief advocacy officer for St. Paul-based Lutheran Social Service of Minnesota (LSS), which is among the largest human service organizations statewide. Emmert will oversee state and national advocacy initiatives for the organization to improve services and public policies that support full and abundant lives for all Minnesotans. Aaron Guggemos joins Animal Humane Society as Director of Strategic Projects
December 20, 2018 - Aaron Guggemos has joined the Animal Humane Society as director of special projects, effective January 7, 2019.  Previously, Aaron was a project management fellow in research and development at Boston Scientific. Ben Noble Joins Senior Community Services as Director of Development and Communications
December 13, 2018 - Ben Noble has left FamilyMeans to become the Director of Development and Communications at Senior Community Services. Ben brings 18 years of experience in the communications field, having previously worked as a reporter and photojournalist for the Minneapolis Star Tribune and San Diego Union-Tribune, before transitioning to the nonprofit sector in 2012. Jeremie Greer joins Board of Directors of Prepare + Prosper
December 12, 2018 - Jeremie Greer, Saint Paul native and vice president at the national nonprofit Prosperity Now, has joined the Board of Directors of Prepare + Prosper (P+P), a nonprofit organization that works with low- to moderate-income people to build financial well-being through free tax preparation and financial services, products, and coaching, and by changing systems to create economic opportunity. Betsy Hammer joins Minnesota Budget Project as Policy Advocate
December 10, 2018 - Betsy Hammer has been hired as policy advocate at the Minnesota Budget Project. The policy advocate uses a combination of analysis and advocacy to advance public policies that expand opportunity and economic security to all Minnesotans, particularly on increasing access to affordable health care and child care. Sean Kershaw becomes new Board Chair for Propel Nonprofits
December 5, 2018 - Sean Kershaw, Vice President, Wilder Center for Communities at Wilder Foundation is the new Board Chair at Propel Nonprofits.  Janet Ogden-Brackett takes new role as Vice President & Chief Program Officer at Propel Nonprofits
December 5, 2018 - Janet Ogden-Brackett has been with Propel Nonprofits for 18 years, most recently as vice president of lending. In her new role, she’ll oversee all of Propel’s programs, including accounting, fiscal sponsorship, lending, training, and strategic services. Propel Nonprofits welcomes Keven Ambrus as its new CFO, VP of Finance
December 5, 2018 - Propel Nonprofits’ has named Keven Ambrus as its new chief financial officer and vice president, finance. He was most recently the director of finance & information technology Minnesota Children’s Museum. At Propel, he will oversee internal operations, finances, and technology. YouthCARE Executive Director Emeritus Wins Award
December 1, 2018 - Craig Luedemann, YouthCARE’s executive director emeritus, received the 2018 Rosalie E. Wahl Justice for Children Award from the Children’s Law Center of Minnesota. YouthCARE Hires Lori Arnold
November 30, 2018 - YouthCARE/Camp Sunrise hired Lori Arnold as Executive Director. Catholic Charities of St. Paul and Minneapolis names Wendy Underwood Senior Director of Advocacy and Government Affairs
November 28, 2018 - Wendy Underwood has been named the new senior director of advocacy and government affairs for Catholic Charities of St. Paul and Minneapolis. Underwood will direct the organization’s advocacy and government affairs work, engaging a network of thousands of advocates, volunteers, and community leaders. Minnesota Environmental Fund Appoints New Leadership and Staff
November 26, 2018 - The Board of the Minnesota Environmental Fund (MEF) announced today its decision to hire Doug Niemela as executive director after a comprehensive search. Mallory Forseth, who had been serving as interim MEF administrator, was appointed to the position of program manager. YWCA Minneapolis Names New Board Members
November 20, 2018 - YWCA Minneapolis announces three new members joining the board of directors: Lakeeta Hill, Director of Executive Administration and Corporate Governance at Cargill, Inc., Carissa Rollins, Chief Information Officer Employer and Individual at UnitedHealth Group, and Bria Shea, Director of Regulatory Strategy and Analysis at Xcel Energy. Lisa Ford Joins Animal Humane Society as Advancement Operations Manager
November 19, 2018 - Lisa Ford has joined Animal Humane Society as advancement operations manager, effective December 10.  Previously, Lisa was the resource development director at Boys & Girls Club of Bemidji Area. Amanda Moua named Executive Director of Page Education Foundation
November 15, 2018 - Amanda Moua is the new executive director of the Page Education  Foundation. She has been with the foundation for more than seven years,  first as a program manager who worked directly with Page Scholars and  Service to Children community partners and then became administrative  director in 2014. Michael Wirth-Davis Celebrates 28 Years at Goodwill-Easter Seals Minnesota
November 14, 2018 - Michael Wirth-Davis’s first day at the helm of GESMN was Nov. 5, 1990. In the past 28 years, more than 300,000 people have received services from GESMN. The same week of this anniversary, Michael was named among the top executive leaders in the state in the “Minnesota 500.” Grand Marais Art Colony Moves into a Co-Directorship
November 7, 2018 - Lyla Brown was named executive director and Ruth Pszwaro artistic director of the Grand Marais Art Colony, the longest-lived art colony in Minnesota, established in 1947. Foundation for Essential Needs Hires Kate Burggraff as Executive Director
November 6, 2018 - Foundation for Essential Needs (FFEN) has hired Kate Burggraff to serve as its executive director effective Oct. 29, 2018. Burggraff brings more than 15 years of experience in hunger relief and nonprofit management to her position at FFEN, a private foundation dedicated to ending hunger in Minnesota. Two Managers Join The Family Partnership Advancement Team
November 5, 2018 - Brian Kimmes has joined The Family Partnership as development manager, where he will manage annual fundraising and additional events. Karen Smith assumes responsibilities as communications manager for The Family Partnership where she will manage all external and internal communications. Kari Aanestad named Director of Advancement at Minnesota Council of Nonprofits
October 31, 2018 - Kari Aanestad has been named the director of advancement at the Minnesota Council of Nonprofits.  Previously, Kari was the development manager.  In her new role, Kari will be working on fundraising, research and development, strategic initiatives, workshops and trainings, and more. Michelle Chang named Policy and Equity Coordinator at Minnesota Council of Nonprofits
October 31, 2018 - Michelle Chang has been named policy and equity coordinator at the Minnesota Council of Nonprofits.  Previously, Michelle served as an AmeriCorps VISTA in the position of inclusion and equity coordinator.  In her new role, she will focus on building power around Census 2020 in partnership with nonprofit members and expanding organizational equity. Krista Gallagher Colt Joins Animal Humane Society as Director of Annual Giving and Advancement Operations
October 31, 2018 - Krista Gallagher Colt has joined the Animal Humane Society as the director of annual giving and advancement operations.  Previously, Krista was the director of development operations at the University of Minnesota College of Science and Engineering. Certified Prosthetist-Orthotist, Prosthetic Product Manager of Orthomerica, Michael Leach, Appointed as Project Lolo’s Certified Prosthetist-Orthotist Advisor
October 24, 2018 - Michael Leach, Certified Prosthetist-Orthotist and prosthetic product manager at Orthomerica, has been appointed as the Certified Prosthetist-Orthotist (CPO) Advisor of Project Lolo. As the CPO advisor, Michael will contribute his expertise to advance Project Lolo’s impact, advise its Board of Directors on technical orthotic and prosthetic (O&P) matters and support the development of unique, informative content. Ashley Boileau joins Animal Humane Society as Organizational Development Strategist
October 19, 2018 - Ashley Boileau has joined the Animal Humane Society as organizational development strategist. Previously, Ashley was a senior business partner at TARGET. Bondo Nyembwe joins Board of Directors of Cultural Jambalaya
October 18, 2018 - Bondo Nyembwe has been named to the board of directors of Cultural Jambalaya, an educational nonprofit that broadens world views of students and breaks down cultural barriers.  He is the executive director of Academia Cesar Chavez, a dual language Charter School (ACC) in St. Paul. Anne Rodenberg, MAL joins Amherst H. Wilder Foundation as Director of Individual Giving
October 9, 2018 - Anne Rodenberg, MAL was named director of individual giving for The Amherst H. Wilder Foundation. Anne has spent two decades advancing the mission of nonprofits including Second Harvest Heartland, the Catholic Community Foundation, WomenVenture, and Dunwoody College of Technology. She earned her Master of Arts in Leadership from Augsburg University. JustUs Health Hires Interim Executive Director
October 8, 2018 -David Fey has joined JustUs Health as its interim executive director as of October 8. Maggie FitzGibbon hired at the Animal Humane Society
October 3, 2018 - Maggie FitzGibbon has been hired as advancement operations supervisor at the Animal Humane Society.  Previously, Maggie was a travel coordinator with PowerObjects. Nou Yang Named Wilder Foundation Senior Program Director
October 3, 2018 -The Amherst H. Wilder Foundation announces that Nou Yang has been promoted to the role of senior program director for Community Leadership within Wilder Center for Communities. Nou will oversee strategic direction, community partnerships, and development and sustainability efforts for community leadership programs, including the Youth Leadership Initiative, Neighborhood Leadership Program, Latino Leadership Program, and James P. Shannon Leadership Institute. FamilyMeans hires Katie McNulty
October 2, 2018 - FamilyMeans hired Katie McNulty as Director of Development & Communications. Conservation Corps Minnesota & Iowa Welcomes Mary Hilfiker as Newest Board Member
October 1, 2018 - Mary Hilfiker, coordinator for Friends of Upper Landing Park, is the newest board member of Conservation Corps Minnesota & Iowa. Mary works as a volunteer for multiple conservation groups and has a background in education. Conservation Corps Minnesota & Iowa names Mark Murphy Executive Director
October 1, 2018 - Conservation Corps Minnesota & Iowa is pleased to announce the arrival of Mark Murphy as its new executive director. Mark is a visionary leader and nonprofit professional with a passion for environmental conservation, youth development, and workforce preparedness. Charlene Brooks named Executive Director of Kinnickinnic River Land Trust
September 27, 2018 - The Kinnickinnic River Land Trust has hired new executive director, Charlene Brooks. Tom Hecht Hired at Osceola Community Health Foundation
September 26, 2018 - Tom Hecht has been named executive director of the Osceola Community Health Foundation. Northstar Problem Gambling Alliance hires Susan Sheridan Tucker
September 21, 2018 - Susan Sheridan Tucker joined Northstar Problem Gambling Alliance as its new executive director. Yellow Tree Theatre hires Peter Carlson as new Managing Director
September 20, 2018 - Yellow Tree Theatre has hired Peter Carlson as its new managing director. Winner of the American Theater Wing’s National Theater Company Grant, YTT has fast-gained a reputation for producing exciting work in the Northwest Suburbs. Peter Carlson is the former general manager of the Rose Ensemble in St. Paul. Kate Kelly named 2018 Outstanding Commissioner 
September 17, 2018 - Kate Kelly, chair of the ServeMinnesota Commission, was announced as the 2018 Outstanding Commissioner at a reception in Arlington, Va. as part of America’s Service Commissions (ASC) Innovation and Leadership Awards.  Stacy McMahon joins Aeon as Vice President of Asset Management 
September 6, 2018 - Aeon has hired a new vice president of asset management, Stacy McMahon. Previous roles for McMahon included director of finance for The Trust for Public Land, and chief financial officer for private real estate investment companies. McMahon says she was drawn to Aeon because of its mission to create home — the foundation of success — for all people in the Twin Cities area. Gena Johnson joins The American Craft Council as Director of Development
September 5, 2018 - The American Craft Council is pleased to announce that Gena Johnson will be its new director of development starting in mid-September. She will lead fundraising and membership efforts for the Council. Norway House Hires Kieth Bartz
September 5, 2018 - Keith Bartz has joined Norway House as director of development. Bill Gray Joins Minnesota Homeownership Center
September 5, 2018 - Bill Gray has joined the Minnesota Homeownership Center as director of stakeholder relations. Shereese Turner Joins Twin Cities Habitat for Humanity
September 4, 2018 - After 11 years at Twin Cities R!SE as the director of programs and operations, Shereese Turner accepted a position with Twin Cities Habitat for Humanity as the senior director of programs and services. Neighbors, Inc. Hires Director of Mission Fulfillment
September 4, 2018 - Neighbors, Inc. recently hired Susan Schroeder as our Director of Mission Fulfillment. Cultural Jambalaya Names 2018 Diversity Award Winners
September 4, 2018 - Cultural Jambalaya has named the  winners of the 2018 Diversity Awards:  Aaisha Said, Ben Herstig, Miranda  Shapiro & Ilham Nur, student leaders at Hopkins High School;   Minneapolis Public School’s  Indian Education Department;  Nate Beulah,  Ethnic Studies teacher at Northeast Middle School; and Reviving the  Islamic Sisterhood for Empowerment (RISE). Three New Members join PRISM Board of Directors 
August 29, 2018 - PRISM welcomed three new members to its board of directors: Kim George-Frey, Sr. Director of Risk Management at Allianz; Barry ZeVan, former Minneapolis area weatherman; and Brianna Miller, nonprofit executive leader and consultant. Prepare + Prosper Welcomes New Board Members and Board President
August 23, 2018 - Roland Sie (regional banking district leader at Wells Fargo), Terri Steenblock (compliance director for Federation of Tax Administrators), and Ron Zweber (senior vice president of the nonprofit banking team at Bremer Bank) have joined the Board of Directors and Greg Pesky (managing partner at AmplifyDMC) has moved into the role of Board president at Prepare + Prosper (P+P). Kat McCaffery joins Minnesota Council of Nonprofits as VISTA Leader
August 22, 2018 - Kat McCaffery has joined the Minnesota Council of Nonprofits (MCN) as VISTA leader. In her position, she will be supporting the professional and personal growth of VISTA members in MCN's cohort. Previously, Kat served in MCN's VISTA cohort as a development specialist with the American Indian Family Center in East St. Paul. Girl Scouts River Valleys names Karla Benson Rutten Vice President of Community Engagement
August 21, 2018 - Girl Scouts River Valleys has announced that Karla Benson Rutten will join the team as vice president of community engagement.  In this role, Karla will focus on building Girl Scouts River Valleys’ mentored troops model, and continue the organization’s community engagement work and Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) readiness initiatives. Karla comes to Girl Scouts River Valleys most recently as the founder and CEO of Benson Rutten Innovations, LLC,a coaching, training, and consulting business. Girl Scouts River Valleys names Chris Amundsen Chief Financial Officer
August 21, 2018 - Girl Scouts River Valleys has announced that Chris Amundsen will join the team as chief financial officer. In this position, Chris oversees Girl Scouts River Valleys’ property management, information systems and analytics, finance and accounting, and retail departments. Most recently, Chris served as the Executive Director of the American Craft Council in Northeast Minneapolis. The Center for Urban and Regional Affairs hires C Terrance Anderson as Director of Community-Based Research
August 8, 2018 - The Center for Urban and Regional Affairs (CURA) has hired C Terrance Anderson as director of community-based research.  C Terrance will oversee CURA's community-based programs.  Previously, C Terrance was the equity manager at the Metropolitan Council of the Twin Cities. Chris Nelson joins Catholic Community Foundation as Vice President of Development and Donor Engagement
July 31, 2018 - The Catholic Community Foundation of Minnesota (CCF) welcomes Christopher Nelson as its new vice president of development and donor engagement. Nelson will oversee a team of development professionals tasked with aiding institutions and individual donors to ensure their investments and donations align with their faith and accomplish their immediate and perpetual goals. Medtronic Foundation Announces Staff Transitions
July 31, 2018 - Medtronic Foundation has announced that Paurvi Bhatt will succeed Dr. Jacob Gayle as the new vice president of philanthropy.  Dr. Gayle will be continuing with Medtronic as vice president for social impact and will continue to serve on the Medtronic Foundation Board.   Mani Vang joins Cultural Jambalaya Board of Directors
July 30, 2018 - Mani Vang has been named to the board of Cultural Jambalaya, an educational nonprofit that creates respect and understanding of all cultures. Vang, whose family was among one of the first Hmong families to resettle in the Twin Cities, is the HR director for the U of M’s College of Education and Human Development. Leading Transportation Advocacy Nonprofit Announces New Name: Move Minnesota
July 27, 2018 - Move Minnesota is the new name of the merged nonprofits Transit for Livable Communities and St. Paul Smart Trips. The transformation coincides with the launch of their new mission: to lead the movement for an equitable transportation system in Minnesota that puts people first. Learn more on their new website: movemn.org. Andrea Diehl Joins Animal Humane Society as Principal and Campaign Gifts Officer
July 25, 2018 - Animal Humane Society has hired Andrea Diehl as principal and campaign gifts officer.  Previously, Andrea was the director of development at Healthcare Network of Southwest Florida. Jess Anna Glover Joins MENTOR Minnesota as Executive Director
July 17, 2018 - MENTOR Minnesota has welcomed Jess Anna Glover as its new executive director effective July 9, 2018.  Most recently, Jess Anna has spent more than a decade as a passionate advocate for student-focused public education policy and educators as an attorney.  Women's Foundation of Minnesota Hires New Staff
July 11, 2018 - Women's Foundation of Minnesota has hired three new staff members.  Jamara Cheek was named a Reatha Clark King Fellow, Ruby Oluoch was named communications project manager and Cynthia J. Zapata was named Wenda Weekes Moore intern. Women's Foundation of Minnesota Announces Staff Transitions
July 11, 2018 - Women's Foundation of Minnesota has announced two staff transitions.  Lulete Mola was promoted to vice president of community impact, and previously held the position of director of community impact.  Jess Kubis was named development manager, and previously held the position of communications manager. Carol Engebretson Byrne Stepping Down as President of Global Minnesota After 21 Years
July 11, 2018 - Global Minnesota announces that Carol Engebretson Byrne will step down from her position as president in January 2019 after leading the organization for 21 years. Prior to her tenure at Global Minnesota (formerly the Minnesota International Center), Carol worked in New York City for international nonprofits including AFS-USA and YMCA Program Services and on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C. Animal Humane Society Names New Managers
July 11, 2018 - Animal Humane Society has named new managers.  Christina Nicholson has joined the team as facilities manager, and was previously the general manager of the Hampden Park Co-Op.  Samantha DelSerra was hired as advancement operations donor database administrator, and was previously the curriculum writer at Curriculum Concepts International. Jeni Gregory joins the Minnesota Humanities Center as Director of Development
July 11, 2018 - Jeni Gregory was recently hired as the Minnesota Humanities Center’s director of development. Her previous experience includes managing fundraising and communications for area environmental organizations and several years spent fundraising for the Greater Twin Cities Youth Symphonies. Prior to taking on the nonprofit development work, Jeni taught adult education English as a Second Language classes. Leondra Burchall named Vice President of the Minnesota Humanities Center
July 11, 2018 - Leondra Burchall has been named vice president of the Minnesota Humanities Center Previously, she served as Senior Program Officer at the National Endowment for the Humanities. She has also held a variety of humanities-related positions, including Director of African American Programs at Virginia Humanities and Researcher with the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture. Erica Dickerson named Executive Director of A Chance to Grow
July 2, 2018 - A Chance To Grow has announced that Erica Dickerson will serve as its next executive director. Dickerson has been with the agency for 17 years, previously serving as the Director of Clinical & Home-Based Services.  Juana Moya Joins Aeon as Advancement Assistant
July 2, 2018 - Juana joins Aeon as advancement assistant with a bachelor’s degree in mass communications and public relations from UW-Eau Claire and has experience in sales and account management. In her new role, Juana aids Aeon’s Advancement Team. She also provides direct support to Aeon’s chief advancement officer. Jen Small Joins Aeon as Grant Writer
July 2, 2018 - Jen Small joins Aeon as grant writer after working for several years in Washington DC. Before joining the nonprofit sector, Jen held business development and strategy roles at a digital marketing agency.  Amy Dillahunt Joins Interfaith Action of Greater Saint Paul as Director of Development and Communication
June 29, 2018 - Interfaith Action of Greater Saint Paul announced the appointment of Amy Dillahunt as the organization’s new director of development and communication. In her new position, Dillahunt will oversee all activities related to fundraising, including solicitation of major gifts, government grants, special events, planned gifts, and support from faith communities, corporations, and foundations. The Page Education Foundation Adds Advisory Board Members and Wins Book Awards
June 29, 2018 - The Page Education Foundation added two new Advisory Board Members to their leadership team:  Mark Irvin, Vice President, Supply Chain - Best Buy and Philip G. J. McKoy, Chief Information Officer – UnitedHealthcare. They also received the Northeastern Minnesota Book Awards and the Midwest Book Awards for their children's book publication, Grandpa Alan's Sugar Shack. Rise, Inc. and ESR Merge
June 22, 2018 - Rise, Inc., a disability service provider offering person-centered employment, housing supports and personal growth services throughout the state of Minnesota, announced its plans to merge with ESR, a similar provider serving Washington County, Minnesota and St. Croix County, Wisconsin. TakeAction Minnesota Names Elianne Farhat Executive Director
June 21, 2018 - Elianne Farhat has been named executive director of TakeAction Minnesota. Before joining TakeAction Minnesota as its program director, Elianne worked for numerous state and national organizations including the Center for Popular Democracy, PICO National Network, and the Minnesota AFL-CIO. Jeremiah Program Names La Juana Whitmore Executive Director
June 20, 2018 - Jeremiah Program announced the hiring of La Juana Whitmore as the new executive director for the organization’s Minneapolis-Saint Paul campus. Whitmore comes to Jeremiah from Metropolitan Economic Development Association (MEDA), where she was director of consulting solutions. Nexus Names Dr. Michelle K. Murray President and C.E.O.
June 14, 2018 - Following a national search, Nexus, a provider of youth and family solutions, has selected Dr. Michelle K. Murray as president, chief executive officer, effective immediately.  Dr. Murray has been acting as interim chief executive officer at Nexus since December 2017. The Family Partnership Names New Staff, Board
June 14, 2018 - The Family Partnership has named Kate Bruce, Grant Kamin and Jodi Sandfort to its Board of Directors.  They have also welcomed Kit Briem as vice president of advancement and promoted Lorena Pinto to program director for the organization's PRIDE program. AchieveMPLS Hires Jennifer Valley as new Events and Communications Manager
June 28, 2018 - AchieveMPLS has hired Jennifer Valley as its new events and communications manager. Jennifer brings extensive event planning and marketing/communication experience to the position. She also shares her perspective as a Minneapolis Public Schools (MPS) graduate, parent and former staff member. Fred Wells Tennis and Education Center names Aaron Holland Director of Operations
June 27, 2018 - Fred Wells Tennis and Education Center (The Fort) is pleased to announce that Aaron Holland will become the director of operations at the St.Paul based nonprofit.  Holland’s appointment will begin July 1st, 2018. Nikki Beasley Joins YWCA St. Paul as Assistant Director of Housing
June 12, 2018 - YWCA St. Paul has hired Nikki Beasley as assistant director of housing. She brings nearly 20 years of experience in program development and working with housing and homeless families, most recently at Women’s Advocates. Michelle Daniel Joins YWCA St. Paul as Director of Development
June 12, 2018 - YWCA St. Paul has hired Michelle Daniel as director of development. She comes to YWCA St. Paul from Greater Twin Cities United Way, and has raised more than $110 million over her 20-year fundraising career. Christina Woodlee Receives Promotion at the Bridge for Youth
June 12, 2018 - Christina Woodlee has been promoted to the position of associate director at the Bridge for Youth.  Christina brings to her position more than 15 years of operational and development leadership. Craig Warren named Vice President of Enterprise Solutions at Minnesota Children's Museum
June 12, 2018 - Craig Warren is joining Minnesota Children’s Museum as vice president of enterprise solutions. Warren, who starts June 20, will be responsible for finance, human resources, volunteer services, information technology, legal and administrative management. He will lead a team of 12 employees. Community Action Partnership of Hennepin County names Steve Piekarski Executive Director
June 7, 2018 - Community Action Partnership of Hennepin County has named Steve Piekarski as its new executive director, effective June 19, 2018. Previous positions include Senior Director for Partners in Community Supports, Product Manager at UCare, and Policy Analysist for the Minnesota Department of Human Services. Lisa Mears named CEO of Family Pathways
June 6, 2018 - Family Pathways announced that Lisa Mears will become their chief executive officer on July 2, 2018. Mears was formerly the chief executive officer of VEAP, a basic needs and social service organization located in Bloomington.  Center for Veterans Research and Education names Joseph Massa Interim Executive Director
June 6, 2018 - Joseph Massa was named interim executive director of the Center for Veterans Research and Education in Minneapolis. Ministries Foundation Receives Gold Telly Award
June 6, 2018 - The Sisters of St. Joseph Ministries Foundation is pleased to announce its “Bold Moves for Health Care” animated video has received a 2018 Gold Telly Award for Best Fund Raising submission in the 39th Annual Telly Awards. The Telly Awards honors excellence in video and television across all screens. Henningson & Snoxell, Ltd. Hires Virginia Cronin
June 6, 2018 - Maple Grove law firm Henningson & Snoxell, Ltd. has announced that Attorney Virginia Cronin has joined the firm. Cronin is a member of the firm’s Business Law Department providing legal counsel to nonprofit organizations including churches, schools and tax exempt organizations.  MRAC Hires Kathy Mouacheupao as Executive Director
May 14, 2018 - The Metropolitan Regional Arts Council (MRAC) has announced Kathy Mouacheupao as its next executive director; she will start in her new role at the organization on June 4, 2018. Kathy has been an MRAC applicant, panelist, and board member. The Sanneh Foundation Adds New Staff
May 2, 2018 - The Sanneh Foundation welcomes Mai-Anh Kapanke as executive director, Jennifer Crosby Zarth as chief advancement officer, and Robert Albachten as finance manager. Pamela Zeller named Executive Director of Women's Initiative for Self Empowerment
April 26, 2018 - Pamela Zeller has been named executive director for WISE after longtime executive director, Dr. Wilhelmina Holder, retired after 14 years of service to the organization. Pamela holds a Bachelor’s degree in Philosophy from Macalester College. Previously, she has served as the executive director of Casa de Esperanza and the Sexual Violence Center. National Association of Social Workers - MN Chapter Names Executive Director
April 26, 2018 - Karen E. Goodenough, MSW, LGSW, was named executive director of the National Association of Social Workers – Minnesota Chapter. FamilyWise Names Anna VonRueden Program Director
April 18, 2018 - FamilyWise has named Anna VonRueden program director. Anna has worked with FamilyWise since 2013, most recently as Youth Services Manager. She’s a Credentialed Process Mentor in High-Fidelity Wraparound and has extensive experience working with at-risk youth and community/county partners. IARP names Jessica Belt Saem Eldahr Executive Director
April 18, 2018 - Jessica Belt Saem Eldahr was named Executive Director of the Iraqi and American Reconciliation Project (IARP). Opportunity Partners Hires Paul Hanson as Vice President of Information Technology
April 12, 2018 - Twin Cities nonprofit organization Opportunity Partners welcomes Paul Hanson as new vice president of information technology. Hanson brings over 30 years of experience to the position, most recently as chief operating officer of MyAlerts Inc. (formerly TrackIf.) Lutheran Social Service of Minnesota Names Patrick Thueson Chief Operating Officer
April 9, 2018 - Patrick Thueson has been named chief operating officer for Lutheran Social Service of Minnesota, in addition to serving as chief financial officer. During Thueson’s five years as CFO, LSS’ services grew more than 40%. Thueson continues leading LSS’ Executive Operations Team, with additional responsibilities for Services and Human Resources. Perspectives, Inc. Names Kaylie Burns Gahagan as Director of Development and Community Engagement
April 2, 2018 - Saint Louis Park-based Perspectives, Inc. has named Kaylie Burns Gahagan director of development and community engagement.  Previously, Kaylie was the director of community engagement. You are signed in as: View My Account  Logout User Name Password

Forgot your password? Login
Create New Account » Minnesota Council of Nonprofits
2314 University Ave. West #20
St. Paul, MN 55114 Phone: 651-642-1904
Fax: 651-642-1517
Greater MN: 1-800-289-1904
info@minnesotanonprofits.org FOLLOW MCN: ©document.write(new Date().getFullYear()); Minnesota Council of Nonprofits. All Rights Reserved.
web design and development created by nclud 