Lori Stone Reinauer Joins NCIP Team as External Relations Director
11/14/2017
Liberal groups have fought fiercely to derail Stephen Bradbury's nomination, citing his authorship of memos providing legal authorization for harsh treatment of prisoners suspected of terrorism. | Cliff Owen/AP Photo By ELANA SCHOR 11/09/2017 05:30 PM EST Stephen Bradbury, who helped write the so-called torture memos endorsing brutal interrogation tactics under the George W. Bush administration, has locked up a key swing vote on his nomination to join the Trump administration. Human rights and other liberal groups have fought fiercely to derail Bradbury's nomination as general counsel of the Department of Transportation, citing his authorship of memos providing legal authorization for harsh treatment of prisoners suspected of terrorism. Story Continued Below But although Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) sent a strong signal this week that he would oppose Bradbury, another swing vote — Sen. Susan Collins (R-Maine) — said Thursday that she would back him in the Senate's vote next week. "His role was not developing the policy," Collins told POLITICO, noting that she has "taken a close look at" Bradbury's background. "His role was as an attorney within the Justice Department, and he's obviously not going to have anything to do with this issue at DOT." Bradbury, who wrote several legal memos approving the use of harsh interrogation tactics after joining the Bush administration's Department of Justice in 2005, saw his bid to become Bush's assistant attorney general in 2008 run aground amid opposition from Senate Democrats. Sen. Tammy Duckworth (D-Ill.) has already placed a hold on his nomination to join the Trump administration. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) filed a procedural motion on Thursday that sets up a final confirmation vote on Bradbury next week. A daily play-by-play of congressional news in your inbox. By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time. Activists working to derail the Bradbury nomination had viewed Collins as a potential "no" vote, given her support in 2014 for the public release of the Senate Intelligence Committee's report on brutal treatment, seen as tantamount to torture, that certain prisoners received while detained by the CIA. With Collins in the "yes" camp, however, human rights groups would have to peel off two more Republican opponents by next week in order to defeat the nomination. A spokesman for Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), a former Judge Advocate General in the Air Force, said Thursday he is leaning toward voting for Bradbury. The office of Sen. Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.), seen as another potential swing vote, did not return a request for comment. Sen. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.), an Intelligence Committee member seen as a potential Bradbury supporter, remains undecided on the nomination, according to a spokesman. McCain appears solidly opposed, telling POLITICO on Wednesday that he would oppose "any nominee who in any way has supported the use of enhanced interrogation." The Arizona Republican this week opposed the nomination of Steven Engel, who reviewed a draft 2007 memo on enhanced interrogation, to the senior Department of Justice position for which Bradbury previously served in an acting capacity.  By DANIEL STRAUSS and ELANA SCHOR McCain's comments gave some hope to human rights groups, who escalated their campaign to defeat Bradbury. Approving the DOT nominee "would send a terribly cruel message to the million-plus refugee torture survivors living in the United States, and the millions more across the globe," the leaders of the nonprofit Center for the Victims of Torture wrote in a Wednesday letter to senators. "There must be accountability for those who champion repugnant and immoral misuses of government authority." Missing out on the latest scoops? Sign up for POLITICO Playbook and get the latest news, every morning — in your inbox. By Jack Shafer By John McCormack By Zachary Karabell By Ken Adelman © 2019 POLITICO LLC 