A CIA program that went too far 
12/16/2014
Near the end of his Dec. 12 op-ed column, “A travesty of a report,” condemning the Senate intelligence committee’s report on the CIA’s use of “enhanced interrogation techniques,” Charles Krauthammer stated: “A nation attacked is not a laboratory for exquisite moral experiments.” He was partially right. This nation is not and must not become a laboratory for moral experiments, period. Since torture is against everything we as a nation have chosen in a moral code and embodied in our Constitution and laws, a “moral experiment” is precisely what was occurring. This experiment must be brought fully to light and justice must be sought for the men who were hidden, imprisoned and brutalized. Linda O’Brien, Takoma Park ● There has been much response to the Senate’s CIA torture report. To the left: We all knew 13 years ago, tacitly, implicitly, that this was going on, and we chose not to speak out. We knew it was torture; we knew it was immoral. We chose immoral and alive over moral and dead, despite the infinitesimal probability of any one of us being the victim of terrorism. Elected officials should stop being hypocritical. They were there, chose not to ask, chose not to listen and chose not to speak out. To the right: There is a reason the “enhanced interrogation” program was stopped. It was immoral, plain and simple, and we were on the wrong side of history. I am tired of hearing from the chickenhawks, so committed to the fight, whose children walk college campuses with backpacks rather than battlefields with gunny sacks. Our words tell us who we wish we were; our actions tell us who we are. We are a nation with a brave military defending a cowardly people. James Vanderzon, Chevy Chase ● In his Dec. 11 op-ed column, E.J. Dionne Jr. raised the deeply troubling prospect of a return to torture and cruelty [“Will we torture again?”]. Despite the Senate report’s detailed description of a CIA program built upon deception and physical and psychological brutality beyond the pale, former officials seem to assert that a future administration could sanction torture again. Even CIA Director John Brennan stated that, although he found the practices abhorrent, using such techniques was a political decision. Torture is immoral and illegal under U.S. and international law. It is never justified, even during wartime. The report makes clear that the CIA based its program on false and misleading information without accountability and received no actionable intelligence. It is necessary for President Obama and Congress to solidify the ban so that torture and cruelty can never be reauthorized with the stroke of a presidential pen or under the cloak of darkness. Marie Soueid, Washington The writer is a legal fellow for the Center for Victims of Torture. We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites. 