MSF Saddened by Loss of Life During Argos Ship Rescue

Jun 16 15
Anab Mohamud Mohamed is a Somali pharmacist who has been working with the Doctors Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) in Somalia since 1997. In late June, and thanks to a special visa (Somalia is stateless and its citizens do not have valid passports to leave the country), she visited MSF's office in Barcelona where she shared her views about the situation in Somalia.Things have changed a lot. Mogadishu was a beautiful, quiet town before the war. Somalis were respectful and kind. Now, everything is different. Life seems to have lost its value; we have become aggressive and do not care about anything. Somalis have been the first ones to neglect our country. Somalia has fallen into oblivion among the rest of the world's countries.We cannot plan, we have no freedom to choose... and all this because we live under an armed menace. With guns pointing at us permanently, it is impossible to talk or make decisions. We can only let ourselves be carried along by the situation.The main problem, in addition to violence, is the lack of public services. Nearly all of the existing structures in Somalia are private and, therefore, inaccessible to most of the population. MSF health centers in Mogadishu are among the few, if not the only health facilities that are free of charge in the entire city and this is why they are so congested. People die from diseases such as malaria or malnutrition that could be cured easily if people had access to health care.I am the project pharmacist and assistant to the medical coordinator and am responsible for the pharmacy: I follow up drug consumption and prepare orders. I also collect data on mortality and epidemiological surveillance.We always keep our hopes up. But, frankly, we do not know what is going to happen from now on. I hope that everything goes well and that at last we have peace, but I don't know if it will be so.MSF runs a primary health care clinic in Yaqshid in the north of Mogadishu. The center carries out more than 12,000 medical consultations every month.