PRI's The World: Thousands in Yemen get Sick in an Entirely Preventable Cholera Outbreak

May 17 17
Doctors Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) is responding to the needs of civilians affected by ongoing violence in Yemen, and currently has 31 international and 534 Yemeni MSF staff on the ground. Since March 19, MSF has treated more than 1,266 war-wounded patients, but it remains extremely difficult to move within the country to evaluate needs and provide assistance, due to the fighting and the airstrikes. Around 100 tons of medical supplies have been sent to Yemen by MSF so far, but a naval blockade is causing severe fuel shortages that are making it difficult for hospitals to operate.Here, an MSF staff member describes the situation in Aden."I don’t really know how I can describe the situation in Aden in one word other than tragic. There are areas that are completely empty. People have evacuated, as they did not have the basic necessities of electricity, water, and food, let alone the extreme deterioration of the security situation [that] is jeopardizing their lives.After evacuating their homes, some people not only lack water and food but also a place to sleep. Some knock on the doors of other people, asking to stay in their houses. Those hotels that are still functioning have received a lot of displaced people. Some rooms are occupied by one or two families.MSF is still present in Aden and we are still receiving injured on a daily basis. We have received hundreds of injured since the beginning of the clashes on March 19. Yet we are facing many difficulties.Movement is extremely difficult and sometimes dangerous. Recently we have not been able to reach the Crater Health Post, which we are supporting.The MSF hospital is now in the middle of the fighting. All the time we hear bombings and airstrikes. Windows at the hospital have been broken many times. The hospital and the ambulance have been hit by stray bullets as snipers are present in the surrounding area and fighting is still ongoing.Aden has changed 180 degrees. The airport is damaged now. Many areas have been demolished. When you walk in the city you feel shocked and you do not believe you are in Aden. We are expecting death from anywhere and everywhere."