MSF Challenges Pfizer's Monopoly on Lifesaving Pneumonia Vaccine in South Korea

Feb 6 18
Ana Zaratiegui is Doctors Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) head of medical operations in Latin America. Here she describes the situation in Colombia, where MSF is responding to an unusual spike in malaria.In April, during an emergency response to provide assistance to displaced people in Chocó Department in northwestern Colombia, our team detected an unusual increase in the number of malaria cases. However, this was not what surprised us the most. Historically in Colombia, as in the rest of Latin America, the type of malaria we usually see is caused by the vivax parasite, but this year there were also many cases caused by the falciparum strain—a variant that causes the most severe form of the disease.However, a other few facts should be considered to better understand the significance of this. In Colombia, malaria is endemic. It is estimated that 85 percent of the country’s territory has the necessary climatic conditions for the anopheles mosquito (the vector that transmits the disease) to be able to live and reproduce. In addition, 60 percent of the Colombian population lives in areas at risk. This is the case in Chocó, which is located on one of the country’s three major outbreak hotspots—the Pacific Coast. In addition, every five or six years there is an outbreak attributed to the El Niño phenomenon, which alters rainfall patterns that then increase mosquito breeding. The last outbreak was in 2010 and at that time more than 117,000 cases were reported: 71 percent were vivax and 28 percent falciparum.Now let’s look at what’s happened this year: in the first six months of 2016, Colombia has registered more than 50,500 cases of malaria, exceeding in just half a year the total number of cases in 2014 and 2015. Ninety-eight percent of them have been simple cases—60 percent falciparum, 35 percent vivax, and 3 percent due to co-infection. The cause of this pattern change is still unknown, but if it is happening in Colombia, it may also be happening (or end up happening) in other countries in the region like Venezuela or Brazil.Both the falciparum and vivax strains of malaria can cause death. If left untreated, the vivax parasite can survive in the liver and cause acute kidney, liver, and lung failure with fatal consequences. The falciparum malaria strain causes the most lethal form of the disease, cerebral malaria, and has a higher associated mortality rate, mainly in the most vulnerable groups—namely children, the elderly and pregnant women.Although treatment for both strains of the disease is completely different, as they are different molecules, both are highly effective if administered in time.There are also cases of people infected with both malarial strains. Most of these patients have to be admitted to hospital and treated for both strains, so recovery is usually slower and complications may sometimes arise.The change in the malaria pattern this year also surprised the Colombian Ministry of Health (MoH), who lacked sufficient treatments for the falciparum malarial strain—it takes three months to obtain treatments through the mechanism established by the Global Fund to Fight Malaria, AIDS, and Tuberculosis. For this reason, at the end of May, MSF donated 20,000 treatments for simple cases and 400 for complicated cases, which were distributed by local health workers in the most affected areas. Our teams also distributed mosquito nets in certain areas of Chocó to try to reduce the number of new infections as much as possible.Now the malaria peak is over and we’ve gone back to dealing with the usual number of cases in endemic areas. But if this trend is confirmed, the MoH will have to adapt their plan and budget for this new reality in the country. Otherwise, there is a risk of increased mortality rates and a rise in the number of complicated cases.Colombia has a good system of epidemiological monitoring. Malaria cases are collated and published each week. In addition, within its malaria program there are the “malarios”—staff that are trained to work in vector control (fumigating, preventing breeding, etc.) and are very well perceived by the community.However, there are areas which are extremely difficult to access. For example, Chocó is an area with large rivers and no roads, where transportation is very expensive, so it is very difficult to reach populations who live far away from waterways. It is a very neglected area, where many health posts are empty due to a lack of staff. Its population has been traditionally affected over decades of internal conflict and violence from all armed actors.Even with these difficulties, the number of malaria cases in Colombia—like in many other Latin American countries—had been brought under control inline with the Millennium Development Goals established in 2000 (to halt or start to reduce the incidence of malaria cases and other major diseases by 2015). However, in the last three years the number of cases in the country has risen again.The emergence of the Chikungunya and Zika viruses, and the efforts undertaken to combat the aedes mosquito (the vector that transmits these diseases and also dengue fever and yellow fever), may have contributed to a neglect of anopheles vector control. This is something that is vital for controlling malaria cases.In the coming years, we will have to closely monitor the development of this issue in Colombia, and the rest of the region, to ensure that we do not back down in the fight against malaria, we are able to adapt to the new realities, and these realities do not translate into diseases and avoidable deaths.