More Than 200 People Treated for Violence-Related Injuries in Manono, Eastern DRC

Jan 23 17
“A lot of people are surprised that talking and counseling can help,” says Doctors Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) psychologist Saràh Dina. “It is a very medication dependent society. When someone has a problem they tend to just take a pill.”Dina recently completed a nine-month assignment in Pakistan, where she coordinated the work of a team of MSF mental health counselors working in Balochistan province. Here, she discusses what she saw, heard, and learned during the experience:Our mental health program in Balochistan benefits the patients from projects that MSF runs in the provincial capital, Quetta, and in the adjacent town of Kuchlak.We started the program in 2008. A doctor who was working in Kuchlak at the time noticed that many women came to the clinic with physical complaints, general body pain and headaches that couldn’t be explained medically. When they looked into it in more depth it was clear that there were psychological reasons for their pain. The program was extended to Quetta pediatric hospital a couple of years ago.Most of our patients (around 82 percent) are female and are predominantly adults, but we also see children and this part of our program is growing. The majority of our beneficiaries come from low socioeconomic backgrounds. Many come from Afghanistan originally; they arrived as refugees years ago.We see a lot of women with general depression and anxiety. On the surface, it can seem like any other place in the world but when you dig a bit deeper you find that the reasons for these problems are very specific to the region.We see many poverty and violence related issues. Normally people come to us with a combination of different factors affecting their psychological wellbeing. Some people have been exposed to war and conflict. Many have experienced a lot of grief and loss, also in relation to situations like maternal and child deaths. Having said this, it is a very resilient community.It is difficult to describe a typical case, but as an example we have had women come to see us who lost their husbands many years ago during the war, and yet they still retain a glimmer of hope that they may still be alive. This can haunt some women for the rest of their lives. They are now required to be financially responsible for their children if they have no other family around to help, and this puts a lot of pressure on them.Some women are also faced with violence in the family home, and come to see the counselors to seek relief from it all, not being able to talk about this in such a frank and open way elsewhere. We also have men and women who come to us with symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Some have nightmares and flashbacks to periods in their lives that they would rather forget—from war and conflict, to violence at home.The time people are allowed to grieve is often very short. Some women in their late 30s or early 40s have already had more than 10 children, some as many as 15 or 16, and not all have survived. We see cases of women for example who have lost four or five children, yet the expectation is that they just move on after each death. It is, however, important to stress that this is not the case for all families.A lot of people are actually surprised that talking and counseling can help. It is a very medication dependent society. When someone has a problem they tend to just take a pill. Many people have been taking psychiatric medication for many years and when they come to us they say that the medication did not help them. This is likely due to an over-prescription of unsuitable medication and a misdiagnosis.At the beginning we were not sure how this program would work because the concept of counseling and mental health is very new in Balochistan but over the years we have seen a very positive increase in people accessing our services. On average, our counselors are seeing five patients per day, which is a lot as you spend a considerable amount of time with each patient, and patients come to see us three or four times. Some people stop after these sessions because they feel better, others need to come back.We are not equipped to deal with acute psychiatric problems, such as psychosis. These patients have to be referred to specialized centers. We could see patients for many years, but it is not our aim either to provide long term counseling.Given the uncertainty of the context where I was working, I was never sure if I would be able to have a follow-up appointment with a patient. The team of counselors would inform me of any progress with any particular women I had met. One woman came to see one of the counselors and knew I was nearing the end of my stay. Not knowing if we would meet again she asked the counselor to teach her a few words of English. She then thanked me in broken English over the phone for our work. I realized that you can communicate with people with depth and kindness, without speaking the same language.MSF offers mental health counseling sessions in two different locations in Balochistan province: in the provincial capital, Quetta, and in Kuchlak, which is an adjoining area. In Kuchlak, MSF runs a clinic for maternal and child healthcare and a program for leishmaniasis. In Quetta, MSF runs a pediatric hospital mostly treating neonates and also offers nutrition services. Between January and July 2014, MSF did 3,176 mental health consultations. The target of consultations for the whole year was around 4,000 but this goal has been increased given the positive trend.