Yemen: MSF closes projects in Ad Dhale due to attacks and threats

Nov 7 18
The hepatitis C virus (HCV) kills 400,000 people every year, despite the existence of breakthrough medicines that can cure the disease in just 12 weeks. As we mark World Hepatitis Day on July 28, Doctors Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) underscores the urgency of greater access to HCV screening and treatment.Around 70 million people worldwide live with chronic HCV infection, millions of whom cannot access lifesaving treatments. Without treatment, the blood-borne disease can lead to liver failure, liver cancer, and death. It can take years for HCV to progress, and the years are often marked by constant fear of what may come.While newer, pill-only direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) are simpler for patients to take, have far fewer side effects, and have a 95 percent cure rate, exorbitant prices remain a deadly barrier to treatment in both high-income and developing countries. In fact, although the estimated manufacturing cost for a 12-week course of sofosbuvir and daclatasvir is less than $100, the manufacturers Gilead and Bristol-Meyers Squibb priced them at a staggering $147,000 per treatment when they launched these drugs in the United States.MSF has been fighting for years to close the HCV treatment gap with strategies aimed at increasing access to affordable, quality-assured generic versions of the drugs. In a major milestone, MSF announced in 2017 a deal with generics manufacturers to procure DAAs for just $120 per treatment in almost all MSF projects, allowing teams to start more people on treatment. MSF provided HCV treatment with DAAs to 5,926 people in 13 countries in 2017.One patient who benefited from an affordable cure is Din Savorn, a 50-year-old father of three living in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, who was diagnosed with HCV in 1999. In recent years, he heard about people being cured with newer treatments but lost hope of being cured himself until he was given the newer drugs sofosbuvir and daclatasvir.“I wanted to get treated, but I couldn’t afford it,” he said. “I would have had to sell my house. Then my children would have no shelter. So, I just waited.”In early 2017, Din started treatment at a MSF clinic in Phnom Penh, the only facility in Cambodia providing HCV treatment free of charge. A few months later, he got the news he had waited almost 20 years to hear: his treatment was a success. He was cured.