MONITORING AND DOCUMENTATION DEPARTMENT OCTOBER – DECEMBER 2006 FIELD REPORT
Unlisted
IntroductionThis is the fourth and last quarterly field report of 2006 by Al-Haq's Monitoring and Documentation Department, covering the period from October to December 2006. Al-Haq’s field reports cover human rights abuses committed by the Israeli Occupying Power and the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Each field report highlights a particularly important and disturbing trend observed by the Monitoring and Documentation Department during the reporting period.Since 1967, Israel has occupied the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip, together constituting the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT), despite binding United Nations Security Council resolutions ordering it to withdraw. Consequently, Al-Haq's monitoring and documentation activities have traditionally been directed towards the violations committed by Israel, the Occupying Power. However, following the creation of the PNA in 1994, Al-Haq also monitors and documents human rights violations perpetrated by the PNA.The field reports are based on first-hand information gathered by Al-Haq's Monitoring and Documentation Department, covering a broad range of human rights abuses, including comprehensive coverage of killings, house demolitions, curfews, and deportations. Al-Haq’s specially trained fieldworkers visit sites of alleged human rights violations, draw maps, draft reports and take sworn witness statements (affidavits) from victims and eyewitnesses. The affidavits excerpted or referenced in field reports are available on Al-Haq’s web site www.alhaq.org, as samples of those gathered during the reporting period. The field reports do not cover the Gaza Strip, since Al-Haq currently has no fieldworkers there.The Human Rights Situation since the Outbreak of the Second IntifadaThe human rights violations committed during the reporting period must be analysed in the broader context of the deteriorating general human rights situation since the outbreak of the second intifada on 29 September 2000, and Israel’s persistent failure to apply international human rights and humanitarian law in the OPT.According to Al-Haq's documentation, from the outbreak of the second intifada until the end of December 2006, Israeli forces killed 1,717 Palestinians in the West Bank, 327 of whom were children, and 95 of whom were women or girls. It is estimated that 280 Palestinians were killed in targeted assassinations. During the same period, Al-Haq documented the demolition, for punitive reasons, of 508 homes in the West Bank (whereof 472 were totally demolished and 36 were partially demolished), leading to the displacement of 3,171 people. Israel has also carried out a large number of administrative house demolitions on the pretext that the houses were built without the required licence. Since the beginning of 2004, 404 houses have been demolished for lack of licence, 180 of which were in East Jerusalem.Since the outbreak of the second intifada, the Occupying Power has almost completely eliminated the already limited authority of the PNA in the OPT. After the establishment of the current Palestinian government in March 2006, Israel’s withholding of PNA tax revenues, arrests and revocations of ID of PNA officials and destruction of ministerial buildings, as well as major international donors’ cessation of aid to the PNA, have rendered it unable to pay the full salaries of its civil servants and carry out its basic functions. These factors have exacerbated the PNA’s inability to uphold law and order in the OPT.