Monitoring and Documentation Report: July- Dec. 2010
Unlisted
General StatisticsWest BankThe Gaza StripHighlighted TrendIllegal Israeli Policies and Practices in East JerusalemFrom July to December 2010, Al-Haq field researchers documented numerous Israeli human rights violations that gravely impact Palestinians’ daily life in East Jerusalem. The Israeli authorities have been committing such violations through discriminatory policies from the outset of the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territory in 1967. These illegal practices result in the unlawful treatment of Palestinian residents of occupied East Jerusalem as part of a wider policy to undermine their presence in the city.Disregarding the occupied status of East Jerusalem, the Israeli parliament ratified its “Basic Law” on the city in 1980 declaring it the undivided capital of Israel. The Israeli declaration never received recognition from the international community and the United Nations (UN) adopted several resolutions rejecting Israel’s claim and reaffirming the status of East Jerusalem as occupied territory.In defiance of numerous UN resolutions, Israel has been implementing expansionist policies in East Jerusalem by continuing to annex territory. The nature of these policies can be analysed as strategic steps by the State of Israel to systematically deny Palestinian Jerusalemites their civil, economic, social and cultural rights in an effort to displace them from the city (for more information on the status of East Jerusalem see Al- Haq position paper: The Jerusalem Trap).Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem lack a basic sense of security in their neighbourhoods. They are constantly harassed, provoked and attacked by Israeli authorities, Israeli settlers or settler guards.2 On the one hand, Israeli authorities impose restrictions on the movement of Palestinian Jerusalemites, threaten their residency status, and prevent them from peacefully protesting against the illegal and discriminatory policies being carried out in the city. On the other hand, the Palestinian population in the West Bank, specifically in Jerusalem, is at constant risk of attacks by settlers and settler guards who enjoy complete impunity.One example of settler violence took place on 22 September when an Israeli settler guard shot and killed Samer Mahmoud Sarhan (32 years old). At approximately 3:40 am, witnesses saw Samer and a friend being provoked by a group of five settler guards in Wadi Hilwa, Silwan. The heavily armed settler guards threatened the young men and the argument turned physical. Naser Muhammad Sarhan, an eye-witness, recalls that Samer had refrained from violence until the settler guards opened random and heavy fire on the men. Samer was hit by a bullet fired by one of the settler guards and subsequently died from the injuries sustained (see Al-Haq Affidavit No. 5853/2010). Al- Haq documentation further confirmed that Samer and his friend were deliberately provoked by the settler guards before any violence erupted (see Al-Haq Field Report on the Killing of Samer Mahmoud Sarhan).