MONITORING AND DOCUMENTATION DEPARTMENT JANUARY – MARCH 2007 FIELD REPORT
Unlisted
IntroductionThis is the first quarterly field report of 2007 by Al-Haq's Monitoring and Documentation Department, covering the period from January to March 2007. Al-Haq’s field reports cover human rights abuses committed by the Israeli Occupying Power and the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Each field report highlights a particularly important and disturbing trend observed by the Monitoring and Documentation Department during the reporting period.Since 1967, Israel has occupied the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip, together constituting the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT), despite binding United Nations Security Council resolutions ordering it to withdraw. Consequently, Al-Haq's monitoring and documentation activities have traditionally been directed towards the human rights violations committed by Israel, the Occupying Power. However, following the creation of the PNA in 1994, Al-Haq also monitors and documents violations perpetrated by the PNA.The field reports are based on first-hand information gathered by Al-Haq's Monitoring and Documentation Department, covering a broad range of human rights abuses, including comprehensive coverage of killings, house demolitions, curfews and deportations. Al-Haq’s specially trained fieldworkers visit sites of alleged human rights violations, draw maps, draft reports and take sworn witness statements (affidavits) from victims and eyewitnesses. The affidavits excerpted or referenced in field reports are available on Al-Haq’s web site www.alhaq.org, as samples of those gathered during the reporting period. The field reports do not cover the Gaza Strip, since Al-Haq currently has no fieldworkers there.The Human Rights Situation since the Outbreak of the Second IntifadaThe human rights violations committed during the reporting period must be analysed in the broader context of the deteriorating general human rights situation since the outbreak of the second intifada on 29 September 2000, and Israel’s persistent failure to apply international human rights and humanitarian law in the OPT.According to Al-Haq's documentation, from the outbreak of the second intifada until the end of March 2007, Israeli forces killed 1,745 Palestinians in the West Bank, 334 of whom were children, and 71 of whom were women. It is estimated that 285 Palestinians were killed in the course of targeted assassination operations. During the same period, Al-Haq documented the demolition, for punitive reasons, of 511 homes in the West Bank (whereof 474 were totally demolished and 37 were partially demolished), leading to the displacement of 3,174 people. Israel has also carried out a large number of administrative house demolitions on the pretext that the houses were built without the required licence. Since the beginning of 2004, 468 houses have been demolished for lack of licence, 202 of which were in East Jerusalem.Since the outbreak of the second intifada, the Occupying Power has almost completely eliminated the already limited authority of the PNA in the OPT. Despite the formation of a democratically elected Palestinian unity government in March 2007, Israel continues to unlawfully withhold PNA tax revenues and to detain PNA officials. Coupled with major international donor’s cessation of aid, the PNA is unable to pay the full salaries of its civil servants and carry out its basic functions. These factors have exacerbated the PNA’s inability to uphold law and order in the OPT.