MONITORING AND DOCUMENTATION DEPARTMENT JANUARY - MARCH 2006 FIELD REPORT
Unlisted
This is the first quarterly field report of 2006 by Al-Haq's Monitoring and Documentation Department, covering the period from January to March 2006. Al-Haq’s field reports cover human rights abuses which occurred during the reporting period; each report highlights a specific trend.First-hand documentation by Al-Haq's Monitoring and Documentation Department constitutes the backbone of all other projects and activities undertaken by the organisation. Al-Haq’s fieldworkers gather information and affidavits from victims of, and eyewitnesses to, human rights violations throughout the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. The field reports do not cover the Gaza Strip, since Al-Haq has no fieldworkers there. The Department continuously documents violations of all sorts, including comprehensive coverage of killings, house demolitions, curfews, and deportations. The information gathered is channelled into Al-Haq's advocacy at the local and international levels, including its interventions, legal research reports and campaigns.Due to Israel's sustained and illegal occupation of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip – together constituting the Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT) – since 1967, Al-Haq's monitoring and documentation activities have traditionally been directed towards the violations committed by Israel, the Occupying Power. However, Al-Haq also monitors and documents violations perpetrated by the Palestinian National Authority (PNA).The Human Rights Situation since the Outbreak of the Second IntifadaThe human rights violations committed during the reporting period must be analysed in the broader context of the deteriorating general human rights situation since the outbreak of the second intifada on 29 September 2000, and the continuous disregard by Israel for international human rights and humanitarian law in the OPT.According to Al-Haq's documentation, from the outbreak of the second intifada until the end of March 2006, 1,600 Palestinians were killed in the West Bank, 308 of whom were children, and 88 of whom were women and girl children. It is estimated that 250 Palestinians were killed in targeted assassinations. During the same period, Al-Haq documented the total demolition, on the basis of an Israeli military order, (punitive house demolition) of 443 homes in the West Bank, leading to the displacement of 3,010 people. Israel has also carried out a large number of house demolitions on the pretext that the houses were built without the required license (administrative house demolition). Since 2004, 329 houses have been demolished for lack of license, 154 of which were in East Jerusalem.Since the outbreak of the second intifada, the already limited authority of the PNA in the OPT has been nearly eliminated by the Occupying Power. With the constitution of the new Palestinian Government in March 2006, Israel’s withholding of PNA tax revenues, and major donors’ subsequent cessation of aid to the PNA, this authority is on the verge of collapse. Nevertheless, the PNA must respect international legal standards. The main problem in this regard remains the inability of the PNA to uphold law and order.