MONITORING AND DOCUMENTATION DEPARTMENT JANUARY - MARCH 2009 FIELD REPORT
Unlisted
IntroductionThis is the first quarterly field report of 2009 by Al-Haq's Monitoring and Documentation Department, covering the period from January to March 2009. Al-Haq’s field reports cover human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law committed by Israel, the Occupying Power in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT), namely the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip. In addition to Israeli violations, the report also covers human rights abuses committed by the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) in the West Bank and those committed by the de facto Hamas authority in the Gaza Strip.Since 1967, Israel has occupied the OPT, despite United Nations Security Council resolutions ordering it to withdraw. Consequently, Al-Haq's monitoring and documentation activities have traditionally been directed towards the violations committed by Israel, the Occupying Power. However, following the creation of the PNA  in 1994, Al-Haq also monitors and documents violations perpetrated by the PNA. In addition, since Hamas’ take-over of the Gaza Strip in June 2007 and assumption of de facto authority, Al-Haq also monitors violations perpetrated by Hamas and its Executive Forces (EF).Each field report highlights a particularly important and disturbing trend observed by the Monitoring and Documentation Department during the reporting period. The field reports are based on first-hand information gathered by Al-Haq's Monitoring and Documentation Department, and cover a broad range of violations, including, but not limited to, comprehensive coverage of killings, house demolitions and curfews. Al-Haq’s specially trained fieldworkers visit sites of alleged violations, draw maps, draft reports and take sworn statements (affidavits) from victims and eyewitnesses. The affidavits excerpted or referenced in the field reports are available on Al-Haq’s web site www.alhaq.org, as samples of those gathered during the reporting period.The Human Rights Situation since the Outbreak of the Second IntifadaThe violations committed during the reporting period must be analysed in the broader context of the deteriorating general human rights situation since the outbreak of the second intifada on 29 September 2000, and Israel’s persistent failure to respect its obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law inthe OPT. As Al-Haq only assigned a fieldworker to Gaza in June of 2007 and a second fieldworker in August 2008, it has not compiled comprehensive statistics similar to those obtained for the West Bank, which date back to the start of the second intifada. In light of Israel’s military offensive “Operation Cast Lead” carried out on the Gaza Strip during the reporting period, this report features a special section on violations committed during this offensive, and includes comprehensive statistics of Palestinians killed.According to Al-Haq's documentation, from the outbreak of the second intifada until the end of March 2009, 1,881 Palestinians were killed in the West Bank, 366 of whom were children, and 103 of whom were female (including girls). It is estimated that 310 Palestinians were killed in targeted assassinations. During the same period, Al-Haq documented the demolition for punitive reasons, of 572 homes1 in the West Bank (whereof 504 were totally demolished, 62 were partially demolished and 6 sealed off), leading to the forcible displacement of 3,351 people. Israel has also carried out a large number of house demolitions on the pretext that the houses were built without the required license (administrative house demolition). Since the beginning of 2004, 592 houses have been demolished for lack of license, 285 of which were in East Jerusalem.Since the outbreak of the second intifada, the Occupying Power has almost completely eliminated the already limited authority of the PNA in the OPT. Israel’s destruction of ministerial buildings, arrests of PNA officials and unlawful withholding of PNA tax revenues have severely limited the ability of the PNA to carry out its most basic functions, including upholding law and order. The effects of many of these policies were exacerbated following the victory of Hamas in the democratic Palestinian elections of 2006, and continue to affect the de facto Hamas government in the Gaza Strip, a government that is plagued by economic and diplomatic isolation and whose administrative functions are therefore limited. By virtue of the control it does exercise over the Gaza Strip, Hamas is responsible for ensuring law and order and is bound by international human rights and humanitarian law obligations.