March 2009-Asylum News
July 02, 2010
House Appropriations   Homeland Security Subcommittee Holds a Hearing on "Health Services for Detainees   in U.S. Immigration & Customs Enforcement Custody"

On March 3, 2009, the House Appropriations Homeland Security Subcommittee   held a hearing to examine health care at immigration detention facilities. The   hearing was prompted by repeated reports of ICE's failure to provide adequate   medical care to detainees in its custody, resulting in several instances of   preventable detainee deaths. Witnesses included, Dora Schriro, Special Advisor   on Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and Detention & Removal; Jim   Hayes, Director, Office of Detention and Removal Operations at ICE; Jose   Rodriguez, Director, Division of Immigrant Health Services at ICE, and Alicia   Puente Cackley, Director, Health Care Issues at the Government Accountability   Office.

Click here to access the written testimonies of the witnesses

Click here for the   transcript of the hearing


U.S. Supreme Court   Issues Decision in "Persecutor Bar" Case

In its March 3, 2009 decision in the case of Negusie v. Holder, the   Supreme Court reversed the decision issued by the U.S. Court of   Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, which ruled that the "persecutor bar," which   prohibits granting refugee protection to anyone who "ordered, incited, assisted,   or otherwise participated in the persecution" of another person, applied without   regard to whether a refugee's involvement in acts of persecution were carried   out under coercion.  The Supreme Court remanded Negusie to the Board of   Immigration Appeals (BIA) to interpret the "persecutor bar" in the first   instance, giving the BIA the opportunity to recognize that the "persecutor bar" applies only to   culpable, voluntary acts.

Click here to   read more


USCIS Issues Written   Guidance on its Policy for Applying Exemptions for Cases Involving Material   Support Provided Under Duress

On February 13, 2009 USCIS issued written guidance to explain the policy   announced on December 22, 2008 that USCIS would be implementing exemptions for   material support provided under duress to all Tier I/II, designated, terrorist   organizations in accordance with the same adjudication process applied to Tier   III, non-designated, organizations. This process allows for a case-by-case   assessment in consideration of the "totality of the circumstances" of whether   the support was provided under duress, regardless of the status of the   organization to which the individual was forced to provide support.

Click here for the   February 13, 2009 USCIS memo


Symposium at Fordham   Law School Addresses the Issue of Legal Representation for   Immigrants

On March 12, 2009, Refugee Protection Program staff members attended a   symposium at Fordham Law School to discuss ideas for increasing quality legal   representation at the Immigration Courts and meeting the other unmet legal needs   of the immigrant community in the New York City area.  It was an event which   grew out of an ongoing series of meetings that Judge Robert A. Katzmann has   organized at the Second Circuit with nonprofits (including HRF), law professors,   attorneys in private practice, judges and others.  The   goal of the symposium was to bring together an even broader array of people,   including local government officials and funders, to open up the discussion to   the wider community.  Around 200 people attended, including a number of partners   from law firms that HRF works with in the pro bono asylum program.

Click here to   view The New York Times article about the event from March 12, 2009

Past Issues 