The Task Force 121 Connection
May 26, 2006
Sometimes, the obvious bears repeating:a  court martial like that of Sgt. Santos Cardona, accused of using his  military dog to threaten and abuse detainees, is critical to determine  individual wrong-doing, but it's only a piece of the larger torture and  abuse scandal. It's no substitute (and shouldn't be) for the necessary  systemic and thorough investigation into events that took place across  Guantanamo, Iraq and Afghanistan, and the role and responsibility of  senior officers – one of the most important ways the U.S. government can  say to all military personnel that abuses will not be tolerated.

The  obvious was brought home during testimony on Thursday from Capt.  Carolyn Wood.Now, Capt. Wood is one of the "Where's Waldos" of the abuse  puzzle; she was posted to both Afghanistan and Iraq, and some of the  worst abuses that have yet come to light appear to have been committed  under her watch. In late 2002, Capt. Wood was in charge of the 519th  Military Intelligence Battalion in Afghanistan.Soldiers under her  command were implicated in the deaths by torture of two Afghan  detainees, Habibullah and Dilawar (see. pp. 14 and 15).Capt. Wood and members of her battalion were then transferred to Iraq, where, in July 2003, they were assigned to Abu Ghraib.

Capt.  Wood testified that, at Abu Ghraib, she oversaw the "screening and  collection [of intelligence] operation for detainees" and became the  "officer in charge for military intelligence." Sgt. Cardona's civilian  defense lawyer, Harvey Volzer, asked Capt. Wood whether she was asked  when she arrived to develop interrogation "rules of engagement."[In the  context of Abu Ghraib, the terms "interrogation rules of engagement," or  "IROE" were used to refer to authorized interrogation techniques; here is  one version of the rules of engagement developed by Capt. Wood and  posted for interrogators at Abu Ghraib.] Capt. Wood said no – she  testified that she had been provided a copy of the rules of engagement  for another task force, which she submitted to her chain of command for  approval. Volzer asked which task force Wood had been referring to and  Wood responded: Task Force 121.My pen faltered in my note-taking.

Task  Force 121 (or TF-121), which has also been referred to as Task Force  6-26, was created in the summer of 2003 and was an elite, joint  military-civilian unit that included CIA and Special Operations forces,  assigned (according to various reports) to search for high-ranking  members of the Saddam regime and/or weapons of mass destruction. By  August 2003, the military Special Operations members of TF-121 were  reportedly using interrogation methods so harsh and aggressive that the  CIA barred its officers from participating. By  December 2003, the report of an internal military investigation  conducted by retired Col. Stuart Herrington (which has not been  released), found that, according to the Washington Post,  TF-121 members "had been abusing detainees throughout Iraq and had been  using a secret interrogation facility to hide their activities." The  Post quotes from the investigation report:"Detainees captured by TF 121  have shown injuries that caused examining medical personnel to note that  'detainee shows signs of having been beaten,'" . . . "It seems clear  that TF 121 needs to be reined in with respect to its treatment of  detainees."  In his testimony from  the Taguba investigation Col. Steven Jordan, who last month was charged  with cruelty and maltreatment and dereliction of duty for his role at  Abu Ghraib, indicated that TF 121 had also abused detainees at Abu Ghraib.

In  the military courtroom, Volzer asked Capt. Wood whether she "made use  of" the TF-121 rules of engagement.Wood did not directly respond – she  repeated that she had "made the recommendation" for the rules of  engagement to be approved, but had not received approval.Volzer asked  how Wood came to have them and Wood replied, "they came from my  Battallion Commander." Volzer did not follow up.

Wood's  testimony raises so many questions that will not be answered in the  context of this court martial; here are just a few:what were TF-121's  rules of engagement and did they deviate from existing military and  civilian regulations and laws?And if so, how?Who approved them?How did  Wood's battalion have them and were they used by military and civilian  interrogators at Abu Ghraib, even in the absence of official  approval?Was there tacit approval?What rules of engagement applied at  Abu Ghraib before General Sanchez approved three different sets of rules  in rapid succession in September and October 2003 (see my post from  yesterday)?

Other  snippets from Thursday that cry out for more explanation:the defense  introduced testimony by stipulation (a process by which both sides agree  to read to the jury and into the trial record testimony previously  obtained from a witness without needing the witness to appear in person)  from two separate sources, concerning the interest of Secretary of  Defense Rumsfeld and then Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz in  Abu Ghraib. The first testimony was from Maj. Michael Thompson, who was  assigned to the 325th Military Intelligence Battalion at Abu Ghraib and  reported to Col. Pappas, then head of military intelligence for the  prison. According to the stipulated testimony, Maj. Thompson was  frequently told by Pappas' executive assistant that "Mr. Donald Rumsfeld  and Mr. Paul Wolfowitz" had called and were "waiting for reports." The  defense also read aloud stipulated testimony from Steve Pescatore, a  civilian interrogator employed by the CACI firm, who recalled being told  by military intelligence personnel that Secretary Rumsfeld and  Wolfowitz received "nightly briefings." It's obvious why it may be to  the government's advantage not to allow more questioning on the public  record about the nightly briefings.I would guess that the defense  thought it enough to give the jury this evidence of pressure from the  top, as context for the high-stress environment in which the defense  says Sgt. Cardona was working. But no official investigation to date has  adequately examined the role of senior military and civilian command in  the torture and abuse at Abu Ghraib and elsewhere.

The  defense also elicited testimony that seemed intended to cast doubt on  Maj. Gen. Miller's Wednesday testimony that, during a visit to Abu  Ghraib in August-September 2003, he only recommended the use of military  working dogs for detainee "custody and control" and benign collection  of "passive intelligence." According to Lt. Col. Jerry L. Phillabaum,  the commander of the 320th Military Police Battalion at Abu Ghraib,  "Maj. Gen. Miller encouraged the use of dogs as much as possible" and  said "they were used effectively at Abu Ghraib around prisoners." Maj.  David DiNenna, the warden of Abu Ghraib prison, recalled a conversation  with Maj. Gen. Miller in which they discussed the lack of resources at  the prison and Miller asked about military working dogs. (Col. Pappas,  head of military intelligence, was also present, according to  DiNenna.)DiNenna testified that he told Miller he'd already requested  working dogs for prison operations and Miller responded that he would  ask for additional resources for Abu Ghraib, including the dogs. DiNenna  added: "[Maj. Gen. Miller] said dogs were extremely effective.He looked  at Col. Pappas and said how effective they were at Guantanamo .This  struck me as funny . . . I was the MP looking for dogs, he answered  MI."How effective this testimony will be in counteracting for the  military jury the strength of Maj. Gen. Miller's denial that he  recommended the use of dogs during interrogation is hard to tell.

In  sum, on Thursday the defense introduced the testimony of seven "live"  witnesses and two witnesses by stipulation.The testimony of all the  witnesses, who included a military dog handling expert, was intended to  bolster the defense's theme:Sgt. Cardona is a good dog handler and his  actions were lawful and reasonable, especially in light of the confusion  and chaos of military detention and interrogation operations at Abu  Ghraib, where orders from above were non-existent, unclear or constantly  changed.

Despite  aggressive cross-examination of the witnesses by the prosecution, the  defense may be making some headway.Late in the afternoon, at the end of  the testimony by the dog handling expert, a panel member asked (in the  military justice system, the jury may submit written questions to be  asked of witnesses):"Is there any guidance within the Geneva Conventions  or the law of war on the use of military working dogs on detainees or  in interrogations?"

So in a story that started with the authorization by the Secretary of Defense of use of dogs during interrogation in Guantanamo, a member of the  United States military, sitting on a jury in a court martial at Fort  Meade, now wonders what the law is on how dogs can be used by the U.S.  military on human beings.  Until then it had always been clear.The use  of dogs to intimidate or threaten or degrade prisoners in interrogation  is unlawful.It violates the Geneva Conventions.It violates U.S. policy as stated in the Army's field manual on interrogations, and it violates the prohibitions against cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment under domestic law and international treaties by which the United States is bound.It also violates the Uniform Code of Military Justice,  under which Sgt. Santos Cardona has been charged with cruelty and  maltreatment and dereliction of duty.In November 2005, the Pentagon  issued a directive explicitly prohibiting the use of dogs in interrogations.

The  dog handling expert to whom the question was posed had not read the  Geneva Conventions and said the subject of use of dogs on detainees and  during interrogations wasn't yet taught in the Army's dog handling  school. The jury member's question went unanswered.And on the fifth day, the defense rested.  The trial is scheduled to resume on Tuesday.  Have a good weekend. 