Wikileaks Cables: Evidence in Hand Points to “Masterminds” Behind Assassination of Prominent Indonesian Rights Activist
December 17, 2010
Among the handful of bombshells one  can find in the cables that went back and forth between the U.S. State  Department and embassy staff in Jakarta is this: the U.S. is apparently aware of  evidence linking a high level Indonesian security official to the assassination  of Munir Said Thalib, one of Indonesia’s most outspoken human rights activists.

Munir was poisoned in 2004 as he  flew from Jakarta to Amsterdam. While a handful of people thought to be  responsible for the murder have been charged in his death, the “masterminds” –  as the cables refer to them – of the assassination are not in  prison.

According to reports  about the cables, recently released by Wikileaks, Indonesian police have a  witness who claims that, “former [Indonesian Intelligence] chief Hendropriyono  chaired two meetings at which Munir's assassination was planned.” A witness at  those meetings told Indonesian police that “only the time and method of the  murder changed from the plans he heard discussed; original plans were to kill  Munir in his office.”

But as the cables make clear, the  witness – like others with first-hand knowledge of the killing – is unwilling to  testify in the case because he fears for his safety.

''A breakthrough on  who ordered the murder would presumably require someone with inside information  to take an extraordinary risk in testifying, and would require protection,” the  cables say. “Nonetheless, the police seem to have been given orders to show  progress on the case, likely due to international  attention.''

Separate cables also detail the  backroom discussions that led to the recent resumption of U.S. military  assistance to Kopassus, the Indonesian special forces who are alleged to have  committed serious human rights violations in Aceh, Papua, East Timor, Jakarta  and elsewhere.

The cables lay out an argument for  re-engaging with the special ops community despite their rights record, by  suggesting that closer military ties  would encourage further reform of Indonesia's military. The cables also report that  Indonesian officials threatened to derail President Obama’s November, 2010 visit  to Indonesia if the ties to Kopassus were not renewed. (Indonesian officials  vehemently deny that this threat was ever made.)

But taken as a complete body of  work, the cables make clear that Washington is keen to make more friends than  enemies in Jakarta. State Department officials devote the majority of their key  strokes to considerations such as:  “U.S. economic interests” in a country that  has grown the largest economy in Southeast Asia; “counter-terrorism cooperation”  in a country where Islamic extremists have found refuge and carried out attacks;  and the relationship between Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and  the Chinese, who are also investing heavily in their ties to  Indonesia.

All this suggests that activists who  want to see accountability for Munir’s death are going to have to continue to  pressure officials in Jakarta and Washington for further action on the case. Now  that there is public evidence that the Indonesians (and the Americans) are aware  of evidence against Hendropriyono, it has become even harder for officials to  close the books on this tragic killing. 