India Obstructs Trafficking Victims from Reuniting with Family
November 12, 2015
Trafficking survivors face a long hard road to reclaiming their lives. Even once they are free, their families may be in danger from vindictive traffickers. For some victims, returning home to try to protect their families is a top priority. But things get even more complicated when politics come into play. In a recent article by Reuters, one man's story highlights the complicated relationship between the United States and India when it comes protecting the families of trafficking victims. In 2013, an Indian diplomat was arrested in New York under suspicion of trafficking a domestic worker. A political controversy erupted. The Indian government started clamping down on those granted a T Nonimmigrant Status (T-visa) by the U.S. government. The government awards the visas only to victims of human trafficking, giving them legal status and allowing them to travel freely and bring their families to the United States. In an eight-month period Indian officials confiscated T-visas from returning trafficking victims, preventing them from returning to the United States. Officials stopped that practice, but T-visa holders are now forced to share details of their trafficking cases with Indian authorities to be allowed to emigrate. This puts survivors and their families at further risk of reprisals and causes long delays. Congressman Chris Smith (R-NJ) brought up the Reuters report at this week's House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee hearing on the 2015 Trafficking in Persons Report. Smith questioned how India maintained a Tier 2 ranking with consistently low numbers of convictions, dismal victim identification, ongoing police complicity in trafficking, and restrictions on T-visas. The TIP office cited the Indian government's efforts to comply with trafficking standards. It also expressed concern over travel restrictions on T-visa holders and testified that that the Department of State is asking the Indian government to abolish this detrimental policy. In the meantime, as India suffers no ill consequences for its lackluster anti-trafficking efforts, many Indian victims are forced to choose between protecting their families and surrendering their own safety in the United States. For more information on Human Rights First's efforts to end the scourge of modern day slavery, read our Blueprint: How to Dismantle the Business of Human Trafficking. 