Asylum News 69
September 01, 2008
Congress Holds EOIR Oversight Hearing

On September 23, 2008 the House Judiciary Committee held its first oversight   hearing of the Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR), an arm of the   Department of Justice (DOJ) that includes the Immigration Courts and Board of   Immigration Appeals (BIA). The oversight hearing occurred amidst reports of   politicized hiring at DOJ, concerns about the “streamlining” of appeals at the   BIA, and criticisms of DOJ’s failure to request appropriations for additional   immigration judges. John Conyers (D-MI), chair of the House Judiciary Committee,   expressed dismay at how 215 judges could be expected to handle 300,000 cases per   year, calling the burden a “crushing workload” that is causing an “appellate   mess that is spilling over into the federal courts.”

Click here to read the transcript and testimony from the hearing.

EOIR Proposed Rule on BIA Streamlining and Affirmance Without Opinion 

Last month, the American Immigration Lawyers Foundation (AILF) and other   groups filed comments expressing concern about a proposed DOJ-EOIR rule change   that would enhance the BIA’s discretion to decide whether to issue summary   affirmances, called Affirmances Without Opinion (AWO), of immigration judge   decisions. AILF expressed concern that the proposed rule was an attempt to limit   federal court review of the BIA’s use of the AWO procedure. The proposed rule   would also expand the BIA’s authority to refer cases to a three-member panel and   authorize publication of precedent decisions by a majority of a three-member   panel.

Click here to read the proposed rules.

Click here to read AILF’s complete comments.

BIA Ruling in FGM Case Vacated 

Last week the Attorney General vacated a 2007 decision of the Board of   Immigration Appeals in which it held that a Malian woman who had previously been   subjected to female genital mutilation (FGM) was not eligible for withholding of   removal because FGM is a “one-time” act of persecution that cannot be repeated   on the same woman. In his decision, the Attorney General noted that the BIA’s   ruling was incorrect as a matter of fact and as a matter of law. The case was   remanded to the BIA for a decision consistent with the Attorney General’s   opinion.

Click here to read the   decision, Matter of A-T-, 24 I&N Dec. 617 (A.G. 2008).

HRF Annual Dinner 

The 2008 Human Rights First Awards Dinner will take place on Thursday,   October 23, at Chelsea Piers in New York City. This year, Human Rights First   will salute longtime human rights activist Senator Ted Kennedy and honor two   human rights defenders: Oleg Kozlovsky of Russia and Nora Younis of Egypt. For   more information, click here. To make   reservations, please call 212-573-6933 or dinner@humanrightsfirst.org.

Board of Immigration Appeals Rules on Gang-Based Asylum Cases 

In a July 30, 2008 decision by the Board of Immigration Appeals, the BIA   ruled that Salvadoran youth who have been subjected to and resisted or rejected   gang recruitment based on opposition to gang values, as well as their family   members, do not constitute a particular social group (Matter of S-E-G-, 24   I&N Dec. 579 (BIA 2008). In a ruling issued the same day in the Matter of   E-A-G-, 24 I&N Dec. 591 (BIA 2008), the court ruled in a case of a young   Honduran male that he had not established that he was a member of a social group   of “persons resistant to gang membership.” The BIA also ruled that a social   group of “young persons who are perceived to be affiliated with gangs,” does not constitute a social group. In both cases the BIA found that individuals who   refuse gang recruitment fail the “social visibility” test and therefore do not   constitute a social group.

Click here to read the July 30, 2008 decision in Matter of S-E-G-

Click here to read the July 30, 2008 decision in Matter of E-A-G-

Congressional Committee Hears Testimony on Medical Care in Immigrant Detention

On June 4, 2008, the House Judiciary Committee, Subcommittee on Immigration,   Citizenship, Refugees, Border Security, and International Law held a hearing on   “Problems with Immigration Detainee Medical Care.” The hearing addressed many of   the issues recently raised in a four part Washington Post series on the   deficiencies in medical and mental health care provided for detainees in   immigrant detention. Among the witnesses testifying were Julie Myers, the   Assistant Secretary for Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in DHS, the   Acting Director of the Division of Immigration Health Services (DIHS) within   ICE, as well as former detainees, representatives of the NGO and medical care   community and an HRF pro bono attorney whose refugee client was severely   impacted by the insufficient medical care she received.

Click here to   access a webcast of the hearing
Click here to   read 6/5/08 Washington Post article

HRF Welcomes Bipartisan Senate Bill on Immigrant Detention Reforms

On June 11, 2008, Senator Joe Lieberman (ID-Conn.), Senator Sam Brownback   (R-Ks.), Senator Ted Kennedy (D-Mass.), and Senator Chuck Hagel, (R-Neb.)   introduced the 2008 Secure and Safe Detention and Asylum Act, S. 3114. The bill   addresses some of the most pressing issues facing asylum seekers and other   immigrants in detention today and includes provisions for immigration court   review of detention of asylum seekers, nationwide alternatives to detention, and   improvements in medical care provided to detained immigrants.

Many of the bill’s provisions address concerns raised in a 2005 report by the   bipartisan U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom relating to the   detention of asylum seekers.

Read 2008   Secure and Safe Detention and Asylum Act
Read HRF   Statement commending Senators
Read the Senate   Statement on the Bill
Second Circuit Issues   Ruling on Female Genital Cutting

On June 11, 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit overturned   Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) denials in the asylum cases of three Guinean   women. The women had each expressed fear of returning to Guinea, including, in   two cases, fear for the safety of their daughters. The three-judge panel of the   Court ruled that although the women had already experienced genital cutting as   children in Guinea, that experience is not necessarily a “one-time act” of   persecution nor the only kind of future persecution the women may face.

Read the Second   Circuit Decision
Read the   6/12/08 New York Times Article
June 20 Marks Annual World Refugee Day 

June 20 was World Refugee Day, a day that has been celebrated annually since   the adoption of a U.N. resolution in December 2000. This year’s theme focused on   protection of refugees. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, António   Guterres, remarked that “refugees show incredible courage and perseverance in   overcoming enormous odds to rebuild their lives. Ensuring that they get the   protection they deserve is a noble cause because refugee rights are human rights   – and rights that belong to us all.” Events celebrating the day were held all   over the world.

For more information, click here.

Annual World Refugee Survey Released 

The U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants released the 2008 World   Refugee Survey on Thursday, June 19. In addition to providing profiles of the   treatment of refugees and refugee policies in various countries around the   world, the survey takes a closer look at countries considered to be the worst   places for refugees.

Read the 2008 World   Refugee Survey 