With Times Square Bomber Sentenced to Life, Ghailani Trial Gets Started
October 05, 2010
Cross-posted on The Huffington Post

In the wake of the life sentence of Times Square bombing plotter Faisal Shahzad, the trial of the first former Guantánamo Bay detainee to be tried in a civilian U.S. federal court will finally get underway on Wednesday. Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani,  a Tanzanian who's been in U.S. custody since 2004, is accused of  assisting the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in East Africa that killed  224 people and wounded hundreds more.
Originally scheduled for opening statements on Monday, the trial was delayed at the government's request so the judge can rule on a critical question: can the government  introduce at trial a witness it first learned about during abusive CIA  interrogations?

Defense lawyers argue that the witness, Hussein Abebe, who the  government says supplied Ghailani with explosives used to bomb the U.S.  embassy in Tanzania in 1998, should be barred from the case because his  identity is the fruit of the government's abuse. Prosecutors counter  that the witness will testify voluntarily, and is only remotely linked  to Ghailani's mistreatment. (Although evidence of Ghailani's treatment  in CIA custody is largely classified and therefore filed under seal,  nobody seems to be denying that Ghailani was subjected to the Bush  administration's "enhanced interrogation techniques" in a secret CIA  prison.)

At a hearing last month, federal district court Judge Lewis Kaplan,  presiding over the case in lower Manhattan, questioned the government's  claim that Abebe, who prosecutors call "a giant witness for the  government," was testifying voluntarily.  He's expected to rule on this  issue by Wednesday.
That ruling could signal how federal judges might decide these sorts of  questions in the future – and whether the government will give more  civilian judges the opportunity to consider them.

About 35 detainees now being held at Guantánamo Bay are slated for  trial, but the government hasn't said how many it plans to bring to  civilian courts on U.S. soil, and how many it will try in military commissions set up at the Guantánamo prison complex.

Since September 11, civilian federal courts have convicted more than 400  people on terrorism-related charges. Many, like Shahzad, are now  serving life sentences. Military commissions, meanwhile, have convicted  only four. And two of those have already been freed. That's in part  because since their creation, the military commissions have been  struggling to interpret the new Military Commissions Act, first passed  in 2006 and amended last year, and the accompanying rulebook issued just  this past Spring. International lawyers and constitutional scholars say  the law has substantial legal problems that would put most post-trial  convictions at risk of appeal.

Judge Kaplan's rulings in the Ghailani case so far reflect the careful way most civilian federal judges handle these cases using established law. In detailed legal opinions,  the judge has so far refused to dismiss the case, rejecting strong  arguments from Ghailani's lawyers that the government violated his right  to a speedy trial by waiting six years to prosecute him (he was  captured in 2004), and that his abuse in CIA custody should lead to his  acquittal.

To their credit, prosecutors are not relying on statements Ghailani made  in custody – presumably concerned that they would be considered the  products of coercive interrogations and therefore inadmissible. With  four other men already convicted and serving life in prison for their  roles in the bombings, the government apparently believes it has enough  evidence against Ghailani without his statements.

Still, the alleged torture of Ghailani in a secret CIA prison hangs  heavy over this case – as it will every other one where detainees were  subjected to the so-called "enhanced interrogation techniques" that  included sleep deprivation, exposure to extreme temperatures, stress  positions, confinement in a box and in some cases, waterboarding.

The Ghailani case is also being closely watched for any local reaction  it provokes. Last year, Liz Cheney and her advocacy group Keep America  Safe rallied in downtown Manhattan to protest the administration's  decision to hold the trials of the alleged September 11 plotters in a  New York federal court. Obama critics such as Debra Burlingame warned that "part of Jihad is tying up lower Manhattan"; Karl Rove called holding  trials there "an utter, unmitigated disaster for the security of the  United States."

So far, though, the New York Policy Department has said it hasn't had to  take any extraordinary security measures for the first former Gitmo  detainee's trial. Having been inside the courthouse for jury selection, I  didn't notice any difference in security, either. Meanwhile, as my colleagues discovered the other day when they interviewed New Yorkers heading to work  downtown, most locals don't even know the trial is happening. Watch  reactions in the video below:

[[{"type":"media","view_mode":"media_large","fid":"65","attributes":{"class":"media-image","typeof":"foaf:Image","height":"343","width":"445","style":""}}]] 