Asylum News 43
July 21, 2006
CIS Ombudsman's Asylum Proposal Rejected
Dr. Emilio Gonzalez, the Director of the Department of Homeland Security's   Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS), announced in late June that he had   rejected the controversial proposal of the USCIS Ombudsman to make sweeping   changes to the asylum process. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and the   Department of Justice's Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) also   disagreed with the proposal. ICE expressed its concern that the proposal would   hinder fraud detection efforts.

Human Rights First, the American   Immigration Lawyers Association, and many other experts and faith-based and   refugee assistance organizations also filed comments opposing the proposal. The   proposal would have deprived the vast majority of asylum seekers of a   non-adversarial asylum interview – instead sending them to immigration court for   removal hearings. The proposal would also have required refugees to pay a fee in   order to access protection, and transferred responsibility for the conduct of   credible fear interviews from professional asylum officers, who are trained to   identify and protect refugees, to DHS immigration and customs enforcement   officers.

In light of the rejection, it is unlikely that the Ombudsman's   office will pursue these proposals further within DHS.

A copy of the   recommendations was included in the Ombudsman's annual report to Congress,   although a copy of the USCIS response was not included in the report. The annual   report to Congress can be found at
http://www.dhs.gov/dhspublic/interapp/editorial/editorial_0890.xml

To read the CIS response to the proposal (in two parts), please click here and here.

Detention of Asylum Seekers: Ongoing Concerns

"It was a torturous experience," said former Human Rights First client Pastor   Edward Neepaye to an AP reporter, about the months he was jailed in an   immigration detention facility in Elizabeth, New Jersey, while his claim for   asylum was pending.

Both the House and the Senate immigration bills would   increase detention for asylum seekers and other immigrants. While Senators Sam   Brownback (R-KS) and Joe Lieberman (D-CT) support improvements that would ensure   that U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement adopt key reforms recommended last   year by the bipartisan U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom, the   Department of Homeland Security has indicated that it opposes this reform,   stating that it would deprive DHS of "operational flexibility in locating,   staffing and operating detention facilities."

To read the AP piece about   immigration detention, please click here.
UNHCR Survey on Alternatives   to Detention

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has issued a   comprehensive survey of alternatives to detention of asylum seekers and refugees   that have been tested and are used in various countries around the world,   including in the United States.

To read the full report, please click here.

Six North Korean Refugees Resettled

The U.S. State Department confirmed in May that six North Korean refugees   were resettled in the United States. The North Korean Human Rights Act, which   was signed by President Bush in 2004, seeks to address the serious human rights   situation in North Korea and promote durable solutions for refugees. Section 303   of the Act provides that the Secretary of State shall undertake to facilitate   the submission of applications by citizens of North Korea seeking protection as   refugees. For more information from the U.S. State Department, click here. 