Forget Those Governors: The Pro-Refugee Pushback has Begun
November 18, 2015
I don’t know about you, but over the last few days my social media feeds were a flurry of anti-refugee clickbait. And with more and more governors piling on to try to keep Syrian refugees out of their states, each one using more over-the-top rhetoric than the last, it may seem like fear is winning out over American ideals. That’s not exactly a new story for the United States. Popular opinion in the 1930s didn’t support admitting German Jewish refugees. And many Americans feared the refugees we took in after the Vietnam War would steal jobs. But ultimately accepting refugees was, and is, more than just the right thing to do; it strengthens our nation. Besides, without them, we wouldn’t have the Nobel Prize, the Internet, or sriracha. That’s why many prominent voices from across the political spectrum are calling the country to fulfill its rightful role as a safe haven. Let’s hope our governors start listening.  National News USA Today: Admit Syrian refugees: Our view Bloomberg: Shutting the Door on Syrian Refugees Helps Islamic State  California Los Angeles Times: Stop the fear-mongering on Syrian refugees The San Diego Union-Tribune: Gov. Brown is right: We can safely accept refugees  District of Columbia The Washington Post: After Paris, America cannot abandon refugees in need  Florida The Gainesville Sun: Shutting borders to Syrians is self-defeating The Independent Florida Alligator: Accepting Syrian refugees is the safer option  Iowa The Des Moines Register:  How to make refugees our enemies  Kansas The Kansas City Star: Sam Brownback yields to hysteria, shuts out Syrian refugees  Massachusetts The Boston Globe: Paris attacks: Baker, others wrong to reject Syrian refugees  Missouri STLtoday.com: Anti-Muslim rhetoric is what ISIS wants  New Hampshire Concord Monitor: Hassan got it wrong on Syrian refugees  New Jersey Asbury Park Press: Let's not lose America's soul over refugees MyCentralJersey.com: Don't follow GOP down xenophobic path NJ.com: Christie and GOP governors: Syrian toddlers' lives don't matter  New York The New York Times: Editorial: After Paris Attacks, Vilifying Refugees New York Daily News: Inhuman fearmongering and very human refugees The Journal News | LoHud.com:   A refugee crisis, and New York's soul  North Carolina The News & Observer: US should welcome Syrian refugees  Oregon East Oregonian: Our view: Keeping our humanity in times of terror  Texas The Dallas Morning News: Abbott's refugee ban panders to xenophobia Fort Worth Star-Telegram: Gov. Abbott slams door on Syrian refugees Houston Chronicle: Don't say no to Syrian refugees.  Washington The Olympian: Let us not forget our humanity in refugee crisis 