Why Should This Court Martial Care About Waterboarding?
May 23, 2006
"Lots of people in the world care if waterboarding happened at Guantanamo. Why should this court martial care?"

So  asked the presiding Judge, Lieutenant Colonel Paul H. McConnell, of  Harvey Volzer, Sergeant Cardona's civilian defense counsel, toward the  end of the first day of the court-martial. Waterboarding (the alleged practice in which the detainee is tied to a board, with  cellophane wrapped over his face  and water is poured over him making  him feel like he is drowning) is not at issue in this trial of a  military dog handler accused of using his dog to abuse detainees in  Iraq. So how did it come up? Volzer and his counterpart, Maj.  Christopher Graveline, the military prosecutor, were arguing over the  documents to which Volzer could refer during his opening statement on  Tuesday. The argument made clear the issues at the heart of this  case:who authorized deviations from existing military law and doctrine  on detainee detention and interrogation, how did those deviations (and  authorization) migrate back and forth among  U.S. operations in Iraq,  Afghanistan and Guantanamo, and what impact does any of this have on the  innocence or guilt of Sgt. Cardona?

In the opening statement, each side will want to present to the jury  (referred to as panel members in the military justice system) its own  narrative about the case in such a way that when the jury listens to a  witness or sees a piece of evidence, they evaluate it in light of that  side's theory of the case. Based on the documents to which he wanted to  refer, Volzer's theory will be that authorization for deviations came  from the top levels of command, techniques authorized for one theatre of  war or detention (in the case of Guantanamo) migrated to others, and  confusion reigned at Abu Ghraib about what the rules were and to whom  they applied.

Although  we in the public couldn't see the specific documents the lawyers and  the judge had in front of them, it was clear that among them were: a  February 7, 2002 White House memo (in which the President determined that al Qaeda detainees did not  merit the protections of the Geneva Conventions and that detainees  captured would be afforded humane treatment only "to the extent  appropriate and consistent with military necessity"); a  November 27, 2002 Memo in  which Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld authorized specific techniques  including "using detainee's individual phobias (such as fear of dog) to  induce stress," "stress positions," "hooding," 20-hour interrogations,  removal of clothing, prolonged isolation, sensory deprivation, and  "forced grooming" for use at Guantanamo; and the April 4, 2003 Pentagon "Working Group" Report and April 16, 2003 Secretary Rumsfeld Memorandum,  which provide dubious legal support for and lay out recommended  techniques that could be used on detainees in Guantanamo."  According to  Volzer, witnesses would testify that each of these were among the  documents brought by General Miller to Iraq and were part of the  authorities U.S. officials, including Col. Pappas and General Sanchez,  relied on to formulate interrogation rules for detainees in Iraq. In  response, the prosecution argued against the documents' relevance to the  issue of Sgt. Cardona's guilt or innocence, and would not concede that  the documents had been relied on by U.S. officials in Iraq.

In  the end, the Judge ruled that none of these three specific documents  could be admitted for the purposes of the opening statement. According  to the Judge, the two questions most important to him were: (1) was the  document in Iraq and/or considered by U.S. personnel in Iraq; and (2)  what would the witness(es) say about how the document was used there. He  added that the defense could seek to reintroduce the documents later  during the proceedings depending on the content of witness testimony.  Underlying the Judge's decision was a concern about how the larger  issues of authorization of interrogation techniques applied to the  particular facts of Sgt. Cardona's case.At least part of the answer, I  think, lies in the  Washington Post article to which my colleague Avi referred on Monday.But the article is not  evidence and how much of the events it describes will be allowed into  and discussed in Sgt. Cardon's court martial proceedings remains to be  seen.

Most of the rest of the day was taken up with selection of the court martial panel members in a process called " voir dire",  which is intended to ferret out potential jurors' biases.  The final  panel has seven members, including four officers and three enlisted  personnel.

Tuesday:  opening statements, likely more arguments about what evidence the jury  can see or hear, and maybe the first few witnesses in the prosecution's  case. 