Washington Week on Human Rights: March 30, 2015
March 30, 2015
Americans Support Refugee Protection This morning, Politico’s "Morning Score" featured a Human Rights First poll that reveals American voters favor candidates who support reforms that increase protections for refugees and those seeking asylum. The poll, conducted by Public Opinion Strategies, surveyed registered voters in 25 of the most competitive congressional districts and statewide in New Hampshire and South Carolina, which are important early primary states. The most compelling findings revealed a sense among American voters that the system to protect refugees and asylum seekers is in need of serious reform that better protects them and their rights. Guantanamo Last week, the Miami Herald’s Carol Rosenberg reported that the Pentagon plans to prosecute at most seven more detainees held at the U.S. detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The information was drawn from publicly released documents associated with an abandoned proposal to require military commission judges to permanently reside on the base. Currently, 10 detainees, including those charged with masterminding the 9/11 and USS Cole bombing attacks, are facing military commission trials. There are currently 122 detainees at Guantanamo, and about half of those remaining have been cleared for transfer by U.S. intelligence and security agencies. Human Rights First has issued a blueprint, "How to Close Guantanamo," detailing steps the administration should take to meet the president’s goal of shuttering the facility. Arab League Summit Over the weekend, Egypt hosted an Arab League Summit that focused on fighting terrorism through military force and enhanced security cooperation. Human Rights First has called on member nations to take a more holistic approach to countering terrorism, a step the Obama Administration emphasized during its own countering violent extremism summit last month. Much of the ideology that fuels violent Islamic extremism finds its roots in the dangerous practices and ideologies of the governments that were leading voices at the Arab League Summit, including Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and the United Arab Emirates. Human Rights First’s recent blueprint “How to Build a More Sustainable and Mutually Beneficial Relationship with Saudi Arabia” details how the United States should press Saudi Arabia to embrace a more inclusive government, respecting basic rights and freedoms, and adhering to the rule of law. Cuba Tomorrow, the United States and Cuba will discuss human rights during a meeting in Washington, DC. The two nations are likely to address the need for Cuba to improve its approach to freedom of expression, assembly, and political activity. The jailing and targeting of Cuban political dissidents is also likely to be on the meeting’s agenda. Tuesday’s dialogue comes ahead of the president’s upcoming visit to Jamaica and his participation in next month’s Summit of the Americas in Panama. “Guantánamo has come to symbolize torture and indefinite detention, and its court system has been discredited as an opaque and dysfunctional process. The latest reshuffle of personnel will not alter this impression. … We need to set politics aside and end this litany of failure. We have competent and credible federal courts that can provide justice — and finally a measure of closure for the thousands of our fellow citizens who have had to wait far too long.” —New York Times editorial by Morris D. Davis, a retired Air Force Colonel who was the chief prosecutor of the military commissions at Guantánamo Bay from September 2005 until October 2007 In a piece for the Houston Chronicle, Human Rights First’s President and CEO Elisa Massimino highlighted the alarming rise of antisemitic violence in Europe, calling on government leaders to condemn hate speech and work to provide security to Jewish communities. The New York Times​’ Somini Sengupta investigated the surging numbers of Syrian refugees seeking asylum throughout the world, noting that Syrians make up only a small fraction of asylum seekers in the United States. In a piece for The Hill, Human Rights First’s Brian Dooley warned that removing arms restrictions on Bahrain will only enable the regime’s ongoing repression of its own citizens. Catholic News reported on a disturbing trend of growing antisemitism in Europe, including the extremist Jobbik party in Hungary and Golden Dawn in Greece that is pushing Jews to hide their identities or in some cases leave. As the Edward M. Kennedy Center for the United States Senate launched, Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Barbara Mikulski (D-MD) joined former Senators Olympia Snowe (R-ME) and Chris Dodd (D-CT) on CBS’s Face the Nation to discuss Senator Ted Kennedy’s legacy. MONDAY, MARCH 30, 2015 The Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) will host a discussion on the Atrocities Prevention Board, an "interagency effort to strengthen the U.S. government's ability to foresee, prevent, and respond to genocide and mass atrocities." The event will feature Undersecretary of State for Civilian Security, Democracy and Human Rights Sarah Sewall. 6:30PM, CFR, 1777 F Street NW, Washington, D.C. TUESDAY, MARCH 31, 2015 The Atlantic Council will hold a discussion on "To Vote or Not to Vote: Egypt's Diverse Electorate." The discussion will feature Sahar Aziz, associate professor of law at Texas A&M University; Reem Awny Abu-Zaid, project officer at the Danish Egyptian Dialogue Institute (via videoconference); Sarah El Sirgany, nonresident fellow in the Atlantic Council's Rafik Hariri Center for the Middle East; and Mirette Mabrouk, deputy director of the Atlantic Council's Rafik Hariri Center for the Middle East. 12PM, Atlantic Council, 1030 15th Street NW, 12th Floor, Washington, D.C. The Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) will host a discussion on "What to Do About the Islamic State Group." The event will feature Audrey Kurth Cronin, professor at George Mason University; Max Boot, senior fellow for national security studies at CFR; and Janine Davidson, senior fellow for defense policy at CFR. 12:30PM, CFR, 1777 F Street NW, Washington, D.C. The Brookings Institution will hold a discussion on "The United States and Central Asia: An Enduring Vision for Partnership and Connectivity in the 21st century." The event will feature Deputy Secretary of State Antony Blinken; Strobe Talbott, president of Brookings; and Fiona Hill, director of the Center on the United States and Europe at Brookings. 3:30PM, Brookings Institution, 1775 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Falk Auditorium, Washington, D.C. THURSDAY, APRIL 2, 2015 The Atlantic Council will host a discussion on "ISIS and al-Qaeda: Assessing Terrorist Threats to the Homeland and Beyond." The event will feature Bruce Hoffman, director of the Security Studies Program at Georgetown University; Bruce Riedel, director of the Intelligence Project and senior fellow at the Brookings Institution; Barry Pavel, vice president and director of the Center on International Security at the Atlantic Council; and Bilal Saab, senior fellow for Middle East security at the Atlantic Council. 12:30PM, Atlantic Council, 1030 15th Street NW, 12th Floor, Washington, D.C. The Middle East Institute will host former American Ambassadors to Afghanistan Zalmay Khalilzad (service in Kabul 2003-2005), Ronald Neumann (2005-2007), and Ryan Crocker (2011-2012) for a panel discussion about the ongoing U.S. role in Afghanistan. President Ashraf Ghani has promised a decade of transformation, but to succeed he must face down growing security concerns and political and economic uncertainty. The panelists will examine the current situation in the country and the future of the U.S. role there in light of resurgent threats from al-Qaeda and the Taliban.12:30PM, SEIU Conference Center, 1800 Massachusetts Ave NW, Washington, D.C. 