2005 Human Rights Award Dinner
October 29, 2005
Honoring human rights defenders
Ludmilla Alexeeva and Dr. Mudawi Ibrahim Adam





Honorary Chair

Thomas R. Pickering


Dinner Chairs

Michael Lacovara
Philip A. Lacovara Sybil Shainwald


Dinner Co-Chairs

Andi and Tom A. Bernstein
Deborah Miller and William D. Zabel




Dr. Mudawi Ibrahim Adam of Sudan

Dr. Mudawi Ibrahim Adam is the Chair of the Sudan Social  Development Organization, an organization that monitors human rights  abuses in Darfur, Sudan and reports on the Sudanese government’s role in  the slaughter and carnage there. In an attempt to silence Dr. Mudawi,  the Sudanese authorities have jailed him three times in the past 18  months – at times in solitary confinement – without access to a lawyer,  his family or medical attention. While Dr. Mudawi is currently out of  jail continuing his human rights work, the charges against him –  including espionage, which carries a possible death sentence – have not  been dropped.

View a short video by clicking on one of the links below.

 View Windows Media Video
 View Real Media Video
Ludmilla Alexeeva
of Russia
Ludmilla Alexeeva, the Chair of the Moscow Helsinki  Group, is the doyenne of Russia's human rights community. Thirty years  ago, she was one of the original Soviet-era dissidents who spoke out  against repression. Today, she is not afraid to raise her voice in the  renewed fight for rights in Russia, including criticizing policies on  hate crimes as well as the war in Chechnya, and is a mentor to the new  generation of dissidents. Alexeeva published the seminal book Soviet  Dissent in 1985. She also served as President of the International  Helsinki Federation for Human Rights – an umbrella group of human rights  organizations from 38 countries –- from 1999 to 2004.

View a short video by clicking on one of the links below.

 View Windows Media Video
 View Real Media Video 




Honorary Chair 
Thomas R. Pickering



Chairs 
Michael Lacovara
Philip A. Lacovara
Sybil Shainwald



Co-Chairs
Andi and Tom A. Bernstein
Deborah Miller and William D. Zabel



Host Committee Chairs 
Gail Furman
Virginia and Robert Joffe



Host Committee
Elsie and Bernie Aidinoff
Kelly and Jay Sugarman
James E. Brumm
Lynda M. Clarizio
Deborah and Craig Cogut
Betsy and Alan D. Cohn
Mitchell and Monica Dolin
Donald F. Donovan
and Jennifer Lake
A. Whitney Ellsworth
Edward P. Evans
Leslie Gimbel and Marc Kusnetz
John J. Gibbons
Karen Goodheart
Kerry Kennedy
Helen & Martin Kimmel
Steven J. Kolleeny
Mathilde Krim
Jo Backer Laird
Joann and Robert Todd Lang
Kenneth Lapatine
Steven S. Lash
Mark Lawrence-Apfelbaum
Jill L. Rosenberg
Philip H. Rudolph
Steven H. Schulman
Steven R. Shapiro
Judith E. Siegel-Baum
John S. Siffert
Harold Snyder
Beryl Snyder
James M. Stillwaggon
Trish and George A. Vradenburg
Sigourney Weaver
Basil P. Zirinis, III
Dinner Committee 
Mig Boyle
Matthew Dontzin
and Ginger Harris
Helen and Peter Haje
Michelle Ores
Llewellyn Wells
Lynn Witkowski 