Why Torture Does Not Work: A Military Perspective
October 01, 2008
WILLIAMSBURG, VA - Retired military leaders will discuss U.S. interrogation policy and the importance of the commander-in-chief setting the highest standards for all U.S. personnel in the treatment of prisoners. Questions about the use and legality of so called "enhanced interrogation techniques" continue to be prominent in the presidential campaign and in the media. Both presidential candidates, Senators Barack Obama and John McCain, were asked to share their perspectives on the use of torture in last week's presidential debate. The William and Mary forum, co-sponsored by Human Rights First and the Human Rights and National Security Law Program of William and Mary Law School, will take place on October 6th at 5:00 p.m. in Room 120 of the William and Mary Law School.
Retired military leaders Major General Paul D. Eaton, Major General Fred E. Haynes and Brigadier General James P. Cullen will discuss the importance of using interrogation methods that are effective, lawful and humane. They will underscore the need to ensure that interrogation and prisoner treatment policies enhance our national security, protect our troops and are consistent with American laws, values and interests.
The forum participants are part of a larger group of retired generals and admirals who are working to ensure that U.S. policy reflects a single standard of prisoner treatment consistent with the Geneva Conventions. During the presidential primary season, the group traveled to New Hampshire and Iowa where they met individually with eight presidential candidates from both parties. Members of the group also participated in forums on the topic of interrogation policy in South Carolina and Florida in advance of those states' primary elections. Recently, the group participated in events at both the Democratic and Republican national conventions and advocated for the inclusion of strong, anti-torture language in both parties' platforms. These retired military leaders are continuing to travel to key states in the presidential campaign because they are committed to ensuring that the next commander-in-chief understands the fundamental importance of prisoner treatment issues to members of the United States Armed Forces and to our national security.
Where: William and Mary Law School, 613 South Henry Street, Room 120

When: October 6, 2008; 5:00 p.m.

Who: Major General Paul D. Eaton, Major General Fred E. Haynes and Brigadier General James P. Cullen
This event is free and open to the public.
Major General Paul D. Eaton, USA (Ret.) 
General Eaton recently retired from the U.S. Army after more than 33 years service. His assignments include Infantry command from the company to brigade levels, command of the Infantry Center at Fort Benning and Chief of Infantry. His most recent operational assignment was Commanding General of the command charged with reestablishing Iraqi Security Forces 2003-2004, where he built the command and established the structure and infrastructure for the Iraqi Armed Forces. Other operational assignments include Somalia, Bosnia and Albania. Other assignments include the Joint Staff, Deputy Commanding General for Transformation and Stryker Unit Development and Assistant Professor and head of the French Department at West Point. He is a 1972 graduate of West Point. 
Major General Fred E. Haynes, USMC (Ret.) 
General Haynes is a combat veteran of World War II, Korea and Vietnam. He was a captain in the regiment that seized Mt Suribachi, Iwo Jima and raised the American flag there, February 23, 1945. In Korea, he was Executive Officer of the 2nd Bn, 1st Marines. During Vietnam, he commanded the Fifth Marines, and was G-3 of the Third Marine Amphibious Force. During the Kennedy and Johnson eras, he served as Pentagon Director, Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs. As a general officer he commanded the Second and Third Marine Divisions. He was the Senior Member of the United Nations Military Armistice Commission in Korea, and was Deputy Chief of Staff for Marine Corps Research and Development. He is chairman of the Combat Veterans of Iwo Jima, Chairman Emeritus of the American Turkish Council and a member of the Council on Foreign Relations. Haynes lives in New York and has recently published a book, The Lions of Iwo Jima: The Story of Combat Team 28 and the Bloodiest Battle of Marine Corps History. 
Brigadier General James P. Cullen, USA (Ret.)
Mr. Cullen is a retired Brigadier General in the United States Army Reserve Judge Advocate General's Corps and last served as the Chief Judge (IMA) of the U.S. Army Court of Criminal Appeals. He currently practices law in New York City. 