Human Rights First Welcomes First U.N. Review of U.S. Human Rights Record
November 05, 2010
Calls for U.S. to Adopt Concrete Reforms to Address Noncompliance
Geneva – The U.S. government today spent three hours  defending its first Universal Periodic Review (UPR) report, a  self-evaluation of the U.S. record of compliance with its international  human rights obligations. Every Member State of the United Nations  undergoes the UPR process every four years. Today's discussion,  monitored by Human Rights First, took place before the U.N. Human Rights  Council in Geneva. Member States submitted written and oral questions,  concerns, and recommendations to the U.S. government delegation, which  included senior officials from the Departments of State, Defense,  Homeland Security, and Health and Human Services.

"U.S.  engagement in this process is important," said Human Rights First's  Devon Chaffee, who is in Geneva. "But today's review session highlighted  significant gaps in U.S. compliance with its human rights obligations –  gaps that undermine the principles and institutions that actually do  work to protect rights in the United States. In its report next week,  the U.S. government should articulate concrete steps it will take to  address these shortfalls."

On November 9, the United States  must submit responses to recommendations raised in today's review. The  Human Rights Council will also prepare an outcomes report identifying  areas of concern and recommendations for how the United States can  improve its compliance with international human rights standards. Both  documents will undergo edits before their final adoption in March 2011.

The U.S. government should accept and implement many of the recommendations made by States today, including by:

• Ending  indefinite detention of prisoners and trials before military  commissions in Guantánamo pursuant to Article 9(4) and Article 14 of the  International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR); and
• Providing  accountability for perpetrators of torture and other detainee abuse and  ensuring adequate remedies for the victims of such abuse pursuant to  Article 7 and 14 of The Convention against Torture (CAT); Article 2 of  the ICCPR; and Articles 49 and 146 of the Geneva Conventions  respectively.

In addition, the U.S. should address the concerns raised in States written submissions by:

• Addressing noncompliance with Article 9(4) of the ICCPR, which  requires prompt court review of decisions to detain, by providing asylum  seekers and other arriving aliens with the chance to have their custody  reviewed in an immigration court hearing.

"Robust  participation in the UPR process strengthens the ability of the United  States to raise concerns and press for change in other countries," said  Human Rights First's Tad Stahnke. "It's an important step in rebuilding  U.S. human rights leadership."

In one demonstration of its  commitment to the process, the Obama administration conferred  extensively with civil society over the past year as it prepared the  report. These civil society consultations took place throughout the  country, and included two—in El Paso, Texas and Washington, DC—co-hosted  by Human Rights First. Many countries noted the importance of these  consultations and recommended that the U.S. government continue the  consultation process.

Human Rights First's submission on the  U.S. Universal Periodic Review to the Office of the High Commissioner on  Human Rights can be accessed here (/wp-content/uploads/pdf/HRF-UPR-2010-submission-final.pdf), and a guide to key issues of concern for refugees in the context of the U.S. UPR can be found here (/wp-content/uploads/pdf/HRF-RPP_KeyIssuesUPR_02252010.pdf). 