House of Representatives Passes Resolution on Combating Antisemitism in Europe
November 05, 2015
This week the House of Representatives unanimously passed a resolution calling on the Obama Administration to work closely with European governments and multilateral organizations to combat antisemitism in Europe and protect the continent’s Jewish communities. This resolution follows a similar one passed by the Senate in June. By highlighting the danger caused by antisemitism, Congress, particularly the Helsinki Commission, is taking a leadership role in combating the rise of extremism in Europe, which is home to the United States’ most crucial allies. As Representative Chris Smith, Chair of the Helsinki Commission and author of this resolution, noted, actions detailed in the resolution are “essential to keep European Jewish communities safe and secure.” This resolution closely tracks Human Rights First’s longstanding recommendations, which we articulated at the 2014 Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Berlin Conference on Anti-Semitism. Since then, the OSCE and the U.S. Helsinki Commission have facilitated close contact with NGOs, including Human Rights First. While high-profile attacks this year—including those on a kosher supermarket in Paris and a synagogue in Copenhagen—have brought attention to extremist violence in Europe, it’s a widespread phenomenon and many incidents go unreported. Between 2013 and 2014, documented antisemitic hate crimes in France and the United Kingdom more than doubled, with 851 in France and 1,168 in the United Kingdom. They also increased substantially in Germany, Belgium, Austria, and Italy. While this resolution emphasizes partnerships between European law enforcement agencies and Jewish community security groups, a human-rights approach is critical to address the root causes of intolerance, including the rise of the far-right parties and extremist groups. Human Rights First’s report, “We’re not Nazis, but. . . The Rise of Hate Parties in Hungary and Greece and Why America Should Care,” documents the rise of violent ultra-nationalist antisemitic parties in Hungary and Greece that are corroding human rights and democratic values. We continue to urge the U.S. government to work with its E.U. partners to help address antisemitism, the corrosion of rule of law, and other rights violations across Europe. 