Judge Orders Independent Auditor to Oversee Family Detention Facilities
August 10, 2018
By Kevin Schuster In April 2018, the Center for Human Rights and Constitutional Law filed a motion to enforce the Flores settlement agreement, claiming that the Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) has breached the Flores agreement. The motion was filed in response to the administration’s implementation of a new “zero tolerance” policy, which criminally prosecuted asylum seekers and led to the separation of thousands of children from their parents. While some children have been reunited with their families under court order, Shiloh Residential Treatment Center—located just south of Houston—is still holding hundreds of children, well past the court-mandated reunification deadline. This problematic detention center has been accused of violating the Flores settlement agreement, which governs detention conditions for children and prevents children from being held for more than 20 days in immigration custody. Reports claim that Shiloh staff forcefully drugged children and denied them drinking water. In response to these allegations, Judge Dolly Gee, a district judge who oversees the Flores settlement agreement, ordered the following: Additionally, the Flores plaintiffs targeted all Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) facilities along the Texas Border and the three ICE family detention centers: Berks Family Residential Center in Berks County, Pennsylvania; Karnes Residential Center in Karnes City Texas; and South Texas Family Residential Center in Dilley, Texas. Judge Gee ordered an independent auditor to monitor the treatment of children in these facilities. Judge Gee also ordered that: With this ruling, the court resoundingly rejected the Trump Administration's request to renegotiate the Flores agreement. While removing children from unsafe conditions and allowing for independent auditors to oversee the treatment of children in family detention centers is a step in the right direction, families who seek asylum should never be criminally prosecuted and detained. It is time that the United States halt all practices that strip the freedom and dignity of those seeking protection on our shores. 