Justice Delayed is Justice Denied for Another Bahraini Medic
June 11, 2013
Haleema Abdulaziz Al-Sabagh, a Bahrain nursing assistant, has had her appeal verdict delayed yet again. Al-Sabagh was arrested at her workplace at Salmaniya hospital last January and charged with taking first-aid medicine for the treatment of injured protesters off-site. The 35-year-old mother of a 2-year-old was sentenced  to prison in September, and was scheduled to hear her appeal verdict this past Monday. She will now have to wait until June 16 to find out her fate – after she will have served 9 months of her year-long sentence. A network of underground medical treatment centers – often in people’s private homes – has sprung up in Bahrain to treat those injured in protests because if activists seek treatment in a state-run public hospital, they are likely to face interrogation and arrest. Al-Sabagh is accused of taking medical supplies from the hospital where she worked to resource one of these underground facilities. According to the family of Al-Sabagh, the prison authorities have denied her access to proper medical care for the last two months. Her family has stated that she suffers from severe back pain, yet prison authorities have stated they will only release her to the hospital for treatment if she is unconscious. The facilities within the prison clinic are insufficient and her family says she is only given limited treatment of painkillers. The Bahraini promptly launched a brutal crackdown on the peaceful protests in February 2011 and called in forces from the Saudi-led Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). Dozens of people have been killed in the crackdown, and the security forces have arrested hundreds, including doctors and nurses accused of treating injured protesters. A report published by the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry (BICI) in November 2011 found that the Bahrain Regime, headed by the Al Khalifa family, had used excessive force in the crackdown and accused the government  of torturing political activists, politicians, and protesters. The Bahraini government’s repeated efforts to crack down and imprison human rights defenders and prominent members of civil society does little to convince the international community of their commitment to reform and upholding minimum standards of human rights. The targeting of Bahraini medics is one of the most widely-reported symbols of the harsh government crackdown. Sadly, Al-Sabagh’s is one of several cases of Bahraini medics who have remained in prison after convictions. 