Asylum News 36
February 24, 2005
New Homeland Security Secretary Should Make Reforms for Refugees
U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom Recommends Changes
Urge New DHS Secretary to Help Refugees

On Tuesday, February 15, Judge Michael Chertoff was sworn in as the  new Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security. Secretary Chertoff  now has the authority to make critical changes that will improve the  treatment of refugees, including those who are jailed in U.S.  immigration detention facilities.

High on the new Secretary’s list should be the much needed reforms  recommended by the bi-partisan U.S. Commission on International  Religious Freedom in its ground-breaking report which was issued on  February 8.

Findings of U.S. Religious Freedom Commission

The Commission is a federal government commission, created by  Congress in 1998, to monitor religious freedom around the world and  advise the President, the Secretary of State, and Congress on religious  freedom. The Commission was authorized by Congress in 2003 to undertake a  study relating to asylum seekers in “expedited removal,” the  deportation process that allows immigration inspectors or border patrol  officers to order deportations, a power previously entrusted only to  immigration judges.

The Commission’s study found that:

There are serious problems in the implementation of the expedited  process that put asylum seekers at risk of improper return - in 15% of  cases observed by the experts, people who expressed a fear of return  were not given a chance to be interviewed by an asylum officer;
Most asylum seekers are held in jails or jail-like facilities  that the Commission found inappropriate for asylum seekers. These  conditions create a serious risk of psychological harm to asylum  seekers;
About 32% of asylum seekers are jailed for 90 days or more;  the average length of detention in these jail-like facilities is 64  days. Release rates vary widely across the country, with parole rates as  low as 0.5% in New Orleans, 8.4% in New York and 3.8% in Newark, New  Jersey;
Asylum seekers who did not have an attorney had a much lower chance of being granted asylum than those who did;
There are significant variations in the rate at which  immigration judges grant asylum, and the approval of asylum appeals in  expedited cases has dropped significantly since changes were made by the  Department of Justice at the immigration appeals board in 2002.

The Commission also found that there are serious impediments to  communication within the Department of Homeland Security and it is  exceedingly difficult to resolve inter-bureau issues.

The Commission’s Recommendations

The Commission made a series of critical recommendations, including that:

DHS should create an office, headed by a high-level official, to  address and coordinate asylum issues that cut across the Department.
DHS should not detain asylum seekers in inappropriate  jail-like facilities but instead in “non-jail like” facilities like a  model facility in Broward County, Florida.
DHS should issue regulations to ensure that asylum seekers  are released from detention when they meet the relevant parole  standards, including establishing identity and no security risk.

Read the Commission’s full findings and recommendations.

Human Rights First has documented the difficulties that refugees face in  these expedited procedures and in immigration jails, most recently in  its January 2004 report In Liberty’s Shadow: U.S. Detention of Asylum Seekers in the Era of Homeland Security.  Human Rights First has recommended that the Department of Homeland  Security create a high-level refugee protection position and formal  regulations to ensure that refugees who seek asylum are not needlessly  jailed. The Commission, after extensive study, made the same  recommendations.

New Legislation, Passed by House of Representatives, Puts Refugees at Further Risk
 The Commission’s report also shows just how difficult it  already is for refugees who flee from religious and other persecution to  navigate their way through the U.S. asylum system. Ironically, the  House of Representatives has just passed legislation that will make it  even more difficult for refugees to get asylum and will allow them to be  deported back into the hands of their persecutors while their cases are  still pending before U.S. federal courts.

The proposed legislation, called the REAL ID Act (H.R. 418), would give  immigration officers and immigration judges broad leeway to deny a  refugee asylum based on alleged "statements" taken in unreliable  circumstances – the very kind of statements that the Commission, in its  report, concluded were “unreliable and incomplete.” The Commission’s  experts specifically found that immigration judges frequently cited to  these unreliable documents when denying asylum.

 
Please encourage your colleagues to join us in this effort, by signing up for this newsletter. 