Asylum News 63
March 30, 2008
Wave of Denials to Stop

On  March 26, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services announced that it would halt  denials under the "material support" and "terrorism" bars in cases where waiver  authority exists, but has not yet been implemented by the Department of  Homeland Security. USCIS will review denials issued since December 26, 2007,  and reopen cases that fall within broad categories that may be eligible for  waivers. If reopened, the cases will be back on hold, where some have been for  several years already.

A  front page story in The Washington Post on Sunday, March 23, documented the  denial of a green card to a translator for the U.S. Marine Corps. Human Rights  First, the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, Human Rights Watch, the U.S. Conference  of Catholic Bishops and other groups have raised concern with U.S. officials  about these denials and the continued failure of DHS to fully address the  impact of the "terrorism" bars on refugees and asylum seekers.

Read  the memo from USCIS Deputy Director Jonathan Scharfen
Read  the letter to DHS Secretary Chertoff from Human Rights First and 18 groups

Read  the March  23 Washington Post article and March  27 Washington Post article

Read  the HRF  background memo for attorneys

U.N. Human Rights Report Calls for Reforms for Detained Migrants and Asylum Seekers 

On March 5, 2008, the U.N. Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of  Migrants submitted his report on the human rights of migrants in the U.S.  to the U.N. Human Rights Council. The report addresses the ways in which U.S. detention  and deportation policies are inconsistent with international human rights laws.

The Special Rapporteur recommends that the U.S. should  ensure that decisions to detain are promptly reviewed by an independent court,  and that asylum seekers are given access to custody determination hearings  before immigration judges.

Read the full report
Read Human Rights First's submission to the U.N. Special Rapporteur
Immigration Courts: New Guidelines to Facilitate Pro Bono

On March 10, 2008, the Office of the Chief Immigration Judge issued new  interim guidance to facilitate pro bono legal services. The new memorandum  calls for local pro bono liaison meetings, encourages judges to be flexible in  scheduling and encourages pre-hearing conferences and other measures.

Human Rights First, with input from a group of legal and pro bono experts,  provided recommendations to the immigration courts (EOIR) in connection with a  review of the immigration court system. While the new guidance should be  helpful to pro bono attorneys, it does not include several important  provisions.

The guidance is available for comment for 60 days before  being finalized.

Read the new EOIR  pro bono memorandum
Read the  recommendations of Human Rights First and others
Hearing on U.S. Response to Iraqi Refugees

On March 11, 2008, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Foreign  Affairs, Subcommittee on Middle East and South Asia, in a joint hearing with  the Subcommittee on International Organizations, Human Rights and Oversight,  heard testimony on "Neglected Responsibilities: The U.S. Response to the  Iraqi Refugee Crisis." Witnesses included Ambassador James Foley, the  Senior Coordinator for Iraqi Refugees and Lori Scialabba of the Department of  Homeland Security (DHS).

For more information on the hearing, including links to  testimony, click here 