Trial of Alleged Senior al Qaeda Operative starts in Federal Court in NYC on Monday
September 27, 2010
When Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani was first transferred to New York from Guantanamo Bay last year, House Republican leader John Boehner of Ohio called it "the first step in the Democrats' plan to import terrorists into America."

More than a year later, Ghailani remains the only detainee from  Guantanamo Bay to be brought to the United States. He's scheduled to go  on trial starting this week in lower Manhattan. Jury selection begins  Monday.

Ghailani is a Tanzanian accused of helping to bomb two U.S. embassies in  East Africa in 1998 that killed 224 people. Like the September 11, 2001  attacks, those bombings have been attributed to Osama bin Laden.

In hundreds of legal charges filed with the federal court in New York,  Ghailani is accused of having scouted out the American embassy in  Tanzania before it was bombed, assembled bomb materials and escorted the  suicide bomber to the site. After the bombings, prosecutors say he fled  to Afghanistan and rose up the ranks of al Qaeda, forging documents for  the group and working as a cook and a bodyguard for Osama bin Laden.

When he was captured in Pakistan in 2004, U.S. authorities deemed  Ghailani a "high-value" detainee and sent him to a secret CIA prison for  interrogation, where Ghailani claims he was tortured. Indeed, a variety  of so-called "enhanced interrogation techniques," including  waterboarding, were authorized for use by CIA interrogators on high-value detainees.

Ghailani was transferred to Guantanamo Bay in 2006. Last year, more than  ten years after the embassy bombings, he was transferred to the New  York prison. The same prison has safely held such notorious criminals as  John Gotti and the blind terror leader Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman.

Critics of Ghailani's transfer warned that his prosecution could be  derailed by his abuse in prison and the long delay in bringing him to  trial. But the federal judge hearing the case, Judge Lewis A. Kaplan,  has denied the defense lawyers' requests to dismiss the trial on those grounds.

Last week, former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani insisted that it would be safer to try Ghailani in a military commission in Guantanamo Bay than in New York City.

Ghailani has already appeared in court for pretrial hearings, however,  without incident. New York City police have said that while they will  provide some extra security for the trial, the proceedings will not require any of the elaborate and costly measures that New York City officials  had warned would be necessary for a trial of the 9/11 plotters. After  receiving complaints from local business groups about the potential  disruption that trial might cause, Police Commissioner Ray Kelly  announced that he would take a range of extraordinary security measures,  including a flood of uniformed police officers, checkpoints and  thousands of interlocking metal barriers. Mayor Bloomberg estimated the  cost at $200 million a year, and the Obama administration soon backed  away from the plan.

Despite the huge costs and inconvenience predicted for the 9-11  plotters' trial, no such estimates have been made for the trials of any  of those accused of carrying out al Qaeda's U.S. embassy bombing  attacks.

Four other men have already been tried and convicted in the same New  York courthouse for their roles in the U.S. embassy attacks. All were sentenced to life in prison without parole. 