First Guantanamo Trial in New York City: So Not Scary
October 01, 2010
The first trial of a former Guantanamo detainee in a U.S. federal court began in New York City this week. With jury selection completed, opening arguments will begin Monday for Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani.

I went to the jury questioning and it was just another day at court,  with a second terrorism trial happening next door. Outside the  courthouse, there were no protests or demonstrations along the lines of  what was staged by groups like Liz Cheney’s Keep America Safe last December after the Obama administration announced it would try the  September 11 co-conspirators in a New York federal court. In fact,  Cheney and Co. were bizarrely quiet about this trial.

Human Rights First staff interviewed New Yorkers on the street in front  of the courthouse while proceedings began. The overwhelming response was  nonchalance, or confidence. Far from the nightmare scenarios predicted  by those who oppose civilian trials for the 9/11 defendants. Watch the  video released yesterday:

[[{"type":"media","view_mode":"media_large","fid":"65","attributes":{"class":"media-image","typeof":"foaf:Image","height":"343","width":"445","style":""}}]]

If you didn’t already know the trial was going on, you’d never know that  anything was different at all in the Southern District of New York  courthouse and in the immediate vicinity. Sure, security was tight, but  it always is. Observers had to pass through the usual metal detectors  and check in their cell phones. It was business as usual.

In fact, although most New Yorkers don’t realize it, there are now two  major terrorism trials going on in the downtown Manhattan courthouse. In  addition to Ghailani’s, there’s the case of four men charged with  planting what they thought were bombs outside two Bronx synagogues, and  planning to fire missiles at military planes. That trial, which hinges  on the role of a government informant, has been going on for five weeks  now without any safety incidents.

As this trial gets underway, you have to wonder what all the fuss was  about. Civilian courts have convicted 400 terrorists since 9/11.  Military commissions, 4. The trial itself has caused no disruption in  lower Manhattan and is running smoothly.

I will be headed to Guantánamo later this month to witness the military  commissions trial of Omar Khadr. Instead of taking the subway to the  proceedings, I’ll be flown down and escorted by U.S. government  officials to a facility that has cost hundreds of millions of dollars to  build and an additional $125 million every year to maintain. This  doesn’t seem to add up. 