Pussy Riot: One Out, Two to Go (to Prison)
October 10, 2012
By Innokenty Grekov

Pussy Riot’s Yekaterina Samutsevich is now free, but Moscow’s city court upheld two-year sentences for bandmates Nadezhda Tolokonnikova and Mariya Alyokhina. Samutsevich’s newly appointed attorney successfully persuaded the appellate court that while she was present in the Christ the Savior Church she did not sing and dance on the altar with the other women during the now-famous punk prayer. The freed member of Pussy Riot has already pledged her unwavering support to the punk rock collective despite her newfound freedom, and promised to fight for her friends who remain imprisoned. Samutsevich’s sentence was suspended, and she will remain on probation for two years while she takes her case further to the European Court of Human Rights. Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina will now work with their lawyers on another appeal in Russia. The court today also ruled that all of the expert testimony used during the initial trial to evaluate the content of the punk prayer will stand, denying the defendants’ request to use alternative independent expert analysis. This denied motion was crucial, as the investigation and prosecution rested almost entirely on the testimony of questionable experts who helped establish that the punk prayer was an act of hooliganism motivated by religious intolerance. The three women from Pussy Riot were convicted under article 213 (part 2) of “hooliganism motivated by religious hatred or hostility.” Hooliganism statues are often used to prosecute violent hate crimes, including those committed by neo-Nazi skinheads, whose heinous racist murders have been previously referred to as “hooligans” by state authorities and are the origin for the statute’s title. In order for the criminal code’s article 213.2 to be applied, it is absolutely necessary to establish the motivation of hostility, without which it would be impossible to penalize the women with more than a fine. The experts used in investigation and prosecution were Vsevolod Troitsky, Vera Abramenkova, and Igor Ponkin. The three experts have one thing in common: their history of aiding other proceedings targeting dissent, artists, or religious groups. Let’s take a closer look at their record: In the Pussy Riot case, the three experts scrutinized the video clip of the punk prayer through “psychological, linguistic, and judicial-linguistic” lenses and concluded that the accused had indeed conspired to violate public norms and showed considerable contempt for the society overall and religious believers in particular, and that the motive was religious hatred. There you have it: today’s verdict to keep Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina locked up is based on a politically motivated reading of Russia’s constitutional norms and the flawed testimony of biased experts. The jailed members of Pussy Riot are guilty of engaging in a blasphemous performance that no doubt offended some believers, but Russia’s criminal code article 213.2 should not have been applied against them. Samutsevich’s bandmates—both of whom have young children—should be released as soon as possible. 