U.S. Government Must Step In to End Ex-Gitmo Detainee’s Detention in Morocco
November 12, 2015
By Alice Debarre Given the importance of detainee transfers to the effort to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay, the U.S. government should seek to ensure that a detainee recently transferred to his home country of Morocco is released from the prison outside of Rabat, where he is currently being held without charge or trial. Younous Chekkouri was captured by Pakistani authorities in December 2001 and turned over to the United States, which held him in Guantanamo for 13 years without charge. Following a habeas petition challenging the legality of his detention—a petition for which the judge never handed down a decision—the initial allegations concerning Chekkouri’s ties with the Group Islamique Combatant Maroc (GICM), a group said to have supported Al-Qaeda, were dropped. This was recently confirmed in the U.S. Department of Justice’s public letter to Chekkouri’s lawyers, which stated that it “took no position on whether Mr. Chekkouri was affiliated with GICM.”  In 2010, he was approved for transfer by the Guantanamo Review Task Force, a robust six-agency review process. However, following Chekkouri’s transfer to Morocco this past September, in conditions reminiscent of his initial harrowing journey to Guantanamo, he is once again being detained. This is contrary to assurances Chekkouri’s lawyers claim were given by Morocco to the U.S. government that he would not be held for longer than 72 hours. Chekkouri has been detained in Morocco without charge for nearly two months, and his local counsel has explained that the dossier compiled against Chekkouri contains the same allegations that had collapsed in U.S. federal court. According Chekkouri’s lawyers, Morocco also assured the United States that Chekkouri would not be prosecuted and agreed with the State Department’s view that there was no basis to prosecute him. Chekkouri’s hearing has been postponed twice already, and is now set for December 3rd. The lawyers who negotiated his release from Guantanamo have been prevented from seeing him. The Moroccan Justice Minister has suggested that there were, in fact, no assurances given to the United States regarding Chekkouri. Given the Obama Administration’s policy of ensuring humane treatment for former detainees, such diplomatic assurances are very important. Former detainees Shaker Aamer and Ahmed Abdel Aziz were recently released and quickly reunited with their families. Chekkouri’s detention is concerning particularly given a 2014 U.S. State Department report on torture and mistreatment in Moroccan prisons. As the Obama Administration prepares to unveil a plan for the closure of the Guantanamo detention facility, the U.S. government needs to go beyond stating that it “remains interested in the matter and will continue its dialogue with the government of Morocco.” It needs to ensure that Morocco complies with the assurances given to the United States, and that Younous Chekkouri is released. Two months’ detention without charge is unacceptable and any potential prosecution against Chekkouri must be based only on credible evidence of criminal acts—not on the discredited allegations that the U.S. Department of Justice has since publicly disavowed. Chekkouri’s postponed hearing date provides the U.S. government the opportunity to act before further injustice is done. In addition, the U.S. government should make sure that such a situation not be reproduced; the credibility of diplomatic assurances about former detainee treatment is crucial to the United States’ ability to swiftly transfer the 53 remaining Guantanamo detainees cleared for release. See Human Rights First’s blueprint “How to Close Guantanamo” for a detailed outline of how the administration can close the prison before President Obama leaves office. 