Romanian Parliament Condemns the Expulsions of Roma from France
September 22, 2010
Today, Romania’s parliament condemned the  expulsions of Roma from France and other European states, calling the  process a “serious violation” of European Union directives and human  rights. The Romanian legislators are thus joining the E.U. Justice  Commissioner Viviane Reding, who said last week she was "appalled" by  France's policy. Commissioner Reding also made a promise that the commission would consider starting legal proceedings against France on September 29.

The United States needs to follow suit. This week, Human Rights First and other rights groups urged U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to comment publicly on this violation of human rights.



Romanian President Traian Basescu had also asked French President Nicolas Sarkozy to stop the expulsion of Roma from France,  stressing that relations between the two countries remain friendly.  Basescu urged Europe to try to solve the problems of the Roma. Mr.  Basescu was involved in several Roma-related controversies over the  years, including one that was reported in Human Rights First's 2008 Hate Crime Survey:  "the president was widely quoted after an incident on May 19, 2007, in  which he insulted journalist Andreea Pana, dismissing her by asking  'don’t you have anything to do today?' and commenting: 'how aggressive  that stinky gypsy was.' (He subsequently apologized)." Good to see he  has spoken up against this current disgrace.


Our joint letter urges U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to comment publicly on  the expulsions of Roma from France and the discourse of intolerance used  by some French politicians. The letter was also signed by Amnesty  International USA, Council for Global Equality, European Roma Rights  Center, Freedom House, Human Rights Watch, Open Society Institute, and  the Public Interest Law Institute.

"Your support would not only draw attention to this particular violation  of human rights, but also signal to other countries where Roma are  facing significant challenges that the U.S. takes seriously  discrimination and collective action against ethnic minorities," notes our letter to Secretary Clinton. 