The End of the Beginning
August 27, 2004
Day Five

Today began just like each of our days here at Guantanamo Bay – very  early in the morning and with a spectacular sunrise. Rather than taking  our usual heavy ferry transport from the remote, leeward side of the bay  where we’ve slept to the windward side for the day’s proceedings, the  Coast Guard today gave us a ride on a small, fast harbor patrol boat  (separate from the press and few migrant workers who had been our  commuting partners earlier in the week).

Events in the Commission chamber were similarly efficient, a stark  contrast to the sense of confusion that prevailed as the Commission  struggled with serious translation difficulties and the defendant’s  request to represent himself yesterday (see Day Four).  Commission participants today devoted just over an hour to the case of  Ibrahim Ahmed Mahmoud al Qosi of Sudan. The government’s charge sheet  accuses him of conspiracy with Osama bin Laden and others to commit  terrorism, attack civilians, and other offenses deemed “triable by  Commission.” The government alleges that al Qosi provided logistical  support to al Qaeda, including managing al Qaeda funds, helping to  transport explosives and weapons from Sudan, and acting as bin Laden’s  body guard and driver until his capture after the U.S. invasion of  Afghanistan in the fall of 2001.

Al Qosi, dressed like Al Bahlul had been yesterday in casual slacks  and a knit shirt, sat next to his appointed military defense counsel,  Lt. Col. Sharon Shaffer, and a translator retained by the defense.  Following the now familiar script swearing in counsel and other  participants, Presiding Officer Brownback turned immediately – and for  the first time this week expressly – to the issue of translation. It is  the duty of the translator, Brownback began his remarks, to provide an  accurate translation of everything said, to translate only the words  actually spoken, and not to explain, repeat questions, clarify or  summarize. The three official commission translators – contractors  through a company called International Language Services, hired by the  military – were unchanged from the day before. But Brownback’s decision  to devote several minutes to the importance of accuracy (at pains to  speak slowly to allow the non-simultaneous translation to proceed)  seemed a clear indication that the Commission was aware of the severe  inadequacies that contributed to the confusion in Al Bahlul’s  proceedings. It is one of the Commission’s most important early tests  whether it can resolve this basic issue of translation quality and  fairness before any detainee next steps into Commission chambers.

The balance of the proceedings were devoted to resolving the status  of Al Qosi’s military defense counsel, who was appointed as Deputy Chief  Defense Counsel to represent Commission defendants in February 2004,  and in May was informed that she had been selected for reassignment (a  promotion in the usual military court system to the role of trial  judge). Shaffer’s early request for an assistant counsel she asked for  by name had been denied, and in June when Al Qosi’s conspiracy charge  was referred to the Commission, Shaffer was now in an ethical bind. She  had to report to her new fulltime assignment in July, and Al Qosi would  fall through the cracks. Shaffer filed a motion to withdraw as counsel  so that another would be appointed, and the presiding officer suspended  all activity in the case on August 6 until the issue could be resolved.  Shaffer thus arrived in the Commission today without any of the motions  or preparations for voir dire that defense counsel earlier in the week had put forward.

Just days before Al Qosi’s first scheduled appearance before the  Commission today, Shaffer managed to secure orders from her new post  detailing her to the Commission until her representation of Al Qosi was  complete (she told us as we sat in the Commission room, waiting for  proceedings to begin). As she explained to Brownback, the conflict issue  had just been resolved; the resource issue hadn’t. Her trial team was  still just her and a translator – no co-counsel, no paralegal, no other  administrative support. Brownback and prosecutors seemed to acknowledge  these concerns, and appropriately set a pre-trial schedule for voir dire and other motions on the condition that Shaffer receives the resources she needs. voir dire was set for October 4 (would have been earlier, but for the ongoing  renovation of the building in early September). A hearing on pretrial  motions was set for the first week of November, with a tentative trial  date of December 7 (which would make Al Qosi the first of the first 4  defendants to move to trial). In the meantime, Mr. Al Qosi returns to  his cell.

Post-Commission briefings by defense and prosecution counsel shed  more light on the inadequacies that have emerged so clearly this week.  Shaffer – a well-spoken, no-nonsense, zealous advocate – met with press  and observers early this afternoon and made no bones about the  inadequate conditions of defense’s resources. “It’s a shame,” she said  when asked about her feelings about having been earlier denied assistant  counsel, that proceedings of this historic significance are being  handled this way. Her client told her just after leaving the courtroom  that all he got from the translation through his headphones were broken,  fractions of sentences. It’s one thing to have only a partial  understanding of what’s going on in these preliminary proceedings,  Shaffer said Al Qosi indicated in his holding cell just outside the  Commission chambers. But how could this work for trial when he needed  really to know what was going on? Still, Shaffer said, Al Qosi was  “relieved” at least to have a lawyer again.

As concerning as the early denial of her request for additional  counsel – which she believed would soon be resolved – was the denial of  all but a small amount of the discovery Shaffer had sought to build her  client’s defense. Shaffer has asked for access to multiple potential  witnesses, including investigators, alleged co-conspirators, and  translators who served in Al Qosi’s interrogations. All of these  requests so far have been denied by the Office of Military Commissions  on the grounds (in June, two months before proceedings began) that they  were premature. Shaffer had no trouble, in contrast, meeting with Al  Qosi’s family in Sudan. “I have visited them,” Shaffer stated. “They are  very concerned.”

Chief Prosecutor Swann then spoke to the assembly for the first time  all week, offering assurances that he had told the Chief Defense Counsel  that he would do anything he could to assist defense in getting the  resources they needed. Swann, who seemed irritated, aggressive, and  impatient with questions from the outset, did himself no favors with the  media. Apart from his general assurance, he seemed to deflect most of  the questions defense counsel had raised about resources, translation  concerns, and discovery – repeatedly stating that whatever the issue,  everyone here and no one more than he wanted to make sure these trials  were “full and fair.” Swann did offer some specifics on next steps,  including the news that there were 9 more Guantanamo detainees who would  soon be charged and referred to the Commission over the next few  months, including some whose names the public would recognize as  previously arrested terrorist suspects.

The press and we observers spent the afternoon packing and trying to  think (and write) about the bigger picture of what happened here this  week. It was already unclear which of the media outlets would send  correspondents back to cover all of the proceedings (including the  substantive pretrial motions now scheduled to heard in November);  perhaps some could come back for one of the trials in January. The  military staff involved in the Commissions had also been having daily  meetings on how things were going, and would soon be facing their own  substantial after-action review. At no remove yet at all, I suspected  perspective would be hard to achieve.

Nonetheless, I am left thinking about at least three themes that  carried through the week and will be on our minds when proceedings  resume. First was the chance to see in action some of the structural  commission rules that Human Rights First had commented and reported upon  as the Commission developed over the past three years. It is one thing  to say that the fusion of judge and jury was inconsistent with U.S.  traditions and seemed inconsistent with fair trials. It was another to  hear the Presiding Officer try to explain to non-lawyer Commission  members (who will be both jury and judge) what “jurisdiction” means, or  to hear one Commission member admit with admirable candor that he wasn’t  really sure what the Geneva Conventions were but knew that there were  three of them (there are four). There are some pretty good reasons why  the U.S. legal system generally separates questions of fact (which lay  juries decide) and questions of law (which are left to judges). This  week was an object lesson in those reasons.

Second were the failures – of translators, resources, and planning –  not at all a function of the military commission rules. There was no  good reason, and no very good excuse, for such problems. All at  Guantanamo seemed to agree that these were problems that should be  remedied. It gave me hope that they will soon be remedied, but made it  much harder to fight skepticism that the Commission process was actually  designed to take seriously the task of answering open questions of a  defendant’s innocence or guilt.

Third was the chance for those present to confront as individuals  what had for years been hundreds of generally undifferentiated  Guantanamo detainees. We can now say that Hamdan looked small and  vulnerable; Hicks beloved by his family; Al Bahlul (despite all  translation problems) educated and articulate; and Al Qosi for whatever  reason determined to keep the military lawyer he was assigned on his  case. Some or all of these men may in fact harbor enormous ill-will  toward the United States. But for those who sat feet from them in the  Commission chamber, it should be much harder to picture just “Gitmo”  writ large.

Finally, at risk of distracting from the real issues at Guantanamo, I  offer a word about my own role this week. Over the past 25 years, my  organization has engaged in trial observation and reporting in countries  around the world, from the Middle East to South America. We have also  participated – as counsel, amicus curiae, or otherwise – in countless  legal proceedings in the United States. As a domestic human rights  lawyer focused on U.S. national security, I always expected I would do  far more of the latter. The fundamental fair trial rules that we human  rights observers look for in trials abroad – in nations transitioning to  democracy or in nations with a history of unfairness – have been so  well engrained here in the United States for so long, I really never  considered I would be reviewing U.S.-run proceedings against that kind  of baseline compliance. We know how to try people in the United States.  It would be crazy to start building a new legal system from scratch. But  this past week, as we shuffled in and out of the still-being-renovated  court building, using adjacent port-o-potties on top of windswept hill  on this hot, dusty base, it felt very clear that we were trying to do  exactly that.

In many respects, the situation was unique for all of us – for  military lawyers trying to practice in something other than well  established courts martial, for the non-lawyer commission members trying  to understand basic concepts from first-year law school, for an  international press corps (unsure whether to send Defense or Justice  Department correspondents) trying to put these proceedings in  perspective, and for the Gitmo base military staff trying to cope with  an influx of demanding visitors whose roles they were only beginning to  understand. It was as though everyone had been thrust from some darkened  room into the blinding sun, all blinking to adjust to the light. The  relative novelty of the situation no doubt contributed to the  camaraderie among all of us that last week would have seemed  extraordinarily unlikely.

In some ways, this dynamic made my role more difficult; I am here to  be independent from all of these actors, to interact with them  skeptically as I would a stranger. I remain hopeful I’ve managed to do  this regardless. In other ways, I am deeply indebted to my colleagues  from the Commission staff, base staff, media, and fellow NGOs, who were  also all away from their families under less-than-ideal conditions and  were also just trying to do their jobs. So I would be remiss if I  neglected to thank all of them, particularly the uniformed Legalmen,  Lieutenants, Captains, Majors, Colonels, and many others who played the  none-too-easy role of our keepers this past week. (I would include their  names here but err on the side of caution in case they or their  families would prefer to stay out of the public eye. Suffice it to say,  they know who they are.) It is my hope that we will have an opportunity  to work together again someday under circumstances in which there is no  question that justice is being done. 