Hunger Strikes at Hutto
November 02, 2015
Last week at least 27 women detained at the T. Don Hutto Residential Center (Hutto) in Taylor, Texas, began a hunger strike to protest the conditions at the facility and demand immediate release. Many of these women fled violence in their home countries, as described in a recent U.N. Refugee Agency (UNHCR) report. The hunger strike draws attention to the Obama Administration’s policy of detaining those who seek asylum and other forms of humanitarian relief in the United States, a policy that is at odds with our nation’s legacy of protecting the persecuted. Eighteen of the women participating in the strike sent handwritten letters to Grassroots Leadership, a Texas-based nonprofit, describing their reasons for coming to the United States and the conditions at Hutto that led them to strike. Their letters cited problems ranging from poor food and inadequate medical care to excessive bail and prolonged detention. As one woman wrote, “I am a woman fleeing a country where women are given few rights, all of which are violated, and land in this place where the people of immigration condemn us to a process with little or no security, since this process will ultimately end with our deportation. With no objection to a lack of defense, condemning us to an assured death upon being deported back to our countries, then where are our rights?” Private prison company Corrections Corporation of America (CCA) operates Hutto. Originally opened in 2006 as a family detention center, Hutto became an all-women facility in 2009 as a result of a lawsuit due to inhumane conditions. The hunger strike at Hutto follows recent hunger strikes at two immigrant detention centers in El Paso, Texas, and LaSalle, Louisiana, and a hunger strike this past April led by 78 mothers detained at the Karnes County Family Residential Center in Texas. The Hutto hunger strike takes place amidst mounting pressure on the Obama Administration to end family detention (see recent reports from the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, Tahirih Justice Center, and Human Rights First). Human Rights First has long advocated for the government to manage migration through a more humane and fiscally-responsible course of action than detention. The Department of Homeland Security should implement community-based alternatives to detention programs, which provide services to individuals who require support to ensure appearance for immigration proceedings. These programs save taxpayer money—intensive programs may cost as little as 20 percent the cost of detention, while also effectively ensuring that immigrants appear for their immigration proceedings.  Additionally, providing individuals with legal information related to their immigration proceedings and/or legal counsel will support appearance for immigration court and appointments. Recent data shows that 98 percent of mothers who have legal counsel and whose cases were initiated in fiscal year 2014 are in compliance with their immigration court obligations. As the women detained at Hutto continue to protest the injustice they face, we urge the Obama Administration to abandon its approach and uphold America’s historic commitment to refugees and asylum seekers. 