President-elect Obama: It Doesn't Gitmo Urgent Than This
January 16, 2009
Gabor Rona – Human Rights First’s International Legal Director – will be in Cuba  to monitor the proceedings and report back on events as they unfold.
January 16, 2009: Next week, for the umpteenth time, a representative of Human Rights  First (me) will embark on a trip that should not occur, to a destination  that should not exist, to witness events that should not happen. But  this time is different. All eyes at the military commissions in  Guantánamo next week will not be on the accused, the lawyers, the  judges, or the jailers. They will instead be focused on a podium in  Washington, D.C., where, shortly after 10:00 a.m on January 20,  President-elect Barack Obama either will, or will not, say the magic  words: “Today, and as my first official act as President of the United  States, I announce the immediate suspension of military commission  trials at the U.S. detention facility in Guantánamo.” Of all the abuses  of law, reason and morality by his predecessor, why should Obama take  this one on first? The reasons are both practical and symbolic.

Obama  can announce an end to torture and extraordinary rendition to countries  where detainees are abused, but it will take time to unravel all the  legal and institutional packaging by which the Bush Administration  attempted to both deny and justify those policies.  He can express his  intention to investigate the abuses of the Bush Administration, and  even, although it seems increasingly unlikely, to prosecute those who  planned and ordered detainee torture and abuse, but the question of how  is fraught. He can declare his intention to close the detention facility  at Guantánamo, but it will take time to figure out what to do with the  detainees – some suspected of serious terrorism offenses, some innocent  of terrorist activity but tainted by famously irresponsible rhetoric of  Bush Administration officials who branded them all as “the worst of the  worst.”

But there’s one thing he can accomplish with little more  than the time and strength it takes to say it. Of all the illegal,  counterproductive and just plain irrational architecture that the Bush  Administration has designed to combat terrorism, nothing is easier to  bring to a screeching halt, and there is no better way to signal a break  with the past than to suspend the Guantánamo military commissions.

The  costs of even a brief delay are great. Within days after  President-elect Obama takes office, the military commissions are slated  to begin trying a child soldier for the first time in modern American  history, contrary to the tenets of international law and common decency.  Whether or not Omar Khadr is found guilty, the stain on the Obama  Administration and on the American judicial system will be indelible. To  put it in strictly legal terms, the harm in being tried by a flawed  tribunal is not merely the risk of being found guilty. It is also in  being subjected to an illegal process in the first place. This is not  just one human rights advocate’s opinion. It is a fact of logic and law  that has been articulated numerous times by the U.S. Supreme Court,  including by one of its most outspokenly conservative members, Justice  Antonin Scalia.

Since it is so easily accomplished,  President-elect Obama’s inaugural announcement to suspend military  commissions would be powerful evidence that he meant what he said in his  application for the job that the majority of voters hired him to  accomplish – to bring change to America. The message would be clear not  only to all Americans, but the entire world, that he will act decisively  to fulfill his stated commitment to end these illegal proceedings, to  transfer the cases that should be prosecuted to the federal criminal  justice system where they belong, and to begin the long march of  returning his country to the rule of American and international law. 