As UN Meets To Discuss LGBTI Refugees, Human Rights First Urges Improved Protection
October 01, 2010
Washington, DC – As a group of representatives from  governments, civil society and academia meet in Geneva today to  participate in a Roundtable discussion on how to better protect lesbian,  gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) refugees, Human Rights  First urges the UN refugee agency – UNHCR – to continue to undertake  concrete steps to ensure LGBTI refugees and asylum seekers are protected  on the basis of equality and dignity.

"Every day, refugees from all corners of the world are forced to flee  their homes on account of their sexual orientation or gender identity,"  said Human Rights First's Jesse Bernstein, author of Persistent Needs and Gaps: the Protection of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex (LGBTI) Refugees,  a report that will be presented today at UNHCR's Roundtable in Geneva.  "By definition, all refugees are vulnerable," said Bernstein. "Yet LGBTI  refugees often face particular challenges in accessing protection and  assistance resulting in needs which frequently go unaddressed."

LGBTI individuals who flee their homes often have no choice but to  flee to neighboring countries where homophobia is as pervasive as the  environments they are seeking to escape. More than 70 countries have  laws that criminalize same-sex conduct, and many of these countries host  refugees. LGBTI refugees often endure discrimination as they navigate  asylum systems, including many that require them to register with  national authorities who may harbor homophobic attitudes or consider  consensual same-sex conduct a crime. As a result, LGBTI refugees fear  registering with authorities, a reality that limits their ability to  access assistance programs or be identified for the purposes of  protection and potential resettlement. In a number of contexts, such as  Iraq and east Africa, LGBTI refugees also experience sexual violence as a  cause of flight or while in countries of first asylum.

Human Rights First welcomes UNHCR's Roundtable as an important step  in developing the response of the international community to better  protect LGBTI refugees. It marks the first time the protection concerns  of LGBTI refugees will be formally discussed under UN auspices with  experts from governments, civil society and academia. At the same time,  however, additional action is necessary to ensure the protection of  LGBTI refugees in real terms.  For example, as Human Rights First's  analysis details, the primary tools used by UNHCR to identify at risk  individuals and the specific needs within refugee populations contain  only limited reference to sexual orientation or gender identity. This  limits the ability of UNHCR staff to identify and respond to the  protection needs of LGBTI refugees, such as a potential need for  resettlement or protection from sexual violence.

"UNHCR should move forward with measures to improve protection for  LGBTI refugees, including through revising relevant policies, developing  practical guidance that details steps local staff can take to ensure  the protection of LGBTI refugees, and ensuring support for  implementation. UNHCR's donor States should provide support as UNHCR  undertakes these reforms," Bernstein concluded. 