Asylum News 29
August 11, 2004
DHS Announces Expansion of Expedited Removal  to Border Areas Border Patrol Officers Given Power to Order Deportations  – Decision Further Undermines Fairness; Puts Refugees at Risk

The Department of Homeland Security announced on Tuesday, August  10, 2004, that it will expand the use of expedited removal – a summary  immigration deportation process – to immigrants who are apprehended  without valid entry documents within 14 days of their entry and within  100 miles of the U.S. border with Canada or Mexico. This significant  change in immigration policy will take effect immediately and immigrants  could be affected within a few weeks.

The expansion of expedited removal will give border patrol  officers in the border area the power to issue deportation orders that  are currently issued by immigration judges. The policy will not be  applied to Cuban nationals, and will not generally be applied to Mexican  and Canadian nationals – with certain exceptions detailed in DHS  materials. The expedited process will be applied to undocumented Central  Americans and other “third country” nationals apprehended in the  100-mile border area. The official notice lists the Border Patrol  Sectors that are affected. For more information:

Read the DHS press release
Read the Federal Register Notice

As a result, these migrants will face the possibility of  deportation without an immigration court deportation (removal) hearing,  will face an increased risk of improper or mistaken deportation under  the summary procedures, and will no longer be entitled to a bond hearing  to seek release from detention before an immigration judge. Those who  are undocumented will, according to DHS, bear the affirmative burden of  showing border patrol officers that they have been in the U.S. for more  than 14 days.

Background on Expedited Removal Concerns 

Numerous concerns have been raised about expedited removal’s  lack of due process protections and about its implementation. Applied  since 1997 at U.S. airports and borders, expedited removal is a summary  deportation process that gives DHS immigration officers the power to  issue deportation orders that could previously be issued only by trained  immigration judges.

Human Rights First has documented the flaws that have plagued  expedited removal in a series of reports. A Human Rights First report  from October 2000 - Is This America? - identified numerous problems with  the expedited process and recommended that its use be limited to  immigration emergencies. A report just issued by the American Bar  Association and the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights also flagged  many deficiencies in the implementation of expedited removal – and  highlighted the case of a refugee who was mistakenly deported back to  face danger in Colombia upon the order of an immigration inspector under  the expedited deportation process.

Concerns About Expansion

At the time the expedited removal provisions were initially  implemented in 1997, the Department of Justice decided not to apply the  process to people who were already within the U.S. and had not been  formally admitted or paroled. Noting that it needed time to “gain  insight and experience” with the process by applying it on a more  limited basis, the Department of Justice and INS acknowledged that  “application of the expedited removal provisions to aliens already in  the United States will involve more complex determinations of fact and  will be more difficult to manage. . .” 62 Fed Reg at page 10313 (March  6, 1997).

It is unclear how border patrol officers will manage the many  complex determinations that are involved in these deportation decisions.  DHS has stated that the expedited procedures will only apply to  undocumented migrants who have entered the U.S. within 14 days, but it  is not clear how Border Patrol officers will make this assessment. DHS  has stated that “the expanded use of expedited removal is primarily  directed at those illegal aliens who are not citizens of Mexico or  Canada.” It is not clear whether the process will be directed at  migrants of particular nationalities, which could raise concerns of  profiling.

DHS has stressed that the process will not be implemented until  border patrol officers have received training. But training will begin  within the next week, and the process could be implemented within weeks.  Although training is critical, it has not prevented the mistaken  deportation of citizens, refugees and legitimate tourists under the  existing expedited process.

Attention Legal Representation Organizations: DHS has advised  that it will issue additional explanatory materials later this week. If  your organization assists migrants and refugees in the border areas, and  you would like to receive these materials, please contact HuntC@humanrightsfirst.org.
If you are not subscribed, and would like to continue receiving Asylum Protection News, sign up here 