Feinstein’s Push to Finally Close Guantanamo
November 05, 2015
By Alice Debarre The Obama Administration is facing its last, best chance to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay following the president's veto of the NDAA. In a New York Times editorial, Senator Diane Feinstein (D-CA) lays out why Congress should help accomplish that goal. Gitmo is a threat to our national security. As Feinstein explains, “Guantanamo is one of the best propaganda tools that terrorists have today.” National security experts and retired military leaders have long noted that it is a powerful symbol in terrorist recruiting materials. The prison also continues to hamper counterterrorism cooperation with our allies, who, she writes, “criticize it as a violation of the rule of law” and have refused to share intelligence or provide access to terrorism suspects if it could perpetuate the prison’s existence. Moreover, Gitmo’s track record on actually trying and convicting terrorists is abysmal. Feinstein notes, “Of the 112 detainees who remain today, only about 10 have been convicted or charged with a crime in the military commissions…. All of the convictions that came from military commissions resulted in light sentences, are currently being appealed or have been overturned entirely.” In comparison, the government has prosecuted of hundreds of terrorist suspects in federal courts since 9/11, with about a 90 percent conviction rate. Meanwhile, the men charged with planning the 9/11 attacks have still not gone to trial. Finally, keeping the prison open is costing billions of dollars. As Feinstein writes, the “cost per detainee at Guantanamo is 30 times more than that of the most secure detention facilities in the United States…. Guantanamo is a huge waste of money.” The Obama Administration has promised to deliver a plan to close the prison, and it should follow through. But Senator Feinstein makes an important point—Congress should amend the onerous transfer restrictions in the NDAA. Unfortunately today the House passed a new NDAA that still contains those restrictions. The president should reiterate that he will not sign any bill that prevents him from closing the prison. Human Rights First’s plan to close Gitmo can be found in our latest Blueprint: How to Close Guantanamo. 