Asylum News 60
December 01, 2007
Amicus Briefs Submitted to Supreme Court on Serious Crimes Bar

Human Rights First and leading legal scholars have submitted an amicus brief   in a case involving the “particularly serious crime” bar that is currently   pending before the U.S. Supreme Court. The amici argue that, in excluding a   refugee from protection, the U.S. Refugee Act requires consideration of an   individual’s “danger to the community” and not simply a mechanical determination   of whether a “particularly serious crime” was committed. Amici argue that the   Board’s approach contradicts the plain language of the Refugee Act as well as   Congress’s intent to incorporate the Refugee Convention’s terms.

The amici include Guy Goodwin-Gill, James C. Hathaway, and Deborah Anker;   they were represented by Brian J. Murray, Gene Crawford, and James E. Gauch of   Jones Day LLP.

To read the   amicus brief, click here.

New HRW Report on HIV/AIDS Services for Detained Immigrants

On December 7, 2007, Human Rights Watch issued a new report entitled “Chronic   Indifference: HIV/AIDS Services for Immigrants Detained by the United States.”   The group’s study found that Immigration and Customs Enforcement   (ICE)-supervised facilities insufficiently monitor medical care in detention   centers and provide inadequate and inconsistent medical care to jailed   immigrants. The report noted that DHS does not collect even “fundamental”   information relating to the treatment of immigrants with HIV/AIDS, and that the   agency’s policies and procedures do not meet national and international   guidelines on HIV/AIDS care of detainees.

To read the   report, click here.

International Migrants Day

In December 2000, the United Nations declared December 18 as International   Migrants Day in recognition of the December 18, 1990 U.N. General Assembly   approval of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All   Migrant Workers and Members of their Families. For more information, including a   list of international events and press releases from the 2007 International   Migrants Day, click here. 