The Consumer Goods Forum Commits to Fighting Forced Labor in its Supply Chains
January 26, 2016
The Consumer Goods Forum (CGF) recently announced the Social Resolution on Forced Labour, a commitment to fight forced labor throughout its global supply chains. In its announcement, CGF proclaims that safeguarding human rights is essential to addressing the root causes of forced labor, and looks to engage its members in efforts to eradicate trafficking from their operations and supply chains. CGF is a global industry association that brings together the CEOs and senior management of approximately 400 manufacturers, service providers, retailers, and other stakeholders from 70 countries. Together, member companies boast combined sales of EUR 2.5 trillion. CGF is ideally positioned to implement this resolution and help develop much needed practices to tackle slavery in global supply chains. The resolution follows the guidance of international frameworks such as the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, U.N. Sustainable Development Goals, the International Labour Organization’s Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development’s Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. The Social Resolution on Forced Labour depends on global collaboration across industries. CGF looks to harness the power of collective action to identify areas vulnerable to forced labor. Once identified, members will work together to develop action plans to address violations, harmonize supply chain standards, and prevent future abuses, thereby making existing company initiatives more effective. To achieve this goal, CGF will work closely with other stakeholders, including governments, civil society, retailers, and manufacturers. It also aims improve information sharing and best practices. Eradicating slavery is too big an endeavor for one industry or government to tackle alone. That’s why collaboration is imperative to create more effective and sustainable strategies to combat human trafficking. Creating industry-wide model compliance plans will maximize protection for workers and mitigate the risk of trafficking throughout supply chains, and CGF should be applauded for its efforts. For more recommendations on how to dismantle the business of human trafficking see our blueprint. 