Senate Should Question Roberts on Presidential Power and International Treaty Obligations
September 09, 2005
More on U.S. Law & 
SecurityAs the Senate prepares to 
consider the nomination of Judge John Roberts to the position of Chief Justice 
of the United States, Human Rights First urged senators to question the nominee 
on his views concerning presidential power during the "global war on terror," 
judicial deference, and U.S. obligations under the U.S. Constitution, laws and 
international humanitarian law. 
Concerns have arisen due to a recent decision, Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 
which upheld military commissions taking place at the U.S. Naval Base at 
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. In approving the military commissions, the Court of 
Appeals panel (on which Roberts sat) sanctioned a system in which the President 
also may act as judge and legislator, violating key constitutional tenets, 
requiring a separation of powers. The panel opinion also ruled that rights under 
the Geneva Conventions are not judicially enforceable, calling into question the 
U.S. commitment to enforce treaties the United States signed and ratified.
"The Hamdan decision raises a number of concerns. The United States 
signed, ratified and has honored the Geneva Conventions for over fifty years. 
The Geneva Conventions were written to protect individuals. The Hamdan 
decision means that defendants brought before the military commission -- an ad 
hoc tribunal that violates basic principles established in Constitutional, U.S. 
military and international law -- have no remedy in the federal courts," said 
Deborah Pearlstein, director of Human Rights First's U.S. Law & Security 
Program. "The decision also grants the President an unprecedented amount of 
power to create commissions, decide the merits of the case and provide his own 
review, subject only to the President's discretion. The decision is a 
fundamental challenge to the rule of law." 
In addition, the decision defers to the President's determination that 
minimal protections in Common Article 3 of the Geneva Convention (prohibiting 
torture and cruel, humiliating, and degrading treatment in non-international 
armed conflicts) did not apply to the conflict in Afghanistan, found that 
Congress had authorized the commissions through its Authorization for Use of 
Military Force, which contained no reference to military commissions, and 
finally upheld the commission regulations' ejection of the accused from his own 
trial. 
Military commission proceedings provide markedly fewer fairness safeguards 
than either U.S. criminal or military court proceedings. The proceedings may be 
conducted partly or entirely in secret, precluding the accused from being 
present at portions of the trial, using secret evidence and witnesses (including 
hearsay evidence from unidentified informants), as well as evidence obtained 
through coercion and torture. 
"The military commissions deprive defendants of the most basic fair trial 
rights and neglect the first principles of the rule of law," added Pearlstein. 
"If the idea of the rule of law includes, at a minimum, a system of publicly 
known regulations, set in advance, applied without arbitrariness, and enforced 
by fair and independent courts -- the commissions fall short in every 
respect."
Human Rights First filed a friend 
of the court brief in support of Mr. Hamdan seeking Supreme Court review 
of the court of appeals decision. Human Rights First noted in the brief the 
commissions' negative effects on longstanding U.S. efforts to advance democracy 
and the rule of law overseas, as repressive regimes abroad point to the United 
States' establishment of military commissions as a basis on which to avoid their 
own responsibilities to maintain systems with independent judicial review.
Read Human Rights First friend of the court brief:
http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/our-work/law-and-security/right-to-remedy/inthecourts/hamdan_briefs/hamdan-hrf-acpc-090805.pdf 