European Headlines: Roma Are Constantly Pressured
September 10, 2010
The Times media reporter Brian Stelter, in an excellent analysis of the U.S. media’s coverage of the Koran-burning story in Florida,  explores the question of how news outlets have contributed to the  intolerant pastor’s sudden rise to fame. The article looks at how Mr.  Jones used “the news lull of summer and the demands of a 24-hour news  cycle to promote his anti-Islam cause.”
While the New York Times is questioning the validity of the media’s focus on the Koran-burning day, the European press is raging about the plight of Europe’s  Roma population. A wave of reports, editorials, and opinion pieces on  the situation of Roma was triggered by the recent decision by the French  government to expel up to a thousand Roma individuals to Romania and Bulgaria.

The EU Observer covered the European Parliament’s demand to immediately stop Roma expulsions from France.  The E.U. parliamentarians adopted a resolution, in a 337 to 245 vote,  rejecting “any statements which link minorities and immigration with  criminality and create discriminatory stereotypes” and directly  referencing French President Sarkozy’s inflammatory remarks about ‘gypsy  criminality’. The Parliament’s only representative of Roma origin, MEP  Livia Jaroka, will head an internal working group, set up by the  center-right European People’s Party, to create specific policy  recommendations for a policy for the economic and social inclusion of  Roma. However, Ms. Jaroka belongs to the same European People’s Party  (EPP) to which the French President is affiliated. EPP deplored the  final text after tabling an alternative resolution that did not  criticize Paris and Brussels directly.A  myriad of articles and publications are seizing the opportunity to  offer coverage of the plight of Roma from different angles, including  the struggle of Roma returnees to Romania; the effects of the French crackdowns on Roma people who remain in France; the ongoing preparations to demolish Roma camps in Italy; or the impunity in the violent mob attack against Roma in Poland.High-level  public officials are also calling on better policies to promote Roma  inclusion and combat discrimination of Roma. The Council of Europe  Commissioner for Human Rights, Thomas Hammarberg, continues to call on  governments to act and avoid feeding prejudice.  Mr. Hammarberg, a longtime partner of Human Rights First, believes that  “politicians should be very careful about language which can promote  further prejudice against the Roma communities.”Human Rights First also continues to monitor cases of violence targeting Roma individuals. We will also honor Viktória Mohácsi,  a former member of the European Parliament’s European Liberal Democrat  and Reform Party and a tireless advocate for Roma rights, at our annual  Human Rights Award Dinner in October. 