Dear Microsoft: Please Stop Helping Russia Abuse Advocates
September 15, 2010
By Elisa Massimino, President of Human Rights First
Crossposted at Huffington Post

This weekend's New York Times article was a wake up call to Microsoft and the entire information and  communications technology industry about the dangers of complying with  government actions aimed at limiting freedom of expression and stifling  dissent.

To date, the most publicized repression has been censoring web content  or surveillance of Internet users. The Russians took a different tack,  using anti piracy laws to crack down on independent non-governmental  organizations and non-violent government critics. Microsoft has a vested  interest in anti piracy enforcement -- piracy is rampant in Russia. But  targeting human rights activists and news organizations for enforcement  is clearly aimed not at protecting Microsoft's intellectual property,  but at crippling political opponents and curbing basic freedoms. And  Microsoft's representatives in Russia cooperated in those proceedings,  providing the legal pretext and evidentiary basis for raids, criminal  and civil charges and penalties that effectively closed down the  targeted organizations.

One of our human rights colleagues in Russia was a victim of this practice, and we reached out to Microsoft to try to find a solution, both to this specific case and to the wider  pattern of abusive enforcement over the past several years. Microsoft's recently announced policies to address several of these concerns.

Importantly, Microsoft will undertake an independent investigation of  its Russian anti piracy team and its role in collaborating with Russian  authorities. We encourage Microsoft to ensure that the individuals and  civil society groups targeted for selective enforcement are interviewed  as part of this review. We have also recommended that Microsoft maintain  headquarters level oversight of its Russian anti piracy efforts to  ensure that its responses to future Russian anti piracy investigations  do not facilitate repression. As our letter to Microsoft CEO Steven Ballmer points out, and as our Russian colleagues have cautioned, local  representatives will likely remain vulnerable to pressure from Russian  authorities to collaborate in politically motivated proceedings.

Our Russian human rights colleagues would welcome a working relationship  with Microsoft. As defendants in these cases, and targets of potential  abuse, they are well positioned to advise on risks and development of  new policies. Microsoft should make every effort to consult with them as  it develops new practices and procedures to respond to the concerns.  The Global Network Initiative can also play an important role in helping  Microsoft and other companies at risk to develop strategies to address  government abuse of intellectual property laws to curb dissent, and to  respond to such demands appropriately.

We welcome Microsoft's commitment to extend access to its free software problem. But as the New York Times story makes clear, without Microsoft's continuing leadership and  engagement, civil society will remain at risk of selective prosecution.  We have recommended that Microsoft join with Human Rights First to host  consultations with Russian civil society for the purpose of obtaining  their insights on the best way forward.

Two years ago, Human Rights First joined with Microsoft and other stakeholders to launch the Global Network Initiative.  We believed that companies could not "go it alone" in confronting  government demands to curb online speech. Russia is not alone in using  technology and selective prosecutions to crack down on civil society. We  now know that these threats can come from many places, and that  companies need to work in partnership with civil society to address  them. 