Asylum News 64
April 01, 2008
Book Details Struggles in U.S. Asylum System

Kenyan refugee David  Ngaruri Kenney had spent years enduring fear and persecution in his home  country. After arriving in the U.S., he was able to locate pro bono  representation through Georgetown   University's Center for  Applied Legal Studies to help him navigate the asylum system. But despite the dedicated help of two Georgetown law students and Professor Philip Schrag, Mr.  Kenney was deported back to Africa. Mr. Kenney  was nearly killed before he was able to return and live safely in the U.S.

The book, written by  Mr. Kenney and Professor Schrag, highlights the struggles refugees face when  they come to the U.S.  and how pro bono legal representation is essential in the success of many  political asylum cases. To read more about the book, click here.

To listen to an April 29 interview on WNYC's The Brian Lehrer Show with   Professor Schrag and Mr. Kenney, click here.

Supreme Court to Review Asylum Case Involving Persecutor Bar

On March 17, the Supreme Court accepted for review an asylum  case that raises the issue of whether duress is a defense to the "persecutor  bar" to asylum and withholding of removal.  The petitioner, an Eritrean  convert to Protestantism, had been jailed in Eritrea before being returned to  military service. While serving against  his will in the Eritrean army, he was made to work as a prison guard.  A U.S. immigration judge found that the  petitioner, who deserted from the Eritrean military and fled to the United States, would face torture if returned to  Eritrea.  But the immigration judge denied asylum on the grounds that the petitioner had  participated in the persecution of prisoners.  This decision was affirmed  by the Board of Immigration Appeals and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth  Circuit.  The Fifth Circuit's decision was issued as Negusie v.  Gonzales, 231 Fed. Appx. 325, No. 06-60193 (5th Cir. May 15,  2007) (per curiam), cert granted sub nom.  Negusie v. Mukasey,  No. 07-499 (U.S.  Mar. 17, 2008).  The petitioner is represented by Andrew J. Pincus at the  law firm of Mayer Brown Rowe & Maw LLP and in conjunction with the Supreme  Court Litigation Clinic at Yale   Law School.

Bellevue Physician Speaks on Persecution for Sexual Orientation

On April 14,   WBAI New York FM radio channel featured an interview with Dr. Leanh Nguyen,  Director of Clinical Training at the Bellevue/NYU Program for Survivors of  Torture. The program discussed the special kind of persecution and trauma that  refugees escaping persecution based on sexual orientation face in their home  countries..

Click here to listen  to the program.

Click here for more information on Bellevue/NYU Program for  Survivors of Torture. 