Russia’s Toolkit for Undermining Democracy
December 13, 2016
The CIA recently announced its conclusion that the Russian government intentionally interfered in the U.S. presidential election. Much of the attention has focused on illegal hacking. While such hacking is deeply concerning, it is just one piece in a larger web of Russian interference— interference that has been an ongoing cause for concern over the past several years, just not in the United States. Europe has been grappling with Russian interference most intensely since Russia invaded Ukraine and annexed Crimea. To combat this threat effectively, we must understand Russia’s goals and the tools it’s using to accomplish them. Russia seeks to disrupt unity in the European Union and the West to push pro-Russian policies, such as repeal of sanctions. It aims to destabilize democracies to portray this form of government as weak and unable to secure the safety of its citizens. It hopes to dissuade countries from joining democratic coalitions such as the European Union and NATO. It promotes authoritarianism, corruption, and nationalism over democracy, rule of law, and tolerance or pluralism. Russia posits itself as a counterweight to the idea that human rights are universal and an inherent part of democracy. It pushes the view that human rights are secondary concerns, subjective, and subject to limitation by the state. By weakening human rights protections—and the concept of human rights itself—Russia gains an ideological foothold in the West to advance its interests. To accomplish these goals, Russia has created an invisible network of corruption—spanning faux NGOs and think tanks, corrupt business or political connections, false or misleading news, and yes, hacking. Some examples: Faux NGOs and think tanks. Russia sponsors supposedly neutral organizations to advance its worldview under a screen of legitimacy. Corrupt business or political connections. Russia courts business executives and politicians, offering them significant financial opportunities in Russia in exchange for influence in their home countries. False or misleading news. Russian-sponsored media masquerade as legitimate news sources while pushing a pro-Russia agenda. These outlets blend facts with outright lies or disproven sources to distort the truth. Hacking. Russia mobilizes a virtual army to access private information and disable digital infrastructure. These strategies capitalize on and exacerbate existing fissures in Western countries, making Russian interference all the more difficult to attribute. But they have real consequences for human rights principles and democratic institutions. The United States must be vigilant against Russian interference, naming it publicly wherever it appears. Shoring up democratic institutions and restoring faith in legitimate news sources—or at least combating the use of illegitimate ones—is an essential part of this effort. Anti-corruption measures for business and non-governmental entities and a firm line on sanctions are also pivotal. The European Union has a head start on the United States in dealing with covert Russian interference—but not on addressing it. The United States should work with its partners in the European Union to identify and implement effective strategies for defending democracy and human rights from Russian undermining. 