April 2009-Asylum News
July 02, 2010
Human Rights First's   Lifeline for Iraqi Refugees Issued a Progress Report, "Promises to the   Persecuted: The Refugee Crisis in Iraq Act of 2008"

On April 28th, Human Rights First issued a new report that examines the   progress and problems with the U.S. government's efforts to help Iraqi refugees.   The report found that, despite a Congressional mandate intended to expedite   Iraqi refugee processing times, as well as committed work on the part of many   U.S. government staff and officials, only a small portion of eligible Iraqis   have been granted safe haven in the United States. The report urges the Obama   administration to examine this issue and clear remaining bureaucratic obstacles   to fulfilling America's promise to persecuted Iraqis who worked with the United   States in Iraq, as well as to their families.

Click here to read the press release

Click here to read the report


Human Rights First   Issued a New Report, "U.S. Detention of Asylum Seekers: Seeking Protection,   Finding Prison"

On April 30th, Human Rights First issued a new report, "U.S. Detention of   Asylum Seekers: Seeking Protection, Finding Prison," that calls on the   Departments of Homeland Security and Justice, and Congress, to put safeguards on   use of detention and improve conditions. The report found that since 2003, U.S.   immigration authorities have spent more than $300 million to detain over 48,000   asylum seekers in U.S. prisons and prison-like facilities. The report concludes   that the system lacks basic due process protections and is inconsistent with   America's longstanding commitment to protect those who flee from persecution.

Click here to read the full report

Click here to read a summary version of the report

Read the DHS's   response to our report

Read the press   release

Watch our short video

U.S. Citizenship and   Immigration Service (USCIS) Announces Implementation of TVPRA Sections Related   to Unaccompanied Minors Seeking Asylum

The Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008 (TVPRA 2008)   transferred initial jurisdiction over any asylum application filed by an   unaccompanied minor from the Immigration Courts to the USCIS Asylum Office for a   non-adversarial adjudication. On March 25, 2009, USCIS issued guidance to the   field on the implementation of that policy change.

See link to USCIS’s memo, "Implementation of Statutory Change Providing USCIS with   Initial Jurisdiction over Asylum Applications Filed by Unaccompanied Alien   Children"


The Department of   Homeland Security (DHS) Issued a Final Rule Altering the Process By Which It   Forwards the Form I-589 to the Department of State (DOS)

Under a new rule issued by DHS, effective April 6, 2009, USCIS will send   affirmative I-589 Applications for Asylum and Withholding of Removal to DOS only   when USCIS believes DOS may have country conditions information relevant to the   case. Prior regulations required USCIS to forward to DOS a copy of all completed   asylum applications. This new rule is designed to increase the efficiency of   DOS' review of asylum applications.

See link to   the final rule

 
Past Issues 