U.S. Meets Target for Resettling Iraqi Refugees
October 02, 2009
Rights group says additional measures needed to protect at-risk Iraqis
New York City – Human Rights First welcomes the  U.S. announcement that it has met its goal of resettling 17,000  vulnerable Iraqi refugees by September 30 and calls on the United States  to devote additional attention and resources to resolving a number of  key issues.

“The U.S. has made significant strides in its efforts to bring  vulnerable Iraqi refugees to safety. Even so, additional steps are  necessary to address remaining impediments that delay the timely  resettlement of the most vulnerable refugees, including Iraqis who have  been targeted because of their work with the United States or with U.S.  groups,” said Ruthie Epstein, Researcher and Advocate at Human Rights  First.

A year ago, the United States set a target of resettling 17,000  vulnerable Iraqi refugees during its 2009 fiscal year, and when that  year ended this week (on September 30), it had met – and exceeded - that  goal by resettling 18,833 Iraqi refugees.  These refugees – who now  live in safety in the United States – include religious and ethnic  minorities, survivors of torture, and Iraqis who faced danger inside  Iraq due to their work with the United States or U.S. groups, and their  families.

Earlier this year, Human Rights First issued Promises to the Persecuted: The Refugee Crisis in Iraq Act of 2008,  a report that identified some of the impediments that continue to  undermine the effectiveness of the resettlement effort and outlined  necessary reform measures. Specifically:

Improve the Security Clearance Process: The White  House should review, improve, and devote additional resources to the  multi-agency security clearance process, so that the applications of  refugees and others who meet all of the requirements for admission to  the United States are not delayed for lengthy periods of time – at  present, up to a year or more;
Reduce Processing Times: The State Department  should increase staffing at the Embassy in Baghdad and the International  Organization of Migration, and the Department of Homeland Security  should increase the frequency and staffing of circuit rides to the  region, so that the refugee applications of thousands of U.S.-affiliated  Iraqis and their families facing danger can be processed expeditiously;
Ensure Post-Arrival Services: Congress, the  State Department, and the Department of Health and Human Services should  continue to work to improve post-arrival services – including basic  housing, health care, and job search assistance - for Iraqi refugees and  other new refugee populations to whom the United States has offered  safety from persecution.

Looking forward, Human Rights First urges the United States to set a  specific target for its resettlement of Iraqi refugees over the next  year to ensure that the multi-step multi-agency process stays on track,  to demonstrate to the international community its ongoing commitment to  address the humanitarian crisis unleashed by the war in Iraq, and to  encourage other countries to increase their own efforts to protect the  most vulnerable Iraqis.  The UN refugee agency estimates that 53,183  Iraqi refugees in the Middle East and Turkey are in need of  resettlement.

While only a small proportion of vulnerable Iraqi refugees will be  relocated to safety through resettlement, the majority of the 3 million  displaced Iraqis will remain in the region.  “As the U.S. military  disengages from Iraq, it is more important than ever that the United  Sates government develop a comprehensive plan for addressing this  displacement crisis,” said Eleanor Acer, Director of Human Rights  First’s Refugee Protection Program. “Not only does this country have a  moral obligation to address the plight of Iraq’s displaced people, but  it is also in the strategic interests of the United States to do so.." 