On Trial:  U.S. Detention and Interrogation Practices at Guantanamo
April 07, 2006
April 7, 2006

Human Rights First, at the invitation of the Department of Defense, is an official observer at the military commissions held at the U.S. Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Priti Patel – a lawyer at Human Rights First in the U.S. Law and Security Program – is in Cuba to monitor the proceedings and is reporting back on events as they unfold. She is providing updates of what she observes.

Observing the military commission proceedings this week –  today is  the last day of hearings – has convinced me that it is not only the  accused  who are on trial here, but also the United States’ detention  and  interrogation policies over the past four years.  And I am not sure  the United States’ detention and  interrogation policies are faring all  that well.  But before I get to that, let me tell you  what happened  today.

The al Bahlul Hearing

This morning I observed Ali Hamza Ahmed Sulayman al Bahlul’s proceeding.  Al Bahlul was not in the commission room  because he had decided, at the last hearing,   to boycott the proceedings.  Al Bahlul objected  to representation by  his detailed U.S. military defense lawyer, Maj.  Thomas Fleener, and  said he would not participate in the proceedings until he  could  represent himself or have a Yemeni lawyer represent him.

At issue today was whether al Bahlul has a right to   self-representation.  On behalf of al  Bahlul, Maj. Fleener submitted a  motion arguing that al Bahlul did have that  right as long as he also  had standby military defense counsel.  There were three other briefs  filed by  non-parties in support of al Bahlul’s position, from the National Institute of Military Justice,  Cpt. William Kuebler who represents Ghassan Abdullah al Sharbi, and private attorneys and law professors from Wyoming,  where Maj Fleener is licensed to practice law.

Maj. Fleener argued that the President’s Military Commissions Order requires commission proceedings to be “full and fair” and that the  right to  self-representation is so fundamental in U.S. law that it has  to be  available if a trial is to meet the full and fair standard.  In  support of his argument, Maj Fleener relied  on a 1975 U.S. Supreme  Court case, Faretta v. California,  which found the right to self-representation is supported  by, among  other things, the Constitution and federal and state statutes.  Maj.  Fleener also argued that al Bahlul’s  right to self-representation could  be found in the Sixth  Amendment,  the due process clause of the Fifth  Amendment,  U.S.  statutory law, customary international law, and U.S. criminal  law.  In fact, as Maj. Fleener said, ''The only  place that a person  doesn't have this right [to self-representation] is the  Star Chamber”;  he asked Col. Brownback not to “let this place become Star   Chamber-esque.”

The government agreed with the defense that al Bahlul has a  right  to self-representation.  The only  disagreement between the two sides  was whether Col. Brownback had the authority  to decide the issue given  that the Appointing Authority had denied al Bahlul’s request for self-representation on June 14, 2005.  The  prosecution argued that Col. Brownback  could not overrule the  Appointing Authority, but suggested that he should send  the question  back to the Appointing Authority for reconsideration, together with  his  own finding that al Bahlul has a right to self-representation.

After he heard both sides’ arguments, Col. Brownback said he  would  issue a ruling “in due course.”   Before he ended the proceedings, Col.  Brownback reiterated his request that Maj. Fleener be provided additional military defense counsel  to assist him.

Though Maj. Fleener did not bring this quote from Faretta to Col. Brownback’s attention, I found it telling:  Justice Stewart  wrote for the majority of the  Supreme Court justices that, “To force a  lawyer on a defendant can only lead  him to believe that the law  contrives against him.”  A finding that there’s no right to   self-representation in the commission proceedings goes to the heart of  the  proceedings’ legitimacy.

The Omar Ahmed Khadr Hearing 

The second hearing I observed today was that of Omar Ahmed Khadr.  His defense counsel had made an oral motion  on Wednesday,  asking that Khadr be moved from Camp 5, where he had been transferred  on March  30, 2006, to Camp 4, where he was held prior to his  transfer.   Khadr had alleged that he had been moved  away from other  detainees because he was being punished for his participation  in the  proceedings. Today, Khadr’s defense counsel withdrew the motion after   conversations with the prosecution.  Defense  counsel said they no  longer believed that Khadr’s transfer was a form of  punishment, and  that the conditions of his confinement were not interfering  with their  access to him.  Khadr’s  counsel informed us after the hearing that  Khadr was no longer boycotting the  proceedings.

Some General Thoughts

The proceedings this week showed how inextricably tied the  military  commissions are to the larger issue of U.S.  detention and  interrogation policies at Guantanamo Bay  over the past four years.   When Presiding  Officer, Col. Ralph Kohlmann, informed Binyam Ahmed Muhammad yesterday of his right to counsel, Muhammed said, “I have been four years  without rights  and now all of the sudden I have rights? What are these  rights…where did these  rights come from?”  Muhammad has a  point.  The  ten defendants who have been  brought before the commission have, in  some cases, been held at Guantanamo for four years;  some of them spent  at least two years without access to counsel.  In this context, it is  all the more important  for the United States  to ensure that defendants  do indeed receive full and fair trials.

Despite the problems plaguing the commissions, including the  lack  of clarity on what laws, if any, apply in these proceedings, and what   rights, if any, the accused have, the lawyers—defense, prosecution and   presiding officers—are working with laudatory dedication, and,  especially in  the case of defense counsel, with considerable courage.

Before I sign off, I again would like to extend my thanks to  the  Department of Defense for inviting Human Rights First to observe these   proceedings and for their assistance with all the logistics necessary  for us to  be on the island.  And I would like to  thank the American  Constitution Society for hosting our blog.  The next set of hearings is  currently scheduled  for the week of April 24, when the commissions plan  to hear the cases of Sufiyan Barhoumi, Ghassan Abdullah al Sharbi, and Jabran Said  bin al Qahtani.

Previous Diary Entries
Read previous posts from Human Rights First observers.

Related Links 
Military Commissions: An Overview
Read about the Individual cases 