58 Firms Sign Historic International Code of Conduct for Private Security Services Providers
November 09, 2010
Code's Success Depends on Credible Implementation and Accountability
Geneva – Fifty-eight private security companies today signed  an historic International Code of Conduct for Private Security  Providers, an agreement to uphold human rights respecting principles and  to establish an inclusive oversight mechanism to verify that these  principles are implemented. Human Rights First has participated in the  Code drafting process for more than a year and said today's signing has  the potential to improve the industry's human rights impacts.

"This Code is a strong document and an important step in building an  effective scheme for improving this industry's human rights  performance," said Human Rights First's Devon Chaffee, who spoke at  today's signing ceremony in Geneva. "But its true value will depend  on how it's enforced. Companies signing the Code have committed to  establishing a mechanism for robust oversight and  governance. The Code's credibility will rest upon the ability of that  mechanism to hold signatory companies to account."

Today's ceremony was attended by companies' CEOs from around the  world including Ignacio Balderas of Triple Canopy, Gen G J Binns of  Aegis Defence Services Ltd., and Matthew R. Kaye of EOD Technology,  Inc. Also in attendance were high level officials from the various  governments that have been instrumental in the Code process, including  Swiss Secretary of State Peter Maurer, U.K. Ambassador John Duncan and  U.S. Legal Adviser to the Secretary of State Harold Koh. Ten American  companies are among the documents initial signers, including industry  leaders such as DynCorp, Triple Canopy, and Xe Services (formerly  Blackwater).

Among its provisions, the International Code of Conduct for Private  Security Providers lays out concrete requirements governing rules for  the use of force, vetting and training personnel, and incident  reporting. It also outlines a clear industry commitment to future  verification, field auditing, a complaint process, and to a time-tabled  roadmap to establish an inclusive governance and oversight mechanism.   We look forward to working with the participating governments and  companies to ensure that the oversight mechanism is effective in  identifying and addressing negative human rights impacts in the field.

Human Rights First has released a number of reports documenting  serious private security contractor abuses including excessive use of  force and cruel treatment of detainees. These are documented in State of Affairs: Three Years After Nisoor Square which outlines a number of steps the U.S. government should take to  increase contractor accountability abroad. Its work to assist in  crafting the International Code of Conduct for Private Security  Providers reflects the organization's ongoing commitment to ensuring  that private companies uphold human rights. Along those lines, Human  Rights First has played a leading role in similar multi-stakeholder  efforts to raise the human rights performances of various industries  including in apparel and footwear manufacturing, the Internet and  communications sector, and security in the extractive sector. 