Retired Military Leaders To Urge Administration Officials Memebers Of Congress Campaign Committees To Press Ahead With Closing Guantanamo, Pursue Federal Trials For Terrorism Suspects
September 14, 2010
Washington, DC – During meetings this week with Attorney General Eric  Holder, members of Congress and DC-based campaign committees, a contingent of  retired military leaders will push for the closure of the U.S. detention facility at Guantanamo Bay and ask that terrorism suspects be  brought to justice in federal civilian courts. The meetings, slated to take  place between Sept. 14-16, will come as the retired military leaders return to  the nation’s capital after months in the states educating candidates of both  parties about the national security benefits of carrying out these  policies.

“We are here to send a clear message that detention  policy and efforts to bring terrorists to justice in federal civil courts are  not issues that should be subject to political posturing,”  General Joseph Hoar,  USMC (Ret.), who served as Commander-in-Chief of U.S. Central Command. “The  politicization of these issues runs counter to America’s national security  interests. It is imperative that we close the U.S. detention facility at Guantanamo Bay as quickly as possible and bring  accused terrorists to justice in federal civilian courts, the only venue with a  proven track record of successfully handling these  cases.”

The group notes that federal civil courts have  successfully convicted more than 400 terrorists, but military commissions have  secured only four convictions. They also argue that treating accused terrorists  as warriors by trying them in military commissions does a disservice to  America’s men and women in uniform  who serve the nation honorably.

Joining General Hoar in Washington, DC will be  Lieutenant General Charles Otstott, USA (Ret.), former Deputy Chairman of the  NATO Military Committee; Major General Paul Eaton, USA (Ret.), former Commanding  General of the command charged with reestablishing Iraqi Security Forces; Rear  Admiral John Hutson, JAGC, USN (Ret.), former Navy Judge Advocate General; and  Brigadier General David R. Irvine, USA (Ret.), former intelligence officer and  Deputy Commander for the 96th Regional Readiness Command. The group’s meetings  include sit-downs with Attorney General Holder, CIA Director Panetta, Ambassador  Daniel Fried, High-Value Interrogation Groups (HIG) Director Andrew McCabe, and  a half dozen members of Congress. The group will also meet with the National  Republican Congressional Committee and the Republican Senatorial Campaign  Committee.

These retired military leaders are part of a group that  works with Human Rights First and came together in 2005, united by concern about  the report of abuse of prisoners at Abu Ghraib and elsewhere in U.S. Custody. At  that time, they urged that prisoner treatment and detention policies comply with  the Geneva Conventions and reflect U.S. laws, values and security  interests. The group was instrumental in winning passage of legislation, known  as the McCain amendment, which prohibited the use of torture techniques such as  waterboarding.

Since then, dozens of retired Generals and Admirals have  joined this nonpartisan effort. These same retired military leaders were active  in the last election cycle and met with eight of the presidential candidates to  urge action on these same issues. President Obama, Vice President Biden,  Governor Huckabee and Secretary Clinton have all publicly credited this group  with influencing their thinking on the treatment of enemy prisoners. As a direct  result of their efforts, on his second full day in office, President Barack  Obama signed Executive Orders ending torture, secret prisons, and promising to  close the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Many of this group of retired  military leaders stood with the President in the Oval Office as he signed these  orders.

This year, fueled by concerns regarding the politicized  tenor that has shaped the debate about these important national security issues,  the retired military leader groups has renewed its commitment to educate  candidates and make themselves available for candid discussions. Earlier this  summer, they held meetings with congressional candidates from Delaware, Illinois, and  Pennsylvania.  Just this past weekend, they aired a 30-second television advertisement during  Sunday news programs in Indiana. That state’s U.S. Senate race has  featured a debate over each candidate’s position on closing the Guantanamo Bay detention  facility.

“Guantanamo is a symbol  of America’s failure to adhere to the  Geneva Conventions and the country’s fundamental principles. It remains a  primary recruiting tool for terrorists. It’s time to turn the page on this  failed facility and the failed policies,” Hoar  concluded.
Bios of Participating Generals &  Admirals
General Joseph Hoar, USMC  (Ret.)

General Hoar served as Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Central Command. After the first  Gulf War, General Hoar led the effort to enforce the naval embargo in the Red  Sea and the Persian Gulf, and to enforce the no-fly zone in the south of  Iraq. He oversaw the humanitarian and  peacekeeping operations in Kenya and Somalia and also supported operations in  Rwanda, and the evacuation of  U.S. civilians from  Yemen during the 1994 civil war. He  was the Deputy for Operations for the Marine Corps during the Gulf War and  served as General Norman Schwarzkopf's Chief of Staff at Central Command.  General Hoar currently runs a consulting business in California.

Lieutenant General Charles Otstott, USA  (Ret.) General Otstott served 32 years in the Army. As an Infantryman, he  commanded at every echelon including command of the 25th Infantry Division  (Light) from 1988-1990. His service included two combat tours in Vietnam. He completed his service in  uniform as Deputy Chairman, NATO Military Committee,  1990-1992.

Major General Paul D. Eaton,  USA  (Ret.)

General Eaton recently retired from the U.S. Army after  more than 33 years service. His assignments include Infantry command from the  company to brigade levels, command of the Infantry Center at Fort Benning and Chief of Infantry. His most  recent operational assignment was Commanding General of the command charged with  reestablishing Iraqi Security Forces 2003-2004, where he built the command and  established the structure and infrastructure for the Iraqi Armed Forces. Other  operational assignments include Somalia, Bosnia and Albania. Other assignments include  the Joint Staff, Deputy Commanding General for Transformation and Stryker Unit  Development and Assistant Professor and head of the French Department at  West Point. He is a 1972 graduate of West Point. He and his wife PJ have three children, all  Soldiers.

Rear Admiral John D. Hutson, JAGC,  USN (Ret.) 

Rear Admiral John D. Hutson served in the U. S. Navy  from 1973 to 2000. He was the Navy's Judge Advocate General from 1997 to 2000.  Admiral Hutson now serves as President and Dean of the Franklin Pierce Law  Center in Concord, New  Hampshire. He also joined Human Rights First’s Board of  Directors in 2005.

Brigadier General David R. Irvine,  USA (Ret.) 

Brigadier General Irvine enlisted in the 96th Infantry  Division, United States Army Reserve, in 1962. He received a direct commission  in 1967 as a strategic intelligence officer. He maintained a faculty assignment  for 18 years with the Sixth U.S. Army Intelligence School, and taught prisoner  of war interrogation and military law for several hundred soldiers, Marines, and  airmen. He retired in 2002, and his last assignment was Deputy Commander for the  96th Regional Readiness Command. General Irvine is an attorney, and practices  law in Salt Lake City,  Utah. He served 4 terms as a  Republican legislator in the Utah House of Representatives, has served as a  congressional chief of staff, and served as a commissioner on the Utah Public  Utilities Commission. 