Asylum News 48
December 01, 2006
U.N. Review of Refugee Detention?
This month marked the international celebrations of Human Rights Day   and International Migrants Day. Here in the United States, when arriving asylum   seekers are detained in immigration jails, they are not given custody hearings   or fair and independent procedures for seeking release. Because this is   inconsistent with our country’s commitments under the International Covenant on   Civil and Political Rights, Human Rights First and other groups have urged the   U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention to visit the United States to review   the situation.

The U.N. Working Group has already made a request to the United States to   visit, and they are currently awaiting a formal invitation from the U.S.   government before they can proceed. Human Rights First has drafted a sign-on   letter to the U.S. State Department and U.S. Department of Homeland Security   urging them to extend the invitation to the U.N. Working Group as soon as   possible. Click   here for more information about signing on to the letter.

Read   HRF’s letter to the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
Read   HRF’s Background Briefing on the Arbitrary Detention of Asylum Seekers 
Administration Finally   Outlines Material Support Plan 

On December 6, Human Rights First and other members of Refugee Council USA   attended a meeting with representatives from the National Security Council, the   Department of Justice, and the Department of Homeland Security. At the meeting,   officials outlined the administration’s plan for addressing the impact of the   sweeping immigration law bar relating to “material support.”

The administration announced that it plans to create a process, by the end of   March 2007, to exercise its authority to “waive” application of the bar in   asylum cases and individual refugee resettlement cases. It was not clear how the   administration intends to address the cases of thousands of refugees and asylees   already granted protection in this country whose adjustment applications have   been put on hold because of the bar. In the resettlement process, the   administration is examining ways to move more quickly with respect to group   “waiver” designations.

Rather than correcting the sweeping immigration definitions that are at the   root of this problem, the administration has proposed a legislative change that   would allow it to “waive” the bar for additional categories of individuals,   specifically people who were members of or fought with armed groups – like the   Montagnards who fought with U.S. troops in Vietnam. Under this plan, the waiver   process is intended to be discretionary and not subject to review by the federal   courts to correct.

The proposal falls far short of providing the comprehensive and effective   solution that Human Rights First and other members of Refugee Council USA   believe is necessary.  For more information about the material support bar, click here.
Supreme Court Issues   Decision in Lopez v. Gonzales

On December 5, the U.S. Supreme Court issued its decision in Lopez v.   Gonzales and found that the federal government was wrong to apply the “drug   trafficking” aggravated felony ground to the state felony drug possession   conviction at issue in the case. While the case did not involve asylum seekers   in particular, a bad decision by the Supreme Court would have had a negative   impact on some refugees, and on the interpretation of bars to refugee protection   more generally. Human Rights First, represented pro bono by lawyers at the firm   of Winston & Strawn LLP, had submitted an amicus brief that highlighted the   fact that the government’s position in the case would have been inconsistent   with U.S. obligations under international law, allowing refugees who had been   convicted of minor possession offenses to be deported to persecution, in   violation of the Refugee Convention.

To read the Supreme Court decision in full, click here

To read HRF’s amicus brief, click here

To read detailed practice advisories for federal and state criminal defense   attorneys, and for immigration lawyers and immigrant advocates, as well as   background information on the case and the issues, go to the web site of the New York State   Defenders Association Immigrant Defense Project
Human Rights Day and   International Migrants Day

On December 18, groups around the world celebrated International Migrants   Day, designated by the U.N. General Assembly as a day to recognize the human   rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants. Click here for   more information, including the text of Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s speech   for the occasion.

On December 10, the international community observed Human Rights Day, which   commemorates the day in 1948 when the U.N. General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Click here for   more information, including the text of Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s speech   for the occasion. 