Asylum News 61
January 01, 2008
Material Support Waiver Legislation

On December 26, 2007, President Bush signed into law an appropriations bill   that included a provision expanding the discretionary authority of the   Secretaries of State and Homeland Security to exempt certain persons and groups   from the application of the immigration law's "terrorism"-related provisions.    This amendment also removes a limited list of named organizations from the   immigration law's definition of a "terrorist organization."

While the overly broad immigration law definitions that have mislabeled many   refugees and asylum seekers as supporters of "terrorist organizations" or as   having engaged in "terrorist activity" have not been rectified by the   legislation, the expanded use of waivers - if properly implemented - should help   address the protection needs of many refugees.

Human Rights First has   prepared an advisory on the new legislation for practitioners with cases   affected by the "terrorism" bars.  To read the advisory, click here.

To read the appropriations bill provision, click here.


Prolonged Detention

On January 7, 2008 the ACLU of Southern California, the ACLU Immigrants'   Rights Project and the Stanford Law School Immigrants' Rights Clinic presented   arguments in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals on two cases involving the   prolonged indefinite detention of immigrants - including asylum seekers. The   organizations filed lawsuits with the Federal Circuit Court in November 2006   after four immigrant men had been detained indefinitely without a bond hearing   to determine their eligibility for parole while awaiting the resolution of their   immigration proceedings.

For more information, click here.


Developments on Iraqi Refugee Resettlement:
Priority Resettlement for Family Members

In December 2007, the State Department's Bureau of Population, Refugees, and   Migration issued information confirming that Iraqi beneficiaries of approved   family-based immigrant visa petitions (known as I-130 petitions) had been   designated for direct access to the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP).    The new P-2 priority category will allow these Iraqi beneficiaries to apply   directly for US resettlement, rather than requiring the extra step of a referral   from UNHCR.

For more information click here.

Resettlement Interviews Resume in Syria

After several months of suspended interviews last year, DHS refugee officers   have been extended visas to allow them to conduct refugee resettlement   interviews in Syria again.  The announcement of the visas followed a trip to   Damascus by senior U.S. Coordinator for Iraqi Refugees James Foley in October.    DHS officers began conducting some interviews in late 2007 in Damascus, and were   expected to resume interviews again in mid to late January. 