Human Rights First Researches Asylum System at U.S. – Mexican Border
April 11, 2014
Though the debate around immigration reform continues in Washington, D.C., last week Human Rights First left the capital and headed for the hot, humid, and windy Rio Grande Valley to see firsthand some of the challenges along the Mexican border. Our trip, the first in a series that will includes Texas, Arizona, and California, was to learn more about the increase in requests for protection along the southern border and strategies for safeguarding the integrity of the system. In the past few years there has been an uptick in protection requests along the border, leading to questions about whether migrants may be abusing the asylum system to enter the country only to disappear into our communities. During our visit we spoke with government officials, service providers, and those who are seeking asylum in the U.S., to better inform Human Rights First’s recommendations for ensuring that asylum seekers have access to protection maintaining the integrity of our immigration system.   Pedestrians crossing at the Hidalgo Port of Entry. In our many meetings, we heard about the challenges facing asylum seekers who are detained along the border in Texas. We spoke to individuals who reported that they had fled from violence and attacks in Central America and Mexico, as well as African asylum seekers who had been detained for months in prison-like conditions along the border. These reports were consistent with the information we have learned from our own pro bono work with asylum seekers who came to this country through the southern border.  Legal service providers along the border are overstretched and doing their best to address at least some of the needs, but many individuals go unrepresented. Many individuals, are detained in facilities hours away from potential legal counsel, and without a funded Legal Orientation Program in place.  Approaching the McAllen Hidalgo International Bridge connecting Hidalgo, Texas with Reynosa, in Mexico. During our visits with immigration officials in south Texas, we learned a lot about the challenges in responding to the increase in protection requests and the overall increase in apprehensions in the area. These include lack of adequate space to conduct initial border interviews, lack of sufficient and appropriate space for holding individuals during initial border processing interviews, overwhelming case loads, and the need for cooperation and collaboration between multiple U.S. agencies. Near Harlingen, we met with the extraordinary sisters of the La Posada Providencia shelter, who provide care, stability, and safety to asylum seekers who otherwise might be held in immigration  detention for months.  They also provide shelter to refugees who have been detained for months in prison-like detention facilities but are released after being granted asylum. The sisters and their volunteers help these refugees to start a new life in the United States.  The McAllen Border Patrol station, where those apprehended between ports of entry and in the interior are processed. Our visits and interviews were informative, and they painted a challenging situation with few simple answers. Solutions will require a meaningful commitment of resources, interagency collaborations, and very real political will. And while our research is still ongoing, our preliminary recommendations include: This is just the beginning. We’ll continue to speak to more immigration officials, non-profit service providers, and individuals seeking protection. The solutions may not be easy, but they should be rights-respecting, fair, and pragmatic policies that facilitate U.S. compliance with international refugee and human rights commitments and strengthen the integrity of the U.S. asylum and immigration systems. As immigration reform proposals continue to be debated and discussed in Washington D.C., we should not forget America’s long history of protecting the persecuted. 