Lebanon Imposes Restrictions on Syrian Refugees
June 10, 2014
For a long time, Lebanon commendably refrained from the kind of border “management” that Turkey, Jordan, and Iraq have each engaged in with regard to admitting and hosting Syrian refugees.  Now, with over one million Syrians in the country—accounting for one fourth of Lebanon’s population—the government has announced plans to restrict entry and send some refugees back to Syria. The newly announced plans include three major restrictions. 1) Syrians coming from “safe” parts of Syria will be prevented from crossing into Lebanon. 2) Syrians who had fled to Lebanon and then returned to Syria will not be allowed back into Lebanon. 3) Syrians coming from parts of Syria far away from the Lebanese border will also be denied entry. Each of these restrictions threatens to deny international protection to Syrian refugees, and the U.N. Refugee Agency has criticized the new policy. Equally dangerous, though, is Lebanon’s repeated proposal to establish safe zones on the Syrian side of the border. Syria is a war zone. It is not safe. As ill-equipped as the Government of Lebanon feels it is to host Syrian refugees (“They are living under inhuman conditions and therefore we began thinking that there are safe areas inside Syria,” said Social Affairs Minister Rashid Derbas), the fact is that Syrian refugees have fled a country where they are not safe and have sought the protection of Lebanon. Syria is not safe, and, what’s more, safe zones are not safe. Historically, the international community has done a poor job of protecting established safe zones for civilians fleeing armed conflict, most notably in its failure to prevent the Srebrenica massacre in which 8,000 Bosnians in a U.N. protected safe area were slaughtered in July 1995. Speaking at the Srebrenica Summer University to a group of students, scholars, survivors, and family members on the anniversary of the massacre, Assistant Secretary Anne Richard said, Most of all, I call upon you to make the world understand not just the tragedy of what happened here in Srebrenica, but equally importantly, the tragedy of what did not happen here. As U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon said during his visit to the Memorial last year, “The international community failed to provide the necessary protection to many people who were killed at the time when they needed our support.” The Srebrenica genocide left many hard, painful lessons. One of those lessons is surely to exercise caution when it comes to establishing “safe zones” within the national borders of a country engaged in a brutal civil war. The international community must do more than simply condemn Lebanon’s recent announcement and withhold its support from plans for safe zones. It must shoulder more of the burden that has brought Lebanon to its knees. In response to these new restrictions, Secretary of State John Kerry announced that the U.S. will be increasing humanitarian assistance in Syrian and in neighboring countries. While humanitarian aid is important, it is equally important that the U.S. make a commitment to resettle significant numbers of Syrian refugees. Read more. 