Asylum News–February 2010
July 02, 2010
Asylum News–February 2010 Register now for "Renewing U.S. Commitment  to Refugee Protection: the 30th Anniversary of the Refugee Act of 1980" On March 16, 2010 in Washington D.C., Human  Rights First and Georgetown   University Law   School are hosting a  symposium in celebration of the 30th Anniversary of the Refugee Act of 1980 and  its continuing importance for refu gees around the world.  Please join U.N. High Commissioner for  Refugees, António Guterres; Assistant Secretary of State for Population, Refugees and Migration,  Eric Schwartz; Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren (D-CA/16th), officials from  the Departments of Justice, State, and Homeland Security, NGO representatives,  refugees, academics, asylum practitioners, and other experts in a discussion about  the goals of the Refugee Act and current U.S. refugee and asylum policies. Please   view the full agenda (PDF) and  register for the symposium.  ABA Releases Report on the Immigration Adjudication  System After conducting a comprehensive review of the U.S. immigration adjudication system, the American Bar Association (ABA) Commission  on Immigration released is long-anticipated report, "Reforming the Immigration  System: Proposals to Promote Independence, Fairness, Efficiency and  Professionalism in the Adjudication of Removal Cases." The study found that pressures on the  adjudication system have grown exponentially in recent years, as the number of  people in immigration proceedings has increased and immigration enforcement  efforts have heightened. The study recommends the creation of an independent  immigration court, either as an Article I court or as an independent  agency. It also makes a series of  recommendations related to funding and staffing and suggests legal changes necessary to improve the fairness and  efficiencies of immigration processes. Read the executive summary of the  report. Congressional Members  to Secretary Clinton: Help LGBT Refugees  Forty-four members of Congress sent a letter to Secretary  Clinton urging the U.S. State Department to implement measures to help ensure  the protection of LGBT refugees who flee violence  or persecution only to face further persecution and violence in the countries  they have sought refuge. Congressional  members expressed their concern for refugees from countries such as Iraq, Iran,  or other countries that have criminalized or are taking steps  to increase penalties for LGBT individuals, such as Uganda. Among the  recommendations in the letter are to make expediting processing for  resettlement available for LGBT refugees and, for those refugees who are under  consideration for resettlement to the United States, to improve coordination of  security clearance procedures in order to enable these procedures to be  completed in a timely manner. Read the letter and Senator Gillibrand's press release. Read a recent analysis of the plight of LGBT  refugees by Human Rights First's Jesse Bernstein in the Huffington Post. Read Human Rights First's fact sheet on Uganda's Anti-Homosexuality Bill.     Human Rights First joins Congressional briefing on  Haitian Migration and the U.S. Response after the Earthquake On February 4, 2010, in the wake of the devastating  earthquake in Haiti, Human Rights First, the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society (HIAS),  World Relief, and Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service (LIRS) briefed  Congressional staff on the steps the United States can and should take to improve U.S. migration for  Haitians, including ensuring access to asylum screenings for interdicted Haitians  with protection concerns, extending humanitarian parole to Haitians waiting in  the family visa backlog, and considering other options for Haitian migration to  the United States. Read "A System Designed to Fail Haitians," a blog post by Eleanor Acer, Director of Refugee Protection at  Human Rights First.  Read the statement from The Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society. Read more about Haitians and the U.S. Asylum System.    Previous Asylum Newsletters 