Has France Breached European Union Laws By Its Forced Repatriation of Roma ?
September 15, 2010
This  summer, as the ‘Ground Zero mosque’ and ‘burn-a-Koran’ controversies  raged on American news and talk shows, Europe had to deal with its own  xenophobia-related problems. The French government decided to dismantle  Roma camps and expel 900 Roma individuals, a choice that triggered a  series of public protests across Europe and propelled the plight of Roma  to the front pages of the European press.

The  French authorities claim that the forced repatriation of Roma is  “voluntary” because the expelled are being compensated financially at  the rate of 300 Euros per adult and 100 Euros per child. This claim is  refuted by experts from the U.N., who affirmed that not all individuals had given their “free and full consent” to be  expelled, nor had they understood their rights during the expulsion  process.

Beyond  looking at France’s obligations to the United Nations, independent  experts debate if France has violated European Union (E.U.) laws that  assert the right of each E.U. citizen to move freely across the  territories of its twenty-seven member states. The European Commission,  the executive body responsible for enforcing E.U. laws, is currently  evaluating if France’s actions are in compliance with the E.U. Charter  of Fundamental Rights, as well as Directive 2004/38/EC.  According to the rules, individuals who no longer fulfill residency  requirements can only be expelled if the decision is proportionate and  sent to them one month in advance “in writing, fully justified and open  to appeal.” Collective expulsions are prohibited—as is ethnic  profiling—and each case must be studied separately.

The  debate in France also sparked a heated exchange in Brussels during the  past couple of weeks as E.U. parliamentarians, journalists, and human  rights groups spoke out angrily against the French “crackdown on Roma.”

On September 14, E.U. Justice and Fundamental Rights Commissioner Viviane Reding said she was appalled by the expulsions, calling them “a disgrace” and  affirming that “discrimination on the basis or ethnic origin or race has  no place in Europe.” The Commision will decide in the next two weeks if  it will propse legal proceedings agains tthe French authorities. If the  European Court of Justice rules that the expulsions have breached the  E.U. law, France would have to pay a hefty fine. Other E.U. diplomats  have evoked what Brussels insiders know as the “nuclear option.” That  option is outlined under article 7 of the E.U. Treaty and reads that in  cases of a “serious and persistent breach” of human rights, an E.U.  government can be stripped of its voting rights altogether. This option,  though possible, is deemed as the most unlikely of all scenarios.

Despite  these heated remarks, political outcry over France’s decision is  somewhat hypocritical. In reality, many governments in Europe have  dismantled Roma camps or evicted residents of Roma origin, or intend to.  Each case has its specificity, although no one can deny a recurring  pattern. In many Italian cities, local administrations have pursued  policies of eviction; Germany declared its desire to expel 12,000 Roma  back to Kosovo; Sweden deported 50 Roma for begging; 700 Roma and  Travelers were sent away from Flanders in Belgium. The only difference  between these actions and the French expulsions is the amount of public  attention each has garnered.

Perhaps  that is because French President Sarkozy recently convened a security  meeting to discuss “the behavior” of certain members of the Roma  community and consistently used language that was inherently biased  against Roma. That negatively charged rhetoric was clearly intended to  mislead the public into supporting the expulsions that President Sarkozy  approved and assuming that this ethnic minority is criminal and  threatening to national security. That kind of fearmongering must stop.

Instead  of adopting populist platforms and striving on negative perceptions of a  minority, politicians must stop using damaging stereotypes and  inflammatory remarks to undermine fundamental rights. The Council of  Europe Commissioner for Human Rights Thomas Hammarberg recently warned that “distorted minds had understood the political messages as an  encouragement for action.” The European Parliament echoed this message  in a resolution it adopted on September 9. It reminded policy-makers of  their responsibilities and urged rejection of “any statements which link  minorities and immigration with criminality” that can “create  discriminatory stereotypes.”


Human Rights First’s recommendations to governments also urge public officials  not only to refrain from using rhetoric that incites violence or  promotes acts that curtail the enjoyment of rights by others, but to  also take steps to consistently condemn such speech when it occurs.

The  perpetuation of the notion of “Gypsy criminality” across many parts of  Europe— not least Central Europe—is one of the most telling examples of  the widespread anti-Roma sentiments across the continent. The concept  stems from the racist stereotyping of Roma as individuals prone to  criminality—a view that continues to permeate the media, to slip  clumsily in the public debate, or to be discussed more crudely in local  pubs. Extremist groups are quick to score populist points by nurturing  these prejudices.

Perhaps  one of the most disturbing manifestations of xenophobia has played out  in Hungary during the past couple of years. At least nine people of Roma  origin were murdered between January 2008 and July 2010 amidst a  climate where anti-Roma hatred was shoved down Hungarians’ throats by  the xenophobic party Jobbik.

This  kind of violence cannot be tolerated. If it goes on, more lives could  be lost in France or Italy or any other nation where hateful words and  policies breed misunderstanding and fear. European governments must  redouble their efforts to dispel collective myths of any ethnic group,  including Roma. Otherwise, they have nobody but themselves to blame if  the extremists in their countries prevail. 