Asylum News 70
October 01, 2008
Attorney General Remands Case of Victim of Domestic Violence to the Board of Immigration Appeals

Twelve years ago an immigration judge in San Francisco granted asylum to Rodi   Alvarado, a Guatemalan woman who survived brutal domestic violence at the hands   of her husband for over a decade. Ms. Alvarado repeatedly sought help from the   police and courts but the Guatemalan government failed to protect her. In an   effort to find safety, Ms. Alvarado fled Guatemala and sought asylum in the U.S.   After twelve years, her asylum case remains unresolved due to government   appeals, procedural complications, and the lack of regulations on gender-based   asylum. For the last seven years Ms. Alvarado’s case has been on hold in the   office of the Attorney General. However, on September 25, 2008, Attorney General   Mukasey made an unexpected decision and remanded her case for reconsideration by   the Board of Immigration Appeals where her case is now pending in Matter of   R-A-, 24 I&N Dec. 629 (A.G. 2008). The results of a decision in Matter of R-A- may have a great impact on the future of asylum claims   based on domestic violence, particularly in the absence of regulations related   to gender-based asylum claims.

See the recent decision here.
See more   on Matter of R-A- here.

Material Support: Exemptions Will be Considered Only for Those With a Final Order 

On October 23rd the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) announced the   process it would be using to grant exemptions to individuals in removal   proceedings who would otherwise be inadmissible under INA §212(a)(3)(B), the   material support and terrorism related inadmissibility grounds (TRIG). DHS will   consider a case for an exemption only after all other issues have been resolved   in the case, including on appeal, and the order of removal is administratively   final. This announcement applies to non-detained cases that have orders of   removal that became administratively final on or after September 8, 2008, and to   all detained cases, regardless of the date of the removal order.

Click here to see the USCIS announcement.

Bill introduced which addresses standards of immigration detention

On October 3, 2008, Rep. Roybal-Allard (D-34th/CA) introduced HR 7255, the   Immigration Oversight and Fairness Act of 2008. HR 7255 addresses the most   prevalent issues in the immigration detention system by expanding options for   release so that vulnerable migrant populations, including asylum seekers, are   not detained unnecessarily and by requiring the Department of Homeland Security   promulgate regulations to create legally enforceable detention standards so that   those immigrant populations who must be detained have access to basic   necessities such as adequate medical care, contact with legal counsel, and   ability to attend religious services. This bill addresses a number of Human   Rights First’s concerns related to the U.S. system of detaining asylum seekers.

Read more on immigration detention here.

The Marvin Frankel Annual Award

Each year, Human Rights First honors the memory of Judge Marvin E. Frankel, a   founding father of Human Rights First and former Chairman of our Board of   Directors with an award in his name. On October 23, 2008, Kramer Levin Naftalis   & Frankel LLP was given the award at HRF’s Annual Dinner. Attorneys at the   firm have provided top quality pro bono legal representation to asylum seekers   through the asylum representation program at Human Rights First for many years.   They have demonstrated the ability to handle a number of complex asylum cases   that have taken several years to resolve as well as cases for refugees who face   particular challenges, such as immigration detention. Given Marvin Frankel's   history at the firm, HRF is particularly pleased to honor the firm with this   award.

Click here to read more   about the Frankel Award. 