Asylum News 59
November 01, 2007
Update: Detention  - ICE Issues new Guidance on Parole of Asylum Seekers

On November 6, 2007, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement issued a new   directive relating to the parole of “arriving” asylum seekers who have passed   through the expedited removal/credible fear process. The directive recasts the   longstanding parole criteria for asylum seekers (that their identities are   established, that they have community ties/lack of flight risk and that present   no risk of harm to the community), as threshold criteria. Asylum seekers who   satisfy the threshold criteria will then need to establish that their parole is   in the “public interest,” or that they are eligible for release due to   pregnancy, medical issues, juvenile status or service as a witness. The guidance   requires local officers to document their decision and calls for a quality   assurance process, but does not provide guidance on the term “public   interest.”

Human Rights First wrote to ICE expressing its concern about the shift in the   parole policy – from one that provided that parole “should be considered” for   those who met the longstanding criteria, to a policy that indicates that parole   “may be considered” and adds a second level of inquiry.

A copy of the new directive is linked to below. Those who represent asylum   seekers should review the guidance closely, and are urged to file parole   applications if their clients satisfy the criteria. While the guidelines provide   no explanation of when parole is in the “public interest,” attorneys are urged   to make all arguments that weigh in favor of an individual asylum seeker’s   release. ICE will be tracking parole requests and denials – so it will be   important to file requests even with local ICE offices that have traditionally   denied deserving parole requests. While the guidance will unfortunately leave   local officers free to continue to detain asylum seekers who present no risk and   satisfy the other criteria, practitioners should cite to the directive as new   ICE policy that confirms that asylum seekers who meet the specified criteria may   be released on parole.

Read the New   ICE Parole Policy for Asylum Seekers
Read HRF Letter   to ICE on Concerns about Shift in US Detention Policy
Read HRF   Statement on New Detention Policy
Read Hebrew   Immigrant Aid Society (HIAS) Statement on New Detention Policy

Former Detainee Awarded Damages in Court

A federal jury in New Jersey awarded damages to a former Somali asylum   seeker, who is now a U.S. citizen, in connection with her 11-month detention at   the infamous detention center run by the former Esmor Corp. in Elizabeth, New   Jersey. The jury concluded that Esmor (now part of the Geo Group Inc.) and some   of its former executives should pay the woman $100,000 for negligent hiring and   training and $1 for violating the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The former   Esmor facility was closed after a riot in 1995. A subsequent INS investigation   into the facility identified a range of serious problems at the facility.   Professor Penny Venetis of Rutgers University filed the lawsuit.

To read the Newark Star-Ledger article (11/14/2007), click here.


Former Detainee Awarded Damages in Court

The fiscal year for U.S. refugee resettlement ended on September 30, 2007.  In   early October, the U.S. announced that it had resettled 1608 Iraqi refugees over   the prior twelve months. The number is far below the 7000 goal announced by the   U.S. earlier in the year.  The Departments of Homeland Security and State   announced a modest resettlement goal of 12,000 Iraqi refugees for the next 12   months.  Over 4 million Iraqis have fled their homes.

Syria also announced that it would require Iraqis to have visas to enter   their country.  The vast majority of Iraqi refugees no longer have any way to   flee from Iraq.  Read: Syria Shuts Main Exit   From War for Iraqis, The New York Times - 10/21/2007

Human Rights First is working to secure a comprehensive response to the Iraqi   refugee crisis. For more information about the issue and HRF's Lifeline for   Iraqi Refugees Project, click here.


EOIR Announces Plan to Expand Pro Bono Program
On November 15, 2007, the Executive Office of Immigration Review (EOIR)   announced plans to implement recommendations by its pro bono committee following   a 2006 directive from former Attorney General Alberto Gonzales. The announcement   said that the committee, consisting of immigration judges, court administrators,   and legal staff, had reached out to various agencies and the non-profit   community to develop a number of suggestions aimed at expanding pro bono efforts   in the immigration court. EOIR stated in the announcement that it intends to:   provide clear guidance to immigration judges and court staff on promoting and   facilitating pro bono representation; expand the legal orientation program and   the BIA pro bono project; designate local pro bono liaison judges to facilitate   pro bono representation; offer pro bono representatives priority scheduling as   appropriate; and encouraging pre-trial conferences in pro bono cases.

To read the EOIR announcement, click here.

To read the May 2006 recommendations sent to EOIR by Human Rights First and   other organizations, click here.


Universal Children’s Day

On November 20th, 2007, the International Detention Coalition and some of its   U.S. members marked Universal Children’s Day by urging governments and policy   makers to end the detention of immigrant children. A coalition of groups issued   a statement outlining steps for the U.S. government to take to protect the   rights of migrant children.

To learn more, click here. 