How American ideals won in Qur'an burning controversy
October 04, 2010
by Tad Stahnke, Director of Policy and Programs, Human Rights First
Crossposted at Washington Post's On Faith series






Pakistani Muslims burn a US flag during a
protest in Lahore on September 19, 2010,
against earlier threats by US pastor Terry Jones to
burn copies of the Muslim holy book, the Koran.



Recently, anti-Muslim incidents in the United States sparked deadly protests in Afghanistan, marches in India and Indonesia, and the burning of Israeli and American flags in Iran and Pakistan. General Petraeus spoke out to remind Americans that actions here in the United States directly  impact our ability to achieve our objectives overseas. His message was  clear: the world is watching what we do. Fortunately, with the spotlight  upon us, we have some positive lessons to share with the rest of the  world about what an effective response to bigotry and hate speech looks  like. And these lessons are particularly relevant as the UN General  Assembly takes up again efforts to establish a global code against  blasphemy.

For over a decade, Pakistan, Egypt and some other predominantly Muslim countries have successfully promoted resolutions at the United Nations which argue that it is necessary to criminalize anti-religious hate  speech (or "defamation") in order to protect freedom of religion. It  would be tempting to view recent anti-Muslim incidents as evidence of  why such legislation is needed.


In reality, criminalizing speech damages rather than advances efforts to  combat religious intolerance. Such laws are all too often abused to  stifle debate and dissent and can have devastating consequences for  those holding religious views that differ from the majority religion.  Journalists, bloggers, teachers, students, poets, religious converts and  other individuals have been targeted, charged and sentenced to prison  or received other punishments simply for exercising their right to  freedom of expression.
The response to the aborted Koran burning  event demonstrates how non-legal measures can effectively and  successfully confront and counteract hatred and intolerance.
For starters, America's leaders got this one right. They affirmed their  commitment to tolerance and diversity and ultimately drowned out the  hateful rhetoric of an isolated extremist. Political, religious, and  other leaders, including President Obama, Secretary of State Hillary  Clinton, General David Petraeus, New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg,  United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon, Florida Governor Charlie  Crist, and many others presented a clear message and a unified front  against the Koran burning.

These high profile messages were joined by the voices of ordinary  citizens and local political and religious leaders who successfully  worked together to affirm religious solidarity. For example, in  Gainesville, Florida more than 20 religious organizations united in  hosting a series of interfaith events incorporating Muslim, Jewish, and  Christian scriptures into worship services focused on peace and  understanding. Members of the Gainesville community were also encouraged  to attend a candlelight vigil and Iftar celebrations.

Their efforts ultimately led the Mayor of Gainesville to declare  September 11th, the day of the planned Koran burning, as "Interfaith  Solidarity Day" in the community. He also issued a statement condemning  the "offensive behavior that has been directed at Muslim neighbors and  those of the Islamic faith worldwide." Ultimately, they won. The planned  "Burn a Koran Day" was cancelled.

Inspired by the success of efforts targeting the proposed Koran burning  in Florida, communities and groups throughout the United States  confronting similar anti-Muslim incidents have also united in opposition  to intolerance.

Restricting speech is not the answer to fighting bigotry and hatred.  What we need more of is condemnation of acts of hatred, as well as  effective policies of inclusion, equality and protection of fundamental  rights and freedoms.

Instead of creating internationally binding obligations that aim to criminalize the "defamation of religions," politicians should confront hate speech and efforts to defame religions  with the mightiest weapon in their arsenal--their voices. 