Asylum News 27
April 28, 2004
High-Level Refugee Protection Official Needed in Department of Homeland Security
Cameroonian Asylum Seeker Detained
Ed.'s Note: “Newsletter  27 narrated the difficulties faced by a Cameroonian asylum seeker who  was detained in the United States upon arrival and was denied parole  despite the fact that he met all criteria for parole eligibility.  He  has since been released from detention.” 
Background on Treatment of Asylum Seekers by DHS

The immigration functions of the former INS (Immigration and Naturalization          Service) were transferred to the Department of Homeland Security in March          2003. At the time that the transfer occurred, Human Rights First and other          organizations were concerned that the structure of the Department (which          separates enforcement functions in separate bureaus from those with experience          in refugee protection) would leave asylum seekers in a very vulnerable          position. Despite much urging, the Department has still not made changes          that would improve the treatment of refugees who are under the authority          of the DHS enforcement bureaus (including CBP and ICE). For more information,          see our webpage on the DHS.

Earlier this year, Human Rights First issued a report on the problems          faced by asylum seekers in DHS detention. That report, called In          Liberty's Shadow: US Detention of Asylum Seekers in the Era of Homeland          Security, details the lack of basic due process safeguards          in the asylum detention system. It also addresses the changes in the treatment          of detained asylum seekers since 9/11.

The report calls on the Department of Homeland Security to:

Create a new high-level refugee protection position in the Office of Secretary Tom Ridge.
Give asylum seekers the chance to have their detention reviewed by an immigration judge, like other immigration detainees.
Put the official parole criteria for asylum seekers into formal regulations.

Read the full report
Please forward this newsletter to friends and colleagues.
If you are not subscribed, and would like to continue receiving Asylum Protection News, sign up here 