2007 Human Rights Award Dinner
April 27, 2010
Monday,   October 15: Pier Sixty, Chelsea Piers, New York City

Dinner   Host: Meredith Vieira

2007 Award   Honoree: Fariba Davoodi Mohajer

Distinguished   Guests:          General Joseph P. Hoar, USMC (ret.), Major General Fred E. Haynes, USMC (ret.), and other senior retired military leaders.

Special   Guest and Presenters: Sam Waterston, Sigourney Weaver

Speaking Out   for Iranian Women






2007 Human Rights First Award Honoree 



Fariba Davoodi Mohajer believes that her rights as a woman, mother, human rights activist, and  Iranian citizen   are indivisible. She has dedicated her life to  challenging laws that   discriminate against Iranian women, including  the lack of legal recourse for   victims of violence against women. As a  founder of the One Million Signatures   Campaign for women’s rights,  Fariba has been a leading voice in this struggle.   As a result of her  activism, she has been detained and beaten, and her family   has been  threatened. Despite this persecution, she continues to devote herself    to the cause of human rights in Iran.


Speaking Out   for the Rule of Law






Several of the leaders, April 2007 



In the aftermath of Abu Ghraib,   Human Rights First began to work  with more than forty retired generals and   admirals who were deeply  concerned about U.S.   policies that sanction torture and dishonor the  values that American   servicemembers fight to protect. These retired  officers are working with us to   bring detainee treatment back into  line with the Geneva Conventions and ensure   that torture is never  again a part of U.S. policy. We will recognize the   leadership of these  extraordinary men and women whose commitment to human rights   is  grounded in the principles on which this country was   founded.


Speaking Out for Iraqi Refugees
More than 2 million Iraqi refugees have fled to other countries  from persecution and violence in Iraq. Another 2 million are displaced  within Iraq. Some have fled religious or ethnic persecution. Others have  been targeted because of their work for the U.S. government or the  media. Iraqis who have served as translators for U.S. forces, for  example, have been attacked and threatened.

Human Rights First’s Lifeline for Iraqi Refugees project is working to secure a comprehensive response to the Iraqi  refugee crisis. The United States has a tradition of giving refuge to  the persecuted and assistance to the victims of war. Yet we have failed  to open our doors to Iraqi refugees. We ask the United States to bring  some of the most vulnerable refugees to safety through a major  resettlement initiative and to lead the international community in  providing aid for refugees and those displaced within Iraq.

Human Rights First is speaking out for Iraqi refugees.  The  stability of the region, the moral credibility of the United States and  the protection of human rights are all at risk.


Speaking Out for Excellence in Television
Human  Rights First created this award to honor a TV program that  self-consciously uses the medium to raise awareness about a human rights  problem. We are giving the award to a TV show that depicts torture and  interrogation in a nuanced, realistic fashion. Too often on TV torture  is presented as effective and even patriotic. On programs like 24 and  Sleeper Cell, torture is routinely employed by heroes and the problems  associated with this practice are rarely explored. A handful of shows  have resisted this formulaic depiction. They offer their viewers – and  notably, young people considering a career in the armed services - a  more complete view of what can happen in the interrogation booth at a  time when these issues are being hotly debated in the United States and  overseas. In giving this award, we recognize the awesome power of TV to  not only entertain, but also to educate and inspire. MORE»





2007 Human Rights Award Dinner Committee



Dinner Chairs
Andi and Tom A. Bernstein

Diane S. and Kenneth R. Feinberg

Gail Furman

Deborah Miller and William D. Zabel



Dinner Committee
Dr. Rosalind and Mr. Adam   Abram

Elsie V. and M. Bernard   Aidinoff

Robert and Helen   Bernstein

William S.   Bernstein

David   Boies

John K.   Castle

James   Chanos

Kenneth I.   Chenault

Lynda M.   Clarizio

Deborah and Craig   Cogut

Jennifer L.   Colyer

Brigadier General Jim Cullen   (ret.)

Daniel   Doctoroff

Donald Francis Donovan and   Jennifer   Lake

Matthew and Ginger   Dontzin

Peter   Edelman

Edward P. Evans

Leslie Gimbel and Marc   Kusnetz

Myrna and Steve   Greenberg

Peter and Helen   Haje

Virginia and Robert   Joffe

Helene and Mark   Kaplan

Ned and Marcia   Kaplin

Kerry   Kennedy

The Mark and Anla Cheng
Kingdon Foundation

Orin S.   Kramer

Dr. Mathilde   Krim

Jo Backer Laird and Michael   Danoff

Robert Todd   Lang

Stephen S.   Lash

Kit and Geraldine   Laybourne

Ted and Lynn   Leonsis

Noel and Harriette   Levine

Leon Levy   Foundation

Ogden   Lewis

Jesse   Margolin

Robert B.   Menschel

George A. Miller and Janet   McKinley

Robert and Adriana   Mnuchin

Charlotte Moss and Barry   Friedberg

Beth and Joshua   Nash

Robert M.   Pennoyer

Lizanne and Barry   Rosenstein

Nathaniel de   Rothschild

Valerie and Michael Rozen

Andrew   Sabin

Steven H.   Schulman

Rena Shulsky and Dr. Sami   David

Richard   Shutran

John S.   Siffert

Riva and Alan B.   Slifka

Harold Snyder and Tamar
Hirschl Snyder

Mary Ann, Gideon, Noah, Dorothy
and Zoey Stein

Judy and Michael   Steinhardt

Rose   Styron

Jay and Kelly   Sugarman

Jeffrey S.   Trachtman

George and Trish   Vradenburg

Lynn   Witkowski

James W.   Ziglar




Previous Human Rights Award Honorees 