So Much for Patriotism: Critics of Ghailani Trial Have Little Faith in U.S. Law
October 08, 2010
Crossposted from Huffington Post

On Wednesday, to the surprise of some spectators in the courtroom, a U.S. federal judge did the right thing: he followed the law.

Judge Lewis Kaplan had a clear choice before him: he could exclude the testimony of a government witness discovered via abusive CIA interrogation of Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani,  or he could allow the government to introduce that testimony, in  blatant violation of U.S. law. Ghailani, transferred from Guantanamo Bay  to New York last year, is now on trial for allegedly assisting in the  1998 bombings of two U.S. embassies in East Africa.

In a U.S. federal court, testimony derived from a  coercive interrogation is not admissible. A similar rule applies in the  military commissions at Guantanamo Bay. Although judges there have more  leeway, most military judges are equally principled and take the ban  seriously. Torture-derived evidence is inadmissible for two reasons: to  prevent U.S. authorities from engaging in torture, and because such  evidence is inherently unreliable. International treaties similarly ban  its use.

The government knew, of course, that this would be a problem, and it  surely has plenty of other evidence against Ghailani or it wouldn't have  transferred him to civilian court in the first place. After Judge  Kaplan's ruling, Attorney General Eric Holder expressed his continued confidence in the case. Notably, four of his alleged co-conspirators in the  bombings were tried and sentenced to life in prison back in 2001 -  without the use of this particular government witness. Evidence  introduced in that trial pointed to Ghailani as well.

Still, since Wednesday, commentators such as Liz Cheney and Jack Goldsmith have seized on Judge Kaplan's ruling to lament not the fact that  Ghailani was thrown in a CIA black site for two years and likely  tortured (the government refuses to address Ghailani's treatment in this  trial but concedes he was "coerced"), but the fact that the judge has  excluded the evidence that his interrogators squeezed out of him - or to  claim the administration should never have given Ghailani a trial at  all.

"If the American people needed any further proof that this  Administration's policy of treating terrorism like a law enforcement  matter is irresponsible and reckless, they received it today," announced  Cheney after the ruling. Goldsmith, the Harvard Professor and former  head of the Office of Legal Counsel Under President Bush, now writing on  the new Lawfare blog, wonders "why the government is bothering to try Ghailani." Why not simply imprison him indefinitely?

Coming from Goldsmith, this is particularly disappointing. When he was at OLC, he had the courage to criticize his colleagues John Yoo and Jay Bybee for their twisted legal analysis  that allowed them to institutionalize torture as U.S. policy. Now,  rather than recalling that error as the source of the problem in  Ghailani's trial today, he's criticizing the Obama administration for  applying the rule of law at all.

Technically, Goldsmith may be right: the administration could just  declare Ghailani an al Qaeda member and ongoing threat and hold him in  military detention forever. That's the unfortunate consequence of the  "war against al Qaeda, the Taliban and associated forces," which has no  logical end. But as a matter of principle and policy, imprisoning people  indefinitely without trial would be a disgrace, along the lines of what  Goldsmith's colleagues at OLC sanctioned.

If there's anything the United States stands for -- or used to stand for  -- it's that we don't throw people in prison without proof they've done  something wrong.

Principle aside, it's just bad strategy. As General Petraeus has acknowledged, winning the war against al Qaeda and the Taliban is  as much about winning over the local populations where they live as it  is about U.S. military prowess. Throwing Muslims in prison for decades  without charge or trial is hardly a good strategy. If, as national  security experts tell us, al Qaeda's strategy is to present the U.S. war  against terror as a war against Islam, indefinite detention of  suspected Islamic insurgents without trial hands al Qaeda its most effective propaganda campaign on a silver platter.

Cheney and Goldsmith may be right that excluding a witness derived by  torture will make the government's case against Ghailani more difficult.  But in the end, a fair trial for a suspected terrorist in a respected  federal court will do far more to defeat al Qaeda and its associates --  and to bolster the image of the United States in the world -- than will  foregoing justice altogether 