Rights Groups Urge Secretary Clinton to Highlight Plight of Roma in France
September 22, 2010
Say U.S. voice is needed as Europe's Roma are under pressure
Washington, DC – Human Rights First today urged U.S.  Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to comment publicly on the expulsions  of Roma from France and the discourse of intolerance used by some  French politicians. In a letter also signed by Amnesty International  USA, Council for Global Equality, European Roma Rights Center, Freedom  House, Human Rights Watch, Open Society Institute, and the Public  Interest Law Institute, the groups noted Secretary Clinton's long-term  commitment to promoting the rights of Roma and urged the U.S. State  Department to specifically address the ongoing situation in France.

Across Europe, Roma are currently facing an array of discriminatory and segregatory policies.  Increasingly, Roma individuals and communities are victimized by  private acts of bias-motivated violence, or hate crime, that further  threatens the security of this vulnerable population. On numerous  occasions, the United States has pronounced its motivation to combat  discrimination, segregation, and violence against Roma.

"Your support would not only draw attention to this particular  violation of human rights, but also signal to other countries where Roma  are facing significant challenges that the U.S. takes seriously  discrimination and collective action against ethnic minorities," the  groups' letter to Secretary Clinton notes.

Since July 2010, the French government has dismantled two hundred  camps populated by Roma and Traveler groups. It has also expelled  approximately 1,230 Roma individuals from France back to their countries  of origin, mainly Romania and Bulgaria, though a variety of means such  as mandatory deportation orders and so-called "voluntary" repatriations.  Rights groups maintain that such singling out of a particular ethnic  group for law enforcement action is impermissible, and the French  expulsions appear to violate numerous due process guarantees provided  for by European Union (E.U.) law.

E.U. laws assert the right of each E.U. citizen to move freely across  the territories of its 27 member states. The European Commission, the  executive body responsible for enforcing E.U. laws, is currently  evaluating if France's actions are in compliance with the E.U. Charter  of Fundamental Rights, as well as Directive 2004/38/EC.  According to the rules, individuals who no longer fulfill residency  requirements can only be expelled if the decision is proportionate and  sent to them one month in advance "in writing, fully justified and open  to appeal." Collective expulsions are prohibited—as is ethnic  profiling—and each case must be studied separately.

"Since you have championed human rights and Roma rights in  particular, your response to these expulsions is critical. We urge you  to speak today to show political condemnation of France's handling of  the Roma evictions and expulsions, as well as the negative stereotyping  of Roma by French politicians. The alternative—silence—may only  undermine the security and safety of Roma throughout Europe," the  groups' letter concludes. 