Meet the Olympic Refugee Team: Part 1
June 24, 2016
By Elise Adams Ten athletes from South Sudan, Ethiopia, Syria, and the Democratic Republic of Congo will go to Rio this summer to compete as the first ever Olympic Refugee Team. All of the athletes fled violence and persecution in their home countries and became refugees in places such as Kenya, Brazil, Germany and Belgium. The athletes, six men and four women, will march under the Olympic flag together this August in Rio de Janeiro. Here are some of their stories. Rami Anis
Country of Origin: Syria  Rami Anis has been swimming since the age of 14, when his uncle who swam competitively in Syria inspired him to try the sport. When his hometown of Aleppo became too dangerous due to the war, Anis was sent to live with his brother in Istanbul, where he continued to swim at a sports club. Anis was unable to swim competitively there because he was not Turkish. Anis rode an inflatable boat to Greece and eventually made it to Belgium, where he could train and compete professionally. Anis will competing in the 100 meter butterfly this summer in Rio.  Yusra Mardini
Country of Origin: Syria   Yusra Mardini and her sister Sarah were forced to flee the violence Syria last year. They boarded an inflatable boat to cross the Mediterranean, but when the boat’s engine died, they had to swim alongside it and push it to the shore of the Greek island Lesbos. Mardini made it to Berlin, Germany where she is training to swim the 200-meter freestyle as a part of the Olympic refugee team this summer. Mardini represented Syria in the 2012 FINA World Swimming Championships and hopes to win a medal this summer in Rio.  Yiech Pur Biel
Country of Origin: South Sudan  Yiech Biel fled the civil war in his hometown of Nasir, South Sudan in 2005 for the Kakuma Refugee Camp in northern Kenya. There Biel began to play football with other refugees during the day. Playing football Biel realized his ability to run and sprint faster than his teammates. Biel found a sense of belonging through running and playing various sports at the camp, where he lived for 10 years. He was selected to join the Tegla Looroupe Foundation for athletics last year when he ran competitively for the first time at the try out. Biel will be running the 800 meter at the Olympic Games this summer. Learn more about the Olympic Refugee Team from the United Nations refugee agency and the IOC.  Photos courtesy of the International Olymic Committee. 