TRANSCRIPT: MEDIA BRIEFING ON ADMINISTRATION'S DECISION TO TRY GUANTANAMO DETAINEES IN FEDERAL COURTS
November 16, 2009
Transcript by
Federal News Service
Washington, D.C.
MODERATOR:
ELISA MASSIMINO, 
PRESIDENT AND CEO, 
HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST
SPEAKERS:
REAR ADM. (RET.) JOHN D. HUTSON,
FORMER JUDGE ADVOCATE GENERAL,
U.S. NAVY
BRIG. GEN JAMES CULLEN,
UNITED STATES ARMY RESERVE FORMER JUDGE ADVOCATE GENERAL'S CORPS, USA
LT. COL. DARREL VANDEVELD,
JUDGE ADVOCATE GENERAL, USA
MINDY KLEINBERG AND PATTY CASAZZA
SEPTEMBER 11TH ADVOCATES

(Music.)

OPERATOR: Please stand by, your conference is about to begin. Good   day, ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to today's conference call. At   this time, all participants are in a listen-only mode. I would now like   to turn the program over to Elisa Massimino, president and CEO of Human   Rights first. Please go ahead.

ELISA MASSIMINO: Thank you, this is Elisa Massimino. Welcome, thank   you for joining us. As I think you all know, today the Obama   administration announced that it will bring the 9/11 defendant to   justice in federal court. It was eight years ago today that   then-president George Bush signed a military order authorizing military   tribunals for trying terrorism suspects. The record of the military   commission in these last eight years has been poor  three convictions,   endless legal challenges and skepticism by the international communities   that the trials would be fair.

In contrast, there have been over 195 convictions of terrorists in   federal courts in the United States, according to our reports, Human   Rights First, in pursuit of justice. Opponents to the president's plan   to close Guantanamo are ignoring that dismal record. We've seen the   pushback already around the country and from members of Congress today.   We'd like to discuss these important developments and these potentially   historic trials, and to do that today, we have a number of people   joining us to talk about and provide perspective about this announcement   and a reality check to some of what we're hearing.

With me today are Adm. John Hutson, the dean of Franklin Pierce Law   Center, Brig. Gen. James Cullen, Mindy Kleinberg and Patty Casazza  both   are 9/11 widows who are also members of the group September 11th   Advocates. They are two of the 12 who were on the Family Steering   Committee that fought for the creation of the 9/11 Commission. So I'd   like to go right ahead and turn it over to Gen. Cullen to make a few   remarks. We'll then turn to Mindy Kleinberg and Patty Casazza and then   to Adm. Hutson, and then we'll open it up to questions. General?

GEN. JAMES CULLEN: Well, good morning, I should say good afternoon.   This is Jim Cullen, a native New Yorker. I'm a retired JAG officer,   retired as JAG brigadier general, and with today's announcement that   they're going to try five of the high-value suspects here in New York, I   think we're  really do think we are following the correct path. We   should, in trying these five individuals in particular, bring them   before a forum about which there is going to be no issue about the   fairness of the trial or the procedures or the transparency if in fact   these guys are convicted.

Now, I lost a good friend at the World Trade Center, and I lost a   good friend in Baghdad, but I think that the symbolism of bringing these   guys to trial in New York is as equally important as assuring the world   that when they are tried, they are going to get a full and fair trial.   Bringing them to New York, which was the scene of the crime and the   terrible incidents of September 11th, is particularly appropriate. When   we convened the Nuremberg Trials, we deliberately chose Nuremberg as the   site where we were going to convict those people who had formulated,   and the symbol of the formulation had occurred in the city where so much   of the horrendous work of the Nazis carried out was first imagined, was   first highlighted. And I think we are going to do the same when we   bring these people to New York, conduct the trial here.

The federal courts are more than able  and Elisa just gave you the   record, 195 convictions  they are more than able to give these guys a   trial with the rigors both for the defense and for the prosecution that   are appropriate and that are deserved. There is ample protection in   place to protect classified information. There was a special act passed   to ensure that classified information would be safeguarded.

This is in addition to the rules carved out by very experienced   justices over the years who've dealt with so many of these cases. The   prisons here in New York have housed other terrorists during their   trials and they're more than equal to the task. The American   Correctional Association came out with an unqualified statement that   they are certainly up to the task of housing these people while they're   awaiting trial and if they are convicted, they're going to be held in   facilities that are really more secure than they are down in Guantanamo.

So I think it is a very positive development that the trials will   take place here in New York and that we that the administration has   chosen to conduct these trials in federal court in New York City. Thank   you.

MS. MASSIMINO: Thank you, Jim. Mindy, would you like to go next?

MINDY KLEINBERG: Well, I just want to say that I was extremely   pleased by the announcement that they will be moving these trials to the   federal court system. I have always felt that the credibility of any   verdict born out of the broken military commissions system, a system   that was secretive in nature. It lacked due process. It used evidence   tainted by questionable interrogation methods would lack legitimacy. And   at the end of the day, the only outcome worth pursuing is the truth and   the only way to get there is by fair trials that uphold the   constitution.

MS. MASSIMINO: Thank you. Thank you very much. That's very powerful. Patty Casazza, do you want to add to that?

PATTY CASAZZA: Yeah. Well, I certainly believe that we're finally on   the path of justice being served and it is one piece to a path of   justice and I believe that bringing these people to New York City   finally avails the victims of 9/11 and their families to see the   prosecution of these people as a  to this point, families have been able   to, by lottery system, go to Cuba to see pieces of certain trials.

That's not really fair to families who wish to see justice being   served to their loved ones. And this finally will avail them of that   justice, bring them here. And I'm fully confident in our system of   justice to guard  people and place, the city around the court systems as   well as the people on trial. You know, we've spent billions on homeland   security.

You know, if we don't have it together by now, when will we? I  you   know, I firmly believe that you know, as I said, it's one piece of the   system that has been tried and true for years. We watched over the last   eight, 9 years trials in Europe which have been declared defunct because   our government wouldn't give information over to  in specific cases in   Germany. And those terrorists were allowed to go free.

Finally, if we're bringing these people to our court system within   our country, evidence will be allowed open  in open court and there   won't be this cloud or this cloak of secrecy anymore. And perhaps this   will permit and open up this system of  transparency that our democracy   is supposed to afford all of us. And you know, maybe this will undo much   of the damage that has been done. Maybe we'll gain back the sense that   our constitution is being repaired.

MS. MASSIMINO: Thank you so much. I think that's a good transition for you, Adm. Hutson.

REAR ADM. (RET.) JOHN HUTSON: Well, it  thanks, Elisa. Honestly, it's   very difficult for me to add much to what Mindy and Patty have just   flawlessly said themselves. You know, I think that in the end, we will   have accomplished two very important things for America and for   individuals in America. One is that we will successfully prosecute some   people that need very, very badly to be prosecuted and we will finally   bring a sense of finality to something that has been going on now, for   years and years and years.

It's late but you know, the best time to have done would have been a   long time ago but the next best time is right now and so I'm  I'm   pleased that we are finally going ahead with this. And the other thing   is that this is going to be a very clear demonstration of both   domestically and internationally of the wonderful system of justice the   United States has. We've been through dark times and our system of   justice has not looked terrific over the last several years. We can turn   that around now and shout from the rooftops so that everybody can hear   it  what justice in America really means and this is going to give us   that opportunity. Thanks.

MS. MASSIMINO: Thank you. I think  for a long time that this group,   particularly these five are the worst of the worst and I think finally,   we're going to have the best of the best to throw at them in our federal   court system and I think that's where we have really been pushing to   get to for a long time and it's gratifying here the bipartisan support   for the  both the closure of Guantanamo and for the trials of these   defendants in federal courts.

I'm going to open it up to questions right now because we're eager to hear what you would like to know. So operator, if you can

OPERATOR: Certainly. At this time, if you wish to register for a   question, please press the * and 1 on your touchtone phone. If at any   time your question has been answered, please press the # key to remove   yourself from the queue. Again, it is the * and 1 to register for   question and we'll go first to Sarah Hussein. Your line is open.

Q: Hi there. This is, I guess, a question for anybody that feels   they'd like to take it on. I'm interested in some of the issues that   might come up when you're dealing with a case firstly, that's as complex   as this one. But secondly, where you have a lot of evidence that   presumably has been tainted. We heard Holder say that he was very   confident about the outcome in this case but do you think that there's   reason for that confidence? It seems to me that there will be a good   basis for lawyers to challenge things, you know, on the basis of   outrageous government conduct for a start. How do you think that will   play out?

MS. MASSIMINO: I wanted to  can I just I jump in before anyone   answers that question to let you know that we have been joined now by   Lt. Col. Darrel Vandeveld and I wonder  Col., if you'd like to say a   couple words briefly so we can get back to questions. I know a lot of   people have to jump off.

LT. COL. (RET.) DARREL VANDEVELD: Sure. The first thing that I've   been reminded to say is that my views are my own and they don't   represent those of the Department of Defense or any of its multifarious   and multifaceted entities which are all around us, as though my views   could ever be taken for those of the Department of Defense.

I've listened to all the comments and I may have missed at least part   of them, but the one thing that I wanted to say was raised in a Wall   Street Journal article by one of the former chief prosecutors, Morris   Davis of the commissions, who said that it's  there's a danger inherent   in establishing a double standard of justice by holding federal trials   for some of the defendants and then the others relegating to Guantanamo   even with the reform commissions where the evidentiary standards are   necessarily less burdensome than they are in federal court.

And he urged President Obama to choose one or the other. But now that   the president has not, it does call into question the continued   validity of the military commissions at Guantanamo, which admittedly, I   think by any commentator's standards, do operate to include  to allow   for the inclusion of proof that would not otherwise be admissible in   federal court.

And so to say that you've achieved the gold standard for certain   defendants, in this case the 9/11 defendants by holding their trials in   federal courts and the rest can go to Guantanamo, doesn't necessarily   resurrect the image of Guantanamo or the military commissions as they're   applied in Guantanamo as beacons of fairness. And if one of the said   goals in closing Guantanamo is to restore America's moral position in   the world, the decision that the Justice Department has taken today   won't go anywhere near toward furthering that.

Again, I'm a soldier. I've got friends overseas at the moment as a   matter of fact. And so I loathe to criticize, but it does bear pointing   out that if  if one of the seminal goals in closing Guantanamo is to  is   to once again, regain the high ground, I'm not sure we've done that by   making the decision that we have.

MS. MASSIMINO: Thank you so much. I want to get back to the questions   quickly and I'm sure we'll have a chance to talk more about the   military commission. Sarah, I think, asked about the confidence that we   have that despite the fact that many of these prisoners have been   mistreated, if not tortured during custody, that the evidence will be   acceptable in our federal  John, I don't know if you wanted to take

REAR ADM. HUTSON: Yeah, sure. I will take a stab at addressing that.   First of all, we can't gloss over the questions of torture and enhanced   interrogation that the KSM would waterboarded 183 times and that sort of   thing. But on the other hand, we  we can't be afraid of our own laws   and in fact, we have to, in these kinds of cases, even more vigorously   enforce them.

And there may be evidence that  I use the word evidence in quotes   because I think that evidence  information that had been derived from   torture can't be called evidence of any kind as a legal matter. But   there may be those kinds of information and statements that simply   aren't going to be admissible and the government's going to have to rely   on other source of evidence.

And I think that's why it's so important to get these cases in the   hands of the most highly competent judges and prosecutors and defense   counsel that we possibly can because some of these are going to be hard   cases and hard fought and if we want successful prosecutions, I think   that it's important to give it to the people that are most likely to   achieve that, understanding that there may be some information that   doesn't come in because it's not  it's literally not trustworthy because   of the way it was derived.

MS. MASSIMINO: Great, thanks. Can we get another question?

OPERATOR: Certainly. We'll go next to Julian Barnes. Your line is open.

Q: Great. I'm wondering what folks think of this decision today and   what its impact on closing Guantanamo might be Attorney General Holder   seems to suggest  he reiterated that he didn't think the deadline would   be met. Was this a big hurdle to kind of conclude? What are the other   big hurdles? What do you think about when and if Guantanamo will be   closed?

MS. MASSIMINO: This is Elisa. I think, clearly, this was a huge   hurdle. In fact, you know, it's hard to remember but I do remember when    when Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and the others were brought to Guantanamo,   prior to that, it started  you know, there was a growing force even in   the Bush administration up to the president himself who had talked about   his desire to close Guantanamo.

Gee, I wish we could do it; it's become a liability. But once the   real worst of the worst were transferred to Guantanamo, then it gave a   whole new meaning and reason for being for the detention facility there.   I think you know, reaching a conclusion about the disposition of those   cases is just pivotal in the important march towards closing the prison   down.

So I think that's key. It's a small number but it's really, you know,   many ways, outsized in importance. There's still many, many more that   you know, who  the Justice Department is still considering how and where   they will be tried or if they will be tried and then a large number   where the challenge really is to find countries that will take them and

REAR ADM. HUTSON: Let me add to that, too, Elisa. You know, there's   been so much irresponsible rhetoric about the threat and the dangers and   the incapacity of federal courts to handle these cases and so forth   that I think that when these cases go to trial, are safely and   successfully prosecuted, that that's going to throw water on all of that   discussion and that people  Americans, are going to be  come to   understand that we can do this. And that will enable us to get on with   it at a much faster pace than we've done up to now where we've just sat   around sort of wringing our hands and saying oh woe is us, this is too   hard for us to handle.

MS. CASAZZA: Can I ask something? This Patty Casazza. I just have a   question. Why didn't President Obama cancel secret renditions in   addition to his promise to close Guantanamo? Because  I mean I   understand they still continue and that means that torture still exists   elsewhere in the world, even if we're not doing it. I mean, shadows of   Guantanamo will still exist and that's one of my concerns and we'll   still have prisoners suffering these kinds of consequences. And again,   will not be able to be fairly tried.

MS. MASSIMINO: Well, I

REAR ADM. HUTSON: I was going to say  if it is true that they are   still going on, if that were to be true, I think you would be exactly   right.

MS. CASAZZA: Well, there was a gentleman from Britain  Mr. Murphy was   an ambassador for Uzbekistan who indicated that they were still going   on.

LT. COL. VANDEVELD: Well, I don't have  I'm not aware that they are.

MS. MASSIMINO: I know this is one of the subjects of one of the three   taskforces to look at the  to make sure that there are sufficient   regulations that we are not violating our obligation under the   Convention Against Torture not to send people back. It wasn't the   subject of what the attorney general talked about today

MS. CASAZZA: I know. I know that.

MS. MASSIMINO:  that the steps, the subject of a taskforce that's   under the White House's jurisdiction. Can I see if there's anyone else   who wants to ask a question on the call?

OPERATOR: Certainly. Just a reminder, it is the * and 1 to register   for a question. We'll go next to Chris Good of the Atlantic. Your line   is open.

Q: I think you may have already spoken to this a little bit but I   just wanted to ask  the alleged security risk of bringing detainees to   U.S. soil cause that's been a major talking point against this   politically from, mostly, Republicans who are opposed to it. A lot of   them have said that not just closing Guantanamo but bringing detainees   to U.S. soil for trial and housing them in federal prison will pose a   security risk. And I'm just wondering what anyone on the call, really,   has to say about that or makes of that complaint.

MS. MASSIMINO: As Gen. Cullen mentioned earlier on  I don't know if   everyone caught that. But the experts at this who've been doing it a   long time, the American Correctional Association, founded before 1900, I   think, just a month or two ago passed a resolution that addressed this   question in response to the fear-mongering that you mentioned on   questions being raised about whether or not our prison facilities can   handle these prisoners safely.

Sen. Graham has asserted that that's not a reasonable concern. That,   of course, our prisons can handle that safely. The American Correctional   Association passed this resolution that stated, and I quote, "Public   safety would be secure and there would be no danger or imminent threat   to the American people should detainees be transferred to correctional   facilities in the United States. So the people who are the experts at   this seem quite confident and prepared to deal with whatever challenges   are created.

And, in fact, they already  this is not a theoretical thing, they   already are dealing with those challenges. With the 195 convictions that   we've had in federal court  where do you think those people are?   They're in our federal prisons. So we are quite experienced, as is  as   Adm. Hutson said  as is the judges, the prosecutors  also the   corrections personnel  are experienced at this. And they're confident   and I think the president, now, has expressed his confidence that they   are up to the job.

GEN. CULLEN: Well, I think, Andy  this is Jim Cullen again  I think   anyone who has visited the Metropolitan Correctional Center, which is   the federal holding facility in downtown Manhattan, knows that the   security down there is significant. And it's there where we held the   blind sheikh and the others involved in the 1993 bombing during the   course of their trials. This is a very secure area. It's very close to   police headquarters.

It would almost remind you, (chuckles), in some respects, in part of   the perimeter, that you were entering Fort Knox. It's quite a secure   facility. And if convictions result, I am confident these guys are going   off to a Supermax facility, which, I would submit to you, is far more   secure even than Guantanamo.

LT. COL. VANDEVELD: Yes, this is Darrel. There's no question about   that and I question al-Qaeda's ability, at this point, to launch any   kind of transnational attack. If anyone here has seen the current   members of al-Qaeda, for the most part  except for the top leadership    they're all illiterate. Couldn't venture beyond their village, much less   find their way to America. You contrast them with the perpetrators of   9/11 who spoke English, who had integrated into Western society    al-Qaeda simply doesn't have those sorts of resources at its disposal at   this point.

If there's a threat at all, the threat would come from within the   United States, from within groups who may well be American, Muslim   American, who are sympathetic to al-Qaeda and its aims. And as we saw   from the recent shooting at Ft. Hood, there's a great deal of   surveillance and intelligence going on to make sure that what we believe   are, at least, nascent threats remains so. So I wouldn't put much stock   in the idea that we're endangering ourselves or members of our   community by bringing these defendants to trial in the United States.

MS. KLEINBERG: I would go even further as to say that if we tried   these suspects in the military commission system, I think that would   prove to be more dangerous to us because people who sympathized with   them would feel that any verdict coming out of that system that was   secretive, whereby we knew that the evidence was questionable  they   might have had more of a problem accepting that verdict and might have   been more tempted to start trouble here. I think that by using our   federal court system and having total transparency will lessen the case   and will lessen our danger.

OPERATOR: Let me ask if there are any further questions. I guess   we'll go next to Jane Mayer of the New Yorker magazine. Your line is   open.

Q: Hi. I was wondering if you now know where, if convicted  you   mentioned a Supermax  but where would these prisoners be held? And have   you found anybody in the Congress who's willing to have them in their   districts, including the senators? And finally, also, what's your   position on whether the death penalty should be sought?

LT. COL. VANDEVELD: Well, this is Darrel. I'm no big fan of the death   penalty but certainly in these instances if we have a death penalty, as   we do, these would be appropriate cases in which to judge the death   penalty. But it's not going to be up to the government to decide whether   to impose the death penalty. It'll be up to the jury to recommend the   death penalty. And so the government can only go so far. The jury  12   Americans  would pass that ultimate sentence or recommend to the judge   that the judge impose the death penalty.

And it's inconceivable to me that these, those who are tried that are   convicted, would be in anything else other than the at least two   Supermax facilities that we have where they wouldn't be allowed out of   their cells or come into contact. They wouldn't be let out of the cells   for 23, 23-and-a-half hours a day. And at that point they will, as time   passes, simply be forgotten.

REAR ADM. HUTSON: Let me make a point, too, about the security   aspect. You know there's no particular reason to believe that if the   terrorists are going to take vengeance on the United States for   prosecuting these people, that that's going to happen at the location or   at a hard target. If we confine them in Florence at Supermax, that may   be the least likely place that vengeance would be taken out because it's   Supermax.

So that unless we just don't prosecute them at all, if there's going   to be vengeance as a result of  it could happen any place. So that the   logical consequences of that stream of logic is that we simply not   prosecute in order to avoid some sort of retribution. And I agree with   Darrel, it'd be very difficult at this point anyway, but I don't see   that as a reason to not prosecute them. Or to not prosecute them at a   particular place or house them in a particular place. The vengeance, if   there were to be some, would be sought at a soft target not a hard   target.

OPERATOR: Other questions? Thanks, James. Certainly, we'll go next to   Daphne Eviatar of The Washington Independent. Your line is open.

Q: Thanks. And I have two questions. One is, just stalling up on that   death penalty question  there's obviously been discussion that these   men want to be killed and want to be martyrs. And I wonder if there's a   concern about allowing them to have that by including the death penalty   if they were to be convicted?

MS. MASSIMINO: Well, I think that's a very good point  this is Elisa.   One of the, I think, one of the most powerful arguments for moving   these cases from a military system into a civilian system is that it   deprives them of the aura, the mantle of combatancy that they seek, that   al-Qaeda has sought and based on which, it recruits new fighters to its   cause. So moving these cases to federal court is really part of a   smarter counterterrorism strategy that's very much reflected in the   wisdom that is collected in the counterinsurgency manual that was   revised in 2006.

So I think it's an important consideration. For so many years, we   have allowed  in essence  our policy towards the detainees to be defined   by their  to fight on their battleground by what they want. And I think   moving the cases to federal court is part of a course correction that   reflects our better understanding of how to fight this kind of enemy.   And I think it would be really important to consider the question about   the death penalty in the same light.

Q: Moving Guantanamo  I mean there's some concern if Guantanamo is   closed relatively soon that there might still be detainees that the   government cannot return to their home countries and they can't find a   place for. And then there's the discussion that those  the Center for   American Progress recently put out a report saying that people should be   transferred to Bagram. But in Bagram, they apparently have less rights.   And I'm wondering if you have any concerns about that or there's   discussion about  what's your view on where detainees should go if   they're either  if they're not going to be tried but they can't be   released?

LT. COL. VANDEVELD: Yeah, I read parts of the  this is Darrel  I read   parts of the Center for American Progress report. Bagram has got its   own issues. The most important of which is that it's still shrouded in   secrecy. However, the right of habeas corpus has been extended, at least   by a federal district court judge, to those detainees at Bagram who can   show that they were  they're not Afghans and they were apprehended   outside Afghanistan.

And so the rights of habeas corpus, except for the Afghans who are   held currently at Guantanamo, would certainly continue were they   transferred to Bagram. And there may be plans in the works which I'm not   privy to which would open up Bagram, to a certain extent, to allow for a   greater deal of transparency. And that would certainly be the easiest   route that the presidential administration could choose in closing   Guantanamo.

It might have a paradoxical effect of focusing the public's attention   on some of the abuses that have gone on at Bagram  although I think   those have largely stopped. So whether or not it's the best solution is   certainly up to debate but it is at least one course of action that the   military and the national command authority, the president and his   secretary of defense, national security advisor, could decide to take.

MS. MASSIMINO: This is Elisa. I just want to add quickly to that. We   have been concerned from the beginning that there'd be a very clear line   drawn between fixing the mess, as the president called it, of   Guantanamo and our policies going forward. But if Guantanamo is closed   but its worst features are perpetuated, and I would include in that the   flawed military commissions but also the prolonged detention without   trial, then Guantanamo won't really have been closed. It'll just have   been moved. And so I think it is of great concern to us that the number   of detainees that fall into the category that you described get down to   zero. And we have heard a strong commitment from the attorney general to   drive that number down to zero. I think it's critical.

There are  what we need to do is recognize that broader scheme of our   fight with al-Qaeda. The number of detainees that we have at Guantanamo   is a tiny fraction. But the potential recruits out there are virtually   endless. And what we need to do in order to win a battle like this is to   regain the moral high ground. And prolonged detention without charge or   trial is counterproductive in that respect. And we're hopeful  we   certainly welcomed when the administration decided not to seek new   authority from Congress to detain people without trial. But we'll be   watching very closely whether this category of people that's been   described as too dangerous to release but can't be tried becomes some   kind of catchall that defeats the purpose of closing Guantanamo.

OPERATOR: Do we have any other questions? Just as a reminder, it is   the * and 1 to register for a question. And we'll just pause for any   further questions. Thank you. It appears there are no further questions.

MS. MASSIMINO: Okay, well I want to thank all of you for joining us   tonight. I want to particularly thank Adm. Hutson, Gen. Cullen, Mindy   Kleinberg and Patty Casazza and Lt. Col. Darrel Vandeveld for their   perspectives on this important announcement today. Thank you.

MS. CASAZZA: Thank you.

GEN. CULLEN: Thank you.

OPERATOR: Thank you. That concludes today's conference call. We appreciate everyone's participation and you may now disconnect.

(END) 