Washington Week on Human Rights: November 2, 2015
November 02, 2015
Guantanamo Last week two detainees were transferred out of the the U.S. detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Shaker Aamer was transferred to the United Kingdom and Ahmed Ould Abdel Aziz to his home country of Mauritania. The transfers came as Congress and the White House negotiate a new National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for Fiscal Year 2016. President Obama vetoed the first version of the bill containing provisions that would make it difficult to close Guantanamo before he leaves office. Following the veto, which Human Rights First had advocated for, the organization is urging President Obama to reiterate that he will not sign into law any bill that prevents him from fulfilling his promise to shutter the facility before the end of his second term. Now, the president must submit a plan to Congress explaining how to achieve that goal. There are now 112 detainees remaining at the detention facility in Guantanamo Bay. Fifty-two of the remaining detainees are cleared for transfer and another 47 are eligible for Periodic Review Board (PRB) hearings. Human Rights First’s plan to close Guantanamo is outlined in its blueprint How to Close Guantanamo. Trafficking On Wednesday, the House Foreign Affairs Committee’s Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations will hold a hearing on the State Department’s 2015 Trafficking in Person’s report, an annual report that holds countries publicly accountable on their progress in the fight against human trafficking. The TIP Report issues a ranking of Tier 1, Tier 2, Tier 2 Watch List, or Tier 3 for each of the 188 countries and territories assessed, including the United States. In July, the State Department released this year’s report, which was criticized for upgrading Malaysia from Tier 3 to Tier 2 Watch List, a step Human Rights First warned could undermine the Obama Administration’s efforts to address human trafficking and the credibility of the report as a whole. Malaysia's ranking upgrade came as the Obama Administration was negotiating the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade deal between the United States and eleven countries in the Asia Pacific region that includes Malaysia. “(W)e must not allow Europe to stand alone at this time of crisis. As the leader of the Atlantic Alliance, the U.S. owes our allies generous support and partnership. It’s time for a more robust U.S. response to the greatest humanitarian challenge of our time.” U.S. Senator Jeanne Shaheen in an October 28 Time opinion piece about the global refugee crisis The Hill issued its annual list of “Top Lobbyists,” naming Human Rights First’s Elisa Massimino for the organization’s work to close Gitmo and end human trafficking. The Guardian, reported on the transfer of UK national Shaker Aamer from the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, calling the five year delay of his transfer, "foot-dragging at the highest levels of Washington." Writing for The Hill, Human Rights First’s Brian Dooley pressed the U.S. delegation to a security conference in Bahrain this weekend to urge for reform in the kingdom. In the piece for The Huffington Post, Human Rights First’s Ashley Kaper shares the story of a Nigerian asylum seeker, demonstrating the vital need for pro bono representation for refugees seeking asylum. According to The Washington Blade, during Secretary of State John Kerry’s trip to Kyrgyzstan over the weekend he failed to raise concerns about the nation’s severe anti-LGBT propaganda bill that is close to becoming law. The Diane Rehm Show examined the challenges faced by refugees fleeing Syria and how European Union nations are struggling to address the world’s largest refugee crisis since World War II. Wednesday, November 4, 2015 The House Foreign Affairs Committee will hold a hearing on “U.S. Policy After Russia’s Escalation in Syria.” 10:00 A.M., 2172 Rayburn House Office Building The House Foreign Affairs Committee’s Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights and International Organizations Subcommittee will hold a hearing on "Demanding Accountability: Evaluating the 2015 'Trafficking in Persons Report.'"1:00 P.M., 2172 Rayburn House Office Building The House Foreign Affairs Committee’s Europe, Eurasia and Emerging Threats Subcommittee will hold a hearing on "Challenge to Europe: The Growing Refugee Crisis." 2:00 P.M., 2200 Rayburn House Office Building The House Homeland Security Committee will markup H.R.2285, the "Prevent Trafficking in Cultural Property Act"; H.R.2795, the "First Responder Identification of Emergency Needs in Disaster Situations (FRIENDS) Act"; H.R.3842, the "Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers Reform and Improvement Act of 2015"; H.R.3859, the " Homeland Security Act of 2002 Technical Corrections Act"; the "Department of Homeland Security Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosives Defense Act of 2015"; the "State and Local Cyber Protection Act of 2015"; and the "Strengthening Cybersecurity Information Sharing and Coordination in Our Ports Act of 2015." 2:00 P.M., 311 Cannon House Office Building Friday, November 6, 2015 The House Foreign Affairs Committee’s Western Hemisphere Subcommittee will hold a field hearing on "Deplorable Human Rights Violations in Cuba and Venezuela." 10:00 A.M., Stephen P. Clark Government Center, 111 NW First Street, Miami, Fla. Monday, November 2, 2015 Defense One will hold its third Annual Summit titled "The Age of Everything: Setting National Security Priorities in an Era of Evolving Threats." 08:30 A.M., Omni Shoreham Hotel, 2500 Calvert Street NW, Washington, D.C. 