Flawed U.S. Filing Deadline Provision Denies, Delays Protection for Legitimate Refugees
September 30, 2010
Washington, DC – Human Rights First today issued a new report calling on Congress to eliminate a technical asylum filing deadline in  U.S. law that has barred thousands of legitimate refugees with  well-founded fears of persecution from receiving asylum in the United  States. According to the report, in the 12 years since the provision  took effect, more than 53,400 asylum applications have been rejected,  denied or delayed based on the deadline and many of these cases have  been pushed unnecessarily into the already overstretched immigration  court system.

In The Asylum Filing Deadline: Denying Protection to the Persecuted and Undermining Governmental Efficiency,  Human Rights First uses real case examples and its own refugee  representation experience to demonstrate the harmful effects of a  provision barring an individual from asylum if he or she did not apply  for protection within a year of arriving in the United States. That  provision, contained within the Illegal Immigrations Reform and  Immigrant Responsibility Act that became law in 1996, has consistently  denied asylum to persecuted individuals in ways that are inconsistent  with the nation's leadership in protecting victims of political,  religious and other forms of persecution. The report also finds that the  filing deadline law has caused inefficiencies and delays in the asylum  system and diverted significant governmental resources.

"The one year asylum filing deadline has led the U.S. to reject or  deny the asylum requests of genuine refugees, even those who have proven  that they have well founded fears of political, religious or other  persecution," said Human Rights First's Eleanor Acer. "Many refugees who  seek this country's protection miss this filing deadline. They may not  speak English, are not familiar with our legal system, do not have the  resources to pay for a lawyer and arrive in this country still  traumatized from their persecution. We have monitored the filing  deadline's impact on refugees for many years now, and it is clear that  despite the existence of exceptions to the filing deadline, many  deserving refugees have been barred from asylum in the United States."

Among the report's chief criticisms of the asylum filing deadline are that it:

Returns some refugees to persecution and leaves other with only  temporary forms of protection that put them at risk of deportation,  detention and prolonged instability;
Divides refugee families, leaving young children stranded in  difficult and dangerous circumstances abroad and separated from their  refugee parents in the United States.
Pushes the cases of genuine refugees into the over-burdened  immigration court system instead of resolving their cases at the initial  asylum office level;
Delays the adjudication of asylum cases that were referred into  the backlogged immigration court system but could have otherwise been  granted asylum more promptly before the asylum office; and
Diverts time and resources at both the asylum office level and  the immigration courts, expending limited government resources  litigating a technicality, when that time could have instead been  allocated to evaluating the actual merits of asylum cases.

Despite the existence of some exceptions, this filing deadline has  barred from asylum refugees who have well founded fears of persecution  in their home countries. These refugees have included victims of  political, religious, ethnic and other forms of persecution from Burma,  China, Colombia, Guinea, Iran, Sierra Leone and other places. The  report's wealth of case examples include the denial of asylum to a  Congolese nurse who was persecuted and tortured due to her human rights  advocacy and her Catholic faith, as well as a denial for a teenager who  was raped, kidnapped and battered in Albania while plans were made to  traffic her into prostitution.

The report also details the many measures that are in place to  counter abuse in the asylum system, and describes how the asylum system  was overhauled in order to eliminate incentives for the filing of  fraudulent claims. The report describes how the filing deadline actually  bars asylum requests regardless of whether the individual is a credible  and legitimate refugee with well founded fears of persecution.

The report concludes that the only effective and comprehensive remedy  to these problems is for Congress to eliminate the filing deadline  altogether. It notes that as long as there is a deadline – even if the  deadline was significantly extended – there will be refugees with well  founded fears of persecution who will be denied asylum on the basis of a  technicality, and significant resources will be expended throughout the  adjudication system to address the many issues relating to the  applicability of this technical requirement.

Acer concludes, "The deadline is inefficient, unnecessary and  inconsistent with this country's commitment to provide refuge to victims  of persecution. Eliminating the deadline will improve the efficiency  and effectiveness of the asylum adjudication system." 