Conditions in Belarus Not Improving, International Action Needed
January 18, 2011
Fearing safety for human rights defenders and concerned  about the deteriorated state of fundamental rights and freedoms in  Belarus, Human Rights First  joined 117 organizations from 28 countries to appeal to the Organization for  Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to take urgent measures to address the  crisis in Belarus.

The appeal calls on the Organization of 56 European and  North American countries to take these principal  steps:

Immediately condemn  the serious and widespread human rights violations and urgently undertake action  in response to the human rights crisis in Belarus;
Immediately begin  the procedure to initiate the “Moscow Mechanism” in light of the particularly  serious threat to the fulfillment of the provisions of the OSCE human dimension  by the authorities of Belarus.

Read  the full appeal and see who signed on.

The Moscow Mechanism is a rarely-evoked instrument for  protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms that was established in  1991. The Moscow Mechanism relies on independent experts to resolve human  dimension crises in OSCE participating States. If the state in question agrees,  the OSCE may carry out an official investigation of alleged violations of human  rights and fundamental freedoms. So far, the Moscow Mechanism has only been used  five times. (Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina in 1992; Estonia in 1992; Moldova in  1993; Serbia in 1993; and Turkmenistan in 2002/3.)

The additional pressure from OSCE would be in line with  other international actions, uni- and multilateral. On January 20, the European  Parliament will likely adopt  a joint resolution condemning the crackdown following Belarus’ presidential election last  month. The draft also calls for targeted sanctions on Belarusian companies and a  freeze of financial aid provided by the International Monetary Fund. The  European Union is also working on a “black list” of officials banned from entry.  Poland has already banned several individuals, starting with President Lukashenko. The United States has long ago declared the December elections in Belarus illegitimate and strongly  condemned a crackdown on opposition demonstrators. 