Pakistani Woman Gets 86 Years for Attempted Murder of U.S. Interrogators; Mystery Looms
September 29, 2010
Last week a Pakistani woman was sentenced to 86 years in prison for the  attempted murder of her U.S. interrogators in Afghanistan. Aafia  Siddiqui is a Pakistani neuroscientist and devout Muslim who went  missing between 2003 and 2008, when she was taken into custody by Afghan  police. She was tried in U.S. federal court in New York.

HRF's Daphne Eviatar participated in a discussion of the case on a live  television program "The Platform," along with other guests including  Siddiqui's lawyer. She spoke about how U.S. federal courts handle terrorism cases. "The Platform" is a joint production with VOA and Express 24/7, Pakistan's only 24-hour English news channel.  Watch it here.

Siddiqui is accused of having fired a gun at American interrogators in a  room while she was awaiting questioning in Afghanistan. The defense  maintained it never happened, and that there was no forensic evidence  retained from the scene and thus no proof that this took place. None of  the agents in the room were wounded, but Siddiqui was shot by a U.S.  soldier.

During pretrial proceedings, the defense had claimed Siddiqui was not  mentally fit to stand trial. The judge, after ordering several  psychological examinations of Dr. Siddiqui which yielded contradictory  results, held that despite some evidence of psychological disturbance,  Siddiqui was competent to stand trial and assist in her defense. During  the trial, against the advice of her attorney, Siddiqui took the stand  to defend herself. Her testimony included significant contradictions and  she was ultimately convicted.

One of the many remaining questions in this case is where exactly  Siddiqui was from March 2003 until she was arrested by Afghan police in  2008. Siddiqui has claimed she was kidnapped and tortured, although this  was not proven at trial. Both U.S. and Pakistani officials have denied  that she was in their custody or mistreated by their officials.  According to her uncle, Siddiqui said she was detained in various  locations and that she was under the impression that she was in the  custody of Pakistani authorities.

When she was arrested by Afghan police in July 2008, Siddiqui was found  carrying unidentified chemicals and notes that referred to 'mass  casualty attacks' and various targets in New York. She was not charged  with any terrorist-related crimes, however. Instead, she was charged  only with attempted murder and other crimes arising out of the shooting.
Adding to the intrigue, Siddiqui's second husband, Amar Al Baluchi, is  the nephew of Khalid Sheikh Mohammad, the professed mastermind of the  9/11 attacks.

Dr. Siddiqui’s case has been closely followed in Pakistan.  Demonstrations demanding her return to Pakistan have intensified since  the 86-year sentence was handed down in New York last week.

On Tuesday, her defense lawyer filed a notice of appeal. 