“If We Can Do It in Texas…”
September 21, 2012
By Ruthie Epstein

So said Texas State Representative Jerry Madden, Republican Chairman of the Texas State Legislature House Corrections Committee, as he kicked off Human Rights First’s first-ever public Dialogues on Detention on September 12 with the story of how they got it done in Texas. The simple version – bipartisan cooperation. Chairman Madden and his counterpart in the State Senate, Democrat John Whitmire, have worked together for the past several years to create a plan to reform the criminal justice system in Texas. They convened experts from the right and the left to identify the best strategy forward. They worked through their differences of opinion to successfully stop building new prisons in Texas. They had to do it – because Texas could no longer afford the cost. Chairman Madden joined Texas-based and national experts convened by Human Rights First at The University of Texas at Austin, LBJ School of Public Affairs, to discuss issues of common concern in immigration detention and criminal justice/corrections, as part of a series of Dialogues we’re holding across the country this fall. Check out the stellar lineup here.  Complete audio to be posted soon! Some key takeaways: We heard some tough conversation on immigration detention conditions. Steve J. Martin, former general counsel of the Texas prison system, said that even the most recent ICE detention standards do not provide for meaningfully distinct conditions of detention for low-custody individuals. He noted that existing facilities used by ICE, especially jails, which hold 50 percent of ICE detainees, are simply not designed to provide conditions that are appropriate for the civil immigration detention population, and that ICE would have to build new facilities in order to provide appropriate conditions. Senior ICE official Kevin Landy noted that ICE recently built such a facility in Karnes, Texas. He also highlighted the many challenges to building new facilities, including the community resistance that defeated two recently proposed facilities in Crete, Illinois, and Southwest Ranches, Florida. Even so, it’s clear that many of the conditions recommended by the ABA’s recent Civil Immigration Detention Standards (whose advisory task force included panelists Dora Schriro and Michele Deitch) could be provided in some existing ICE facilities – including expanded outdoor recreation, contact visits, and civilian clothing. Indeed, ICE is in the process of implementing new standards that recommend 4 hours per day of recreation and contact visits at existing facilities. But Dr. Schriro, Mr. Martin, and Barbara Hines, co-counsel in ground-breaking litigation challenging conditions at Hutto, an ICE facility in Taylor, Texas, suggested that “civil” conditions should go even further. Finally, Hope and Nazry Mustakim drove down from Waco, Texas, to generously share their story. Their courage and the challenging experiences they’ve faced remind us all – advocates, attorneys, politicians, and government officials – of the real people whose lives are impacted by every single detention bed. The information shared during the dialogue made clear that it is possible to move forward with real solutions for reform that are grounded in best practices, cost savings, and human rights. On to California! (Follow us @HR1stRefugees and #HRFDetention.) 