Take Action on Sudan
October 22, 2009
On Monday, President Obama's Administration announced its new and  long-delayed policy on Sudan. On paper, the policy covers many useful bases. But  it will be nothing more than empty words unless the Administration puts some  serious pressure on the Sudanese government. Fortunately for the Administration,  a ready-made pressure point is available immediately: an opportunity to ensure  discussion and action at the United Nations on new evidence of violations of the  arms embargo on Sudan. One of the goals of the new Sudan policy is achieving "a definitive end to  conflict, gross human rights abuses, and genocide in Darfur," in part by  encouraging and strengthening initiatives for ending violent conflict.  The four-year-old U.N. arms embargo has never been enforced. Arms and  ammunition continue to flow into Darfur, fueling violence against civilians.  This makes the parties to the conflict less inclined to negotiate a peace  settlement and undermines the authority of the U.N. Security Council.   Special Envoy Gration needs to face this reality head-on-he should take  the arms embargo seriously and use it as an effective tool to bring pressure to  bear on Khartoum and its allies. A new report by the U.N. Panel of Experts on Sudan-the group monitoring the  arms embargo-is due out soon. Like past reports, it will likely detail numerous  violations to the embargo. It must prompt action to hold accountable those who  refuse to respect this international law. Human Rights First has been drawing attention to the arms issue for well over  a year, including by briefing the U.N. Sanctions Committee at the end of last  year. But more progress must be made.  Help  us send a clear message to the Administration as it implements its new  strategy - the U.N. arms embargo on Sudan must be enforced! U.S. Ambassador to the U.N., Susan Rice, and U.S. Special Envoy to Sudan,  Scott Gration, should ensure that discussions of the Panel of Experts report at  the Sanctions Committee are thorough and detailed, and that there are  consequences for those who have violated the embargo. Write  them today to let them know that you're paying attention! 