"Arguing for Free Speech—not Defamation of Religion—at Human Rights Council"
October 05, 2010
At the UN Human Rights Council debate (with Githu Muigai Special  Rapporteur on 'contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,  xenophobia and related intolerance') Human Rights First's Joelle Fiss  spoke on the importance of fighting religious intolerance whilst  preserving free speech. She advised against a defamation of religions  provision that seeks to criminalize blasphemy. She used the recent Burn a  Koran day in the United States as an example on how to fight hatred  whilst respecting freedom of speech.

Watch her presentation at the Council, or read the full text after the jump:


[[{"type":"media","view_mode":"media_large","fid":"66","attributes":{"class":"media-image","typeof":"foaf:Image","height":"343","width":"445","style":""}}]]

"I am speaking on behalf of Human Rights First. We are dedicated to  building respect for human rights and the rule of law and have worked  for many years to reverse the rising tide of hate crimes and  discrimination to help ensure the protection of fundamental freedoms for  all.
Human Rights First congratulates the Special Rapporteur for his  report detailing cases of religious intolerance and condemning acts of  violence or incitement to violence against individuals based on religion  or belief. We believe that the Special Rapporteur is providing a good  framework whereby States will be able to better measure their  commitments and success in confronting each of the forms of  discrimination addressed. 
Human Rights First fully supports the recommendations of the Special  Rapporteur, in paragraph 90 of his report, whereby he “encourages States  to move away from the notion of defamation of religions” and to “anchor  the debate in the relevant existing international legal framework”. We  oppose all efforts to create internationally binding obligations that  aim to criminalize the ‘defamation of religions’. National blasphemy  laws are all too often abused to stifle debate and dissent and to target  members of religious minorities. These laws serve to protect ideas  rather individuals. They enable States to define which views are  acceptable and which are not.
Today, the depth of hatred, anger and violence expressed against many  religious, ethnic, national and other minorities is alarming. The rise  of anti-Muslim bias, and all forms of hate crime and intolerance, must  be taken very seriously. But restricting speech is not the answer to  fighting bigotry and hatred. What we need more of, is public  condemnation of hate crimes, as well as effective policies of inclusion,  equality and protection of fundamental rights and freedoms. We agree  with the Special Rapporteur when he states in paragraph 91 that  “legislative responses…are far from being sufficient to bring about real  changes in mindsets, perceptions and discourse”. 
In recent months, there have been a number of anti-Muslim incidents  in the United States that have caused many people to feel concern. Those  incidents, including “Burn the Koran Day” and the obstruction of the  building of several mosques and cultural centers, were driven by fear  and ignorance. 
The debate surrounding the “Burn A Koran Day” in the United States  provides an excellent example of how non-legislative measures  successfully confront and counteract incitement and violence. The  hateful rhetoric of an isolated extremist was drowned out by the voices  of every day citizens, as well as scores of political, religious and  military leaders from across the spectrum, who all used their voices to  speak out again hatred. The proposed event was finally cancelled. Human  Rights First organized an online initiative asking supporters to send us  their top ten reasons NOT to burn a Koran . We received over 5000  suggestions from individuals eager to express their opposition to the  burning. 
To conclude, we call on all delegates to follow the recommendations  of the Special Rapporteur - and to ensure that existing international  norms to fight hatred are better implemented at international, national  and local levels." 