Asylum News 56
August 01, 2007
Settlement Announced in   Hutto Litigation

On August 27, the American Civil Liberties Union announced   a settlement in the federal lawsuits brought by the ACLU, the ACLU of Texas, the   University of Texas School of Law Immigration Clinic, and the law firm of   LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene & MacRae LLP against U.S. Immigration and Customs   Enforcement on behalf of 26 children detained at the T. Don Hutto Residential   Center in Taylor, Texas (see March Asylum   News). The settlement requires ICE to make significant improvements in its   treatment of detained asylum seekers and children at the Hutto facility.

For more information about Hutto and the litigation, click here.
To read the ACLU press release (8/27/07), click here.
To   read the New York Times article (8/28/07), click here.


Update: Iraqi   Refugee Crisis

Human Rights First is working to secure a comprehensive response to the Iraqi   refugee crisis. For more information about the issue and HRF’s Lifeline for   Iraqi Refugees Project, click   here. Meanwhile, public attention to the Iraqi refugee crisis has not   subsided. Following is a sample of the media coverage in the past month.

New York Times   article about the crisis inside Iraq (8/29/07)
Op-ed by   Michael Gerson in the Washington Post (8/22/07)
Washington   Post editorial on the bi-partisan bills in the House and the Senate   (8/12/07)
New York Times   article about Iraqi refugees in Jordan (8/10/07) (paid subscription   required)
CNN segment   about Iraqi interpreters who worked for the U.S. military (8/10/07)


Update: Material   Support

As reported in June’s Asylum News, U.S.   Citizenship and Immigration Services has announced a process for assessing   exemptions for “material support” cases pending before that bureau. Click here to   read the guidance and notices provided by USCIS. This process is now slowly   beginning to function for asylum seekers whose cases have been on hold before   the Asylum Office. There is still no process in place, however, to grant   exceptions to the “material support” bar to asylum seekers whose cases are or   have been in removal proceedings before the immigration court or the Board of   Immigration Appeals.

To read a Washington Post article on this problem (8/13/07), click here.


Resources for   Advocates of Asylum Seekers and Refugees

The Capital   Area Immigrants’ Rights Coalition in Washington, D.C., has updated its manual   for advocates of asylum seekers fleeing gang violence in Central America. For   more information, please contact Vanessa Allyn at Vanessa.allyn@caircoalition.org.   Another helpful resource is a transnational study on youth gangs released in   March 2007 by the Washington Office of Latin America. It covers gangs in   Washington, D.C., Nicaragua, Mexico, Honduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador. To   read the executive summary, click here.

The U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants has released its “Resource   Guide for Serving Refugees with Disabilities.” It is available for download at www.refugees.org/DisabilityGuide.   The guide, written for refugee case managers and those serving refugees with   disabilities, includes information about resources for serving adults and   children with disabilities, housing for refugees with disabilities, assistive   technology, medical resources, citizenship and disability, and benefits for   refugees with disabilities. 