Key Immigration Reforms Would Increase Pro Bono Representation
June 12, 2013
By Latonia Haney Keith & Steven Schulman As S. 744, the Senate’s comprehensive immigration reform bill, hits the floor for debate today,  lawyers around the country have engaged in discussions around the various provisions that may allow pro bono attorneys to serve clients in more effective and efficient ways. The Association of Pro Bono Counsel (APBCo), an organization with more than 120 members who lead the pro bono practices at 85 of the nation’s largest law firms, is focused on how S.744 can allow our colleagues to provide free legal services to immigrants more effectively and efficiently. According to data from The American Lawyer, pro bono hours devoted by the top 200 grossing law firms in the U.S. has grown five-fold since 1994. But perhaps no area of the law has seen more private lawyer pro bono involvement than immigration.  Lawyers at APBCo-member firms work on a variety of immigration matters, including helping refugees fleeing persecution file asylum applications, defending legal permanent residents in immigration court proceedings, and assisting abused immigrant women with applications under the Violence Against Women Act.  Pro bono lawyers help change these immigrants’ lives for the better, and make the entire immigration system function more effectively. Currently, even the most vulnerable immigrants are not appointed counsel by the government, leaving nearly half of immigrants in immigration court proceedings and around eighty percent of immigrants in immigration detention go through their proceedings with a lawyer. This includes traumatized asylum seekers seeking protection in the United States, young and unaccompanied children, those with severe mental disabilities or other extremely vulnerable populations left to navigate our complex immigration laws and court proceedings on their own. Several provisions of S.744 would change that law in ways that will allow our colleagues to serve these pro bono clients in more effective and efficient ways. Section 3401 would remove the bar on asylum applications filed more than one year after a refugee enters the United States. Section 3404 would allow arriving aliens – those who appear at our borders – to seek asylum via a non-adversarial interview rather than be forced to claim asylum in a removal proceeding in immigration court. Section 3501 would increase the number of immigration judges and support staff, thereby improving immigrants’ access to pro bono counsel by reducing the current backlog in some immigration courts. Section 3502 would require the Attorney General to appoint counsel for unaccompanied minors and individuals with serious mental disabilities. Section 3503 would expand Legal Orientation Programs to all immigration detention centers (LOPs currently reach only 25 immigration detention facilities). Coons Amendment 5, which was adopted by voice vote in the Judiciary Committee, would require the Department of Homeland Security to provide essential documents to immigrants without first filing a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request. Lawyers at Association of Pro Bono Counsel-member firms are committed to providing free legal services to immigrants in need.  S.744 will allow them to serve these pro bono clients better, and to serve more immigrants who need help navigating a complex system. Latonia Haney Keith is the President of the Association of Pro Bono Counsel and the Pro Bono Counsel at McDermott Will & Emery in Chicago. Steven Schulman is the President-Elect of APBCo and is the Pro Bono Partner at Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld in Washington, DC. 