(Un)Fair Enough: Why You Should Care about Supply Chains
November 02, 2015
The Christian Science Monitor has launched a new series exploring the complex systems that undergird modern slavery. The first entry, Modern Slavery: Human Trafficking is Everywhere and Nowhere, introduces readers to individual stories of debt bondage and broader sagas of supply chain malfeasance. The Monitor methodically shows that slavery doesn’t just happen in far-off factories or brothels, but also right here in our communities. Case in point: the story of five Mexican men, forced to work in harsh conditions without pay—not in a dingy factory or an underhanded farm—but at one of Syracuse's hallmarks of family fun: The Great New York State Fair. After each shift, when children were taking home plush toys from the midway and proud ranchers were hanging up first place ribbons, these men would return to a bug-infested trailer to receive their daily meal, often with no pay to show for hours of labor. Their story is familiar to many victims of labor trafficking in the United States. Convinced by unscrupulous labor recruiters to come to America, instead of arriving to the promised well-paying jobs, they are trapped in a life without freedom. They are prevented from leaving these jobs, not by barred doors or armed guards, but by the fear of being reported for violating temporary work permits and returning home penniless and indebted. This is not the only way traffickers abuse and manipulate the vulnerable poor, and the United States is certainly not the only place they do it. Worldwide, the International Labor Organization estimates that there are over 20 million victims of trafficking. And, while these victims receive pennies—if anything—for their work, human traffickers reap huge profits, upwards of $150 billion per year. Labor recruiters are a big reason this illicit business is a success. On local, regional, national, and international levels, these criminals take advantage of the supply chains of legitimate businesses by tricking desperate workers with fraudulent terms and deceiving companies about what the workers are offered. This is why Human Rights First is working with both the public and private sectors for change. By encouraging corporate leaders to protect their supply chains from forced labor, pressing for policy solutions to incentivize businesses to adopt best practices and increase transparency in their supply chains, and advocating for better enforcement around federal procurement, unscrupulous recruiters will become a thing of the past. And trafficking victims, like the five men in Syracuse, will have a better future. 