Obama Administration Must Tackle Tough Issues About Sudan at U.N. Gathering
September 22, 2010
U.N. General Assembly Gathering Offers Opportunity to Demonstrate Leadership, Reinforce Key Priorities
Washington, DC – This week as President Obama seizes the  opportunity provided by the United Nations (U.N.) General Assembly to  personally engage on Sudan, Human Rights First is urging him to assert  U.S. leadership to ensure that January's referenda votes happen smoothly  and on time. The group notes that President Obama should also work with  key countries to stifle the potential for violence in the coming  months.

In less than four months, on January 9, 2011, two referenda will take  place in Sudan that mark a critical moment for Africa's largest  country. The implementation of the referendum on self-determination for  Southern Sudan and a second referendum on the status of the border  region of Abyei are two core provisions of the Comprehensive Peace  Agreement (CPA) signed in 2005. That document brought an end to the  decades-long civil war between north and south Sudan.

In recent weeks, senior U.S. officials have clearly conveyed their  concern about the current moment in Sudan's history.  Secretary Clinton  described a "ticking time-bomb," and U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Susan  Rice called the current situation "a very precarious moment." Later this  week, President Obama will meet with both Northern and Southern  leaders, which will mark his first direct interaction with Sudanese  leaders since he took office. The President will also join a high-level  meeting led by the U.N. Secretary-General on Friday that will focus on  international attention and support ahead of the January referenda.

"This week, President Obama has the opportunity to defuse what  Secretary Clinton has labeled a "ticking time-bomb' and to help ensure  that Sudan's future is not dictated by its troubled past," said Elisa  Massimino, President and CEO of Human Rights First. "There is no  substitute for U.S. leadership in the effort to bring peace to Sudan.  The United States must also be vigilant and prepared to address the  potential for violence in the aftermath of the referenda votes."

Human Rights First notes that there are ongoing concerns about the  fragility of the situation in Sudan at present and about how much still  remains to be done to prepare for these critical votes. There are also  well-founded fears about the potential for a return to violence and mass  atrocities against civilians in the south, even as atrocities continue  in the western region of Darfur. It notes that there is a clear need for  adequate diplomatic, financial, and technical resources to ensure these  votes happen on time, are carried off smoothly, and are a legitimate  expression of the will of the voters. There is also an urgent need to  prepare for what happens after the referenda to ensure their outcomes  are respected and that they form the basis for a peaceful future for all  of Sudan's people.

In advance of President Obama's meetings on Sudan this week in New York, Human Rights First is urging President Obama to affirm U.S. commitment to the following five priorities:

Support existing multilateral mechanisms: The U.S.  was one of the so-called Guarantors to the CPA when it was signed in  2005, along with the U.K., Norway, Netherlands, Egypt, Italy, and the  following institutions: African Union (A.U.), European Union (E.U.),  Arab League, and the U.N. President Obama should now mobilize this group  of international actors to help ensure the CPA is implemented and to  avoid a return to violence, including by supporting existing  multilateral mechanisms such as the A.U.-U.N. Consultative Forum and the  A.U. High-Level Implementation Panel for Sudan.
Engage key countries with leverage in Sudan: While  broad international engagement on Sudan is needed at this moment, there  are certain countries with strong ties to the Government of Sudan and  therefore with particular leverage that the U.S. should seek to enlist.  China's role as a major economic partner of Khartoum and as a  significant source of arms flows to the Sudanese government throughout  its campaign of atrocities in Darfur warrants particular attention.  President Obama should encourage China to use its relationship to help  pave the way for smooth referenda and for a peaceful outcome to those  votes. Not only China but also other countries such as Russia, Chad, and  the UAE, which have been sources or transit points for military  materials and other critical goods and services that have helped sustain  the capacity of armed forces to commit atrocities in Darfur, should be  urged by the U.S. to act as constructive stakeholders and avoid enabling  atrocities anywhere in Sudan.
Don't forget Darfur: International attention  has shifted to focus on Southern Sudan as the referenda approach, but  insecurity continues to plague the western region of Darfur, and  persistent violence against civilians there should remain a concern for  U.S. policy makers. Next month, the final report of the U.N. Panel of  Experts on Sudan is expected to reveal serious violations of the arms  embargo on Darfur, just as its predecessor panels concluded in their  reports over the past several years. The failure of third parties to  comply with these U.N. sanctions in Darfur and the failure of the U.N.  Security Council to take new measures to enforce the embargo have  contributed to the ongoing atrocities in that region. The U.S. should  carefully review the Panel's report and recommendations next month, and  action on that front should be one of several ways in which the U.S.  shows a concrete commitment to Darfur and to a holistic approach that  address all flashpoints in Sudan at present.
Make clear that a return to north-south violence is not an option: President Obama should send a clear message to the parties to the CPA  and to others that resorting to violence in the run-up to—or the  aftermath of—the referenda is not an option. All parties in Sudan, and  all third parties with ties to that country, should be put on notice  that the U.S. and the international community are committed to avoiding  violence against civilians, are prepared to act to prevent it, and will  levy consequences on any who plan or perpetrate it.
Be prepared for risks of mass atrocities against civilians in Southern Sudan: Even  as the Obama administration focuses on ensuring smooth preparations for  the referenda, it should remain alert to the potential for a recurrence  of violence around or after those critical votes. Given Sudan's history  of government-sponsored atrocities against civilians, the U.S. should  keep a watchful eye for early warning signs of plans for violence  targeting civilian populations, and should be prepared for that worst  case scenario. Part of its contingency planning should include support  for the preventive deployment of peacekeepers from UNMIS to flashpoint  areas to monitor the situation and deter localized violence. Another  critical part of preparedness and prevention efforts should include the  use of intelligence assets to track the flow of arms, ammunition, and  other goods and services to those who may be engaged in planning or  committing atrocities in the coming months. With Sudan's history of mass  atrocities, the past may offer a prologue; previous patterns and  perpetrators, as well as potential third-party enablers, deserve special  attention at this fragile time.

For more information about Human Rights First's work on Sudan and its  ongoing work to hold accountable the enablers of atrocities, please  visit http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/cahp/index.aspx. 