Senior Administration Official Praises Ghailani Trial, Verdict
November 18, 2010
A senior administration official is praising yesterday’s federal jury conviction of Ahmed Ghailani, who was found guilty of conspiracy and will be  sentenced  between a minimum of  20 years without  possibility of parole  to life in prison. The  official notes that the conviction shows that the federal courts are up to the  task of prosecuting suspected terrorists, a sentiment Human Rights First is calling on the Obama  Administration to echo with regard to the federal trials  of other Guantanamo detainees.

The senior  administration official told ABC News:

"He was convicted by  a jury of a count which carries a 20-year minimum sentence.   He  will very likely  be sentenced to something closer to life. (The judge  can, and very likely will,  take into account things that the jury did  not, and he can and will consider  conduct that the jury found him not  guilty of -- e.g., murder). He will never be  paroled (there is no  parole in the federal system). There are very few federal  crimes that  carry a mandatory MINIMUM of 20 years. What that means is that he  was  convicted of a crime that is a very big deal.

"So,  we tried a guy  (who the Bush Admin tortured and then held at GTMO for  4-plus years with no end  game whatsoever) in a federal court before a  NY jury with full transparency and  international legitimacy and --  despite all of the legacy problems of the case  (i.e., evidence getting  thrown out because of Bush-Admin torture, etc,) we were  STILL able to  convict him and INCAPACITATE him for essentially the rest of his   natural life, AND there was not one -- not one -- security problem  associated  with the trial."

"Would  it have been  better optically if he had been convicted of more  counts? Sure. Would it have  made any practical difference? No."

To read Human Rights First’s reaction to  the verdict visit http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/media/usls/2010/alert/691/index.htm. 