U.S. Government Should Welcome Greek Reporting on Golden Dawn Trial and Hate Crimes
November 02, 2015
Two U.N. human rights committees recently raised concerns with Greece about bias-motivated violence in general and the Golden Dawn trial in particular. The Obama Administration should use this as an opening to help its ally combat hate crime. It should, as a priority measure, send monitors as part of an effort to ensure that the trial meets international standards. Golden Dawn is not your run-of-the-mill neo-Nazi group; it’s both a criminal enterprise and the third largest party in the parliament. Dozens of high-level party leaders and members are charged with violent crimes and membership in a criminal organization. Greece recently completed a round of reporting to the United Nations on its compliance with its obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). Together, these treaties cover fundamental human rights obligations across a wide range of issues. The committees did not let Greece off easy. Rather, they honed in on problems with racism, discrimination, and xenophobia. The Human Rights Committee, which covers the ICCPR, highlighted the importance of ensuring that all racist and xenophobic crimes are investigated and all perpetrators, including law enforcement officers, are punished. They expressed concern about underreporting of hate crimes due to lack of trust in the authorities. The committee also noted the rise of hate speech among extremist groups, political and religious leaders, and the media. In its response, the Greek delegation cited the Golden Dawn trial as evidence of its efforts to combat hate crimes, but flagged the neo-Nazi group’s growing political influence as a significant challenge. They attributed the rise of extremism to several factors: discontent of those disadvantaged by the economic crisis, fear in light of the refugee crisis, and anger against parts of the political system. The Greek delegation outlined efforts to combat impunity for racist crimes, but the effectiveness of new 2014 anti-racism legislation remains an open question. Human Rights First stressed the need to address many of these problems, including impunity for police involvement in hate crimes, in our “Stemming the Tide of Extremism” recommendations to the Greek Government. In mid-October the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights expressed concern about the disproportionate economic and social impacts of austerity measures on disadvantaged and marginalized groups. The committee also cited discriminatory housing practices and forced evictions of Roma. Its observations highlighted youth unemployment, social exclusion, and inadequate refugee integration programs—pervasive conditions which Human Rights First has identified as root problems that may foster an uptick in bias-motivated violence. Greece should not have to face these challenges alone. Human Rights First has issued recommendations to the Obama Administration to help Greece combat the rise of hate parties and the erosion of respect for human rights. The rise of extremist hate movements in Europe threatens U.S. and European security and common prosperity. It is in the collective interest of the United States and European Union nations to protect vulnerable minorities and step up enforcement efforts against violence and bias-motivated crime. The U.S. government could set this tone by welcoming the treaty bodies’ criticism of Greece and urging its ally to respond with meaningful policy and public statements countering extremism. For more background on the Golden Dawn trial, see Human Rights First’s fact sheet. 