Detention Without Charge or Trial: A "Solution" that Only Compounds the Problem
October 08, 2010
By Gabor Rona, International Legal Director
Crossposted at Huffington Post

In the last few days we’ve seen several knee jerk “I told you so”  reactions to the recent decision of a federal judge to exclude  torture-based evidence from terrorism suspect Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani’s  trial. You’d be forgiven for thinking that the “told you so” is “this is  what happens when you torture people to get evidence.” Instead, some,  such as Liz Cheney, former Attorney General Michael Mukasey, former  federal prosecutor Andy McCarthy, and former Department of Justice  official Jack Goldsmith have come to the misguided conclusion that “this  is what happens when you put suspected terrorists on trial rather than  simply detain them without charge or trial.”

Here’s the proof that their view is flawed: approximately 400 terrorism  cases have been successfully handled by our regular federal courts since  the 9/11 attacks. True, these 400 cases have not involved Guantanamo  detainees. This one case does involve a former Guantanamo detainee,  allegedly held in secret CIA detention where he was mistreated in  interrogation. Still, it would be premature to conclude that the  criminal case is doomed or that former Guantanamo detainees must be  detained without trial. There is, for example, much evidence of criminal  conduct of the so-called 9/11 mastermind, Khalid Sheik Mohammed, that  is not derived from water board-induced confessions or other forms of  abuse.

Here’s another reason their view is wrong: it projects into the future  the problems of our past. The Bush Administration left a legacy of  arbitrary detention, torture and failures to gather proper evidence from  the dark post-9/11 days when it was banking on no rules, no law, and no  courts. That has all changed. In addition, the extraterritorial reach  of US criminal law concerning terrorism is also, now, well established.  Our intelligence, law enforcement and even military personnel are  becoming increasingly cognizant of the need to gather admissible  evidence to support criminal charges and trials. The FBI has clearly  stated that application of Miranda warnings, a cause célèbre for those  critical of using civilian justice, is not an issue. Once we’re done  swallowing the consequences of the Bush administration’s atrocious  judgments and conduct that compromised, rather than protected national  security, we should have very few, if any, cases in which persons must  be detained but cannot be tried.

Detention without charge or trial is recognized and legitimate under  narrow conditions applicable in armed conflict. But expanding our  concept of war to cover the entire planet, without any reasonable  expectation of how to define victory against an amorphous enemy in order  to justify application of exceptional detention powers is exactly the  wrong thing to do. We cannot solve the problems created by an  administration that trashed our historic commitment to due process of  law by now further trashing our historic commitment to due process of  law. Detention without charge or trial is not only a ‘solution’ that  merely compounds a problem, it’s one that undermines the values by which  we define our society – values which, not coincidentally, enhance our  security in a world where our departures from the rule of law play right  into the hands of those who seek to harm us. 