May 2009-Asylum News
July 02, 2010
John Morton Confirmed    as ICE Assistant Secretary

On May 12, 2009, the Senate confirmed John Morton as the Assistant Secretary   for Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) within the U.S. Department of   Homeland Security. John Morton was previously with the U.S. Department of   Justice (DOJ), where he worked on immigration enforcement and criminal   prosecution.

For more information on John Morton, please see DHS's website

Juan Osuna Appointed   as  Deputy Assistant Attorney General (DAAG) for the Office of Immigration    Litigation

Juan Osuna has been named Deputy Assistant Attorney General (DAAG) for the   Office of Immigration Litigation (OIL). OIL is the office responsible for   coordinating immigration matters before the federal district courts and circuit   courts of appeals. Prior to this appointment, Mr. Osuna served as the chairman   of the Board of Immigration Appeals.

Click here for more information on Juan Osuna and other appointments within the Department   of Justice’s Civil Rights Division


Asylum Seekers    Continue to be the Unintended Victims of the Overly Broad Definitions of    Terrorist Activity in the INA

In an article entitled, "U.S. allies losing asylum bids over definition of   'terrorist'," the McClatchy Newspapers highlighted a series of cases in which   asylum seekers continue to be impacted by the overly broad definition of   "terrorist activity" in section 212(a)(3)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality   Act. The article profiles cases of asylum seekers and refugees whose cases have   either been put on hold or denied due to these overly broad provisions.

The entire article is available here

Disparities Continue    to Exist in Asylum Adjudications

At a symposium in Chicago last month, two professors at the Georgetown   University Law Center, Andrew Schoenholtz and Philip Schrag, offered a glimpse   into the findings of their research into how U.S. Courts handle asylum cases.   Based on extensive data collection, the professors have found that within the   system, major disparities in asylum outcomes continue to exist.

Click here to read more

Past Issues 