Asylum News 68
August 01, 2008
Asylum Denied More Often by Politically Vetted Judges; DOJ Failure to Increase Number of Judges

An August 24, 2008 analysis by The New York Times revealed that   immigration judges who were vetted for political affiliations before being hired   disproportionately denied asylum. The analysis was based on statistics obtained   by Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC), associated with Syracuse   University. On July 28, 2008, the Inspector General of the Department of Justice   had issued a report documenting the politicized hiring of immigration judges and   others within the Department of Justice. Another TRAC study found that there has   been no increase in the number of immigration judges despite the Justice   Department’s 2006 commitment to increase the number of judges.

Click here to read the August 24, 2008 New York Times Article

Click here to read the July 28, 2008 Report by the Justice Department Office of the   Inspector General

Click here to read the July 28, 2008 TRAC Report.

DHS Considers Medical Care as "Material Support"

The U.S. Department of Homeland Security continues to take the position that   the provision of medical care constitutes “material support” when provided to   injured members of an armed group. A recent piece, researched by ABC news,   profiled the cases of a Sudanese doctor who treated rebels in Darfur and a   Nepalese medical worker who was kidnapped and forced to provide aid to Maoist   rebels.

Click here to read the story

Attorney General Overturns Previous Rulings on Coerced Population Control

On May 15, 2008, the U.S. Attorney General issued a decision in Matter of   J-S-, holding that spouses of individuals subjected to forced sterilization   or abortion do not qualify as refugees by that fact alone.  The decision in this   case, which the Attorney General had ordered the Board of Immigration Appeals   (BIA) to certify to him last September, overturns the BIA’s holdings in two   earlier precedential cases, Matter of C-Y-Z-, 21 I&N Dec. 915 (BIA   1997) and Matter of S-L-L-, 24 I&N Dec. 1 (BIA 2006)(en banc), that   the spouses of victims of forced abortion or sterilization should automatically   be considered to meet the refugee definition on that basis.  In his decision,   the Attorney General notes that such applicants may still qualify for asylum or   refugee status based on a showing of past persecution or a well-founded fear of   persecution based on their own failure or refusal to undergo sterilization or   abortion, their resistance to coercive population control, or other grounds   recognized under U.S. law.

Click here to read the May 15, 2008 decision in Matter of J-S-, 24 I&N 520   (A.G. 2008)

Attorney General Certified Cases Address Effective Assistance of Counsel before Immigration Courts 

On August 7, 2008, the U.S Attorney General certified to himself three   unpublished BIA decisions addressing the question of whether and to what extent   non-citizens who are represented in immigration proceedings have a right to   effective assistance of counsel.   In reviewing the three cases, the Attorney   General will also examine whether and how requirements set forth in Matter   of Lozada, 19 I&N Dec. 637 (1988) shall continue to apply to claims of   ineffective assistance of counsel.  A range of groups have written to the   Attorney General protesting the surprise nature of this decision to reexamine   longstanding precedents and the tight deadline (September 15, 2008) and word   limits (9,000 words) imposed on amicus briefs.

Board of Immigration Appeals Rules on Gang-Based Asylum Cases 

In a July 30, 2008 decision by the Board of Immigration Appeals, the BIA   ruled that Salvadoran youth who have been subjected to and resisted or rejected   gang recruitment based on opposition to gang values, as well as their family   members, do not constitute a particular social group (Matter of S-E-G-, 24   I&N Dec. 579 (BIA 2008). In a ruling issued the same day in the Matter of   E-A-G-, 24 I&N Dec. 591 (BIA 2008), the court ruled in a case of a young   Honduran male that he had not established that he was a member of a social group   of “persons resistant to gang membership.” The BIA also ruled that a social   group of “young persons who are perceived to be affiliated with gangs,” does not   constitute a social group.  In both cases the BIA found that individuals who   refuse gang recruitment fail the “social visibility” test and therefore do not   constitute a social group.

Click here to read the July 30, 2008 decision in Matter of S-E-G-

Click here to read the July 30, 2008 decision in Matter of E-A-G-

Congressional Committee Hears Testimony on Medical Care in Immigrant Detention

On June 4, 2008, the House Judiciary Committee, Subcommittee on Immigration,   Citizenship, Refugees, Border Security, and International Law held a hearing on   “Problems with Immigration Detainee Medical Care.” The hearing addressed many of   the issues recently raised in a four part Washington Post series on the   deficiencies in medical and mental health care provided for detainees in   immigrant detention. Among the witnesses testifying were Julie Myers, the   Assistant Secretary for Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in DHS, the   Acting Director of the Division of Immigration Health Services (DIHS) within   ICE, as well as former detainees, representatives of the NGO and medical care   community and an HRF pro bono attorney whose refugee client was severely   impacted by the insufficient medical care she received.

Click here to   access a webcast of the hearing
Click here to   read 6/5/08 Washington Post article

HRF Welcomes Bipartisan Senate Bill on Immigrant Detention Reforms

On June 11, 2008, Senator Joe Lieberman (ID-Conn.), Senator Sam Brownback   (R-Ks.), Senator Ted Kennedy (D-Mass.), and Senator Chuck Hagel, (R-Neb.)   introduced the 2008 Secure and Safe Detention and Asylum Act, S. 3114. The bill   addresses some of the most pressing issues facing asylum seekers and other   immigrants in detention today and includes provisions for immigration court   review of detention of asylum seekers, nationwide alternatives to detention, and   improvements in medical care provided to detained immigrants.

Many of the bill’s provisions address concerns raised in a 2005 report by the   bipartisan U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom relating to the   detention of asylum seekers.

Read 2008   Secure and Safe Detention and Asylum Act
Read HRF   Statement commending Senators
Read the Senate   Statement on the Bill
Second Circuit Issues   Ruling on Female Genital Cutting

On June 11, 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit overturned   Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) denials in the asylum cases of three Guinean   women. The women had each expressed fear of returning to Guinea, including, in   two cases, fear for the safety of their daughters. The three-judge panel of the   Court ruled that although the women had already experienced genital cutting as   children in Guinea, that experience is not necessarily a “one-time act” of   persecution nor the only kind of future persecution the women may face.

Read the Second   Circuit Decision
Read the   6/12/08 New York Times Article
June 20 Marks Annual World Refugee Day 

June 20 was World Refugee Day, a day that has been celebrated annually since   the adoption of a U.N. resolution in December 2000. This year’s theme focused on   protection of refugees. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, António   Guterres, remarked that “refugees show incredible courage and perseverance in   overcoming enormous odds to rebuild their lives. Ensuring that they get the   protection they deserve is a noble cause because refugee rights are human rights   – and rights that belong to us all.” Events celebrating the day were held all   over the world.

For more information, click here.

Annual World Refugee Survey Released 

The U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants released the 2008 World   Refugee Survey on Thursday, June 19. In addition to providing profiles of the   treatment of refugees and refugee policies in various countries around the   world, the survey takes a closer look at countries considered to be the worst   places for refugees.

Read the 2008 World   Refugee Survey 