Asylum News 47
November 01, 2006
Material Support Update: Call to Action
Dear Friends and Colleagues,

During this season of thanksgiving and   hope, we urge you to take a moment to write to the White House to ask President   Bush to intervene to resolve the crisis that threatens to undermine America's   historic role as a haven for those who seek freedom from oppression.

As many of you know only too well, thousands of refugees and asylum seekers   are being prevented from receiving asylum, resettlement, or more permanent   residence in this country under overly broad immigration definitions that punish   the victims of persecution. The U.S. refugee resettlement program - a lifeline   for those who flee oppression - has been devastated by the failure to resolve   the crisis caused by this "material support" bar. At the same time, the   Department of Homeland Security has failed to set up a process to exempt   eligible refugees in the asylum process from these provisions. To read the   letter just sent to President Bush by Human Rights First, please click here.

Please join Human Rights First, the Refugee Council USA, its member   organizations, and others around the country to urge the President to ensure   that this problem is fully addressed early in the new year.

And please circulate this notice broadly to others who care about refugees and asylum seekers. Together, we can make sure that thousands of Americans write to the White House this holiday season to express their concern about the fate of the thousands of refugees who have been affected by this problem.

For more information on the material support bar to asylum, click here.

December 3 Panel Discussion on the United States as Refuge

During this holiday season, the Neuberger Museum of Art at the State   University of New York in Purchase presents a panel discussion entitled "Your   Huddled Masses: United States as Refuge, Then and Now," in conjunction with the   exhibition "Crossing the BLVD: Strangers, Neighbors, Aliens in a New America,"   by Warren Lehrer and Judith Sloan. The panelists include activists, advocates,   and refugees, including Human Rights First's Refugee Protection Program director   Eleanor Acer, and the event will be moderated by Brian Lehrer of WNYC radio.

The panel begins at 2 p.m. on Sunday, December 3, in the PepsiCo Theater of   the Performing Arts Center at SUNY–Purchase. A reception follows in the   Neuberger Museum of Art. To purchase tickets, call 914-251-6125.

The exhibition "Crossing the BLVD: Strangers, Neighbors, Aliens in a New   America" will be up until January 7, 2007. For more information, go to www.neuberger.org and www.crossingtheboulevard.org 