Religious Freedom Report Comes at Crucial Moment
November 17, 2010
Washington, D.C. – Today, Secretary of State Hilary Clinton  will release the 2010 Annual Report on International Religious Freedom,  an annual examination of "the legal status of religious freedom as well  as the attitudes towards it, in almost 200 countries and territories  around the world." Human Rights First is urging the administration to  use the report to strengthen efforts to protect religious minorities  around the world – such as the Iraqi Christians – and to combat  defamation of religion laws that are used to silence debate and dissent  and persecute religious minorities.

"Freedom of religion is a basic human right," said Human Rights  First's Tad Stahnke. "It's also a value on which this country was  founded. President Obama has been clear that protecting religious  freedom is a priority for his administration, continuing a commitment to  human rights that has animated American foreign policy for decades.  Today's report should provide a roadmap for the State Department and  other agencies to put this commitment into action in the coming years."

Last year in Cairo, President Obama stressed the importance for  religions to respect their differences – a theme that will likely be  reflected in today's report. In those remarks, he noted, "Indeed, faith  should bring us together. That is why we are forging service projects in  America that bring together Christians, Muslims, and Jews. … Around the  world, we can turn dialogue into Interfaith service, so bridges between  peoples lead to action – whether it is combating malaria in Africa, or  providing relief after a natural disaster."

Earlier this month in Jakarta, President Obama referenced his remarks  in Cairo, stating, "I said then, and I will repeat now, that no single  speech can eradicate years of mistrust. But I believed then, and I  believe today, that we have a choice. We can choose to be defined by our  differences, and give in to a future of suspicion and mistrust. Or we  can choose to do the hard work of forging common ground, and commit  ourselves to the steady pursuit of progress. And I can promise you – no  matter what setbacks may come, the United States is committed to human  progress. That is who we are. That is what we have done. That is what we  will do."

Human Rights First notes that President Obama's Jakarta speech and  today's State Department report come at crucial time for religious  tolerance. In Iraq, the Christian community has recently been targeted  for brutal attack. This fall, the United Nations General Assembly will  engage in a debate over a contentious "defamation of religions"  resolution. Human Rights First has found that defamation laws are  frequently used to target individuals for the peaceful expression of  political or religious views. A recent report issued by the  organization, Blasphemy Laws Exposed: The Consequences of Criminalizing "Defamation of Religions," details more than 50 recent cases from 15 countries that provide a  window into how national blasphemy laws are abused by governments. The  real-life stories in this report document how time and again,  accusations of blasphemy have resulted in arrests and arbitrary  detentions and have sparked assaults, murders and mob attacks.

As the State Department releases today's report, Human Rights First  is urging the administration to maintain its position against such a  measure at the United Nations and to urge other nations to join in  opposing its passage.

It is also urging the administration to respond to a series of recent  attacks targeting Christians in Iraq. Among the group's key  recommendations are the following:

The United States should continue to support the protection of Iraqi  refugees and displaced people, by leading the international community  in providing assistance for Iraqis who have been displaced by the  violence in Iraq and by encouraging other states to join more robustly  in this effort.
The Department of State, with other relevant agencies, should  take additional steps to improve the pace of resettlement for Iraqi  refugees – at present, they can wait a year or more for their  applications to be processed – so that refugees are not left stranded in  difficult or dangerous circumstances for extended periods of time;
The Department of State, with other relevant agencies, should  enhance capacity to expedite the resettlement of refugees who face  imminent harm by developing a transparent and formal expedited procedure  for refugees who face an imminent risk of harm; and
The Department of State, working with the Department of  Homeland Security and intelligence agencies, should improve the  staffing, coordination, and timeliness of the security clearance process  so that Iraqi refugees are not left stranded in difficult and dangerous  situations.

"In many parts of the world, people are in danger because of how they  choose to worship. The United States must fulfill its promise to  protect those fleeing persecution," Stahnke concluded. 