2006 Human Rights Award Dinner
April 27, 2010
Honoring

Damas de Blanco from Cuba 

Munir and Suciwati from Indonesia 

Special Guests

Meredith Vieira,

Sigourney Weaver

Alberto J. Mora


Dinner Chairs

Lewis B. Kaden,

Vice Chairman & CAO,

Citigroup Inc.

Ellen O. Kaden, SVP,

Law & Government Affairs,

Campbell Soup Company


Award Presenters

Photo Album










In the spring of 2003, the Cuban government arrested and   summarily tried and sentenced 75 human rights activists, independent   journalists and librarians to terms of up to 28 years in prison.

Following the arrests, the wives, daughters and  relatives of  those imprisoned formed las Damas de Blanco (the Ladies in  White) to advocate  for the release of their loved ones. Las Damas de  Blanco’s method of protest is  entirely peaceful. Every Sunday, dressed  in white, the women meet at mass in  the Santa Rita church, and then  walk down Fifth Avenue in Havana in silent  protest of the unjust  incarceration of their relatives and the lack of  fundamental freedoms  in Cuba.

Las Damas de Blanco have appealed directly to foreign   governments and Cuban officials demanding the unconditional release of  all  political prisoners. In the face of persistent threats, insults and  attempts to  silence them by the Cuban government, these courageous  activists remain  steadfast in their struggle for justice and human  rights. Their work to promote  human rights in Cuba has earned the  recognition and respect of the  international community. In October  2005, las Damas de Blanco were awarded the  prestigious Sakharov Prize  by the European Parliament.

The U.S. representative of las Damas de Blanco, Yolanda   Huerga Cedeño, and her husband Manuel Vázquez Portal are accepting the  award on  behalf of las Damas de Blanco. Huerga Cedeño is a founder of  the group. Vázquez  Portal is an independent journalist who was  imprisoned in the spring of 2003  but was conditionally released for  medical reasons in 2004. Huerga Cedeño and  Vázquez Portal now live in  Miami where they continue their vigorous activism in  defense of human  rights and freedom in Cuba.











Munir, one of Indonesia’s foremost human rights  defenders,  was known for his fearless advocacy and careful human rights  research during  and after the authoritarian Soeharto regime. Munir  died on September 7, 2004  while flying to the Netherlands to continue  his studies in international law.  He was 38 years old. An autopsy later  found a massive dose of arsenic in his  system.
The President of Indonesia created a special  fact-finding  team, which soon uncovered the apparent complicity of  state airline employees.  The trail stopped at the door of the State  Intelligence Agency; the team’s  mandate ended and the President never  released its final report.

In December 2005, an off-duty pilot was sentenced to 14   years in prison for poisoning Munir’s in-flight meal; earlier this  month, his  murder conviction was overturned. The judge at his trial  called for further  investigation into senior intelligence officials,  but there has been no  follow-up.
Originally from East Java, Munir worked at the Legal Aid   Foundation before founding the Commission for Disappearances and  Victims of  Violence (Kontras) in 1998. Kontras has been widely  recognized for its work on  the disappearance of pro-democracy activists  and succeeding in locating some —  but not all — of the missing  activists alive.

Munir is survived by his wife, Suciwati, and two young   children, Diva and Alif. Munir once said that Suciwati was the brave one  in the  family. Suciwati has worked tirelessly to bring Munir’s killers  to justice –  and has been threatened and harassed for her outspoken  advocacy. In addition to  campaigning on her husband’s case, Suciwati  brings together victims of human  rights abuses to work for justice on  their own behalf.Munir  set out to show Indonesians that they did not  have to live in fear. He urged  his fellow citizens to reject violence,  and helped Indonesia navigate a  tumultuous period through rigorous  investigations. His work lives on through  organizations he helped  create in Indonesia and throughout the region, and in a  generation of  young activists he inspired to fight for justice..








2006 Human Rights Award Dinner Committee



Dinner Chairs 
Lewis B. Kaden,
Vice Chairman & CAO,
Citigroup Inc.

Ellen O. Kaden, SVP,
Law & Government Affairs,
Campbell Soup Company



Co-Chairs
Andi & Tom A. Bernstein
Deborah Miller & William D. Zabel



Committee
Elsie and Bernie Aidinoff
Susan Berkwitt
Robert and Helen Bernstein
William Bernstein
Rachel Bohm
Mig Boyle
Tom & Meredith Brokaw
Patrick J. Carome
John K. Castle
James Chanos
Kenneth Chenault
Lynda M. Clarizio
Deborah and Craig Cogut
Saralyn M. Cohen
Jennifer Colyer
Mitchell and Monica Dolin
Donald Francis Donovan and Jennifer Lake
Matthew and Ginger Dontzin
Edward P. Evans
Kenneth R. Feinberg
Gail Furman
John J. Gibbons
Leslie Gimbel and Marc Kusnetz
Jeffrey Gracer
Myrna and Steve Greenberg
Peter and Helen Haje
Joseph Hassett
Louis and Alice Henkin
Peter N. Hillman
Scott Horton
Antonia B. Iannello
Paul Irving
Virginia and Robert Joffe
Kerry Kennedy
Steven Kolleeny

Mathilde Krim, Ph.D.
Michael Lacovara
Philip A. Lacovara
Jo Backer Laird and Michael Danoff
Joann and Robert Todd Lang
Stephen S. Lash
Leonard M. Leiman
Edwin S. Maynard
Frank H. Menaker
George A. Miller
Michelle Ores and Charles Schorin
Barbara and Jeffry Picower
Robert Pitofsky
Andrea G. Podolsky
Duane C. Quaini
John and Lynn Savarese
Barbara Schatz and Frederick  Schaffer
Steve Schulman
Sybil Shainwald
Susan and Jeremy Shamos
John S. Siffert
Harold Snyder and Tamar Hirshl Snyder
George Soros
James M. Stillwaggon
Jay and Kelly Sugarman
B. Cary Tolley
Jeffrey S. Trachtman
Trish and George Vradenburg
Gregory Wallance
Shelby White
Lynn Witkowski
Basil P. Zirinis III 