Human Rights First Welcomes President Obama's Statement at U.N. on "Urgent Situation" in Sudan
September 24, 2010
Emphasizes need to maintain momentum and be attentive to flashpoints in Southern Sudan as well as ongoing violence in Darfur
Washington, DC – Human Rights First welcomes the strong  signal sent today by President Obama and other world leaders to the  parties to Sudan's Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) about the  importance of two key referenda on self-determination scheduled for  January 9, 2011.

This afternoon's high-level meeting convened by the U.N.  Secretary-General was designed to focus international attention and  mobilize broad support ahead of the two votes that may lead to the  breakup of Africa's largest country. While recognizing the considerable  political and technical challenges to be overcome in advance of the  referenda, President Obama sent a clear message to both the Khartoum  government and the Government of Southern Sudan that the schedule must  be kept, that the outcome of the vote must be respected by all sides,  and that peace processes for Darfur and Eastern Sudan must also be  implemented.

Even as the January referenda formed the primary focus of this  afternoon's meeting, Human Rights First welcomed President Obama's clear  statement that the U.S. "will not abandon the people of Darfur." A  recent spike in violence there emphasizes the importance of continued  U.S. and international attention to that region of Sudan. A draft of the  Communique to be released following this afternoon's meeting made  specific mention of the need to halt arms flows into Darfur, where an  arms embargo, in place since 2005, has never effectively been enforced.

Human Rights First President and CEO Elisa Massimino, said today, "It  is vital that the U.S. remain engaged in Darfur, including by promoting  enforcement of the arms embargo. A new Panel of Experts report due out  next month will again reveal serious and sustained violations of the  embargo by a range of third-party enablers, including both states and  commercial actors.  By asserting a new commitment to enforce the embargo  and hold violators accountable in Darfur, the U.S. can help change the  dynamics of the crisis in Darfur and at the same time send a strong  message to those who would commit atrocities anywhere in Sudan that such  violence will not be tolerated."

While the draft Communique available this afternoon expresses  appreciation for recent steps made by the Government of Sudan, President  Obama made clear that Khartoum will be held to its commitments to halt  violence, allow humanitarian access to the people of Darfur, and  negotiate a lasting peace. At the same time, Human Rights First echoes  the concerns raised by 23 Members of Congress in a letter sent to  President Obama yesterday (http://allafrica.com/download/resource/main/main/idatcs/00020278:b58aa02bd49ab52629cb90bdffe1d766.pdf)  about the track record of the Sudanese government in back-tracking on  its agreements, as well as about the absence of specifics from the White  House on the kinds of consequences that Khartoum will face if it  engages in any obstruction of the January referenda or their outcomes.

Massimino noted, "High-level diplomatic efforts by the U.S. must be  sustained past this week and must focus not only on the parties in  Sudan, but also on third parties in the region and beyond who have the  potential to encourage or derail progress toward peace in Sudan."

In a statement earlier this week (http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/media/ij/2010/alert/656/),  Human Rights First urged a clear U.S. commitment not only to  multilateral approaches but also to bilateral diplomacy to engage key  countries, such as China, with particular leverage in Sudan.

The organization also notes Sudan's history of government-sponsored  atrocities, and urges the U.S. to remain alert to indications that  violence against civilians may be being planned in the run-up to the  referenda, or may increase in Darfur or other parts of Sudan in that  period, and to be prepared for that contingency.

Massimino concluded, "We applaud President Obama's clear statement  today that genocide and other human rights abuses will not be tolerated,  and we urge the U.S. to continue to engage at the highest levels to  bring an end to atrocities in Darfur and to prevent violence against  civilians in the south or elsewhere in Sudan." 