Live Stream: U.S. Foreign Policy and the Future of Bahrain
July 06, 2011
Today, Human Rights First's Director of Programs and Policy Tad Stahnke and Bahrain Center for Human Rights' Nabeel Rajab are speaking at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in a conference entitled, "U.S. Foreign Policy and the Future of Bahrain." The conference is organized by the Institute for Gulf Affairs.

The conference will focus on the anatomy of the recent protests in Bahrain and the influence of U.S. foreign policy on the monarchy's crackdown, which was the first of its kind in response to the Arab Spring.

Watch the live stream below starting at 12:30p.m. EST (7:30 pm Bahrain time), July 6, 2011:
[[{"type":"media","view_mode":"media_large","fid":"3","attributes":{"class":"media-image","typeof":"foaf:Image","height":"280","width":"440","style":""}}]]

Live Streaming by Ustream

For a complete schedule, click read more.

The Institute for Gulf Affairs Presents:
 US FOREIGN POLICY AND THE FUTURE OF BAHRAIN
JULY 6, 2011
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
1779 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC
Conference Program
12:30-1:00 Introduction and Opening Remarks
Mr. Ali al-Ahmed, Director of the Institute for Gulf Affairs
Mr. Ahmed Abdulhussain, Bahraini political activist and poet
“The Experience of Youth, Young Professionals, and Athletes in Bahrain”
1:00-2:00 Keynote Address
Mr. Tad Stahnke, Director of Policy and Programs at Human Rights First
"Reconciliation at Risk: Continuing Crackdown on Human Rights and the Sectarian Divide in Bahrain"
2:00-2:30 Luncheon Speech
Dr. Qasim Omran, MD.
"Personal Account of a Doctor who survived the Crackdown in Manama”
2:30-4:00 Panel: The Pearl of the Gulf in Peril:
Current Political Attitudes and the Crackdown:

Mr. Justin Gengler, PhD Candidate at the University of Michigan
“The Political Attitudes of Bahraini Citizens”

Dr. Nabil Mikhail, George Washington University
"US Foreign Policy and Bahrain”
Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights
“Human Rights and Political Opposition under the al-Khalifa Monarchy” 