Asylum News 72
December 01, 2008
DHS Announces a New   Policy for Applying Exemptions for Cases Involving Material Support Provided   Under Duress 

On December 22, 2008 USCIS announced that it will be implementing exemptions   for material support provided under duress to all Tier I/II, designated,   terrorist organizations in accordance with the same adjudication process   currently being applied to Tier III, non-designated, organizations. This process   allows for a case-by-case assessment in consideration of the "totality of the   circumstances" of whether the support was provided under duress, regardless of   the status of the organization to which the individual was forced to provide   support.

Click here to view the notice in the Federal Register dated May 8, 2007 outlining the   analysis that USCIS follows in assessing whether support was provided under   "duress."

Human Rights First   Released a Comprehensive Blueprint Entitled, "How to Confront the Iraqi Refugee   Crisis"

On December 22, 2008 Human Rights First released a blueprint calling   on President-elect Obama to fulfill his campaign's commitment to confront the   Iraqi refugee crisis by strengthening oversight and effectiveness of refugee   assistance, ensuring that the Iraqi government refrains from pressuring refugees   to return home before they can do so in safety, and placing a coordinator for   Iraqi refuges in the White House which puts forward a strategy for the incoming   Obama administration to address the Iraqi refugee crisis as part of its pledge   to withdraw from Iraq.

Click here to read the full blueprint.

Congress Passes   Legislation That Eliminates the One Year filing Deadline for Unaccompanied   Minors and Provides the USCIS Asylum Office With Initial Jurisdiction Over Their   Asylum Applications

On December 12, 2008 Congress presented to President Bush for signature the   William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008,   HR 7311, (TVPRA 2008). While primarily aimed at preventing human trafficking and   protecting its victims, the TVPRA 2008 contains a couple of key provisions   related to unaccompanied minors seeking asylum in the United States. These   provisions i) eliminate the one year filing deadline for unaccompanied minors by   amending INA ยง208(a)(2) to exclude minors and ii) transfer initial jurisdiction   over any asylum application filed by an unaccompanied minor from the Immigration   Courts to the USCIS Asylum Office for a non-adversarial adjudication.

Click here to see the text of the bill.

USCIS Announces an   Interim Final Rule to Allow "T" and "U" Nonimmigrants to Adjust Their Status and   Become Lawful Permanent Residents

On December 8, 2008 USCIS announced an interim final rule that will allow "T"   and "U" nonimmigrants to adjust their status and become lawful permanent   residents. "T" visas are granted to victims of a severe form of trafficking   while "U" visas are granted to victims of certain serious crimes. Both visas   generally require cooperation with law enforcement for eligibility, with certain   exceptions. The interim rule announced by USCIS allows for "T" and "U"   nonimmigrants to adjust their status after three years of physical presence in   the U.S.

Click here to see the Federal Register announcement for more information about eligibility   requirements to adjust status for "T" or "U" nonimmigrants and how to submit   comments. 