Asylum News 46
October 01, 2006
Material Support Update: DHS Delay Continues, State Department Exempts Some Chin Refugees From Material Support Bar
On Thursday, October   19, U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice announced that she has exercised   her authority under the immigration law to exempt some Burmese Chin refugees   living in Malaysia,   Thailand, and   India from the so-called material   support bar.  This overly broad bar, and the government’s failure to recognize   duress as a defense, has prevented thousands of victims of repression and   violence from receiving the protection of this   country.

The State Department   has used its exemption authority on three occasions now, to allow for the   resettlement of thousands of Burmese Karen and Chin refugees living abroad who   have supported armed groups that resist the Burmese military regime but are   being categorized as "terrorist" organizations under the overly broad   immigration law provisions. This exemption does not cover thousands of other   refugees abroad who still remain at risk.

Meanwhile, the   Department of Homeland Security has still not set up a process for refugees   already in the United   States to seek an exemption from the bar. In a   report issued last month, Human Rights First documented the impact of the   material support bar on those who seek asylum in this country. Many refugees   have had their asylum requests denied or relegated to a long-term administrative   limbo. The time they have spent in immigration jails – or separated from their   families – has been prolonged by months or even years.

In the United   States, the material support bar has impacted several thousand refugees,   including more than 565 affirmative asylum cases, 2,300 refugee and asylee   adjustment cases, and about 350 applications for asylees and refugees to bring   their children and spouses to safety – as well as asylum seekers whose cases are   pending before the U.S. immigration courts.

To read the State   Department's announcement of the Chin waiver, click here.

To read Human Rights   First's report "Abandoning the Persecuted," click   here.

Senate Hearings: Refugee Admissions and Material Support

On September 27, the   Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, Border Security and Citizenship   held a hearing on the U.S. refugee resettlement program,   covering the issues of refugee admissions and the impact of the material support   bar.

Father Ken Gavin of   the Jesuit Refugee Service testified on behalf of the Refugee Council USA. Also   testifying was Michael J. Horowitz, senior fellow at the Hudson Institute, who   stated that the administration has, for more than two years, construed the   material support bar "in a manner that has caused stunned consternation on the   part of liberals and conservatives, religious and human rights leaders and   Congressional leaders from both parties."

The Department of   Justice appeared to argue in favor of the broad immigration-law definitions   relating to material support.  In a written statement for the hearing, Rachel L.   Brand, Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Policy, urged that   exemptions be decided by the Secretaries of State and Homeland Security in   "their sole and unreviewable discretion," allowing "for the broadest   consideration of all factors relevant to the case – the foreign policy   considerations, the counter-terrorist strategy considerations, the immigration   considerations and the litigation risks."

Read the testimonies   submitted by Father Ken   Gavin and Michael J.   Horowitz.

Read the written   testimony submitted by Human Rights   First.

Read the statements   of committee members Russ Feingold (D-WI)   and Patrick Leahy (D-VT). 