Asylum News 55
July 01, 2007
GAO Finds Lack of Phone Access for Detainees
On July 6, the U.S. Government Accountability Office issued a report entitled   “Alien Detention Standards.” GAO had been asked to review U.S. Immigration and   Customs Enforcement’s implementation of detention standards given the recent   significant increase in the numbers of detained immigrants in the United States.   GAO found the most consistently serious problems in telephone access for   detainees. To read the abstract or the complete report, click here.

Read July   6 Washington Post editorial on treatment of immigrant detainees
Read July 19   Washington Post letter to the editor from HRF Refugee Protection Program   Director Eleanor Acer on lack of fair release process for asylum seekers
Update: Iraqi Refugee Crisis
Public attention continued to focus on the plight of Iraqi refugees and asylum   seekers over the last month. As World Refugee Day passed on June 20, CNN   profiled the stories of various Iraqis, including those who have worked for the   U.S. government and the U.S. media. To watch one of these pieces, profiling a   U.S. asylum seeker who is represented by pro bono attorneys working with Human   Rights First, click here.

A July 19 piece on USA Today’s web site, authored by Lanny J. Davis and   Michael Medved, urged that those who supported and those who opposed the war –   indeed, “all people of goodwill” – should recognize “America’s moral obligation   to open our doors - immediately - to Iraqis who face danger and death because of   their assistance to our forces.” To read the complete piece, click here.

Support the bi-partisan “Refugee Crisis in Iraq” bill, introduced on June 19   by Senators Edward Kennedy (D-MA) and Gordon Smith (R-OR), which would provide   safe haven in the United States to some of those Iraqis who are at risk because   of their work with the United States or with U.S. organizations.

To learn more about the Iraqi refugee crisis, click here.

Update: Material Support
More than six months after the January 2007 public announcement that the   Department of Homeland Security would consider asylum seekers for exemptions   from the “material support” bar, DHS and the Department of Justice have still   not announced a process for assessing these exemptions in cases pending before   the immigration courts, the Board of Immigration Appeals, or the federal courts.   On July 19, Human Rights First wrote to senior DHS and DOJ officials urging that   an exemption process for these cases be implemented without further delay. Human   Rights First flagged the cases of individual asylum seekers whose separations   from their families – or their time in immigration detention – have been   prolonged over the last few years as immigration officials have considered   approaches to addressing this problem.

As reported in last month’s Asylum News, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration   Services has announced a process for assessing exemptions for “material support”   cases pending before that bureau. Click here to   read the guidance and notices provided by USCIS.

To read the July 15 Pittsburgh Post-Gazette op-ed by HRF Senior Counsel Anwen   Hughes on the impact of the material support bar on child soldiers, click here.

New EOIR Codes of Conduct

The Executive Office for Immigration Review has proposed new Codes of Conduct   for immigration judges and the Board of Immigration Appeals. EOIR is seeking   public comment on the Codes. The deadline for submitting comment is July 30,   2007.

To review the Codes and for instructions on submitting comments, click here.

2007 World Refugee Survey

The U.S. Committee on Refugees and Immigrants has released its 2007 World   Refugee Survey, which includes country-specific statistics and analysis of the   treatment of refugees all over the world. To access the survey, click here:

Asylee Adjustment Instructions

U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services recently clarified its filing   instructions for asylee adjustment of status applications. Effective July 30,   the applications should be filed at either the Nebraska Service Center or the   Texas Service Center, depending on the home state of the applicant. Applicants   living in New York, New Jersey, Washington, D.C., Maryland, and Virginia should   file at the Texas Service Center. For complete instructions, click here.

Please note that USCIS’s new filing fees also go into effect on July 30. 