Slavery at the World Cup?
November 05, 2015
In 2022 the world’s nations will send their best soccer players to Qatar to compete for the FIFA World Cup. In preparation for the quadrennial event, the country is investing $200 billion in infrastructure. But as visitors stroll vast promenades towards the pitch and scale stadium stairwells to their seats, they may not know that they are walking on the backs of victims of labor trafficking. In many labor trafficking cases, unscrupulous recruiters lure workers to another country and charge exorbitant fees, forcing them into debt before they even begin the job. Then employers withhold their immigration documents and deny their wages, giving workers no legal recourse without proof of their legal status. In Qatar, these recruiters manipulate the kafala system, a series of sponsorship laws under which foreign workers cannot quit or change jobs or leave the country to visit family unless they have their employer’s permission. Employers routinely deny pay to workers under threat of deportation or withhold identification documents to extort wages. The system puts all of the power in the hands of the employer and makes modern day slaves out of men and women simply trying to earn a living. Due to mounting international scrutiny, Qatar passed a new law “reforming” the kafala system. But in fact, the system is not fundamentally changed—only streamlined. Employees on open-ended contracts will be able to change jobs—but only if they have spent five years with their company and receive government approval. The law also removes the requirement that a worker must leave Qatar for two years before finding new work. These measures fall far short of the hopes of the international human rights community, and may have little to no effect on the prevalence of forced labor in the country. Change will require sustained pressure from the international community and leadership from the Qatari authorities. The many nations and corporations involved in the World Cup have an important role to play in ensuring the event is not tainted by the products of slave labor. The organizers, athletes, and visitors of the World Cup should not tolerate the Qatari government’s weak attempts to address this widespread, well-known problem. For more information on Human Rights First's efforts to bankrupt modern day slavery, read our blueprint: How to Dismantle the Business of Human Trafficking. 