Counterterrorism Cooperation Between Uzbekistan and Malaysia May Encourage Abuses
October 05, 2005
More on Human Rights 
DefendersNEW YORK -- Uzbekistan's 
President Islam Karimov and Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi of Malaysia signed 
agreements Monday, October 3rd, establishing their cooperation in a number of 
areas, including counterterrorism and national security. 
Human Rights First is concerned that a deepened alliance between the 
governments of Uzbekistan and Malaysia could have negative consequences for 
human rights conditions in those countries. Both governments have a record of 
using counterterrorism laws to arrest, jail and prosecute members of the 
political opposition and other nonviolent critics -- exploiting security measures 
to mask official policies of repression.
After Uzbek security forces killed hundreds of protestors in Andizhan on May 
13, 2005, human rights defenders who sought to investigate or report on the 
events became targets of arrest, detention, beating and torture during an 
unprecedented crackdown. The government of Uzbekistan has refused to heed calls 
for an international, independent investigation into the Andizhan events and the 
ensuing persecution of defenders, and instead claims that these violations are 
part of its fight against terrorism. Though some governments have criticized 
this response, Uzbekistan has found allies among those countries that have 
similarly used the threat of terrorism as an excuse to silence non-violent 
dissent. 
"President Karimov's ability to create military and counterterrorism 
alliances with the Malaysian, Chinese, and Russian governments should be seen as 
a warning sign," said Neil Hicks, Director of International Programs. "In the 
global struggle against terrorism we are seeing the emergence of alliances of 
autocrats who are more interested in using counterterrorism as a pretext to 
stifle dissent, than in taking effective measure to combat the real threat of 
transnational terrorism. As such they pursue policies that only foster 
polarization and instability, creating the breeding ground for terrorists." 
Human Rights First urges all governments and international governmental 
organizations to demand accountability for human rights violations occurring in 
Uzbekistan, beginning with an independent, international investigation into the 
government use of force against civilians in Andizhan. International cooperation 
to combat terrorism cannot be built on a foundation of repression and disregard 
for the rule of law.
Background
Both Uzbekistan and Malaysia have a history of using counterterrorism as a 
justification for committing human rights violations against their nonviolent 
critics, including human rights defenders. Since bomb blasts went off in 
Tashkent, Uzbekistan, in 1999, the Uzbek government has used counterterrorism 
laws and policies to persecute and silence human rights defenders. In Malaysia, 
the Internal Security Act (ISA) -- a draconian law justified as necessary in the 
fight against terrorism -- has been used to hold political opponents, religious 
activists, and common criminals without charge or trial. International and 
domestic efforts to repeal the ISA were set back in the climate of heightened 
global security after the September 11 attacks. 