UN "Defamation of Religions" Resolution to Spark Heated Debate
November 05, 2010
New York, NY – As the United Nations General Assembly  prepares for a heated debate this fall over a contentious "defamation of  religions" resolution, Human Rights First is urging delegations to see  past the rhetoric that has long-shaped this discussion and take a closer  look at the realities that result from such laws. The group notes that a  vote in the Third Committee is expected to occur before the end of  November, and the General Assembly will tackle the resolution in  December.

In an open letter sent to Delegations of the U.N. Member States, Human Rights First  noted, "Those who support defamation of religions laws argue that such  restrictions are necessary in order to combat incitement to  discrimination, hostility, and violence, as well as to protect freedom  of religion. In practice, these laws create particular problems for  those holding religious views that differ from the majority, as well as  nonbelievers and adherents to minority faiths."

To underscore this point, Human Rights First has issued a new report  exposing the harsh realities of the "defamation of religions" concept. Blasphemy Laws Exposed: The Consequences of Criminalizing "Defamation of Religions," details more than 50 recent cases from 15 countries that provide a  window into how national blasphemy laws are abused by governments. The  real-life stories in this report document how blasphemy statutes are  frequently used to target individuals for the peaceful expression of  political or religious views. Human Rights First notes that time and  again, accusations of blasphemy have resulted in arrests and arbitrary  detentions and have sparked assaults, murders and mob attacks.

For example, one story detailed in Human Rights First's new report,  originates from Egypt, where "defamation of religion" is illegal. On  February 22, 2007, Abdul Kareem Nabeel Suliman (a.k.a. Kareem Amer), a  22-year-old law student from Alexandria, was sentenced to four years in  prison: three years for contempt of religion and one year for defaming  President Mubarak. Disturbed by what Kareem perceived to be religious  extremism at his university, he expressed secular views promoting gender  equality and questioning Islam on his blog and websites, Modern Discussion and Copts United.  Kareem was first arrested in 2005 and detained for 12 days. In November  2006, he was arrested again after being expelled from Al-Azhar  University, who had informed state prosecutors of his writings. Until  his trial, he was held in solitary confinement because he refused to  recant. In March 2007, the Court of Appeals upheld Kareem's conviction  and approved a civil claim brought by Egyptian lawyers who sought to  fine him for insulting Islam." Kareem's family has disowned him and his  father has called for the application of Sharia law against him. For his  efforts, Kareem was awarded the 2007 Hugo Young Award for Journalism  and is an honorary member of English PEN.

Despite widespread abuse of blasphemy laws, for more than a decade,  efforts have been made through several channels at the United Nations to  promote the concept that states have an obligation to adopt and enforce  laws against the "defamation of religions." Most recently, in March,  there was growing UN Human Rights Council opposition to a "defamation of  religions" resolution brought before the Council and many nations that  had previously abstained from this debate chose to speak out in  opposition to the measure's passage. Though a growing number of U.N.  States ultimately voted against the resolution, it narrowly passed.

The U.N. General Assembly has shown a similar steady erosion of  support for the "defamations of religions" concept. This fall's  defamation of religions resolution will test the will of nations to  ultimately reject this problematic measure and the harsh realities of  its potential passage and replace it with action steps that governments  must take to combat violence, discrimination and bigotry.

"Violence and discrimination against Muslims – as well as members of  other religious minorities – is a real concern and more should be done  to confront and counteract this problem," said Human Rights First's Tad  Stahnke. "But creating new international norms restricting freedom of  expression is not the way. Instead, governments and communities need to  join forces to speak out and condemn acts of bigotry and hatred.  Governments should also do more to combat violence motivated by  religious intolerance."

Human Rights First notes that this approach works and cites a recent  U.S. example to back this claim. According to the group, in the wake of  the debate surrounding the "Burn A Koran Day" planned by a small  congregation in Gainesville, Florida, a wave of public outcry was  unleashed. From officials at the highest levels of government and  prominent military leaders to local elected leaders and ordinary  Americans, voices from across the nation united to convey a very  different message – one of tolerance and peace. Their actions  demonstrated how political tools – as opposed to laws created to limit  freedom of expression – can effectively confront and counteract  violence, discrimination, incitement and hatred.

Speaking out against intolerance has long been a cornerstone of Human Rights First's work. For example, the organization's 10 Point Plan to Combat Hate Crime provides governments with steps they can take to confront hate speech  while respecting freedom of expression. To read more about this work,  visit http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/discrimination/pages.aspx?id=150. 