“I wonder who the experts are”: Who Helps to Keep Pussy Riot in Jail?
June 29, 2012
Photo of Pussy Riot punk band member Tolokonnikova. Photo: Denis Sinyakov/Reuters By Innokenty Grekov Three members of the female punk band Pussy Riot remain in pretrial detention for staging a nonviolent protest against Vladimir Putin and the Russian Orthodox Church in Moscow’s main cathedral. They were originally charged with “hooliganism” (punishable by up to 7 years in prison), but they could be penalized further if they are found guilty of “inciting hatred” toward Christians. This scheme has worked well in the past: Russian authorities use anti-extremism laws to suppress civic dissenters, religious groups, and artists. The growing mountain of cases often rely on the testimony of “independent” experts who are recruited to determine whether the accused tried to incite hatred through words or actions. These subjective testimonies—often misleading and full of blunders—carry a lot of weight. A regional court in Orenburg issued a federal ban on 65 Islamic publications without consulting an expert affiliated with a Muslim group or even a religious scholar. “I wonder who the judges are” is an oft-quoted phrase from Alexander Griboedov’s classic Woe from Wit. It’s too early for a final verdict in the Pussy Riot case, so for now let us consider the experts. They include three esteemed professors—Vsevolod Troitsky, Vera Abramenkova, and Igor Ponkin—who scrutinized the video clip of Pussy Riot’s “Punk Prayer” through “psychological, linguistic, and judicial-linguistic” lenses and concluded that the accused had indeed conspired to violate public norms and showed considerable contempt for the society overall and religious believers in particular, and that their motive was religious hatred. Here is how these three particular experts testified in past cases, all related to the problem of misuse of anti-extremism laws in Russia: “My! I see familiar faces!” is another celebrated phrase from Griboedov’s comedy. There can be no question about their bias against the accused punk artists. Russia should stop playing games and release Pussy Riot immediately before proceeding to making significant alterations in the country’s strategy for combating extremism, in which the experts are often a bigger problem than the accused. 