Changes Needed to Army Field Manual on Interrogation, Former Interrogators and Intelligence Officials Say
November 16, 2010
A  regulation  that human rights advocates have long sought to overturn  may severely hamper  the ability of U.S. interrogators to question   terrorism suspects and individuals captured on the battlefield, more  than a  dozen former interrogators and intelligence officials told Secretary of Defense  Robert Gates today.

“We are very  concerned about a handful of changes that were written into the [Army Field  Manual on Interrogation] in 2006,” the former interrogators wrote in a letter  delivered to the Secretary today.

Signatories to  the letter include Ali  Soufan, a leading FBI interrogator who questioned  high level Al Qaeda  suspects such as Abu Zubaydah; Steve Kleinman, a leading  author of the  2006 Defense Science Board Educing Information report which the Obama  administration has used to help chart  interrogation policy; and COL Stuart  Herrington, an intelligence  officer who ran high value detainee interrogation  operations for the  U.S. Army in Vietnam, Panama, and Iraq.

Appendix  M

At  issue is an  appendix added to the manual in 2006. The appendix, known  as Appendix M, “places  unnecessary restrictions on an effective  interrogation technique known as  ‘separation,’” the former  interrogators and intelligence officials  wrote.

Since it was  adopted, rights  advocates have asked the Pentagon to eliminate the appendix.  They  point to guidelines in the appendix that could be construed as  permitting U.S. interrogators to use sleep  deprivation and sensory deprivation techniques on high value detainees.

Appendix   M identifies a select  interrogation technique to be used only against  so-called “unlawful enemy  combatants”  for the first time  since the  initial  version of the manual was written in 1956, and this technique  is particularly vulnerable to  abuse according to a  torture in  their  letter, saying “Regardless of the form in which they are used,  we do not believe  the abusive techniques set forth in Appendix M will  enhance the ability of  United  States interrogators to question  detainees  effectively.”

But  they also  argue that the appendix is hampering U.S. intelligence  gathering efforts  by restricting the use of separation. The letter  quotes Col.  Herrington:

In  all the interrogation centers that I  have worked in or run, we  separated the “guests” from one another.  Most  welcomed this.  A  prisoner might cooperate if decently and cleverly treated, but  only if  we could provide a discreet  environment where  he could feel comfortable spending long hours  talking with us.  That  meant each “guest” had to have a private room, and could  not be exposed  to any other detainee (encounters in the hallways, for example).   This  was Rule #1 in our centers.  Iraqi general officers housed in our  “guest  center” did not want to be seen by other Iraqi officers and were  grateful for  the comfortable, compartmented environment that we  provided.

The interrogators  and intelligence officials continue, “Separation must not be confused with  isolation. The former seeks only  to protect a detainee from the negative influences of—or unnecessary  exposure  to—other detainees. The latter is commonly employed as a means of   punishment and/or coercion in an ill-conceived effort to ‘break’ a   detainee.”

Special  Permission

Writing  just two  years after the revelations of abuse at Abu Ghraib, the  authors of Appendix M  included what they call, “more stringent than  normal safeguards” in authorizing  the use of separation.

Separation,  which  was lumped together with the authorization for the use of sleep  deprivation and  sensory deprivation tactics, became a “restricted  technique,” requiring special  authorization from the combat commander, a  4-star commanding general or  admiral.

“Incorrectly   linking the use of potentially abusive questioning tactics with the  ‘separation’  approach has severely, and unnecessarily, restricted the  use of this valuable  technique,” the interrogators and intelligence  officials  write.

“If  this had been  in place when I was in Iraq,  Panama or Vietnam, I would   not have been able to do my job,” Col. Herrington told Human Rights   First.

Eliminating   Appendix M would not take an act of Congress. It can be reviewed and  updated at  any time according to Army Field Manual regulations. As the  interrogators and  intelligence officials make clear, it is time to  eradicate an interrogation  policy that not only opens the door to human  rights violations but also makes us  less safe. 