Buzzfeed Chronicles Struggles of LGBT Syrian Refugees in Turkey
November 04, 2015
A recent feature by Buzzfeed's J. Lester Feder on the plight of LGBT Syrian refugees offered a rare look at the lives of one of the most vulnerable displaced groups. Feder relays the fears of LGBT refugees caught in limbo in Turkey as they try to find safe haven. According to the article, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees’ office in Turkey reports that it has registered 700 LGBT individuals. That number is likely low, as many refugees are unaware that sexual orientation or gender identity can be a basis for refugee protection and, in some cases, resettlement in a third country. Many LGBT Syrians are also too afraid to come forward out of fear that they will become targets of homophobic violence. The estimated total wait time for refugees, including LGBT refugees, to be resettled is typically a minimum of two years. The process includes multiple appointments with UNHCR, other agencies, and representatives of resettlement states. During this time, work is scarce, leading many to seek a living in exploitative or inhumane conditions. The waiting and lack of legitimate work lead many to abandon the process altogether. Some pay exorbitant fees to ride in flimsy rubber boats across the Mediterranean, in hopes that they can find refuge in a European state. Some return to Syria, where despite the uncertainty of whether they'll live another day, they are at least at home. Due to the conflict in Syria, over four million refugees have fled to Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, and Egypt. There are about 2 million Syrian refugees in Turkey alone. These frontline countries are overstretched and have not received sufficient international support through resettlement and other assistance. As the crisis worsens, Syria's neighbors are turning away new arrivals in violation of international law—leaving them trapped amid the violence of war. To ease the pressure on these states, the U.S. government should back up the efforts of Syria's neighbors with increased aid and a revived effort to resettle more Syrian refugees, including LGBT refugees. The United States should also improve the pace and efficiency of its unduly slow resettlement system. This can be accomplished without undermining the security vetting process; in fact, the United States should devote more resources to eliminate delays in this area as well. Many refugees face dire risks while they wait for completion of U.S. vetting and resettlement processes. To honor its commitment to global leadership on human rights, the United States should lead a global initiative to increase humanitarian assistance for refugees, development assistance for refugee-hosting communities, and resettlement to at least 100,000 Syrian refugees over the next year. For the LGBT refugees featured in the Buzzfeed article, a renewed commitment to help resolve this crisis may be too late. But for the many just beginning their journey, the United States should act now. Learn more about Human Rights First's efforts to protect the human rights of LGBT people and our commitment to refugee protection. 