Washington Week on Human Rights: November 16, 2015
November 16, 2015
France Attacks Following the tragic November 13 Paris terrorist attacks that claimed more than 130 lives across the city, Human Rights First’s Susan Corke, who was in Paris last week to meet with French officials and nongovernmental organizations working on extremism and antisemitism, issued a set of recommendations that stem from her ongoing research. Corke is working on a report about how the rise of far-right extremism, Muslim extremism, and antisemitism are converging to fuel intolerance and violence in France. Human Rights First’s Daphne Eviatar also examined how the United States should respond to the attacks in a piece targeting presidential candidates. Her Huffington Post blog “5 Truths About Counterterrorism Presidential Candidates Should Keep in Mind” lays out five lessons the United States should have learned in the 14 years since the 9/11 terror attacks and strategies that best work to counter extremism. Both Corke’s recommendations and Eviatar’s piece prioritize the need to continue assistance to Syrian refugees, many of whom are fleeing the same kind of terror perpetrated in Friday’s attacks. Guantanamo Five detainees from the U.S. detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, have been transferred to the United Arab Emirates. The transfers came as Congress continues its push to limit the Obama Administration’s ability to close the facility before the end of his second term. Last week 32 of the nation’s most respected retired generals and admirals urged President Obama to submit a plan to Congress detailing actions the administration will take to shutter the facility. There are 107 detainees at the detention facility in Guantanamo Bay. Military leaders and national security experts agree that the facility harms national security and should be closed. Forty-eight of the remaining detainees are cleared for transfer, and another 48 are eligible for Periodic Review Board (PRB) review. Human Rights First’s plan to close Guantanamo is outlined in its blueprint How to Close Guantanamo. Global Equality Last week, the Ukrainian parliament passed a workplace anti-discrimination amendment to the country’s labor code that is inclusive of sexual orientation and gender identity. The new legislation provides a key legal protection to lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) Ukrainians, while also bringing the country more in line with E.U. human rights standards. The Ukrainian amendment passed one day after Lithuania removed consideration of a proposed anti-LGBT amendment from its agenda. The Lithuanian parliament was poised to vote on the proposed amendment to Lithuania's Code of Administrative Violations, which would introduce administrative liability for public denigration of "constitutional family values." The Ukrainian and Lithuanian developments are a welcome shift away from the homophobic political influence of Russia in the region and present an opportunity for the United States and the E.U. to continue confronting persecution and marginalization of the LGBT community. While these positive steps are an encouraging rebuke of Russia in Eastern Europe, a long-considered anti-LGBT bill before the Kyrgyzstan parliament will soon receive a final reading. The bill emulates Russia's bill banning propaganda of nontraditional sexual relations to minors. If passed, Kyrgyz President Atambayev would have the opportunity to veto the homophobic legislation that could lead to imprisonment of LGBT individuals. Human Rights First continues to urge the U.S. government to work to prevent the spread of Russian-style propaganda laws in the surrounding region. Human Rights First’s blueprint, How to Stop Russia from Exporting Homophobia details how Russia’s homophobic laws and policies have spread throughout Eastern Europe and Central Asia, and outlines key steps that the U.S. government can take to stop the spread of laws and policies that infringe on the human rights of the LGBT community. Veterans for American Ideals On Veteran’s Day, Human Rights First launched an initiative called Veterans for American Ideals, a new group focused on raising the voices of veterans to continue their service by challenging America to live up to its ideals. The initiative reflects the organization’s long history of working with military leaders to advocate policies that adhere to American ideals and enhance national security. Veterans for American Ideals is a nonpartisan group of veterans who share a belief that America is strongest and most secure when its policies and actions match its ideals. The group will focus on working with people across the aisle to drive consensus on issues from torture to ensuring that those fleeing persecution can find refuge. To learn more or join, visit vfai.org. “This is an attack not just on Paris, it’s an attack not just on the people of France, but this is an attack on all of humanity and the universal values that we share.” --Remarks by President Obama Following the November 13 Paris Terrorist Attacks In a piece for The Hill, Human Rights First’s Eleanor Acer argued that Congress should appropriate additional funding to support increased efforts to resettle Syrian refugees. Writing for the Philadelphia Inquirer, Human Rights First’s Olga Byrne described the conditions inside the Berks County family detention center, demonstrating how immigration detention is detrimental to the health and well-being of children. In a letter to the editor of The New York Times, Human Rights First’s Elisa Massimino highlighted the U.S.’s flawed policy of treating refugees as criminals. Rolling Stone commentator Jesse Berney argued that the rightful response to the terrorist attacks in Paris is to welcome more refugees who are fleeing extremism, rather than turn them away. Human Rights First’s Susan Corke appeared on MSNBC to discuss extremism and the political climate in France. Corke spoke with Chris Hayes about her recent research trip to France, trends Human Rights First is following, and how the Paris attacks may impact assistance for Syrian refugees. Wednesday, November 18, 2015 The House Armed Services Committee will hold a hearing on "Outside Views on the Strategy for Iraq and Syria." John McLaughlin, former acting director of central intelligence; and Ryan Crocker, former ambassador to Syria and Iraq, will testify. 1PM, 2118 Rayburn House Office Building Thursday, November 19, 2015 The House Judiciary Committee’s Immigration and Border Security Subcommittee will hold a hearing on "The Syrian Refugee Crisis and Its Impact on the Security of the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program." 9AM, 2141 Rayburn House Office Building Monday, November 16, 2015 The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) will host the 6th annual "Global Security Forum" on the top challenges facing U.S. and global security. 8AM, CSIS, 1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW, Washington, D.C. The Project on Middle East Democracy (POMED) and the Legatum Institute will hold a discussion on "Countering Terrorism in Tunisia: Prospects for Security Sector Reform." The event will feature Daniel Brumberg, co-director of democracy and governance studies at Georgetown University; Querine Hanlon, president of the Strategic Capacity Group; Cole Bockenfeld, deputy director for policy at POMED; Anne Applebaum, director of the transitions forum at the Legatum Institute; and Fadil Aliriza, visiting senior fellow at the Legatum Institute. 12PM, Open Society Foundations, 1730 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 700, Washington, D.C. The Project on Middle East Democracy (POMED) and Americans for Democracy and Human Rights in Bahrain (ADHRB) will host a discussion on "Bahrain's Stalled Path to Reform." The event will feature Elliot Abrams, senior fellow for Middle Eastern studies at the Council on Foreign Relations; Robert Herman, vice president of regional programs at Freedom House; Dwight Bashir, acting co-director of policy and research at the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom; Matar Ebrihim Matar, former Bahraini politician of the al-Wefaq political party; and Kate Kizer, U.S. advocacy officer at ADHRB. 3:30PM, SVC-212, U.S. Capitol The George Washington University (GWU) Elliott School of International Affairs will hold a discussion on "Political and Economic Trends in Kazakhstan: Risks, Threats and Prospects." 4:30PM, GWU Elliott School, 1957 E Street NW, Room 505, Washington, D.C. Tuesday, November 17, 2015 The National Endowment for Democracy (NED) will hold a discussion on "The Global Assault on Civil Society." The event will feature Anne Applebaum, director of Legatum Institute's Transitions Forum; Michele Dunne, director and senior associate in Carnegie Endowment for International Peace's Middle East Program; Louisa Greve, vice president for Asia, Middle East and North Africa, and global programs at NED; Douglas Rutzen, president and CEO at the International Center for Not-for-Profit Law; Christopher Walker, executive director of the International Forum for Democratic Studies; Marc Plattner, vice president for research and studies at NED and editor of the Journal of Democracy. 12PM, NED, 1025 F Street NW, Suite 800, Washington, D.C. The Johns Hopkins University Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) will hold an off-the-record forum on "U.S. Foreign Policy and National Security." The discussion will feature former Deputy Secretary of State William Burns, president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace; Shirin Tahir-Kheli, senior fellow at the Foreign Policy Institute. 12:30PM, SAIS, Nitze Building, 1740 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Kenney Auditorium, Washington, D.C. Thursday, November 19, 2015 Freedom House will host a forum on "Roadblocks or Stepping Stones for Civil Society in Eurasia? Prominent Voices from the Ground." The event will feature Ales Bialiatski, chair of the Human Rights Center Viasna (Belarus); and Yevgeny Zhovtis, chair of the board of the Kazakhstan International Bureau for Human Rights and Rule of Law. 3PM, Freedom House, 1850 M Street NW, Suite 1100, Washington, D.C. 