Asylum News–Winter 2009/2010
July 02, 2010
ICE implements new  guidance on parole from detention for asylum seekers On January 4, 2010, a new policy by the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) guiding the parole  and release decisions for asylum seekers who pass credible fear went into  effect. Under U.S. immigration law, arriving  asylum seekers are initially subject to mandatory detention. The new parole  guidance issued by ICE requires that arriving asylum seekers who pass through  the "credible fear" screening process be assessed for release from  detention by ICE, and allows for the release of those who can establish their  identity and do not present a flight risk or danger to the community.  Read more about  Human  Rights First's recommendations on the detention of asylum seekers and more  about ICE's new parole policy. DHS extends TPS to  Haitian nationals in the United States Three days following the catastrophic earthquake in Haiti, Janet Napolitano, Secretary of the  Department of Homeland Security, announced that the United   States will extend Temporary Protected Status (TPS) for  18 months to Haitian nationals, thus allowing Haitians already living in the United States  to apply for permission to remain here for a limited time and work  legally. As noted in the DHS announcement, TPS will only be available to  Haitian nationals who were in the United States  as of January 12, 2010 – and is not available to any Haitian nationals who arrive  in the United States  after that date. Read the Human Rights First statement. Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service developed an  online training titled: "Applying for Temporary Protected Status for  Haitians in the U.S." You can download notes and a recording of the 1.5 hour training  (or listen without downloading) here.  For more information on how to apply for TPS, see USCIS' website. Hearing on U.S. compliance  with international human rights treaties On December 16, 2009, the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on  Human Rights and the Law held the first ever hearing focused on how the U.S. is  living up to its obligations under international human rights treaties. Human  Rights First President and CEO, Elisa Massimino,  testified before the Subcommittee, calling for implementation of human rights  treaties across the U.S. government, noting that the United States must meet  its own treaty obligations as it seeks to strengthen efforts to advance human  rights abroad. Ms. Massimino noted that the United Nations Universal Periodic  Review of the United States,  conducted this year, provides an excellent opportunity to demonstrate the  commitment of the United States  to uphold its international treaty obligations and to advance a better  understanding of those obligations by domestic government agencies and the  broader public.  Testimony of Human Rights  First President and CEO, Elisa Massimino, and the appendix on U.S. asylum  policies. Read more about the hearing.  Read more about the Universal Periodic Review.  Rodi Alvarado finally  granted asylum, ending her fourteen year legal battle On December 16, 2009 – fourteen years after fleeing her home  country of Guatemala,  where she suffered a decade of brutal domestic violence – Rodi Alvarado's legal  battle finally concluded when an immigration judge granted her asylum. Human  Rights First is relieved that Ms. Alvarado's legal struggle has been resolved  but continues to urge U.S. policymakers to promulgate regulations clarifying  aspects of the "social group" basis for asylum so that other women  who have suffered brutal persecution are not denied refugee protection in the  United States – or forced to wait for years to have their cases resolved. Read about Ms. Alvarado's legal battle and the Center for Gender &  Refugee Studies' successful advocacy on behalf of Ms. Alvarado. Save the Date: "Renewing  U.S.  Commitment to Refugee Protection: The 30th Anniversary of the Refugee  Act," March 16, 2010 On March 16, 2010, Human Rights First and Georgetown University  Law School  will be hosting a symposium entitled, "Renewing U.S. Commitment to Refugee  Protection: The 30th Anniversary of the Refugee Act," in Washington, D.C. The 30th Anniversary of the this landmark  piece of legislation offers an occasion to highlight the United States'  achievements under the Refugee Act and honor the contributions refugees and  their children have made to the diverse fabric of American society. Likewise,  it is an opportunity to discuss the current challenges in the U.S. refugee  resettlement and asylum systems and the ways in which policymakers can work  together to overcome them. The forum will bring together members of Congress  and their staff, UNHCR, officials within current and past administrations,  faith leaders, members of the NGO community, leading academics in the field of  refugee and asylum policy, pro bono attorneys, and refugees who have restarted  their lives in the United States.  Read more symposium information and register.  Previous Asylum Newsletters 