New Trafficking Ambassador Addresses U.S. Mission to the United Nations
November 06, 2015
After almost a year without a leader, the State Department Trafficking in Person’s office has a new Ambassador, Susan Coppedge Amato, confirmed by Congress in October. She certainly seems like a good choice for the job. At her first public appearance today, Ambassador Coppedge, a former federal prosecutor from Georgia with a strong record prosecuting human trafficking cases, made clear that while the United States has some strong laws on the books to prosecute traffickers, “we must all do more to address this problem." Speaking at the U.S. Mission to the United Nations, Coppedge presented her office’s 2015 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) report, a 382-page volume on anti-trafficking efforts around the world that Coppedge called “the United States’ principle diplomatic tool” to convince other countries to do more to fight this form of modern slavery. The credibility of that report has recently been called into question, however – an issue the new ambassador will need to address. As a Reuters news report revealed in August, the TIP report released last summer (before Coppedge took office) upgraded the rankings of 14 countries, even though State Department experts reportedly did not believe the evidence supported improvement on their efforts to combat trafficking. Malaysia, for example, long criticized for not doing enough to combat forced labor and sex trafficking, was upgraded this year to “Tier 2 Watch List,” a step above its previous “Tier 3” ranking –  essentially a failing grade. (Tier 3 countries are those “whose governments do not fully comply with the minimum standards and are not making significant efforts to do so.”) Malaysia’s upgrade was crucial to President Obama’s ability to win “fast-track” approval for his proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) in Congress, since Malaysia would be a partner in the proposed trade agreement, and Congress has prohibited “fast-track” approval of any trade deal that includes a Tier 3 country. The upgrade of Malaysia therefore raised understandable suspicion that the State Department’s change in rank was more an attempt to push through the trade deal than a reflection of any actual improvement in the country’s anti-trafficking efforts. The lack of a leader in the State Department to champion the anti-trafficking cause may have smoothed the way for that upgrade – or at least left skeptics suspicious. Coppedge has the ability to restore the credibility of her office and its important annual report. Her strong background prosecuting traffickers inspires confidence. Today, she recounted several moving stories about prosecutions of traffickers in Georgia that revealed a real understanding of the challenges involved and the need to improve education and the resources available to take on this often hidden crime. She also talked about the importance of businesses mapping their global supply chains to examine and root out labor trafficking, although she didn’t specifically address prosecuting them. That’s a problem. Worldwide, convictions for human trafficking dropped 23 percent last year, from nearly 6000 to under 4500. With more than 20 million victims of trafficking around the globe, Coppedge will need to press both the U.S. government and other countries to make prosecuting human trafficking – both sex trafficking and labor trafficking, by individuals and by organizations -- a much higher priority. She also needs to repair the credibility of the TIP Report, increasing transparency around that investigative process so it’s clear that countries are rated on their actual anti-trafficking efforts and not for other political interests. Responding to a question about the report on Friday, she said “the report has been honest and forthcoming every year, and we will continue to do that in next year’s TIP report.” We hope that in her new position, she will find ways to demonstrate that publicly. She also needs to improve how data is collected, so all countries are ranked consistently based on the same information provided. The theme of this year’s TIP report was “preventing human trafficking in global supply chains.” Coppedge noted that governments can “lead by example,” as the U.S. government has done by requiring government contractors to demonstrate that neither they nor their subcontractors are relying upon forced labor. But the U.S. government can and should do more, including using the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and other federal statutes to clamp down on all companies that turn a blind eye to trafficking by their sub-contractors and other agents. U.S. anti-trafficking law “is very generous to prosecutors,” Coppedge said on Friday. That’s good news to hear from a former prosecutor. But the low number of convictions in trafficking cases is not encouraging. We hope Coppedge will be able to use her influence in her new post to encourage the U.S. government to devote far more resources and interest in prosecuting this crime, wherever it occurs. 