3 Years After Blackwater Massacre in Iraq, Contractors Still Lack Accountability and Oversight
September 16, 2010
By Melina Milazzo and Daphne Eviatar
Law and Security


On September 16, 2007, Blackwater Worldwide (now Xe) private security  contractors working for the U.S. Department of State shot dead 17  unarmed civilians and wounded 24 more in an unprovoked incident in  Baghdad’s Nisoor Square. Amid the political firestorm that ensued, one  thing became crystal clear: the United States lacked a coordinated,  systematic policy for overseeing private contractors abroad and holding  them accountable for serious violent crimes.

Three years later, we’ve seen some progress in U.S. law and policy.  Congress has required greater agency oversight and coordination over  contractors in Iraq and Afghanistan, and established a means of  investigating and reviewing incidents of violence by private security  contractors abroad.

But serious gaps in oversight and accountability continue, especially  when it comes to holding contractors accountable for serious violent  crimes like the ones that took place in Baghdad three years ago. And the  U.S. has never created a mechanism for compensating the victims of  private security contractors’ crimes.

In a report issued  today, Human Rights First provides a snapshot of the legal and  regulatory progress made since the Nisoor Square shooting, and  identifies key areas where we still need major improvement.

When it came to holding the Blackwater contractors accountable, the Bush  administration claimed that the U.S. government had no authority to  prosecute private security contractors working for the State Department,  as the Blackwater guards were. Although the Obama administration takes a  different view, the issue has never been resolved by Congress or the  courts.

To date, it remains unclear whether the U.S. government can prosecute  contractors who work for any agencies other than the Department of  Defense for serious crimes committed abroad. And it’s not clear that the  Status of Forces Agreement between Iraq and the United States even  allows the Iraqi government to prosecute all private security  contractors in its own country for serious crimes committed there.

The Civilian Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act, or CEJA, currently in  both chambers of Congress, would clarif y and expand U.S. criminal  jurisdiction over all private contractors working for the U.S.  government abroad . The U.S. government also needs to review its  agreements with Iraq and Afghanistan and ensure that local law in those  countries adequately extends to civilian contractors, so that serious  crimes committed do not go unpunished.

The problem isn’t only with prosecuting violent crimes, however. U.S.  government agencies don’t even track how many contractors and  subcontractors work for them abroad. And the U.S. government still lacks  sufficient staff within agencies that rely on private contractors  abroad to keep track of contractors’ work and ensure they’re obeying the  law. In Iraq, a Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction found  that the Defense and State Departments still need to improve their  investigations of serious incidents. And in Afghanistan, private  security contractors for the State Department are not even required to  report serious incidents (such as attacks, injuries, and death)  involving contractors to the government.

Despite the troubling lack of oversight, the United States is  dramatically increasing its reliance on private security contractors.  With the U.S. drawdown in Iraq, the Department of State plans to more  than double the number of private security contractors it employs, from  2,700 to 7,000. And an additional 50,000 contractors are expected to be  needed to support the Afghan surge. Meanwhile, the jurisdictional gap  over non-Defense contractors widens.

“We cannot win a fight for hearts and minds when we outsource critical  missions to unaccountable contractors,” said Barack Obama, then a U.S.  Senator, shortly after the Nisoor Square shootings. President Obama was  right then. The U.S. has both a moral responsibility and a national  security interest in ensuring that the contractors it fields abroad  operate in an effective, safe and law-abiding manner. 