Human Rights Summit
October 11, 2012
Day 1 Video streaming by Ustream
Video streaming by Ustream Day 2 Video streaming by Ustream
Video streaming by Ustream View the Agenda View Participant Bios On December 4-5, 2012, Human Rights First will convene the inaugural Human Rights Summit: American ideals. Universal values, marking the 64th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Summit is designed to bring international civil society activists, U.S. policymakers, military and business leaders together to reaffirm the importance of U.S. global leadership on human rights. Human Rights First believes that American leadership is necessary to secure human rights around the world. We hope you will join us as we celebrate progress and address the challenges ahead. Sessions during the two-day Summit will cover human rights issues including the Arab Spring, emerging technologies, immigration reform, and more. Senators Richard Durbin (D – IL) and John McCain (R-AZ), Chairman of the United Civil Front Garry Kasparov, President of the Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission Dr. Richard Land, and Vice President of Communications and Public Policy at Facebook Elliot Schrage will join us as guest speakers. Film Screening: THE HOUSE I LIVE IN Human Rights First invites you to the screening of the award-winning film THE HOUSE I LIVE IN on Tuesday, December 4, at 7 p.m. The screening will be followed by a discussion with acclaimed filmmaker Eugene Jarecki, who received the Grand Jury Prize at this year’s Sundance Film Festival for this film. Human Rights First will also unveil winners of our distinguished awards: The Baldwin Award: The Roger N. Baldwin Medal of Liberty was established in 1989 in honor of the principal founder of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and the International League for Human Rights. The Award is presented by Human Rights First every other year to a human rights organization or activist outside of the United States that has made a distinguished contribution to the protection and promotion of human rights. More info. Beacon Award: The annual Beacon Prize will be awarded to an individual or organization whose work embodies the best in the tradition of American leadership on human rights.  More info. 