Intergovernmental Report: Hate Crime Remains a Serious Problem in Europe and North America
November 17, 2010
Human Rights First, Anti-Defamation League Issue Companion Analysis that Urges Government Action to Combat Hate Crime
New York, NY – The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) today released its annual report for 2009 "Hate Crimes in the OSCE Region – Incidents and Responses,"  concluding that hate crime continued to be a serious problem in many of  the 56 countries in North America, Europe, and the former Soviet Union.  This is the first study since the passage of the notable 2009  Ministerial Council Decision 9/09, in which participating countries  upheld unanimously their commitment to collect and publicize detailed  statistics on hate crime.

To compliment the intergovernmental report, U.S. international rights  groups Human Rights First (HRF) and Anti-Defamation League (ADL) issued  a reaction paper that highlights the failure of many of the OSCE states to fulfill commitments to combat the problem.

"While the OSCE member states have adopted meaningful political  commitments to combat hate crime, this report reveals that most states  still have a long way to go in turning those words into action," stated  Human Rights First's Paul LeGendre. "We are calling on States to  reaffirm these commitments and their will to act at the highest level  when they meet on December 1-2 at the first OSCE Summit meeting since  1999."

According to the report of the OSCE's Office for Democratic  Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR), 2009 saw instances of  intimidation, threats, vandalism, arson, assault, and murder targeted  against persons or groups because of their race, religion, ethnicity,  sexual orientation or other status. The scarcely available official  government figures tracking such crimes underscore the importance of  strengthening state responses to hate crimes, including through  enactment of legislation, data collection, and sharing of best  practices.

Human Rights First maintains that authorities continue to underreport  the true number of incidents, although the group acknowledges that more  countries are taking steps to improve their legislative frameworks and  systems of data collection, while requesting international cooperation  to train police and prosecutors.

"Bulgaria, for example, amended its hate crime provision and  submitted data to ODIHR for the first time this year, while also  agreeing to participate in the Law Enforcement Training Program  coordinated by the OSCE," notes Paul LeGendre. "We hope the ODIHR's  report serves as an annual reminder to more governments about the vast  resources available to them, as the overall across-the-board response to  hate crime remains feeble."

The joint analysis produced by Human Rights First and Anti-Defamation  League offers specific recommendations tailored to states' varying  levels of adherence to commitments to combat hate crimes.

"The ODIHR's annual report confirms nongovernmental and media reports  suggesting that hate crime continues to be a serious challenge for  governments throughout the region in 2009." noted LeGendre.

The beheading of a Kyrgyz man in the Russian Federation, the brutal  murder of a Romani man and his 5-year-old son in Hungary, the stabbing  of a gay couple in the United Kingdom, the wave of antisemitic violence  across many countries in Europe that followed Israeli attacks in Gaza,  and the stabbing of a Muslim cab driver in the United States, are among  the long list of violent hate crimes that generated shock waves through  entire communities.

"Governments must step up their efforts to combat hate violence and  enlist the help of ODIHR's experts to improve their legislative  frameworks, institute sound data collection mechanisms, and train law  enforcement officials." concluded LeGendre. 