MEDIA ADVISORY: Distinguished Military Leaders to Discuss National Security Benefits of Closing Guantanamo Detention Facility
November 18, 2009
(Williamsburg, Virginia  November 18, 2009) A group of the nation's most distinguished retired military leaders will discuss the national security benefits of closing the U.S. detention facility at Guantanamo on November 19, 2009 at 5 p.m. at William & Mary Law School. 
Following last week's Obama administration announcement, the panelists will also offer insight about the national security implications and legal benefits of trying terrorism suspects in New York's federal courts. The U.S. Court for the Eastern District of Virginia was also considered as a top venue for these cases. There are still many cases pending review.
What: Military leaders to discuss the national security benefits of closing the Guantanamo detention facility. This event, hosted by the Human Rights First and Human Security Law Program, is free and open to the public.Who: Major General Paul D. Eaton, USA (Ret.)Lieutenant General Harry E. Soyster, USA (Ret.)Brigadier General James P. Cullen, USA (Ret.) 

These panelists are among the retired military officials who stood behind President Obama on his second day in office as he signed the Executive Orders banning torture and ordering the closure of the Guantanamo detention facility by January 2010.
When: Thursday, November 19, 2009 at 5:00 pm
Where: William & Mary Law School, Room 127
About the panelists:
Major General Paul D. Eaton, USA (Ret.)General Eaton recently retired from the U.S. Army after more than 33 years service. His assignments include Infantry command from the company to brigade levels, command of the Infantry Center at Fort Benning and Chief of Infantry. His most recent operational assignment was Commanding General of the command charged with reestablishing Iraqi Security Forces 2003-2004, where he built the command and established the structure and infrastructure for the Iraqi Armed Forces. Other operational assignments include Somalia, Bosnia and Albania. Other assignments include the Joint Staff, Deputy Commanding General for Transformation and Stryker Unit Development and Assistant Professor and head of the French Department at West Point. He is a 1972 graduate of West Point.
Lieutenant General Harry E. Soyster, USA (Ret.)Lieutenant General Soyster served as Director, Defense Intelligence Agency during DESERT SHIELD/STORM. He also served as Deputy Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, Commanding General, U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Command and in the Joint Reconnaissance Center, Joint Chiefs of Staff. In Vietnam he was an operations officer in a field artillery battalion. Upon retirement he was VP for International Operations with Military Professional Resources Incorporated and returned to government as Special Assistant to the SEC ARMY for WWII 60th Anniversary Commemorations completed in 2006.
Brigadier General James P. Cullen, USA (Ret.)Mr. Cullen is a retired Brigadier General in the United States Army Reserve Judge Advocate General's Corps and last served as the Chief Judge (IMA) of the U.S. Army Court of Criminal Appeals. He currently practices law in New York City. 