Elisa Massimino Testifies in Congress on Antisemitism
April 14, 2010
Human Rights First President and CEO Elisa Massimino testified today at 2 p.m. before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs on the alarming rise of antisemitism worldwide.Congressman Russ Carnahan (MO-03), Chairman of the Subcommittee on International Organizations, Human Rights, and Oversight, is convening experts to give recommendations on how to combat this dangerous trend. He warns, "Anti-Semitism is not just rhetoric; it is a violation of human rights."Read our press release, and her statement, "Combating Antisemitism, Protecting Human Rights," excerpted below:TESTIMONY OF ELISA MASSIMINOPRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERHUMAN RIGHTS FIRSTHearing on“COMBATING ANTISEMITISM: PROTECTING HUMAN RIGHTS”UNITED STATES HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS,SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS,HUMAN RIGHTS, AND OVERSIGHTApril 14, 2010INTRODUCTIONChairman Carnahan and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for convening this hearingto examine antisemitism as a human rights concern. I appreciate the opportunity to be herethis afternoon to share Human Rights First’s findings and recommendations on this importantmatter and to discuss ways that we can work together with you to advance human rightsprotections. We are grateful to the Subcommittee for the important role it plays in keeping keyhuman rights issues front and center in the Congress, and we look forward to continuing towork with you to assist in these efforts.Human Rights First (HRF) has been working since 2002 to both monitor antisemitic violenceand press for stronger government action to combat it. Our advocacy has been based ondocumentation of the problem in regular reports:Fire and Broken Glass: The Rise of Antisemitism in Europe (2002);Antisemitism in Europe (2004);Everyday Fears: A Survey of Violent Hate Crimes in Europe and North America(2005);2007 Hate Crime Survey: Antisemitism (2007);2008 Hate Crime Survey: Antisemitic Violence (2008).Our focus has been—and the focus of my testimony today will be—on the rise of antisemiticviolence in many parts of Europe, North America, and the former Soviet Union (countries thatcomprise the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)) and on practicalsteps that governments and others can take to more effectively combat this problem.Human Rights First has long maintained that antisemitic violence, as well as other forms ofhate crime, must be viewed and responded to as a serious violation of human rights and thatgovernments can and must do more to confront these abuses.Likewise, we believe it is important that these violations be challenged, not just by victims’ groups or those who represent communities of targeted individuals, but by all those who seek to advance universal rights and freedoms. Although some progress has been made in the last decade to draw greater attention to the issue—to a large extent in response to efforts led by the United States—high levels of antisemitic violence persist, and the political will to reverse that trend remains lacking in much of the OSCE region.I would like to make three key points today.Antisemitism is a unique and potent form of racism and religious intolerance and theextent of violence motivated by anti-Jewish animus throughout much of the OSCEregion remains alarming. With a few exceptions, governments have not responded adequately to this rising tideof violence, and there is an urgent need to adopt comprehensive strategies to combat itRelated forms of violent hate crime, motivated by race, religion, national origin, sexualorientation, and other similar factors, have been on the rise in many countries. Strategies for combating antisemitic violence are effective and necessary to confrontthese scourges as well.Finally, Human Rights First has several recommendations to strengthen the leadership rolethat the United States has taken to combat antisemitism, along with other forms of biasmotivated violence, working both bilaterally and multilaterally.ANTISEMITIC VIOLENCE TODAYAntisemitic violence in Europe and North America remains at high levels, following asignificant increase beginning in 2000. Indeed, violence in some countries is several timeshigher than that of the end of the 1990s. Although the number of incidents in the last decadehas fluctuated from year-to-year and from country-to-country, our findings show that, withalarming frequency, synagogues, Jewish homes, and Jewish-owned businesses have beentargeted in arson attacks and subjected to widespread vandalism, and ordinary people havebeen harassed, beaten, stabbed, or shot because they were Jewish.Antisemitism—like other forms of racism and religious intolerance—is an obstacle toparticipation in public life fully and free of fear. As such, it can take the form of an assault onidentity itself. Violent incidents have involved individuals who are identified as Jewish bytheir religious dress or appearance when traveling on public transport or walking in the street.Some people have been targeted because of their leadership positions in the Jewishcommunity. In many other incidents, Jews have been targeted while going to or from theirplace of worship or from schools. In others, attacks have targeted Jewish communityinstitutions, from synagogues and community centers to secondary schools and kindergartens.As we reported in Everyday Fears, in the face of the daily reality of harassment and risk ofviolence, some Jewish Europeans have acknowledged that they no longer openly wearpendants of the Jewish star; that yarmulkes are worn in public only under baseball caps orother concealing headgear; and that they think carefully before acknowledging their identity tostrangers.Among the representative incidents that we have documented, epithets and threats wereshouted from passing cars, and Jews walking home from schools or synagogues were peltedwith eggs, trash, or noxious liquids. Threatening graffiti was daubed on homes and shops.Windows were broken, sometimes with accompanying graffiti making clear that this was donebecause of hatred of Jews. Individuals faced everyday threats of physical violence, frompushing and shoving on the sidewalk to full scale assaults; from stone throwing to attackswith fists, clubs, knives, or guns.Frequently, attacks have been directed at synagogues. These incidents ranged from graffiti andacts of desecration to gunfire and attacks with explosives and Molotov cocktails. The realitiesof everyday violence were often exacerbated by periodic explosions of extraordinary violence,including murder.The translation of sentiment against Israel or the policies of its government into anti-Jewishantipathy has since 2000 generated new patterns of antisemitic violence that have fluctuated inrelation to events in the Middle East. In this “new” form of antisemitism, Jews around theworld have increasingly been targeted for violence and vilification as if collectivelyresponsible for wrongs attributed to the state of Israel. This new antisemitism combines theancient roots and forms of antisemitism with new political elements, and may be largelyresponsible for both ongoing high levels of antisemitic violence and periodic surges in attacks.Over the past decade, several principal “trigger events” in the Middle East were followed bysharp increases in attacks on Jewish institutions and on ordinary Jews living in Europe andNorth America.Most recently, Israeli military action in Gaza triggered a wave of backlashattacks against Jews in Europe and contributed to sharp rises in the number of incidents forthe whole of 2009. For example, in the United Kingdom, the Community Security Trust’sincident reports for 2009 showed it to have been the worst year on record since monitoringbegan in 1984. Record numbers were also reported by B’nai Brith Canada, which overallnoted a five-fold increase in antisemitic incidents over the past decade. The 2009 annualreport by the French Jewish Community Protection Service (SPCJ) noted a 75 percentincrease in antisemitic incidents in 2009 over the previous year.Some examples from January 2009 show the virulence of antisemitic violence which sweptEurope during that time, and underscore the potential for recurring surges of violence:In Belgium, attackers threw a firebomb into a Brussels synagogue; broke windows inanother, in Charleroi; and attempted to burn down a Jewish family home in Antwerp. In France, attackers rammed a burning car into a synagogue’s gates in Toulouse;damaged kosher shops in Bordeaux; and threw Molotov cocktails at a communitycenter in St. Denis, outside Paris, which houses a synagogue and a center for autisticchildren. In the Netherlands, attackers set a synagogue and a house alight in Amsterdam; andthere was an attempted arson attack at a synagogue in Arnhem.In the United Kingdom, arsonists attacked a North West London synagogue; attackersdragged a man from his car and beat him; and vandals damaged Jewish property innumerous incidents. The Middle East is, however, only part of today’s antisemitism. Contemporary antisemitism ismulti-faceted and deeply rooted. It cannot be viewed solely as a transitory side-effect of theconflict in the Middle East. Antisemitic incitement and violence predate the Middle Eastconflict and continue to be based in large part on centuries-old hatred and prejudice. Thebranding of Jews as scapegoats for both ancient and modern ills remains a powerfulunderlying factor in the antisemitic hatred and violence that continues to manifest itself today.Less than a year ago, we received a startling reminder of this old hatred when James vonBrunn, a self-avowed white supremacist and antisemite, gunned down and killed a securityguard at the entrance to the Holocaust Museum in Washington, DC. Prosecutors werepursuing hate crime charges when Mr. von Brunn died in January 2010.This age-old antisemitic hatred is continuing to erupt into violence across the OSCE region.Just last month:• Two 23-year-old women and a 25-year-old man were asked if they were Jewish andthen beaten and insulted with antisemitic slurs on a subway train in Berlin, Germany;• The home of a Chabad rabbi in Budapest, Hungary, was pelted with rocks as anumber of people gathered there for the second Passover Seder;• Holocaust memorials at a former Nazi concentration camp near Krakow, Poland,were desecrated with antisemitic graffiti and swastikas a day before a planned marchmarking the 67th anniversary of the liquidation of Krakow’s ghetto.Violent crime is antisemitism’s sharp edge, but it is important to note that these crimes oftenoccur in the context of virulent hate speech. In some countries, established political andreligious leaders engage in persistent antisemitic discourse. This discourse often reflectslongstanding antisemitic themes, attacking Jews through stereotypes, slanders, andscapegoating. In addition, Jews as a people are vilified in the context of attacks on Israel orIsraeli policies. While criticism of Israeli government—or any government’s—policies iscertainly legitimate, criticism of Israel or the Zionist movement crosses the line to becomeantisemitism when it disparages or demonizes Jews as a people.When hate speech involves direct and immediate threats of violence to particular individualsor institutions, governments must hold those responsible under criminal law. Short of this, thehate speech dimension of antisemitism still deserves our attention, in particular when publicofficials and community leaders are the ones responsible for statements advocating or incitinganti-Jewish hatred, which can contribute to a climate in which violence takes place. Butconfronting hate speech must not impinge on free expression. Indeed, when appliedconsistently and comprehensively, political and educational tools can be effective inresponding to antisemitic and other forms of hate speech without restricting speech.GOVERNMENT RESPONSES TO ANTISEMITIC VIOLENCEGovernment authorities have an obligation under national legislation and international humanrights law to respond to antisemitic, as well as other violent hate crimes. Nationalgovernments must take proactive measures to deter and prosecute actions motivated by anti-Jewish hatred.Human Rights First has advocated a comprehensive program of action for governments tocombat antisemitic and other forms of bias-motivated violence (see HRF’s attached 10-pointplan). In response, we have seen some limited progress in the last several years. There hasbeen some improvement in public recognition of the problem; in monitoring and reporting; inthe enactment of effective hate crime laws; in law enforcement; and in the priority given thefight against antisemitism in public policy. But high levels of antisemitic violence persist andthe political will to address them is still lacking in much of the region.In our first report on the problem, in 2002, we pointed to a “data deficit” on antisemiticoffenses, with most governments failing even to monitor and report upon these crimes.Almost ten years later, most European governments still fall short of their commitments tomonitor antisemitic offences—an essential building block for comprehensive responses to theproblem. The failure of many governments to act in the areas of monitoring and reporting,legislation, and effective law enforcement also reflects a leadership shortfall: a reluctance tospeak out and take a stand at the national and regional levels.For example, in the area of data collection, only 14 of the 56 participating states of the OSCEare fulfilling their basic commitments to monitor hate crimes. (Austria, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Finland, France, Ireland, Poland, Slovakia, Sweden,the United Kingdom, and the United States.) The others collect and publisheither nothing at all or extremely limited information on the incidence of antisemitic or otherhate crimes.As concerns monitoring and reporting specifically on antisemitic hate crime, the EuropeanUnion’s Fundamental Rights Agency reports that only six (of 27) EU countries collectsufficiently robust criminal justice data on antisemitic hate crime to allow for trend analysisover time about the incidence of such crime. (Austria, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.)Likewise, while OSCE states have made political commitments to adopt and implement hatecrime laws, including those addressing antisemitic violence, 22 OSCE countries still have noexpress provisions defining bias as an aggravating circumstance in the commission of violentcrimes against persons. (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Estonia, Germany, Holy See, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Luxembourg, Lithuania, Macedonia, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Poland, San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Switzerland, and Turkey.) Even among countries that have adopted such laws, effective enforcement is often hindered by inadequate training among law enforcement and criminal justice officials and a lack of political will to ensure accountability.THE SHARED NATURE OF BIAS-MOTIVATED VIOLENCEThe threats facing the Jewish community today are deeply-rooted and uniquely potent, butalso should be seen as part of a rising tide of hate-motivated violence across Europe. We havereported since 2005 that bias-motivated violence is increasing in the region, perpetratedagainst members of a range of communities because of their ethnicity, religion, sexualorientation, or other similar factors.Many of the OSCE states experience levels of violent hate crimes that are a cause for concern.In these, violence motivated by racism and xenophobia, often exacerbated by religious bias,threatens communities distinguished by ethnic or national origin, including both nationalminorities and people of immigrant origin, citizens and noncitizens, longtime residents, andnewcomers.In addition to antisemitic violence:Roma and Sinti face violent hate crimes and a myriad of other forms of public andprivate discrimination throughout Europe. Violence is employed in many parts ofEurope to cause immediate harm to Roma families and to physically expel Roma fromtowns and villages; Bias-motivated violence against Muslims has become increasingly pervasive andextreme in western and central Europe, taking the form of personal assaults on thestreets and attacks on places of worship and on immigrant-run businesses. In the former Soviet Union in particular, violent expressions of religious hatred toward“nontraditional” religions—including Baptists, Catholics, and the Jehovah’sWitnesses—prevent entire communities from freely practicing their religions.Cemeteries, churches, and religious schools are subjected to vandalism and arsonattacks. In some cases, official government policies create a hostile atmosphere thatencourages private acts of violence motivated by religious hatred. Continuing violence based on sexual orientation and gender identity bias, though stilllargely unseen, is an intimidating day-to-day reality for lesbian, gay, bisexual, andtransgender (LGBT) individuals, as well as others who are targeted because they do notconform to stereotypes of gender identity or simply advocate for LGBT rights.The shared nature of the problem of bias-motivated violence underscores the need forgovernments to adopt comprehensive approaches to the full range of forms of hate crime.Strong government responses that show hate crimes will be prosecuted to the full extent of thelaw send an unequivocal signal that such incidents will not be tolerated by society. They alsoreassure members of communities under threat that their right to security is guaranteed andnon-negotiable. Likewise in the non-governmental sphere, the shared nature of the problem calls for acoordinated response. The promise of work towards common solutions is perhaps bestillustrated by the cross-community cooperation that has emerged in recent years among civilsociety groups, both in the United States and abroad. In the United States, the LeadershipConference on Civil and Human Rights, of which Human Rights First is a proud member, isperhaps the best expression of this unified effort. Working together has enormouslystrengthened our capacity to raise awareness both within the United States and internationallyof the threat posed by antisemitic and other hate crimes and to work with governments forchange. Unfortunately, this type of cooperation is sorely lacking in many countries where biasmotivated violence persists, where government action to combat it has been weak, and wherecommunities are working in isolation from one another. THE ROLE OF INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS Intergovernmental bodies have an important role to play in providing oversight of thefulfillment of state commitments to combat antisemitic and other hate crimes. They can alsoprovide technical assistance to states and other nongovernmental actors to help them meet thischallenge. The record of responses by intergovernmental bodies to antisemitism, however, hasalso been uneven. The OSCE has led the field: adopting commitments on hate crime, establishing mechanismsto monitor implementation of those commitments, engaging in activities to raise political andpublic awareness, and developing programs to train police and civil society groups in dealingwith hate crime. The OSCE’s special programs to deal with antisemitism have led the way inits broader work to combat hate violence. Most recently, in December 2009, foreign ministers of the 56 states of the OSCE adopted aspecial decision on hate crime. Governments made commitments to combat hate crime byenacting laws that acknowledge hate crimes as particularly serious crimes; establishingsystems for the collection of reliable statistics on incidents, investigations, and prosecutions;training law enforcement and criminal justice officials; and conducting awareness raisingcampaigns. This is an important reaffirmation of past commitments and must be followed byeffective action for implementation within the OSCE region. Yet, many states are demonstrating a certain “fatigue” with OSCE commitments to combathate crimes and antisemitism in particular. In order to ensure the important work of the OSCEcontinues, the United States needs to reinforce its political support for the implementation ofcommitments to combat antisemitism and other hate crimes. THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT’S ROLE The strong global role for the United States in combating antisemitism starts at home, whereantisemitic and other hate crime remain a serious problem. Accordingly, Human Rights Firstwelcomed the enactment of the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crime PreventionAct, which has given renewed vigor to the efforts to combat antisemitic and other biasmotivatedviolence in this country. The newly adopted legislation reaffirms the U.S. government’s commitment to developing a comprehensive response to domestic hate crimeviolence, and offers an opportunity for the United States to demonstrate leadership in bothbilateral and multilateral efforts to combat the scourge of hate crime globally. The United States has long been engaged in international efforts to confront antisemitism. Infact, two individuals testifying at this hearing—Hannah Rosenthal and Andrew Baker—holdmandates that reflect the importance that the United States has attached to this issue, and wewelcome their commitment and the opportunity to work closely with them. The GlobalAntisemitism Review Act’s establishment of a Special Envoy to Monitor and CombatAntisemitism is an important position through which to strengthen U.S. advocacy of policiesto address the problem around the world. Similarly, the United States, including with theactive involvement of the Commission for Security and Cooperation in Europe in particular,also played a leading role in the efforts to establish and subsequently support the OSCEPersonal Representative on Combating Antisemitism in the OSCE region. Many aspects of theOSCE’s work on this issue are models for other international structures, and the U.S.contributed substantial efforts to creating and sustaining that model. Below we detail three principal ways in which the executive and legislative branches of theUnited States government can build on past success and advance a vigorous human rightsresponse to antisemitic and other violent hate crime. First, the United States should demonstrate international leadership in the OSCE by providingextrabudgetary contributions to specific initiatives to combat antisemitism and racism and byencouraging the implementation of commitments. Second, the United States should advance efforts to combat antisemitism in bilateral relationsby ensuring that the need to confront this problem is a part of regular discussions with othergovernments, and by offering technical assistance and other forms of cooperation, asappropriate. Finally, the United States should positively contribute to the strength of civil society actors onthe ground—a key factor in promoting a vigorous government response—by ensuring thathuman rights defenders advancing this cause in their countries have access to the funds andtraining resources they need to succeed. Demonstrate International Leadership at the OSCEEncourage the implementation by participating states of tolerance and nondiscriminationcommitments, including the recently adopted Decision No 9/09 on Combating HateCrimes, in particular the commitments to collect hate crime data, to report that data to the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR), and to enacttailored legislation to combat hate crimes. Lead efforts to ensure the effective organization of the proposed Conference on Toleranceand Nondiscrimination in June 2010. The United States should work to ensure: The adoption of an agenda that focuses on the states’ implementation of theircommitments to combat hate crime and other forms of intolerance, as well as bestpractices for addressing these concerns. The agenda should include targeteddiscussions focusing on the unique problem of antisemitism. A high-level of participation from states by individuals directly involved in theimplementation of tolerance and non-discrimination commitments, including thoseadopted in December 2009 to combat hate crime. High-level participation by U.S.officials from the Department of Justice and other relevant agencies would support thiseffort. The organization of a civil society preparatory meeting that would result inrecommendations to be presented to the conference participants. This would requiresufficient logistical support, including by ODIHR as appropriate, to ensure fullparticipation by civil society organizations. An active role for civil society representatives in the conference itself. Providing for extrabudgetary contributions, secondment of personnel, and other in-kindsupport for OSCE programs to combat violent hate crimes, including by making availableits law enforcement expertise. Advocate in Bilateral Relationships and Offer Technical AssistancePromote stronger government responses to antisemitic and other violent hate crime throughU.S. human rights reporting as well as through bilateral relationships of the United States, by:Maintaining strong and inclusive State Department monitoring and public reporting onantisemitic, racist and xenophobic, anti-Muslim, homophobic, anti-Roma, and other biasmotivated violence. In doing so, the government should consult with civil society groups while providing appropriate training for human rights officers and other relevant missionstaff abroad. Raising incidents of antisemitic violence with representatives of foreign governments andencouraging vigorous responses. Share concrete recommendations, such as thosearticulated in HRF’s Ten-Point plan for combating hate crime (attached below). Offering appropriate technical assistance and other forms of cooperation, includingtraining of police and prosecutors in investigating, recording, reporting, and prosecutingviolent hate crimes as well as translation of Department of Justice and Federal Bureau ofInvestigation (FBI) materials on hate crimes. Moreover, the FBI’s International LawEnforcement Academy should include a hate crime component in its training of lawenforcement personnel in emerging democracies of Eastern Europe and the former SovietUnion. Organizing International Visitors Programs on combating bias-motivated violence forrepresentatives of law enforcement, victim communities, human rights groups, and legaladvocates.Support Civil Society OrganizationsExpand funding and other support to build the capacity of civil society groups in the OSCEregion to combat antisemitic and other forms of violent hate crimes, by:Providing extrabudgetary support to expand OSCE’s civil society training program oncombating hate crimes. Ensuring that groups working to combat all forms of violent hate crime have access tosupport under existing U.S. funding programs, including the Human Rights andDemocracy Fund and programs for human rights defenders. Congressional establishment of a long-term funding program at the State Department,USAID or an outside agency to provide financial support for civil society groups tomonitor and report on violent hate crime, to advocate more effective laws and policies andstronger official responses to hate crime incidents, to provide services to victims, and todevelop and implement programs to prevent and respond to hate crime.Human Rights First’s Ten-Point Plan for Combating Hate Crimes1) Acknowledge and condemn violent hate crimes whenever they occur. Seniorgovernment leaders should send immediate, strong, public, and consistent messages thatviolent crimes which appear to be motivated by prejudice and intolerance will beinvestigated thoroughly and prosecuted to the full extent of the law.2) Enact laws that expressly address hate crimes. Recognizing the particular harmcaused by violent hate crimes, governments should enact laws that establish specificoffenses or provide enhanced penalties for violent crimes committed because of thevictim’s race, religion, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, mental andphysical disabilities, or other similar status.3) Strengthen enforcement and prosecute offenders. Governments should ensure thatthose responsible for hate crimes are held accountable under the law, that theenforcement of hate crime laws is a priority for the criminal justice system, and that therecord of their enforcement is well documented and publicized.4) Provide adequate instructions and resources to law enforcement bodies.Governments should ensure that police and investigators—as the first responders incases of violent crime—are specifically instructed and have the necessary procedures,resources and training to identify, investigate and register bias motives before the courts,and that prosecutors have been trained to bring evidence of bias motivations and applythe legal measures required to prosecute hate crimes.5) Undertake parliamentary, interagency or other special inquiries into the problemof hate crimes. Such public, official inquiries should encourage public debate,investigate ways to better respond to hate crimes, and seek creative ways to address theroots of intolerance and discrimination through education and other means.6) Monitor and report on hate crimes. Governments should maintain official systemsof monitoring and public reporting to provide accurate data for informed policydecisions to combat violent hate crimes. Such systems should include anonymous anddisaggregated information on bias motivations and/or victim groups, and should monitorincidents and offenses, as well as prosecutions. Governments should considerestablishing third party complaint procedures to encourage greater reporting of hate crimes and conducting periodic hate crime victimization surveys to monitorunderreporting by victims and under recording by police.7) Create and strengthen antidiscrimination bodies. Official antidiscrimination andhuman rights bodies should have the authority to address hate crimes throughmonitoring, reporting, and assistance to victims.8) Reach out to community groups. Governments should conduct outreach and educationefforts to communities and civil society groups to reduce fear and assist victims, advancepolice-community relations, encourage improved reporting of hate crimes to the policeand improve the quality of data collection by law enforcement bodies.9) Speak out against official intolerance and bigotry. Freedom of speech allowsconsiderable latitude for offensive and hateful speech, but public figures should be heldto a higher standard. Members of parliament and local government leaders should beheld politically accountable for bigoted words that encourage discrimination andviolence and create a climate of fear for minorities.10) Encourage international cooperation on hate crimes. Governments should supportand strengthen the mandates of intergovernmental organizations that are addressingdiscrimination—like the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, theEuropean Commission against Racism and Intolerance, and the Fundamental RightsAgency—including by encouraging such organizations to raise the capacity of and trainpolice, prosecutors, and judges, as well as other official bodies and civil society groupsto combat violent hate crimes. Governments should also provide a detailed accountingon the incidence and nature of hate crimes to these bodies in accordance with relevantcommitments. 