Finally Some Accountability? DOJ to Investigate Waterboarding
February 22, 2008
Today, the Department of Justice's Office of Professional Responsibility wrote to Senator Durbin and Senator Whitehouse announcing an investigation into the authorization of the use of waterboarding.  This is a good first step toward demanding accountability from those responsible for betraying our nation's values.  Unfortunately, the problem of torture and official cruelty extends beyond the one technique of waterboarding.  While the DoJ is at its investigation, it should also look at the other illegal activities reportedly in use such as the employment of stress positions, sleep deprivation, and hypothermia.  From The Politico:Justice Department Announces Waterboarding InvestigationBy Daniel W. ReillyFeb 22, 2008(The Politico) The Justice Department announced it has launched an investigation into who authorized the use of waterboarding at the department, following a request from Democratic Sens. Richard J. Durbin of Illinois and Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island. After the two sent the DOJ a letter asking who authorized the use of the controversial interrogation technique, H. Marshall Jarrett, the head of DOJ’s Office of Professional Responsibility, wrote the senators that this issue is; “included in a pending OPR investigation into the circumstances surrounding the drafting” of a 2002 Office of Legal Counsel memo on interrogation standards.Earlier this month, CIA Director Michael Hayden publicly admitted for the first time that the agency had used waterboarding on 3 suspects, including Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, known as one of the architects of the 9/11 terrorist attacks.“The United States has always repudiated waterboarding as a form of torture and prosecuted it as a war crime,” said Durbin in a statement released on Friday. “Justice Department officials who ignored this history -- even those at the highest levels -- must be held accountable for their actions.”The waterboarding issue nearly derailed the nomination of Michael Mukasey to beattorney general, with Democrats trying to get Mukasey to state unequivocally that the practice was torture. Although Mukasey refused to do so and was later confirmed--Democrats have not let the issue drop.“Congress and the American people deserve to know how these decisions were made and who was involved,” Durbin said of the investigation.There was no indication of when the DOJ’s investigation would be completed.  Here's a copy of the DoJ's letter to Senators Dubin and Whitehouse. 