The End the Shutdown and Secure the Border Act Would Ban Asylum for Central American Children
January 23, 2019
The Trump-McConnell bill—the "End the Shutdown and Secure the Border Act"—is nothing more than a hateful anti-immigration wish list, designed to hold the nation hostage in exchange for extremely harmful policies that make a mockery of America’s ideals. The legislation introduced would: Create a new asylum ban: The legislation immediately bars children from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras from requesting asylum at a U.S. port of entry or after crossing the U.S. border. This would gut current protections for refugees under domestic immigration law. Section 208(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act allows any asylum seeker who arrives in the United States to request protection at a port of entry or after having crossed the border. Children with legitimate, well-founded fears of persecution who would otherwise qualify for asylum would be deported to the place where they fear harm, unless they are able to meet the much stricter requirements for withholding of removal or Convention Against Torture. Remove protections for unaccompanied children from Central America: The bill strips the protections included in the Trafficking Victim’s Protection Reauthorization Act (TVPRA) for unaccompanied children from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. It subjects children from these countries to immediate, involuntary repatriation after an interview with a Customs and Border Protection officer—not a trained asylum officer— unless the child can show that it is more probable than not that the child would be trafficked or would qualify for asylum. This places the burden on children who are almost never represented by counsel to establish their need for protection rather than on the U.S. government to show that the child would not be at risk and has voluntarily decided to return. The standard applied to Central American children would be even higher than the standard adult asylum seekers must meet during a credible fear interview to be permitted to seek asylum. Establish a pseudo-resettlement scheme for children from Central American: Under the Trump-McConnell proposal, children from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras can only receive “asylum” by applying at processing centers, including the countries where they fear persecution, to be established outside of the United States within 240 days. ​Create additional restrictions to deny refugees asylum protection by: 