International Community Laments the Obama Administration’s Failure to Close Gitmo
November 06, 2015
By Alice Debarre Though many Americans have grown complacent about the prison at Guantanamo Bay, it’s still a pressing concern to the international community. Because Gitmo has been the site of torture and other egregious human rights abuses, a number of allied countries have refused to share intelligence or provide access to terrorism suspects out of concern that they might perpetuate the prison’s existence. On September 21st the United States released its follow-up report to the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination’s (CERD) latest recommendations. CERD reviewed the United States last year for its compliance with the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, or national origin. One of only three issues it flagged: the failure to close the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay. The committee’s main concern about Guantanamo is that the United States discriminates on the basis of national origin through the ongoing detention of non-citizens at the prison, thus undermining justice. This speaks to how much the administration’s continued failure to shutter the facility remains of grave concern to the international community. Other international human rights bodies continue to spotlight the issue. In its concluding observations on April 23rd, 2014 the U.N. Human Rights Committee stressed the need to expedite the periodic review process for the remaining 47 eligible detainees and the transfer of the 52 detainees designated for release. At the United States’ Universal Periodic Review for compliance under all U.N. human rights treaties in May 2015, many members of the Human Rights Council, including France, the United Kingdom, and Ireland focused on closing the prison. Most recently, British Prime Minister David Cameron again called for the prison’s closure following the last British detainee’s transfer. These voices should bolster President Obama’s resolve to close Gitmo. The president’s recent veto of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for 2016 was based in part on onerous transfer restrictions that would make it impossible to close the prison before the end of his second term. The House of Representatives passed a new version of the NDAA yesterday that still contains those provisions. Obama shouldn’t sign it. He should reiterate that as he said at the first veto, “the continued operation of this facility weakens our national security by […] damaging our relationships with key allies and partners.” Human Rights First has repeatedly emphasized that Gitmo undermines counterterrorism cooperation with our allies, who rightly see the prison as an affront to the rule of law. Our follow-up shadow report to CERD is available here. You can also check out our blueprint: How to Close Guantanamo. 