September 2009-Asylum News
July 02, 2010
Petition for Cert Filed   in Asylum Filing Deadline Case

The American Civil Liberties Union, the National Immigrant Justice Center and   the law firm of Enow & Associates submitted a petition for certiorari in Gomis v. Holder, a case involving federal court jurisdiction to review   decisions relating to the one-year asylum filing deadline. Human Rights First,   along with other groups, submitted an amicus brief in support of the petition.   The brief explains why judicial review of one-year deadline determinations is   necessary – to ensure that refugees are not improperly denied asylum or deported   back to countries where they face political, religious and other forms of   persecution. Human Rights First and other amici petitioners were represented by   Steven Schulman of Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP, and by Alice Clapman   of Georgetown Law, who drafted the brief.

Click here to read the petition for certiorari

Click here to read the amicus brief

Click here to read the appendix


Congressional Briefing   Examines Protection of Women and Children Fleeing   Persecution

On Sept. 30, 2009, Human Rights First joined the Tahirih Justice Center, the   Women's Refugee Commission, and award-winning actor Sam Waterson to educate   members of Congress and their staff on U.S. policies and practices impacting   access to asylum protection for women and children fleeing persecution. The   briefing provided a critical assessment of the state of U.S. policy towards   women and girls fleeing gender-based persecution and how some of those policies   are preventing these asylum seekers from finding the protection they need and   deserve. The briefing occurred in conjunction with the release of a new report   by the Tahirih Justice Center entitled, Precarious Protection: How Unsettled   Policy and Current Laws Harm Women and Girls Fleeing Persecution.

Click here to read the Tahirih Justice Center's report.

Click here to read an article in the Washington Post from September 30, 2009 entitled,   "Clearer Rules Urged For Asylum Seekers System Fails to Protect Women, Study   Says"


Human Rights First   delivers statement on U.S. detention of asylum seekers to UN Human Rights   Council

On September 17, 2009, the 12th Session of the Human Rights Council held a   panel on migrant detention. HRF's Andrew Hudson delivered a statement that   highlighted the U.S. practice of detaining asylum seekers, and the steps that   the U.S. and other states must take to reform immigration detention procedures   that are inconsistent with international human rights standards. A statement   issued by the International Detention Coalition and signed by 141 organizations   encouraged all States to consider and implement legislation and policy that   ensures than human rights standards are maintained whenever States detain   migrants. The United States, represented by DHS, also issued a statement   describing its plan to refashion the current detention system into a new model   that is better suited to DHS's civil detention authority and ensure humane   treatment of detainees, including access to needed medical care and legal   resources.

Click here to read   HRF's statement to HRC panel

Click here to see HRF's Andrew Hudson delivering statement to   HRC panel

Click here to read UNHCR's statement to HRC panel

Click here to read the U.S. statement to HRC panel

Click here to read the NGO Joint Statement to the HRC Detention Meeting 17th Sept 2009


MPI Releases a Report   on Immigration Detention

In its new report, Immigrant Detention: Can ICE Meet its Legal   Imperatives and Case Management Responsibilities?, MPI analyzes whether the   US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) has adequate information systems to   collect all the data necessary for compliance with legal, detention management   and humanitarian standards. To explore this question, the report takes a   snapshot of one night in January 2009. By analyzing select data for all 32,000   detainees in ICE custody that night, MPI examines the sufficiency of the   agency's database and case tracking system. This report is particularly timely   as ICE begins to take steps to implement its initiative to shift from a penal   model of detention to a civil model of detention.

Click here to read the full report


Human Rights First   Annual Dinner 

The 2009 Human Rights First Awards Dinner will take place on Thursday,   October 22, at Chelsea Piers in New York City. This year, Human Rights First   will honor Brazilian human rights defender Sandra Carvalho, Colombian human   rights defender Principe Gabriel González, and will salute Michael Posner,   founding executive director of Human Rights First. Tom Brokaw will be a special   guest.  For more information, click here. To make   reservations, please call 212-845-5215 or send an e-mail to dinner@humanrightsfirst.org.

 
Previous Asylum Newsletters 