Asylum News 28
June 18, 2004
World Refugee Day - June 20, 2004:
Urge Department of Homeland Security to Release Pastor's Wife and Make Needed Changes to Detention System
Urge Secretary Ridge to Release Mrs. E and Ensure Fair Policies for Asylum Seekers! 
Pastor's Wife Detained for Months

Mrs. E, a pastor's wife and the mother of young children, fled  persecution in Togo and was detained by U.S. immigration officials in  February 2004. Mrs. E and her husband had been attacked by government  soldiers in their home and in their church because her husband preached  and prayed for change in Togo. Mrs. E., who had been raped by soldiers  when she was just 16 years old, was unable to endure these ongoing  attacks by the military. She fled to the United States to save her life.

When she arrived at JFK Airport in February 2004, she was  detained by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security which determined  that she had not left on time during a prior visit to the U.S. She was  taken in handcuffs to a detention facility in Queens, New York, her  clothes and possessions taken from her, and she was given a blue prison  uniform to wear. The Department of Homeland Security denied her request  for release on parole even though she has several close family members  and U.S. citizen friends in this country. Mrs. E has now been detained  in prison-like conditions for about four months.

World Refugee Day Is June 20, 2004

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has declared  that the theme of this year's World Refugee Day is "A place to call  home: Rebuilding lives in safety and dignity." In the United States,  thousands of asylum seekers are held for months and even years in jails  and detention centers after asking for protection at our airports and  borders. To improve the treatment of asylum seekers, we urge the  Department of Homeland Security to make these changes:

(1) Create a new high-level refugee protection position in the Office of Secretary Tom Ridge.

(2) Give asylum seekers the chance to have their detention  reviewed by an immigration judge, like other immigration detainees.

(3) Put the official parole criteria for asylum seekers into formal regulations.

Background on Treatment of Asylum Seekers by DHS
Earlier this year, Human Rights First issued a report on the  problems faced by asylum seekers in DHS detention. That report, called  In Liberty's Shadow: US Detention of Asylum Seekers in the Era of  Homeland Security, details the lack of basic due process safeguards in  the asylum detention system. It also addresses the changes in the  treatment of detained asylum seekers since 9/11. For example, since  9/11, U.S. immigration authorities have become increasingly reluctant to  release asylum seekers on parole even if they present no security  threat. The result is that refugees, who have come to the United States  seeking asylum are treated like criminals and often held in jails and  detention centers for months and even years.

To read the full report, please go to:
www.lchr.org/about_us/events/Chasing_Freedom/asylum_report.htm

Take Action!!
Visit our website.

Urge the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to release Mrs. E  from jail by sending a letter to DHS asking for her release. You can  also help others like her gain access to a fairer release process by  urging DHS Secretary Tom Ridge to create a high-level refugee protection  position and make the other changes recommended above.

To learn more about World Refugee Day and activities taking place in your area, visit: www.unhcr.ch
If you are not subscribed, and would like to continue receiving Asylum Protection News, sign up here 