Refugee Stories
December 07, 2018
The “Refugee Stories” project was created to bring a lens to the humanity of the refugee crisis. Each refugee story and experience is different; collectively, they show the resiliency and strength of the human spirit. With these interviews we are celebrating and memorializing these individual stories. This project was made possible through a grant with The New School, whose history is rooted in principles of academic freedom, tolerance and social engagement. Refugee Stories: Lev Sviridov Interviewing Lev and hearing his story was profound. Lev and his mother didn’t have a home when they decided to stay in the United States undocumented. Together they found ways to survive while “living in the shadows” as Lev put it. Working with Human Rights First they were able to gain citizenship and build their lives here. Growing up as a first-generation American, it was an honor and privilege for me to hear and record Lev’s story. —Kristin Sztyk, Director & Editor MA Candidate, Media Studies at The New School Part 01, A Ticket Out  Part 02, A Decision to Stay  Part 03, A Choice to Live  Refugee Stories: Myra Dahgaypaw In completing the “Refugee Stories” project, we wanted to express how the refugee experience embodies essential values of strength and courage. These videos tell the story of how refugees have been able to rebuild their lives in the US after overcoming their displacement. The experience of listening to Myra’s story was inspiring. She had experienced a lot of difficulties before arriving in the United States. But that did not hold her back when it came to helping others and doing advocacy work for the Burmese community. It was an enriching experience to get to know her story. This project was completed through a grant with The New School, whose history is rooted in principles of academic freedom, tolerance and social engagement. Cristina Müller, Director & Editor MA Candidate, Media Studies at The New School Part 01, Displacement  Part 02, Asylum  Part 03, Identity  