President Obama to attend U.N. meeting on Sudan today
September 24, 2010
By Heather Harms, Crimes Against Humanity Program Intern

President Obama will meet this afternoon with leaders from around the  world to help focus international attention on Sudan with less than four  months to go until two critical referenda on that country’s future.

Today’s meeting, convened by U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, comes  at a moment when it is clear that there is no time to waste in preparing  for these referenda as well as for the potential for a return to  violence between north and south Sudan.

Sudan has been a focus for senior U.S. officials attending the U.N.  General Assembly meetings this week. Samantha Power, senior director of  multilateral affairs at the National Security Council, said yesterday  that President Obama will be “giving a very substantial set of remarks  on Sudan” on Friday. When Secretary Clinton met with Sudanese Vice  President Ali Osman Taha on Tuesday, she encouraged him to begin taking specific, concrete steps towards implementing the referendum. The necessary steps include  finalizing the wording of the referendum, creating an operational plan  and budget, agreeing on voter registration criteria and procedures,  hiring and training registration workers, and determining the boundary  between north and south.

Additionally, in meetings throughout the week with  other international leaders, Secretary Clinton has urged countries that  have close ties to Sudan to encourage full implementation of the  Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), which is the basis for the January  votes. China is of particular importance, given its role as a major  economic partner of Khartoum and as a significant source of arms flows to the Sudanese government.

Human Rights First encourages the Obama administration to continue to  provide strong leadership on Sudan at this critical time. In a statement released this week,  the organization urged President Obama’s attention to five priorities,  including maintaining a focus on the ongoing crisis in Darfur and being  prepared for the risk of mass atrocities around the referenda in  Southern Sudan. 