Asylum News 66
June 30, 2008
Congressional Committee Hears Testimony on Medical Care in Immigrant Detention

On June 4, 2008, the House Judiciary Committee, Subcommittee on Immigration,   Citizenship, Refugees, Border Security, and International Law held a hearing on   “Problems with Immigration Detainee Medical Care.” The hearing addressed many of   the issues recently raised in a four part Washington Post series on the   deficiencies in medical and mental health care provided for detainees in   immigrant detention. Among the witnesses testifying were Julie Myers, the   Assistant Secretary for Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in DHS, the   Acting Director of the Division of Immigration Health Services (DIHS) within   ICE, as well as former detainees, representatives of the NGO and medical care   community and an HRF pro bono attorney whose refugee client was severely   impacted by the insufficient medical care she received.

Click here to   access a webcast of the hearing
Click here to   read 6/5/08 Washington Post article

HRF Welcomes Bipartisan Senate Bill on Immigrant Detention Reforms

On June 11, 2008, Senator Joe Lieberman (ID-Conn.), Senator Sam Brownback   (R-Ks.), Senator Ted Kennedy (D-Mass.), and Senator Chuck Hagel, (R-Neb.)   introduced the 2008 Secure and Safe Detention and Asylum Act, S. 3114. The bill   addresses some of the most pressing issues facing asylum seekers and other   immigrants in detention today and includes provisions for immigration court   review of detention of asylum seekers, nationwide alternatives to detention, and   improvements in medical care provided to detained immigrants.

Many of the bill’s provisions address concerns raised in a 2005 report by the   bipartisan U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom relating to the   detention of asylum seekers.

Read 2008   Secure and Safe Detention and Asylum Act
Read HRF   Statement commending Senators
Read the Senate   Statement on the Bill
Second Circuit Issues   Ruling on Female Genital Cutting

On June 11, 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit overturned   Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) denials in the asylum cases of three Guinean   women. The women had each expressed fear of returning to Guinea, including, in   two cases, fear for the safety of their daughters. The three-judge panel of the   Court ruled that although the women had already experienced genital cutting as   children in Guinea, that experience is not necessarily a “one-time act” of   persecution nor the only kind of future persecution the women may face.

Read the Second   Circuit Decision
Read the   6/12/08 New York Times Article
June 20 Marks Annual World Refugee Day 

June 20 was World Refugee Day, a day that has been celebrated annually since   the adoption of a U.N. resolution in December 2000. This year’s theme focused on   protection of refugees. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, António   Guterres, remarked that “refugees show incredible courage and perseverance in   overcoming enormous odds to rebuild their lives. Ensuring that they get the   protection they deserve is a noble cause because refugee rights are human rights   – and rights that belong to us all.” Events celebrating the day were held all   over the world.

For more information, click here.

Annual World Refugee Survey Released 

The U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants released the 2008 World   Refugee Survey on Thursday, June 19. In addition to providing profiles of the   treatment of refugees and refugee policies in various countries around the   world, the survey takes a closer look at countries considered to be the worst   places for refugees.

Read the 2008 World   Refugee Survey 