Civil Society Under Assault: Global Repercussions and U.S. Responses
September 05, 2013
 Thursday, September 12, 2013 8:45am - 2:00pm Video streaming by Ustream Welcome Remarks Mr. David J. Kramer President, Freedom House Panel Discussion I: Defending the Freedom of Association Authoritarian regimes are undermining international norms on freedom of association and blocking U.S. efforts to support civil society. Are the United States and the international community doing enough to address the global crackdown on civil society? What support for civil society is most effective? And what changes in U.S. policy are needed? Featuring: Admiral Dennis Blair - United States Former Director of National Intelligence, Freedom House Trustee Dr. Sarah E. Mendelson - United States Deputy Assistant Administrator in USAID’s Bureau for Democracy, Conflict and Humanitarian Assistance Ms. Margaret Sekaggya - Uganda UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders Moderated by Ms. Elisa Massimino President and CEO, Human Rights First Panel Discussion II: The View from the Ground on the Crackdown on Civil Society Video streaming by Ustream Space for civil society is shrinking in countries around the world as governments use a variety of methods, both overt and subtle, to stifle the creation, operations, and funding of civil society organizations. How is this crackdown affecting the ability of civil society to advocate for greater freedom in key countries? And how is the international, particularly the U.S. response to the crackdown viewed by frontline activists? Featuring: Dr. Nancy Okail - Egypt Freedom House Mr. Hernán Charosky - Argentina Professor, University of Palermo, Center for the Implementation of Public Policies Promoting Equity and Growth (Cippec) Mr. Pavel Chikov - Russia Chairman of AGORA, Russia Mr. Aung Maw Zin - Burma Program Officer for Asia, National Endowment for Democracy Moderated by Ms. Jennifer Windsor Associate Dean of the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University Keynote Address by Fred Hiatt and Closing Remarks by Ms. Elisa Massimino Video streaming by Ustream Mr. Fred Hiatt Washington Post Editorial Page Editor As a member of the media covering international issues, Mr. Hiatt has used his position as the Editor of the Washington Post editorial page to sound the alarm over instances of government repression around the world. He will give his perspective on the global crackdown against human rights defenders and civil society. Introduction by Mr. David J. Kramer Q&A Moderated by Ms. Elisa Massimino Freedom House & Human Rights First thank our Supporting Partners: ABA Center for Human Rights, Amnesty International USA, Center for Victims of Torture, Enough Project, Open Society Foundations, Project on Middle East Democracy, the Robert F. Kennedy Center for Human Rights, Physicians for Human Rights 