Brits on Bush
November 10, 2010
by Gabor Rona

International Legal Director

Is anyone other than perhaps George Bush surprised that the Conservative British government is publicly, emphatically, unequivocally denying his book tour mantra that waterboardings authorized by him saved lives?

It  would be one thing for our most special-relationship allies to quietly  shake their heads, but why are the inventors of etiquette rubbing it in  the nose of a man whose only remaining message about terrorism looks  backward, not forward in a somewhat sad and embarrassing attempt to  re-write history?

Perhaps it's best understood as a message to his successor, who famously prefers to look forward not backward.

What  could the message be? After all, can't we take Obama at his word that  the era of official torture is over? Yes, we can. And so the message  must be about something else.

Perhaps  it's about the Obama regime's pristine record in holding no one  accountable for setting torture policy or for allowing no torture  victims their day in court. Or its very recent decision to turn a blind eye to official and apparently illegal cover-ups of  torture. Or maybe about other ways in which the Obama regime is  following in its predecessor's footsteps, dissing international law.  Maybe it's about continued arbitrary detentions at Gitmo and elsewhere.  Maybe about Military Commission trials that violate the Geneva  Conventions and other human rights treaties. Or maybe interrogation policies that, while not necessarily torture, still permit practices like sleep  and sensory deprivation, in violation of legal obligations of humane  treatment. Or maybe all of the above.

But still, why? I have a theory.

Unlike  the US, the Brits, like other Europeans, adhere to external mechanisms  like the European Court of Human Rights to enforce their obligations.  Those obligations include not cooperating with other countries'  violations of human rights.

The Brits are not naïve or  soft on terrorism. They've had many more incidents of it and have many  more worrisome characters in their midst than the US. But they also  realize that effective counter-terrorism requires close international  cooperation in intelligence sharing and transfer of suspects. And for  them, cooperation requires respect for human rights by their cooperating  partners.

If it were just about the past, perhaps they  would've said nothing. But since it's about the future, it makes  perfect sense that having seen something, they said something.

This  is not just about European sensibilities. The US needs their  cooperation every bit as much as they need the US. So if it wants to get  national security right, the Obama administration might start paying  more attention to its allies' sensibilities and less to its domestic  opponents' politically tainted fear mongering. 