Quick, What Are The First Five Things That Come To Mind When You Think of Guantanamo?
March 23, 2007
March 23 , 2007

Human Rights First, at the invitation of the Department of Defense, is an official observer at the military commissions held at the U.S. Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Hina Shamsi – a lawyer at Human Rights First in the  Law and Security Program – is in Cuba to monitor the proceedings and is reporting back on events as they unfold. She is providing updates of what she observes.

This isn’t a test – don’t think too hard – just note what  pops into your head.

I did this exercise myself in the last couple of days, once  the U.S  military confirmed that I could go to the U.S.  naval base in  Guantanamo  to observe a hearing in the case of Australian detainee  David Hicks.  The hearing is this Monday, March 26.  My organization,  Human Rights First, has sent  an observer to Guantanamo  to report on  every hearing since they began in 2004, but this will be my first trip.  I work on  related issues daily, but it’s been  a while since I thought about what  it evokes personally.

Not unexpectedly, my responses were pretty lawyerly – at the  core  of each was the concept of Guantanamo  as a law-free zone – and I got to  wondering what the place evokes for people  who don’t work on human  rights and civil liberties issues.  So, in a completely random survey  that  doesn’t aspire even to a pretense of science or impartiality, I  got responses  to my question from ten friends whose only basis for  inclusion is that they  called me back within a 24-hour period.   Oh, I  tried for geographical diversity (hello Montana,  California and  Illinois!)  and also included an old buddy from North    Carolina who  identifies himself as a conservative  thinker.  I’ll get to the  responses, but  first, a note about the significance of the Hicks  hearing.

Monday’s Significance

David Hicks has been charged with material support for terrorism.  (My  post for this blog on  Monday will be about the specifics of Mr. Hicks’ case and  the parallel  proceedings his lawyers in Australia  and the U.K.  are pursuing.)  It’s  likely that the Monday  hearing will be pretty mundane:  it is  the  arraignment at which the charges against Mr. Hicks will be read.  Mr.  Hicks will then be asked to make a  plea.  The judge may set a schedule  for  legal motions by both sides and, unless any issues are raised by  the prosecution  or the defense, that’s likely to be it.

Still, Monday will be significant for Mr. Hicks’ father, who  will  see his son for the first time in three years.  The father is already apprehensive and anticipating the emotional toll and  stress.  I can’t begin to  imagine what a  parent in that situation feels like.  But  Mr. Hicks at  least has seen his son.  The  families of most of the approximately 385  detainees still at Guantanamo have not, for more than five  years.

The other significance of Monday is that it’s the first  military  commission hearing to take place since the old system established  under  an order by President Bush was struck down by the Supreme Court in June   2006 in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld.  Hamdan, of  course, is one of the most important Supreme Court decisions on the   limits of Presidential power, and the Court made clear that the  executive  branch must comply with U.S.  laws and treaties on fair  trials and humane treatment.   Congress then responded with the Military   Commissions Act of 2006 (MCA), which the President signed into law in  October  last year, and which establishes a military trial system that  is deeply flawed,  but not as much as the old system.  If  you want to  travel down memory lane to recall just how bad the old system was, here’s HRF’s analysis of it.

The new military commission system’s proponents say it’s  possible  to have a fair trial under the MCA – and theoretically, that’s   possible, but only if the trial is presided over by heroically ethical  judges  who don’t do what the law tells them they can.   For example,  the law says judges can:

allow evidence obtained through coercion;
order that evidence showing the defendant’s innocence or   otherwise favorable to his defense be provided only in summary or  redacted  form, if the government claims it’s classified; and
try people (including civilians captured far from any battlefield   and who may not have committed any terrorist act) for acts that  weren’t war crimes  when they were committed.

That’s just a start; you can read about some of the other  flaws here (And I don’t have the space here to write  about the most distressing  aspect of the MCA, its stripping from the Guantanamo detainees the   right to challenge the basis for their detention, through habeas corpus, which the Supreme Court recognized in 2004, in Rasul v. Bush.   The habeas-stripping provision is being  challenged in cases now  heading to the Supreme Court.)   Justice Robert Jackson famously said in  his  opening statement to the International Military Tribunal at  Nuremberg, “We must never forget that the  record on which we judge  these defendants today is the record on which history  will judge us  tomorrow. To pass these defendants a poisoned chalice is to put  it to  our lips as well.”  We would do  well to remember his admonition.

Back to “Guantanamo”

We know that the administration established the prison there  on the  theory that it was not U.S.  territory and detainees would not be  protected by U.S. or international laws  requiring due process and  humane treatment.   In essence, no law, no protections.   That theory  was soundly rejected by the Supreme Court in Rasul, of course, and again in Hamdan.    Also, in large part as a result of the efforts of dedicated lawyers,   military and civilian, and also because of legislative measures like the  McCain  Amendment, improvements have been made (but more on Monday  about continuing  concerns on detainee treatment).   Still,  the  administration may have got what it wanted, but not in the way that it   wanted it. The reality is that Guantanamo  is no longer completely  lawless, but that may not matter for perception.

Based only on my (non)survey:

Every single person referred to torture or abuse as the  first or  second thing that came to mind about Guantanamo.   Some (most)  specifically said “Torture.”   A couple of people reeled off specific  techniques, including, to my  surprise (a lesson learned about  friendship and preconceptions), the metals  trader from Delaware  who  recited: “waterboarding, deprivation, not allowed Korans, forced   renditions, forced confession.”
The next highest category (five people) responded with what  I  think of as “emotional words”:   “Wrong”, “Abhorrent”, “Horror”,  “Frustration” [later explained as  frustration with the U.S.,  that this  was happening], “Shaming of America.”
For about half the people, Guantanamo evoked “military”.  One  expanded:   “There’s a social contract between people and the military.   They protect us, in a manner that protects  our ideals.  We’re supposed  to support  them and protect them, not ask them to do things that are  immoral or against  what this country stands for.”
The impact on the U.S.  and its reputation was another common  theme, with four people expressing variations  (e.g. “Un-American,”  “violation of every principle this country is built on”,  “Pariah, I  mean the U.S.’s  behavior that’s led to international opprobrium, we’re  outside the community of  nations”).  It was the main response of  my  conservative friend:  “We stand for  the universal rights of man, the  idea of the city on a hill. . .[This is] not  something Reagan would  have approved of.   Not what Americans do.”
And then there were the responses I think of as specific  to the  person: “Control” (the psychologist), “No value” (the investment   banker), and “black” (the lawyer who, asked to explain, said “legal  black  hole”).

You probably didn’t need my little exercise to tell you what  you  already know:  Guantanamo  is a symbol of unfairness, of cruelty and  it’s badly hurt the United States’  human rights reputation around the  world.   But, on the eve of trials starting again, it might be  interesting to  think (and ask around) this weekend what “Guantanamo”   evokes for you and your friends.

My responses?   Torture.  Indefinite and arbitrary  detention.  Hamdan.  The detainees, Gitmo-ize.









Previous Diary Entries
Read previous posts from Human Rights First observers.

Related Links 
Military Commissions: An Overview
Read about the Individual cases 