Congress wants to keep refugees like Hadeel out of the U.S. Listen to her story first.
November 24, 2015
This Thanksgiving Human Rights First asked some of our refugee clients to tell as what they’re most thankful for. For many of them, their journeys to the United States were spurred by harrowing situations. They came here seeking safety from violence, threats, torture, and persecution. Despite encountering situations many of us cannot imagine, these brave individuals have started new lives in the United States. One of these women is Hadeel Oueis, who fled the Assad regime in Syria. When the civil war in Syria broke out Hadeel knew she had to get out of the country. She had already been jailed three times for speaking out against the Assad regime and for helping to provide medical aid to injured protestors. She knew if she stayed her life would be in grave danger. As she told Human Rights First, "I am thankful for the United States that gave me the chance to start a new life full of freedom, equality, and opportunities. And thankful for the chance I got to come back to school and study the major I've always dreamt about.” Watch Hadeel talk about her experiences on MSNBC. Many in Congress are supporting proposals that would prevent vulnerable Syrian families, women like Hadeel, from receiving protection in the United States. The American Security Against Foreign Enemies (SAFE) Act, which passed in the House and will soon be voted on in the Senate, would effectively halt the resettlement of Syrian and Iraqi refugees. Human Rights First has urged the Senate to reject the proposal and any other bills that would halt or pause the already slow and thorough process for resettlement of vulnerable refugee families who are fleeing violence and terrorism.  You can join our call by contacting your senator and asking them to prioritize protecting refugees like Hadeel. As Thanksgiving approaches, Human Rights First is thankful for the opportunity to work with Hadeel and thousands of other refugees who have come to the United States seeking safety, enriching our country in return.  We hope you will stand with us as we continue this important work. 