June 2009-Asylum News
July 02, 2010
"The St. Louis Refugee   Ship Blues" by Art Spiegelman

On June 21st, The Washington Post printed a visual commentary entitled, "The St. Louis Refugee   Ship Blues," by Art Spiegelman. In this editorial cartoon, Spiegleman used   the main character from his Pulitzer Prize-winning comic-strip, Maus,   to look back on a tragic moment in U.S. history when, in 1939, the U.S. refused   to grant entry to 900 Jews fleeing Nazi Germany. Spiegelman connected this to   the present with a compelling visual -- a "free orange jumpsuits and handcuffs"   sign next to the Statue of Liberty -- and a reference to Human Rights First's   recent report on the detention of asylum seekers in the United States.

To see "The St. Louis Refugee Ship Blues," please visit the website of The Washington   Post.

Click here to learn more about Art Spiegleman and Maus.

To read about the voyage of the St. Louis, please see the website of   the U.S. Holocaust   Memorial Museum.


World Refugee   Day

World Refugee Day marks an opportunity to embrace the contributions of   refugees worldwide and honor their courage and perseverance. This year, the U.N.   High Commissioner for Refugees, António Gutierrez, and UNHCR Goodwill   Ambassador, Angelina Jolie, joined Ann Curry from NBC television, Rose Mapendo,   a refugee from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, NGOs, and officials from   the U.S. government at an awareness-raising event at the National Geographic   Society in Washington, D.C.

Click here to read Human Rights First's World Refugee Day statement and its recommendations   to the Obama Administration.

Click here to read more about UNHCR's celebrations of World Refugee Day worldwide.


Holder vacates Matter of Compean

On June 3rd, Attorney General Eric Holder vacated the decision issued by   former Attorney General Michael Mukasey in Matter of Compean, Bangaly   & J-E-C-, 24 I&N Dec. 710 (A.G. 2009). In this decision, Attorney   General Holder directed the BIA and the Immigration Judges to continue to apply   the long-standing framework for reviewing motions to reopen based on claims of   ineffective assistance of counsel that was established in Matter of   Lozada, 19 I&N Dec. 637 (BIA 1988). In vacating the order issued in Matter of Compean, Attorney General Holder announced his intention to   initiate rulemaking to govern procedures for reopening cases based on   ineffective assistance of counsel.

To read Attorney General Holder’s decision in Matter of Compean,   please see the Department of   Justice's website.

For additional background on the Matter of Compean decision issued   by Attorney General Mukasey see Human Rights First's Asylum News Issue   #73.


BIA decision in Matter of A-T

On June 4th, the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) issued an interim   decision in the Matter of A-T, 25 I&N Dec. 1 (A.G. 2009), a case   addressing eligibility for asylum or withholding of removal based on past   persecution related to female genital mutilation and the applicability of the   exceptions to the one year filing deadline for asylum. In this decision, the BIA   held that the applicant was time barred from asylum but remanded the case to the   Immigration Judge for additional fact finding on her eligibility for withholding   of removal.

To read the BIA's decision in Matter of A-T, please see the BIA's website.

 
Past Issues 