Human Rights Panel Of Experts To Mark 10th Anniversary Of International Human Rights Agreement
October 22, 2008
NEW YORK - A group of international human rights experts and activists will participate in a panel discussion to mark the 10th anniversary of an international agreement to protect human rights defenders. 
The panel, "The United Nations Human Rights Defenders Declaration after 10 Years: Protecting Rights in a Changing World," will begin at 1:15PM on Friday, October 28 at the UN building in conference room 9. 
The 1998 adoption of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders was a landmark achievement in the struggle toward better protection of those at risk for carrying out human rights activities. It was the first U.N. instrument to recognize the importance and legitimacy of the work of human rights defenders, as well as their need for better protection. 
Among the panelists is the recently appointed Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders, Margaret Sekaggya, a magistrate from Uganda who was appointed to this position in March. The Special Rapporteur is charged with monitoring the situation of human rights defenders around the world and working with governments, UN bodies and other international actors as they implement the Declaration. 
The discussion, which will moderated by Human Rights First's Andrew Hudson, will also include panelists: Nora Younis, an internationally recognized Egyptian human rights activist; Oscar Pedraza, founder of the Colombian group Sons and Daughters for Memory and Against Impunity; and Morten Wetland, Norway's Ambassador to the UN.
The event is sponsored by Human Rights First, the International Service for Human Rights, and the Norwegian Mission to the United Nations. Media coverage is welcome.
WHAT: "Protecting Rights in a Changing World," a panel of experts will hold a discussion to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders
WHERE: United Nations Conference Room 9

WHEN: Friday, October 28th, 1:15-2:45 p.m.

WHO: Ms. Margaret Sekaggya
Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders

Ambassador Morten Wetland
Permanent Representative of Norway to the United Nations 

Mr. Oscar Pedraza
Joint founder, Sons and Daughters for Memory and Against Impunity, Colombia

Ms. Nora Younis
New media activist, Egypt

Mr. Andrew Hudson, moderator
Human rights defenders program, Human Rights First 