Asylum News 45
September 01, 2006
Material   Support: New Report and Senate Hearing
On   September 26, Human Rights First issued a report entitled “Abandoning the   Persecuted: Victims of Terrorism and Oppression Barred from Asylum.” The report   outlines the impact of the “material support” bar on the U.S. asylum system and on refugees who seek   asylum in the United   States. It includes recommendations for the   Department of Homeland Security, the Departments of Justice and State, and the   U.S. Congress.

As detailed in the   report, the overly broad bar regarding “material support” to terrorism has   adversely affected many refugees who are actually the victims of terrorism and   oppression. Many refugees have had their asylum requests denied or relegated to   a long-term administrative limbo. The time that they have spent in immigration   jails – or separated from their families – has been prolonged by months or even   years.

To read the report, click   here

To read the   Associated Press article, click here (9/26/06)

On September 27, the   Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, Border Security and Citizenship   will hold a hearing on the U.S. refugee resettlement program,   with an emphasis on the ongoing problems with the “material support” bar to   resettlement. Father Ken Gavin of Jesuit Refugee Service will testify on behalf   of the Refugee Council USA.

Material   Support: Second State Department Waiver

On August 30, the   U.S. State Department exercised its discretionary authority to waive the   material support bar for a second set of Burmese Karen living in refugee camps   in Thailand, allowing them to   be resettled in the United   States if they meet the other eligibility   requirements. The August waiver expanded the May 2006 waiver, which had allowed   for the resettlement of a subset of Karen refugees in one particular camp in   Thailand, to cover Karen   refugees at other camps in Thailand. These waivers, however,   still leave many vulnerable Karen refugees at risk. The State Department’s press   release can be found at http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2006/71680.htm
Material   Support: Litigation on Refugee Victims of Terrorist   Duress 

On August 24, the   Board of Immigration Appeals held a rare oral argument in a case involving the   question of whether a refugee can be denied asylum when any support he gave was   the result of duress. The case concerns a fisherman from Sri Lanka who   had been kidnapped by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), commonly   known as the Tamil Tigers. The Department of Homeland Security and the   immigration judge have taken the view that the ransom money the fisherman paid   constitutes “material support” to the LTTE, preventing the refugee from   receiving asylum in the United States.

Human Rights First   submitted an amicus brief to the Board, and Refugee Protection Program staff   attorney Anwen Hughes participated in   the oral argument. To read or cite to a copy of this amicus brief, which   explains why duress is an implicit defense to this bar, click   here
Immigration   Enforcement Proposals in Congress

A barrage of   immigration enforcement bills have been proposed in the final days before   Congress adjourns on September 29. These proposals contain some provisions that   would adversely affect asylum seekers, including extensions of the time that   they spend in immigration jails.

Learn more from Rights Working   Group and the American Immigration   Lawyers Association
Guidance   for Attorneys: The Post-9/11 Asylum System

In the years since   September 11, the challenges that face those who flee from persecution and seek   refuge in the United   States have multiplied. So, too, have the   challenges that face the attorneys who represent these refugees in the   U.S. asylum system. New laws, new   policies, shifts in practice, and bureaucratic changes abound. Human Rights   First Refugee Protection Program director Eleanor   Acer and staff attorney Anwen   Hughes review the post-9/11 asylum system and offer advice to   attorneys representing asylum seekers in the current environment in the American   Bar Association’s summer 2006 issue of the Journal of the Section of Litigation. Click here to   read the full article.

New   Job Hunt Options for Refugees and Other Immigrants

Upwardly Global is a   nonprofit organization that helps refugees, asylees, and other immigrants with   professional backgrounds to rebuild their careers in the United States.   Upwardly Global staff work with unemployed and underemployed foreign-born   professionals to conduct thoughtful and targeted job searches. They also nurture   relationships with employers and help them recruit, hire, and train talented   immigrant professionals. Eligible immigrants must be legally authorized to work   in the U.S. without employer sponsorship.

This San   Francisco-based organization recently opened offices in New   York and is actively recruiting clients and employers in the   New York City   area. For further information, see www.upwardlyglobal.com.

Human   Rights First Annual Dinner

The 2006 Human   Rights First Awards Dinner will take place on Monday, October 16, at Chelsea   Piers in New York   City. This year, Human Rights First will honor Munir and   Suciwati of Indonesia and the Damas de Blanco (Ladies in   White) of Cuba. The program will also feature   the stories of clients of the Asylum Legal Representation Program. For more   information, click here. To   make reservations, please call 212-845-5276 or email nuttallb@humanrightsfirst.org. 