Asylum News 51
March 01, 2007
Iraqi Refugees Face Hurdles in Search for Refuge

Public attention continues to focus on the plight of refugees who have fled   Iraq and those who remain in danger within the country. Two million Iraqis have   fled from persecution and violence in Iraq, some targeted because of their ties   to the United States. The overwhelming majority of refugees remain in Jordan and   Syria, as well as other countries in the region.

A small number of Iraqis have fled to the United States. Of the 22,200 Iraqis   who sought asylum in industrial countries last year, only 537 filed for asylum   in the U.S., according to statistics recently released by the UN refugee agency.   Iraqi asylum seekers face the same hurdles that other asylum seekers face,   including detention in immigration jails. Once granted asylum, they face the   tremendous difficulty of bringing their families to safety in this country.

Read New York   Times article on Iraqi refugees in the United States (3/11/07) (sub.   req.)
Read 60 Minutes   piece on Iraqi translators and the adequacy of the U.S. response   (3/11/07)
Read New Yorker   article about Iraqi translators fleeing violence (3/26/07)
Read more about   the refugee crisis
Material Support:   Medical Professionals and Progress on Waivers

The U.S. Department of Homeland Security has opposed the asylum requests of   medical professionals who were forced to treat injured rebels. One worker was   kidnapped by rebels in Nepal and a nurse was kidnapped and forced to treat a   member of an armed group in Colombia. These and other refugees have been   prevented from receiving asylum or resettlement in the U.S. under sweeping   immigration laws that label innocent refugees as supporters of "terrorist   organizations."

Read Washington   Post op-ed from Physicians for Human Rights (3/5/07)

In the March 6 Federal Register, DHS published notices confirming that the   Secretary has decided to exercise his discretion to exempt from the material   support bar individuals who have provided support to certain armed groups, and   those who have provided support to armed groups under duress. The notices do not   apply to those refugees who were the victims of duress by designated or listed   "terrorist organizations." The notices spell out the criteria for qualifying for   an exemption, and delegate this authority to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration   Services (USCIS).

Read the March 6 Federal Register notices:

Federal   Register DHS Material Support Waiver (2/26/07)
Federal   Register DHS Material Support Waivers (02/20/07)

On March 23, USCIS informed refugee organizations that it had exempted four   asylum seekers, victims of armed groups in Liberia and Somalia, from the   material support bar. These are the first asylum seekers to receive exemptions.   USCIS is finalizing procedures to assess exemptions in cases pending before   USCIS. With respect to cases pending before the immigration courts, various   approaches to implementing the waiver process are being examined.

Read the New   York Times editorial (3/9/07) (sub. req.)
Lawsuits Filed on Detention   of Children

On March 6, the ACLU, the ACLU of Texas, the University of Texas School of   Law Immigration Clinic, and the law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene & MacRae   LLP filed lawsuits against DHS on behalf of 10 children detained at the T. Don   Hutto Residential Center in Taylor, Texas, one of two "family" detention   facilities now open in the United States. (See February Asylum   News)

The lawsuits contend that the conditions inside Hutto violate numerous   provisions of Flores v. Meese, a 1997 court settlement that established   minimum standards and conditions for the housing and release of all minors in   federal immigration custody.

For more information, click here
Inspector General Reports on   "Lifers"

In February, the DHS Office of the Inspector General released its report on   ICE (Immigration and Customs Enforcement) compliance with detention limits for   immigrants who remain detained after receiving final deportation orders. The   report documents a range of problems, including that post-order custody reviews   were not consistently conducted and that required notifications and reviews were   not consistently complete or timely.

To read the complete OIG report, click here
2006 State Department   Country Reports on Human Rights Practices

On March 6, the U.S. State Department released the 2006 Country Reports on   Human Rights Practices. The reports, presented to Congress, address   internationally recognized individual, civil, political, and worker rights, as   set forth in the Universal Declaration   of Human Rights.

To read the reports, click here 