Affidavit No. 4161/2008
2008
On Wednesday 16 April 2008, around 4:30 pm, I realised that a number of Palestinians had been killed during a raid of the Israeli occupying forces in Johar al-Dik area, east of al-Breij Camp in the Gaza Strip. As a result, I headed into the area, accompanied by my two colleagues Wisam Nassar and Ashraf Abu-‘Amra in a white jeep owned by the French Press Agency, where I work. We took the Salah al-Din Road on the Eastern Line in order to reach the Johar al-Deik area as quickly as possible.Around 15 minutes after we arrived, I heard a very loud explosion and saw black smoke and dust ascending from the side street in the al-Wad area, specifically the Eastern Bridge in the Wadi area, which is branched from Salah al-Din Street, from the eastern direction. I saw a number of children and adolescents pointing toward the location of the explosion and fleeing toward the main street. We stopped the jeep and my colleagues Ashraf and Wisam and I carried the photography equipment in order to start taking photos of the incident. Through my long experience as a press photographer, I was certain that a number of people had been killed.As we reached the entrance of the side street, I saw my colleague, the press photographer Wafa’ Abu-Mizyed, shouting in a hysterical manner and asking for help. I asked him why he was crying. He said that our colleague 24-year-old colleague Fadel Subhi Shana’a, who is working for Reuters, had been injured and was lying on the ground in front of the silver jeep, which he uses for his work. Wafa’ was pointing to eastwards, down the side street. Along with my two colleagues Ashraf and Wisam, I headed toward that street where three children were lying motionless on the ground, bleeding. My colleagues started taking photographs of the children, while a number of Palestinian citizens and children gathered around the corpses of the children lying on the ground.I looked east and saw the silver jeep, owned by Reuters, that my colleague Fadel Shana’a always used for his work. I have been a friend of Fadel’s for more than five years and I also knew him through work. The jeep was stopped in the middle of the side street, 60 metres east of the location where the three children were killed.My colleagues Ashraf, Wisam, Wafa’ and I headed toward the jeep which was preventing us from seeing Fadel. When we were 25 metres from where Fadel was lying on the ground, we heard another very loud explosion and fire was ascending from the backside of the jeep. My colleagues and I took cover on the ground fearing that another explosion might take place and retreated back. When we saw fire and smoke ascending from the back of Fadel’s jeep, we started screaming and crying and we were in a state of fear and horror. We also started checking ourselves, fearing that shrapnel had certainly hit us.I called the ambulance, while remaining on the ground. After ten minutes an ambulance arrived, which encouraged us. We got up and headed to the place where Fadel was lying in front of the jeep. I saw Fadel five metres beyond the burned jeep. He was lying on his back with his head pointed toward the south. I moved closer and saw that his neck and chest were completely opened and bleeding heavily. The camera and the carrier of the camera had fallen on his chest and other photography equipment was around him. I also saw two children, aged 12 and 16, lying beside Fadel and also bleeding heavily.I was strongly shocked and panicked by the sight of Fadel, who looked like he had been slaughtered, and the two innocent children. I started crying and shouting and so did mytwo colleagues Ashraf and Wisam. Four ambulance men carried the corpses of Fadel and the two children on stretchers to the ambulance and the ambulance headed quickly to al-Aqsa Martyrs’ Hospital in Deir al-Balah, in central Gaza. My colleagues and I followed the ambulance to the hospital.I swear to God that I had not heard any firing since my arrival at the place nor did I see any veiled person or fighter or any piece of weapon in the entire area. Moreover, there was not any manifestation of Palestinian resistance. I have only seen civilians, most of them are children or adolescents, who usually gather whenever they see oncoming Israeli tanks and vehicles. I had also seen the Israeli occupation tanks positioning at around one kilometre and a half from the location where my friend Fadel, and the rest of the children were killed.It is worth noting that the place was fully visible to occupation tanks and so was the place where Fadel was standing to take photos for the raiding tanks. He was standing in front of the silver coloured jeep, a two door Mitsubishi Pajero, with the words Press and TV clearly written on it. There were no cars or bodies around obscuring Fadel’s visibility.It is also worth noting that the occupation tanks shelled the place using heavy artillery that are internationally prohibited. They committed a massacre against the civilian children, in which 13 Palestinians including nine children whose ages did not exceed 17 years were killed. My colleague Fadel Shana’a was 24 years old when he was killed.