Affidavit No. 3962/2007
2007
I do not know where to begin or end the story of my suffering. I am a Palestinian women and a resident of Nablus Street in Jenin City, in the northern West Bank. I have been married to Yousef ‘Abd-al-Rahim Abu-Hasan, 31 years old, for seven years. I have four children, Yazan aged six, Hiba aged four-and-a-half, Lina aged three, and Muhammad, aged two. My husband used to work in construction within the Green Line, and had a very good income which covered the family’s basic needs. We enjoyed a good life and were satisfied until our life was turned upside down by the Israeli occupation. Since Israeli occupying forces initiated their constant aggression against the Palestinian people at the end of 2000, our lives became like a hell which can’t be described.This was seven years ago, when Israeli occupying forces began to penetrate Palestinian cities and villages, and construct military checkpoints around Palestinian cities and other areas. Later, they started constructing the Israeli Annexation and Expansion Wall, separating the territories occupied by Israel in 1948 from those occupied in 1967. Theyalso carried out killings and targeted assassinations, implemented all kinds of collective punishments and committed numerous human rights violations against Palestinians.All of these facts turned my life and those of my husband and children into a tough and painful reality, aggravated by the fact that my husband was eventually stopped fromworking inside the territories occupied in 1948. Yes, my husband has been without work or income for seven years, which led us, me and my children, to live in extremely difficult economic conditions that I cannot describe in words. I thought about committing suicide several times, in order to no longer see my children suffer from hunger.My husband looked for work in the area of Jenin, but did not find anything due to the bad economic conditions resulting from Israeli military checkpoints and the continuous Israeli aggression affecting Palestinian cities in general, but Jenin, in particular.Imagine that my oldest son, Yazan Abu-Hasan, goes to school without even one Shekel of pocket money; even the clothes he wears to school are worn-out as a result of myinability to buy him new clothes. All my kids suffer from our dire financial situation. I am not ashamed to say that I feed my children with food that I collect from other people. Yes, this is how I feed my children; my fridge is completely empty, not even containing the most basic food. Many occasions and feasts have passed when I could not provide any new clothes for my kids, who cry about their situation.This situation has been very hard on me psychologically. You cannot imagine what happens to me when my children say, “Why don’t you give us pocket-money and a sandwich when we go to school, mom?” I start crying and my husband does, too, without being able to do anything for them. I tried to look for work at commercial stores,institutions and houses, but did not find anything. The electricity and water bills from the municipality of Jenin have accumulated several times, and I borrowed money to paysome of the electricity bills in order to have some light in our home, which we have been deprived of several times. My husband tried to obtain permits allowing him to pass the Green Line and to work in Israel, but the Israeli occupying authorities refuse to grant him such a permit. They use security pretexts in order to deny him permission. Thesesecurity allegations are false, because my husband is not wanted nor is he an activist in any faction of the Palestinian resistance movement.My husband also tried to enter the territories occupied in 1948 illegally, by bypassing the checkpoints and the Wall, but he never succeeded and was arrested several times by the Israelis. This prevented him from working and earning any money. Imagine that my children did not taste chicken for days and did not have any fruit for a long time. I cannot describe in words the miserable conditions we reached due to the Israeli occupation’s brutal measures which have prevented my husband from getting work.None of the Palestinian Authority institutions provide us any assistance. I went to the Ministry of Social Affairs in Jenin several times requesting help, but refusal was the onlyresponse I got, and the argument was that my husband is young and can work. But where is this work? My son, Yazan, suffers from continuous pain in his feet and rheumatism, and I cannot provide him with treatment and medications. I cannot speak anymore. I am not ashamed to cry in front of you, since tears do not leave my face. I amalways crying for my children and my husband. Let me finish my story by asking what crime I, my children and husband have committed. And why are we paying the price forsomething we never did? Why is the Israeli occupation punishing us? Punishing young children? What is their guilt?This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 27 November 2007.Signature: Lubna Abu-Hasan