Affidavit No. 2070/2004
2004
On 28  October 2004, I was standing in front of my shop in Kufr Saba quarter in  Qalqiliya and two young men were standing beside me: Ibrahim, whom I  know very well, and his friend Iyad. It was approximately 7:20 p.m. and  we were talking together. Ibrahim was drinking coffee and was carrying a  pistol in his hand. After around 10 minutes, his nephew, Muhammad, came  in a taxi, which he was driving, and stopped at about four metres from  us to the northeast.Iyad  approached Muhammad and they started talking together. After just  seconds, I saw Ibrahim bend backwards while Iyad and Muhammad were  looking at him. We all were not registering what was going on. We first  believed that Ibrahim was joking with this movement, but soon I saw the  laser of a weapon coming from the north and shining on the place where  we were standing. After a few seconds, I heard gunfire while I was  looking to the north, the source of the light. I saw a white Ford car  standing at a distance of about 70 metres; the gunfire and laser were  coming from that car. I instantly realised that the car belonged to the  Israeli Special Squad, especially because Ibrahim and I had heard that  Israeli patrols had entered the city from the north, which is far from  the place where we were present.Following  what happened around us, Iyad shot fire in the air without realising  what was going on around him. At that moment, the Ford car quickly  withdrew from the place. I then came close to Ibrahim to see what  happened to him. He was motionless and did not utter any words. He was  shot in the chest, head and one of his ears. Muhammad, Iyad and I  carried him and put him in Muhammad’s car and went quickly to the  Emergency Hospital in Qalqiliya. All the medical efforts could not save  his life, and so he died. As for the firing, at first a silent weapon  was used because when Ibrahim bent backwards we did not hear sound of  any firing. But after seconds we heard the sound of gunfire coming from  the white Ford car that the laser was also coming from, and those  vehicles are usually used by the Special Squad forces. It is worth  mentioning that the gunfire to which we had been subjected was not  preceded by any warning. It was wilful killing and resulted in the death  of Ibrahim. As for me, I was lucky that I was not killed or injured,  especially considering that I was standing beside Ibrahim and there was  only a distance of one metre between us.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 25 September 2004Signature: Husein Mousa Husein Abu-Rayyash