Affidavit No. 7213/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Rafe’ Abd al-Ghani Abd al-lah Bani Jaber, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 85237352, born on 14 April 1979, a farmer, and a resident of the Khirbet al-Tawil area, Nablus governorate, would like to declare the following:I am a resident of the Khirbet al-Tawil area east of ‘Aqraba town, at a distance of about four kilometres from the city of Nablus. At around 12:00 pm on 15 March 2012, my family and I were in our residential tent in Khirbet al-Tawil. My family comprises of six members. I have two tents, each with a surface area of 30 metres square. Offered to me by the Ministry of State for Wall and Settlement Affairs in Ramallah, I also have a sheep shelter with a surface area of 120 metres square. A yellow bulldozer, accompanied by approximately seven Israeli military patrol vehicles and three jeeps of the Planning and Construction Department at the Israeli Civil Administration came to the area. About 50 Israeli soldiers went out of the patrol vehicles. The majority of soldiers were Israeli Border Guard officers, whom I distinguished by their grey uniforms. An Israeli officer, who spoke Arabic, asked why I lived in the area.“I am a farmer and live here. I rely on sheep [to make a living].” I answered.He told me that the area was a closed military zone, in which presence and residence was prohibited. Three Israeli workers, who accompanied the military force cut the ropes tied to the tents, confiscated the tents and took them to the military patrol vehicles. The Israeli officer issued an order to demolish the sheep shelter by a bulldozer. An iron fence and bars were destroyed and removed from the area surrounding the shelter. Two 100-square-metre plastic covers were also seized.About 40 minutes after the shelter, in which I tended almost 150 sheep, had been destroyed, an Israeli Civil Administration officer handed to me a paper issued by the Central Unit of Inspection and Control. The paper contained an order of the seizure of goods. The officer also gave me another paper issued by the Israeli Defence Army, stating that plastic covers had been confiscated from me. He told me that the paper included an Israeli telephone number, which I could call to see what I should do if I wanted to restore the objects seized by the Israeli occupying army. Later, the Israeli army, including the military patrol vehicles and bulldozer, withdrew from the area.I would like to note that on 14 February 2012, the Israeli occupying forces demolished my residence barracks, two sheep shelters, and a taboon oven. They also confiscated my tractor. Until this moment, the Israeli occupying authorities have not returned it to me. The Israeli occupying forces also arrested my two brothers. My brother Ayman Abd al-Ghani Bani Jaber (40 years) continues to be detained, but the other was released.This time, the Israeli occupying forces demolished my barracks and seized residential tents without an official order and without a prior notice.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 28 March 2012