Affidavit No. 4141/2008
2008
On Monday 24 March 2008, between 9:45 am and 10:15 am, I received a phone call from Muhammad Rashid Al Maktoum School, which is only 200 metres from the Islamic Charitable Society School for Boys, in which I work. The caller told me that members of the Palestinian Preventive Security had left the Muhammad Rashid Al Maktoum School and were headed to my school, searching for premises of the Islamic Charitable Society.I left my office, which is close to the school gate. As I reached the gate, I saw several Palestinian dark olive green police jeeps. Their doors read “Preventive Security”. These jeeps were besieging the school and closing the street leading to it. The members of the force were armed and carrying clubs. One of them approached me and told me and the other teachers, who came to see what was going on, to give him our identity cards. I refused and asked him who he was to ask for our identity cards. He told me that he was a member of the Preventive Security Force. This discussion took place at the entrance of the school. I told him that I needed a search warrant and he said that they would get one later on. At that moment, this guy dragged the School principal from his shoulder outside of the school. When we saw that, we gave him our identity cards.Then I saw a black military jeep driving fast towards the street leading to the third floor of the school where the premises of the Islamic Charitable Society are located. An armedmember of the force entered the schoolyard. As a result, we cancelled the students recess in order to keep the 500 students from watching the arrest of the school principal, Ra’ed Hamed, and other members of the Society.I think that the Preventive Security members left the school at approximately 10:45 am, after they confiscated the Society’s property, including computer sets and other things. At a certain moment, Maher Dweikat, accompanied by two guards, entered the school and told the school secretary that they had come to protect us from the criminal al-Zahhar. Then he asked her if anybody had caused us any trouble. Then they left the school.When I asked for my identity card, one of the force members told me and the others whose cards had been seized by the force to go to the Preventive Security Headquarters located near al-Am’ari Camp. I went there and got my identity card. Together with my identity card I was handed a notification requiring me to appear before them on Wednesday 19 March 2008 but I did not go and nothing happened after that.