Affidavit No. 7265/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Karim ‘Awad Abd al-Hasib Zalloum, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 404988008, born on 4 March 2000, a student, and a resident of the Wadi al-Ghurous neighbourhood, Hebron city, Hebron governorate, would like to declare the following:I live with my seven-member family in the Wadi al-Ghurous neighbourhood near to the northern fence of the ‘Kiryat Arba’ settlement east of Hebron city. A military camp of the Israeli Border police is close to our home. The Israeli army closes the main street leading to our neighbourhood with rocks and dirt barricades, denying access to Palestinian cars. The gate to the border police camp is at a distance of about 20 metres west of our home. A cabin in which a border police officer is usually positioned is opposite the border police camp. Frequently, border police officers at the camp gate and in the cabin stop passers-by, examine their ID cards, search and harass them.On Wednesday afternoon 2 February, I was on my way back from school together with my cousins Ahmad Fayez Zalloum (ten years old) and Jamil ‘Umar Zalloum (12 years old). I reached the border police’s cabin at around 1:30 pm. After my cousins passed the cabin, two border police officers, who were standing nearby, blocked my way. One of them kicked me on my left leg and punched me in the face twice. I felt dizzy, fell to the ground, threw up, and started to cry. The other border police officer stopped in front of me and held me so that his colleague could beat me. The police officer who beat me had blonde hair and a light beard. He was of strong build and in his early twenties. The other border police officer, who blocked my way, was a little fat, almost as tall as his colleague, about the same age. He was of a white complexion and had black hair. After I had fallen to the ground, the border police officers left me. My cousin Ahmed came and helped me stand on my feet and walk to my home. When I reached my home, I threw up once again. My leg and head hurt.About 15 minutes later, my father took me to the gate to the border police camp. The police officer, who had beaten me stood near the gate. My father talked to the border police officer who beat me. Later, my father met with the responsible officer and I explained to him what had happened. The officer asked the border police officer why he had done so, but he denied it. The officer spoke Arabic fluently. He gave my father the number of the border police officer, who beat me, and said he could file a complaint against him. The police officer’s name was Shai. My father took me to the Hebron government hospital, where my leg was x-rayed and I had medical tests. Doctors gave me a medical prescription. We left the hospital at around 2:30 pm and went to the Israeli police station near to the settlement of ‘Kiryat Arba’ to file a complaint. We waited outside the police station for a period of not less than an hour. It was rainy and very cold. We waited in a yard that was roofed with tin sheets. At the police station, the interrogator listened to what had happened to me. We stayed a little more than an hour and returned to our home. Until this day, the scar is visible on my leg. From time to time, I suffer from pain in the head.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 3 March 2012asib Zalloum, guardian of the child Karim ‘Awad Zalloum, hereby confirm that this sworn statement was taken in my presence