Affidavit No. 4332/2008
2008
On 8 July 2008, my colleague Sa'id, 52 years old, and I were on duty at the Nablus Mall, located near al-Muntazahat Street. About five minutes after we closed the outer gates of the Mall, I looked at my watch and it read 12.10 am. Around that time, my colleague and I saw from the windows overlooking the street adjacent to the northwest of the Mall, dozens of Israeli patrol cars taking up position along the streetsimmediately adjacent to the Mall. The Mall is surrounded by streets on all four sides.Moments later, I saw scores of soldiers in regular military uniform, carrying long weapons and wearing helmets, approach the north-western gate of the Mall. I could see this clearly under the light of street lampposts. Later, I heard loud knocking on the gate. I asked my colleague to accompany me to the gate to see what was going on as I feared that the gate would be destroyed. There, I saw a soldier carry a crowbar and another hold a vice. They were about to break the padlock, which was connected to chains, on the gate. The upper part of the gate was composed of iron bars and wire.There were many soldiers. I told them in Arabic that we were the guards and we could open the door. One of them immediately commanded that I open the door. I knew that he was an officer by the vine leaf insignia on his shoulder. He was about 45 years of age, in regular military uniform. He carried a long weapon and wore a helmet. Beside him was another officer who was in the same uniform, with a threestar insignia on each shoulder. I think that he was in late thirties. After I opened the door, the two officers and over 20 soldiers entered the Mall."Do you have a weapon?" the officer with the vine leaf insignia asked us in Arabic. Having answered that we hadn’t, the soldiers searched us. They did not demand that we present our ID cards. Then, the officer with the three-star insignia demanded that we go home. My colleague Sa'id left immediately. I responded that I could not leave since I was the guard in charge and bear responsibility for anything that happens to the Mall. "I fear that something would be stolen from the Mall, not by you, but by the  residents in case you open up some shops and leave while I am not here," I explained.He allowed me to stay. He questioned me about the location of cameras inside the Mall. As I said I did not know, he started to yell at me and said I was lying to him. I reiterated that I did not know anything about the cameras. About two minutes later, he told me to look at the corner of the second floor. What I saw was a lamp. "That is a camera," he said. "It is a lamp," I insisted. "Do you challenge me? It is a camera," he continued. "No," I kept saying. He asked me, "if I prove to you that it is a camera, what will I do with you?" "Anything you want," I replied. Meanwhile the other officer, who I mentioned earlier, arrived. Repeating that it was a camera, the first officer grabbed a chair from the corridor and took it out. "Look! This is a camera," he said.It was a camera. Then the officer with the three-star insignia punched my back and chest for about two minutes. He asked me then about how the TV set was connected to the cameras. When I said I did not know, he punched me again on my back and face for about one minute. Then, the officer with the three-star insignia questioned me about the Investment Company (Bayt al-Maal) as well as about the office of Mr. Abu-’Abdallah, Director of the Nablus Mall and Director of the Investment Company. I told him that I did not know and that I had only been employed in the Mall for four days. Only my colleague, who had left the Mall, knew all this information. The officer started to curse at me, saying I was a liar and dishonest. "How come you do not know and you are the guard?" he asked me.The other officer punched me on the face for a while. I believe he understood Arabic. During my conversation with the other officer he came up and beat me when he did not like one of my statements. "You are lying and claiming that you do not know anything," the first officer kept saying. The two officers and a number of soldiers took me to the main signboard, on which names of commercials shops and offices are written. "Where is the office of Abu-’Abdallah, Director of the Investment Company?" he asked. "As is written, it is on the second floor," I replied.They took me to the second floor. He stopped in front of an office and said that it was Abu-’Abdallah's office. A soldier holding a crowbar and vice broke the lock and padlock. The officer and other soldiers entered the office, which consisted of several rooms. I waited outside the office supervised by a number of soldiers. Within minutes I saw them exit, carrying three computers, a fridge, an electric fan, a number of chairs and several files. Using a machine, a soldier welded the door shut with oxygen. Then, I was taken to a number of shops on the first and third floor.although empty and unused, they also welded their doors shut with oxygen. While moving around the Mall, I saw soldiers put notices on the doors of shops, although I did not know what these notices said. Accompanied by the two officers and soldiers, I also saw a number of soldiers stop beside a wedding hall, called Dream, on the second floor. They broke the glass door, entered the hall and took out an amplifier device. I don’t know where they took it. Approximately two hours later, a number of soldiers and the officer with the three-star insignia took me to the first floor, where I was forced to sit on the ground.I could not control myself; I started to cry loudly like a child. Every five minutes, the officer demanded that I stop crying and forced me to sit in another place on the same floor. I continued to cry for an hour or so. Then, the officer with the three-star insignia came and brought back my mobile telephone, which he had taken from me earlier. "Why are you crying?" he asked. "No reason," I answered. "I work as a guard and if I would ever of known that you would come here and beat me, I would have never worked as a guard. I am an old man and work to earn a living for my children. I have left my children and wife alone so that I make a living by earning my due wages of guarding." "Dear Bashshar, you have to come to terms with us," he replied.When he asked me about the soldier who beat me, I pointed at the other officer. Then he talked to the soldiers in Hebrew. I understood that he told them to check my ID. If I was clear they would leave me alone. A soldier requested my ID. Using the wireless device, he called another officer and examined my ID. Two minutes later, they gave me my ID card back.Several minutes later, the soldiers started to leave, it was 4:30 am. They did not tell me that they were leaving the Mall, about 20 minutes later however, I saw the patrol cars withdraw from the area. I stayed inside the Mall until the morning. Only then could I see the content of the notices posted on the doors of commercial shops. They stated that by an order from the Commander of the Area of Judea and Samaria, the Mall would be closed and placed under control as of 15 August 2008. I should note that on the next day while I was standing on duty at the southern gate of the Mall at about 1:00 am, several jeeps arrived and stopped near me. I was surprised to see the officer with the three-star insignia talking to me from one of the jeeps. He said, "after the stated date, each person who enters the Mall and does not abide by the notice will be subject to responsibility for what happens to him." Then, they left.