Affidavit No. 5059/2009
2009
I live in the town of Ya’bad, which has a population of about 18,000 people and is located south of the city of Jenin, I own a piece of agricultural land located north of the town, which I inherited from my father ‘Adnan Zeid. Measuring 38 dunums, the land is used to grow olive and almond trees.In May 2009, while I was touring around the property and taking care of trees I saw an order for the confiscation of the land by the Israeli occupying authorities. Having verified the order, which was written in both Arabic and Hebrew, I discovered that approximately 20 dunums of my land would be seized. The order was signed by the Commander of the Israeli Defence Army for the area of Judea and Samaria. The land area to be confiscated is also planted with almond and olives trees.This land is the only source of income for us, as we produce olives, oil and almonds. The confiscation order did not affect us alone; it included several pieces of land adjacent to mine. These belonged to residents of the town of Ya’bad. The total area of land to be confiscated is approximately 150 dunums. It is all farmland, which is planted with olive and almond trees.Other affected landowners and I retained a Palestinian lawyer residing in the territory occupied in 1948 in order to file a case for the annulment of the confiscation order. So far, no results have been achieved. I should note I do not know the name of that lawyer. Until this moment, the Israeli occupying forces have not levelled the land or uprooted trees.In addition, in mid August 2009, the Israeli occupying authorities issued further orders for confiscation of about 115 dunums, which include forests and land in the same area. All of this land belongs to residents of the town of Ya’bad.So far, we have not known the Israeli occupying authorities’ objective in seizing this large area of land. There are no Israeli settlements or military posts near the land being confiscated. The Wall is at a distance of about one kilometre north of the affected land. According to citizens, particularly landowners, the Israeli occupying authorities intend to establish an industrial zone on the seized land. However, there is no material evidence to the north to prove that. We are afraid that this phenomenon of land confiscation will persist.