Affidavit No. 6310/2011
2011
At around 1:30 pm on Friday, 15 April 2011, I left my home to participate in the weekly peacefuldemonstration in Bil’in. The protest is organised in Bi’lin in protest of the Wall and the settlementactivities affecting the Palestinian village. We marched towards the Wall’s eastern Gate which isattached to the Wall and had been built on the village residents’ land in the western area ofBil’in. Participants in the weekly demonstrations have been marching towards this gate for seven years. At 2:00 pm, I was standing at a distance of almost three metres from the gate.A large number of Israeli occupying forces were positioned around the Wall and along the route of the Wall. I estimated that there were hundreds of them. More than 30 soldiers, including officers,  were immediately opposite of me. I could distinguish the officers by their uniforms, which showed military ranks on their shoulders. At that time, soldiers fired various types of tear gas grenades while a white vehicle sprayed bad smelling wastewater on the protestors; the occupying soldiers usually discharge wastewater on protestors using this vehicle that they bring with them to almost each demonstration. Due to the tear gas and wastewater, participants were  dispersed from the area near the Wall’s gate. I remained the only one standing near the gate. A group of young men were at a distance of almost 30 metres behind me. Among them was a 15- year-old child, who was carrying a slingshot and was waving it around. I heard one of the [Israeli] officers speaking to another soldier in Hebrew, a language I understand well.He was saying, “Toreebo” – which means shoot him.I heard him say that so I put up my hands. The officer was standing about 25 meters away from me on the other side of the gate but I could hear him well because I was standing by myself and there was no shooting going on at the time. After I heard what he had said, I immediately saw one of the soldiers advance towards me and stop about 15 meters away; he was also on the other side of the Wall; the east side. He positioned himself there and pointed his gun at me as I was standing still watching him. I felt that he was going to fire his gun but I expected that he was aiming at the boy who was waving around his slingshot behind me. Regardless, I held my hands up again and said shoot if you want to kill me. I slightly turned around to face the boy immediately after I said this and told him to go away and be careful. As soon as I finished talking to the boy, I felt severe pain in my leg, felt somewhat like a shock, and I found the soldiers coming after me so I ran around 25 meters on one foot until other young men came towards me and I was shouting that I had been hit. The soldiers were still running after me to arrest me but they could not reach me because the young men were able to make them retreat by throwing stones at them. I was transported to the Palestine Medical Complex. I appeared that I was shot with an explosive type of tutu bullets in the left foot near my toe. Though most of the bullet shrapnel was taken out, six fragments remained in my foot. I also sustained another surface wound from the same kind of bullet in the shoulder. Two shrapnel fragments remained in myshoulder.