Affidavit No. 5016/2009
2009
Settlers attempted to push me to the ground so that they could continue beating me. I tried to avoid their beating and confronted them. I was attacked for a period of 10–15 minutes. A soldier, who was positioned in the area, attempted to defend me, but he could not due to the large number of settlers. The young settler who had first obstructed my access hit me with a chair the soldier had been using, but I pushed it away with my left hand. As army and police patrols as arrived in the area, the settlers stopped attacking me. While I was being beaten, settlers shouted obscenities at me. Settlers dispersed when the army and the police arrived, but the police officers did not attempt to arrest or pursue any of the settlers.I sustained contusions and scratches on my face, arms and stomach. Neither the soldiers nor the police officers offered me any medical aid.“If you want to pass, I can accompany you.” A soldier told me.“Go to the hospital and have a medical report completed. Then, come tomorrow and file a complaint.” A police officer said.Because I was dizzy and suffered pain in various parts of my body, I called my friends for help. After they arrived, my friends transported me to the Hebron Governmental Hospital („Alia). I arrived at the hospital at approximately 6:30 pm. I had various medical tests completed and was given medication. I left half an hour later. Except for one bag of clothes, I had lost all other bags when the settlers attacked me.I returned to the station today. The police officer took an official statement and I lodged a complaint about the attack. The interrogator showed me pictures of settlers. Of these, I identified two settlers who had assaulted me.An Israeli soldier and police officer are usually positioned in the area where I was attacked. However, the police officer was absent on the day I was assaulted. Only the soldier, whose powers to confront settler attacks are limited, was present.I am married and a father of three children, the eldest of whom is three years old. Due to the attack and pains I have suffered, I did not go to my workplace today. I believe that I will not be able to work for several other days.