Affidavit No. 5591/2010
2010
At around 11:45 pm on Thursday 15 July 2010, I was attending the wedding party of my nephew, Bakr ‘Abd-al-Qader Ibrahim al-Shawwaf, 25 years old. The party was taking place on 10 dunums of vacant land of near our properties in al-Shawwaf neighbourhood in the centre of ‘Abasan al-Kabira town, east of Khan Younes city. Chanting songs common to wedding parties, a popular band that used simple musical instruments celebrated the occasion. The congregation was comprised of approximately 500 people, most of whom were relatives, friends and neighbours, including a number of women. We had been obliged to obtain a permit from the police to organise the party.Suddenly we heard the sound of intensive fire at a very close distance. Shortly later, I saw about eight armed, masked individuals, who wore black clothes and carried batons and sticks. They raided the party from behind the platform, which was installed in the western area of the land. While setting fire to the platform, a number of these individuals opened fire in the air to disperse the congregation. They also destroyed chairs and beat several people with sticks and batons. About two minutes later, they withdrew from the place.Approximately 10 minutes later, the police and Internal Security force arrived. A number of the wedding party guests quarrelled with security officers. Several relatives of mine also threw stones at the police. Consequently, officers beat participants with sticks and batons, injuring a number of individuals. About five minutes later, senior members of my family intervened, settled the problem and calmed down the situation.Around half an hour later, I was informed that the police had arrested my 54-year-old brother, ‘Abd-al-Qader - the bridegroom’s father - as well as his sons ‘Arafat (21 years old) and Ibrahim (19 years old), and that they had been taken to Bani Suheila Police station in Bani Suheila town in the eastern Khan Younes governorate. They were detained on charges of assaulting police officers. Another 15 members of my family were also detained on the same grounds. Police officers arrested my brother while he was in a civilian car travelling to hospital; he had sustained injuries to the head after police officers had beaten him. After a number of noteworthy individuals had visited Bani Suheila police station, the police released my brother (the bridegroom’s father) and my two sons. However, the police refused to release the remaining detainees.I also learned that the Police arrested four armed individuals, who had raided the wedding party – all members of al-Qassam Brigades, who live in our area. The police prosecuted other four individuals, who were suspected of taking part in the attack on the wedding party.