Affidavit No. 4138/2008
2008
On Wednesday, 12 March 2008, I was at home with my wife ‘Adla, my 21 year old son Majdi, and my 17 year old daughter Shireen. Our house is located in the centre of Qalqiliya. While we were all sleeping I was woken up by loud shouting coming from the main gate of our home. I looked at the clock hanging on the bedroom wall and saw that it was 5:00 am. I woke up my wife to listen to the shouting which was loud but not understandable. Then I looked through the window overlooking the street. I was shocked when I saw the street full of Israeli jeeps and more than 200 soldiers.I went to the door and opened it before the soldiers could tell me to do so. I was afraid that otherwise they would break the door, just like they had done before. Then I woke up my son and daughter and told them to get ready because the soldiers were filling the streets. Every time the soldiers raided the area, they targeted our home because my son Muhammad has been wanted by the Israeli occupation army for three years.What I expected came true. After three minutes a large number of the soldiers entered the yard to our home. Our house consists of two floors: the first floor comprises a kitchen and a salon and the second floor encompasses the bedrooms. We left the house without being asked to do so and stood in front of it. One of the soldiers asked me in Hebrew, which I understand, if anyone remained in the house and I told him that no one was inside, then he asked us to go outside and to stay in the street. Some of the soldiers were in the street, some were in our yard, and others entered our home. The soldiers who entered our home were accompanied by two huge black dogs. Two huge soldiers were dragging them and carrying weapons – which kind of weapons I don’t know. They were also wearing helmets on their heads.We remained in the street for one hour not knowing what was going on in our home. We were standing with our faces toward the wall while an unidentified number of Israeli soldiers were watching us and aiming their weapons at us. An hour later, after they had taken our identity cards from us, a soldier told us to go back to our house home and so we did. As we entered, we found our house in a big mess. The couches were turned upside down and broken. Then one of the soldiers asked me if I am Rafiq and I said yes. He ordered me to follow him to the salon on the first floor. He brought a chair and ordered me to sit on it. He sat down, in front of me, face to face, at a distance of less than half a metre. Then he started to ask me about my sons, especially my wanted son Muhammad. I told him that I had not seen him for three years. Then the soldier asked if Muhammad visits our home and I denied that he did. At that moment he started to yell and told me to be frank with him. This soldier was tall and wearing the same uniform as the other soldiers. He was carrying a weapon, which was shorter than the weapons of the other soldiers. He left and asked another soldier to watch me.After less than one minute, another soldier opened the door with his foot and asked me the same questions that I was previously asked. He sat very close to me, so close that his nose touched mine. I gave the same answers. He accused me of lying, stood up and threw his helmet against the wall behind me in order to intimidate me. He stayed like that for half an hour. I got tired and told him to either shoot me or to let me to go to the doctor because I was sick. He told the other soldier to bring me some water. I told him that I didnot want any water. I left the room looking for my wife, son and daughter. I found them in another room where the Israeli soldiers were interrogating them. This situation lasted for four hours, during which we were going from one interrogation to another.Our home was in very bad condition. Every piece of furniture was broken. After the interrogations the Israeli soldiers left, leaving behind severe damage, especially in the kitchen. When we entered it, we were shocked to see the state of the kitchen. While we were outside the house the soldiers had destroyed our furniture and their dogs had also made a mess. I told my wife not to clean the house because I was very tired and wanted to see a doctor. I called the doctor and made an appointment for 2:00 pm. When I left home at 1:45 pm, I found a person carrying a long weapon and wearing civilian clothes at the door. He was tall and blonde. He grabbed my hand strongly, causing me severe pain and asked me about who was in the house. I told him that my wife and daughter were inside and that my son had gone out to the market. He told me to tell them to get out of the house. I shouted at my daughter and wife telling them to get out. Then he said that they would enter the house and if they found anybody inside, they would kill him. I said “kill him”. On the street, I saw 30 soldiers in civil cars with yellow plates [Israeli licence plates]. A person in military uniform who was carrying weapons got out of one of the cars, a Ford, and approached me. He asked me about my son Muhammad, directly facing me he said that he had been informed about my son Muhammad being in the house just a few minutes earlier, but I denied that.This time the soldiers were accompanied by four huge black dogs. Once again, they entered our home together with the four dogs, while we stayed outside under the guard of four soldiers. After 15 minutes the soldiers left our home. They stood in front of our house and counted in Hebrew from one to fifteen. As they said fifteen, we heard an explosion inside our home. The doors and windows exploded and the Israeli soldiers left. When I entered our home, I found Dynamite wires inside the house. They also blew up the electricity watch. As a result, our house was cut off of electricity for two days. This is what happened to us. It is worth noting that I am now unable to repair my house. They have done this several times but this is the first time they have used dynamite wires to blow up the house.