Affidavit No. 7332 /2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Fida’ Salem Muhammad Sarhan, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 802612465, born on 6 October 1990, a student at the al-Aqsa University, and a resident of the al-Manarah neighbourhood, Khan Younis city, would like to declare the following:I, the undersigned, Fida’ Salem Muhammad Sarhan, I am 22 years old and I live in the Al Manarah neighbourhood east of Khan Younis city. I am a student at Al-Aqsa University – Khan Younis Branch and I am coordinator of the Student Action Front, the Student Division of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) at the University.At around 4:30 pm on Monday, 14 May 2012, I received a call on my mobile telephone from an unknown number. When I accepted the call the person on the line introduced himself as a member of the Internal Security agency and talked to me about an upcoming activity that had been organised by the Student Action Front at al-Aqsa University – Khan Younis Branch. A trip had been organised for university students, including about 80 female students and 50 male students. Having completed the necessary arrangements, the trip was scheduled to set off on the next day, Tuesday, 15 May 2012. The Internal Security officer inquired about the organisers and nature of the trip. Then, he told me that a decision had been made to prevent the activity. I replied that the trip had been prepared and participants had already registered. I also said that we had prepared and booked sites we intended to visit and that the trip could not be cancelled. At that point, a quarrel took place between us. I told him there were other coordinators of the trip and that he could talk to them. He reported the decision on prevention once again and ended the telephone conversation.At around 10:30 pm on the same day, two persons arrived on a motorcycle at my house and presented two summons signed by the Internal Security agency. One summons was delivered to me and the other to my father. We were summoned to report to the Internal Security headquarters in Khan Younis at 9:00 am the next day, 15 May 2012. We reported the matter to the faction with which I am affiliated – the PFLP. At around 1:00 am, the PFLP told us that they had contacted the Internal Security agency and that they had resolved the matter. Accordingly, the summons was cancelled. The PFLP also told me that the trip had been postponed because the organisers had decided to put it off for several days.On Wednesday evening, my mobile telephone SIM card was suspended. I did not know why it was not working. JAWWAL company told me that a person had requested that they suspend my SIM card. Therefore, I could not follow up with the trip. On Thursday morning, 17 May 2012, some female students told me that the trip would set off at around 8:30 am on the same day. They said that female students would gather near to the Al-Aqsa Community College on al-Qassam Street in the centre of Khan Younis city. Male students would gather near Al Farra Tower on Jalal Street in the city centre. I called another coordinator. She told me that some students, who had coordinated the trip, had fixed the time. However, she did not know whether the trip was coordinated with the Internal Security agency or not. I then went to the University. I did not go to the place where the female students gathered. When I was at the University, some female students who had been supposed to participate in the trip arrived and told me that Internal Security officers had arrived at the place where the female students gathered and inquired about me. The Internal Security officers prevented the female students from getting into the bus. Female students went to the taxicab stand on Jalal Street in the centre of Khan Younis city in order to take taxies and join the trip. However, Internal Security officers chased the female students and prevented them from getting into taxies. Accordingly, the female students’ trip was cancelled.On Saturday evening, 19 May 2012, my father received a telephone call from an Internal Security officer, who demanded that he report to the Internal Security headquarters at 09:00 am on the next day, 20 May 2012. Indeed, my father reported to the Internal Security agency at the designated time. My father told me that he was detained at the headquarters until 1:00 pm and was treated badly. Internal Security officers were sceptical about the trip and about its goals... According to my father, Internal Security officers said the trip had been designed to allow mixing between male and female students. It entailed objectives that breached public morals.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 22 May 2012