Affidavit No. 3007/2006
2006
Since 1 January 1999, I have been working in the Ministry of Health – Salfit Directorate as a driver for the Ministry. My job is to drive the administrative employees from the governorate to the directorate. My monthly salary is 1,850 shekels. Although my salary is low and I cannot provide my family – which consists of 9 members: my wife Zohore (a housewife, 37 years old), Maysa’ (a Tawjihi student, 18 years), Rashed (a student, 16 years), Bisan (a student, 10 years), Hassan (a student, 8 years), and Sultan (5 years) – with basic necessities, we try to cope with this salary. I have suffered when I have not been able to even fulfil the basic needs of my children. I looked for another job to increase our income but my searches were useless because of the poor economy and lack of jobs. Many times, I have gone to borrow money from a friend to purchase basic necessities for my family. That was the case when I was receiving a salary.But now, I have not received a salary for three months and I do not have an alternative or any other means of living. Since I stopped receiving my salary, we have been living on bread and oil. Fruit and meat are not to be found in our home. I begin to cry when one of my children asks me for a shekel to buy something and I cannot even afford that shekel. The little children start to shout and I do not blame them because they do not know that I do not have that shekel.My little children do not know that the Palestinian people are punished collectively for their choice in a democracy that the international community itself called for. Unfortunately, our democracy was not tailored according to the specifications of the decision makers of the world. My eldest daughter Maysa’ was dreaming of studying medicine or politics in Europe or the United States after she graduates from school. But after she realized what is happening and how the international community cut off the assistance to the Palestinian people, she told me, “Father, I have often heard about Europe and America as oases for freedom, democracy and human values. Had this been accurate, this world would not have contributed to our starvation, deprivation and making our lives impossible.” I answered by agreeing with what she said. She continued, saying, “Last year, I read about the United Nations and realized that it upholds values and noble principles for all humanity. I felt with hope that some day our darkness would vanish and we would see light, based on what I read of its assistance to the Palestinian people and to humanity in general.” She added, “I started to watch the news on radio and television but I was shocked when I realized that the UN is participating in our oppression. These values and principles are not for the Palestinians, they are for the welfare of European and American peoples. It is just words.”Imagine: this is my daughter’s perception, although she is just 18 years old and still in the period of mental development. I believe that her words were the closest description of what the Palestinian people are suffering simply because they chose a democracy which the world did not like.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 10 June 2006Signature: Zuhdi RashedName not withheldField researcher: Yousef Qawariq