Affidavit No. 2149/2005
2005
At around  3:00 pm 26 January 2005, I was with my friends Maher Harb and Muhammad  Khamis in a car that Maher was driving in Qalqiliya, specifically in the  central part of Kufr Saba Quarter. I was sitting in the back seat while  Muhammad was sitting in the front passenger seat, and Maher was driving  very slowly due to the potholes in the street. All of a sudden, someone  shouted, “Stop!” and was shooting at the car. I looked around and saw  three persons surrounding the car and firing at us. I saw one of them,  the one who was standing on the right side, aim his gun directly at  Maher from a distance not exceeding two metres, then shoot him in the  neck. Maher immediately leaned to his left side, bleeding, and at that  moment the car crashed into a nearby tree on the sidewalk, coming to a  complete stop.At this  point, I saw a white Volkswagen car stopped in front of us. Then the  three men opened the car doors and fired at Muhammad Khamis, who was  injured. I realised that they were from the Special Squads, and one of  them grasped my bleeding left hand, and asked me about the weapons and  hit me with the butt of his gun, I told him that we did not have  weapons, while my friend Muhammad and I were yelling from pain. Maher  was not moving or breathing and I thought that he was dead at that  moment. This was not enough for one of the soldiers who was one and a  half metres away from me, sitting on one knee and a half; he shot at my  right leg. Then he and the other soldiers pulled us out of the car and  dragged us on the ground for a distance of around 12 metres to one of  the nearby shops. One of the soldiers then asked me about my name, and I  told him, “Yihiya,” and he responded “Nazzal,” and then said this is  Muhammad Khamis and this is Maher (al-Somali).These  soldiers held us under their feet until two patrols arrived, which they  put us inside and took us the Liaison Office on the eastern side at the  entry of Qalqiliya. There, they threw us out of the patrol cars and on  to the ground. An Israeli doctor came and examined us. When he examined  Maher, he said that he was dead, while the soldiers put Muhammad Khamis  and me in an ambulance and took us to an unknown place, which I later  learned was the Belinson Hospital inside Israel. I stayed there for five  days and then I was referred to the Emergency Hospital in Qalqiliya. I  am still under treatment for the injury I sustained in my leg, which was  the result of explosive bullets that penetrated the bone of my thigh  and leg. It is worth mentioning that the Special Squad soldiers have  practiced the severest types of oppression, torture, and wilful killing  against us without any justification especially that none of us was  armed and it was very easy for them to arrest us. As for my friend  Muhammad Khamis, he is in a critical situation and is still undergoing  treatment.