Affidavit No. 2807/2006
2006
On 20 February 2006, while my nine-member family, including me and my four children, were sleeping in our home located on the Zaghloul Street in Balata camp, we heard sound bombs and heavy firing on the northern walls of our home, facing the street. We were frightened and the children started screaming. We were confused and at a loss as to what the Israeli soldiers were doing to our home. This was especially confusing because the Israeli occupying forces had imposed a curfew on the camp and they had been present since 19 February 2006.After a few minutes, the firing and bombing stopped and the soldiers issued orders in Arabic over a loudspeaker telling people to leave their homes. They didn't mention which home or which family should leave. I told my husband that the soldiers were specifically targeting our home. I said this because over the past few weeks and months Israeli soldiers had broken into our house many times, though they did so without firing or using sound bombs. The Israeli soldiers broke into our home because they are chasing my son Muhammad who has been wanted by Israel for several years.My husband went to the northern entrance of our home where the soldiers were standing, opened the door, and asked them which home they wanted evacuated. They started shouting and saying, “Your home”, and dozens of soldiers entered. They were shouting and yelling and asking everyone in the home to go out in the street. We all went down to the street. We were not able to take anything with us. On the street, the soldiers took the men’s ID cards and made us all sit about ten metres from our home while a soldier stood guard beside us. We remained on the street for two hours, with the crying children, until the soldiers finished searching our home. They did not allow anybody to accompany them while they searched our home. After they finished searching, they returned the ID cards to the men.When we entered our home I told my husband that I had left our money in the cupboard. He blamed me for leaving it there and not taking it with me, but I was scared and the soldiers had not given us time to take anything with us. I headed to the cupboard, specifically, the middle shelf where I had put 4,500 shekels and 550 Jordanian dinars inside a sack among some clothes, but I did not find anything. All the clothes were on the floor. I searched everywhere hoping that the sack fell somewhere when the soldiers threw the clothes about, but to no avail. I was sure that one of the soldiers had stolen the money.I went to the other rooms and discovered that everything was thrown on the floor – the fridge, the washing machine, the TV, the two-by-two metres living room door, and three windows. My husband's hearing aid was partially destroyed. In addition to all the furniture and kitchen utensils, the solar panels were also destroyed.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 27 February 2006Signature: Fathiyya Jum'a