Affidavit No. 5201/2009
2009
At around 3:15 pm on Thursday, 26 November 2009, my husband, my sister Fahima, who was visiting us from Nablus, and I were sitting on the western veranda of the house. After I heard a loud shout, I rose from my place and looked through the window, which overlooks the western area of our land. I saw a person running away from the grocery, which is located at the north-western entrance of the petrol station. He ran towards the east. I also saw a person dressed in the civil uniform standing ten metres north of the man who was running away fire three bullets from his pistol at the man. After he fell on the ground, the victim got up and ran again for a distance of almost 25 metres.“Papa!” I heard the victim shout in Arabic after he had fallen on the ground.After the three bullets had been fired, about 15 Israeli soldiers and civilians who were waiting at a bus stop on the south-eastern sidewalk of the petrol station rushed to the station. I saw soldiers getting out of a bus that had just arrived at the bus stop and run towards the petrol station. After the victim had run for a distance of 25 metres, I saw two soldiers stand in front of him and behind him. They opened fire on the victim and he fell on the ground. The victim remained lying on the ground for about 15 minutes and received no medical aid despite the fact that ambulances had arrived at the petrol station within five minutes of the first incident of gunfire. As the victim lay stretched on the ground without being offered first aid, a grey Mercedes car approached him and its driver drove over the body of the victim back and forth three times. Meanwhile, those who had been present at the petrol station shouted at the driver. The soldiers and persons present in the petrol station then forced the driver out of the Mercedes car whilst the victim was underneath it and took him to a place, which I do not know. The victim was then pulled from underneath the Mercedes car and transported to an Israeli ambulance, which left the petrol station quickly.