Affidavit No. 7512/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, ‘Amer Husein ‘Abd-al-Qader al-Mahariq, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 850618091, born on 20 June 1987, an employee, and a resident of al-Sammou’ town, Hebron governorate, would like to declare the following:On 20 July 2010, my mother and I went to the Allenby Bridge in order to travel to Saudi Arabia and perform ‘Umrah’ (minor pilgrimage to holy shrines in the city of Mecca). On the Bridge, I was surprised by an Israeli female employee, who said that I was banned from travelling abroad. She said I could inquire about the reasons for the travel ban. Several days after I had returned, I went to the Israeli District Coordination Office (DCO) in Hebron, filled in and submitted an application form, including my name and reason of travel. Eight weeks after I had filed the application form, I received a reply, stating that I was banned from travelling abroad for security reasons. I was in touch with the Jerusalem-based Center for the Defence of the Individual (HaMoked), who advised me to submit the said application.On 23 March 2011, I filed a case at the Jerusalem Central Court through HaMoked. The application was refused until a settlement could be reached between the applicant and Attorney General. Then, I did not submit any further applications. As they informed me in the court session, according to the Israeli law, any legal procedure I could resort to should take place nine months after the court decision is entered. In May 2011, I went to the Allenby Bridge in order to travel to Jordan. However, I was not allowed to travel once again. Three weeks later, a HaMoked employee called me to inform me that:“According to the lawyer, the Prosecution reported to HaMoked that I can file another application for travel within eight weeks.”Therefore, I submitted an application at the Israeli DCO, but it was rejected on 20 July 2011 for security reasons. On 20 October 2011, I tried to travel again, but an Israeli female employee told me that I was banned from travelling and demanded that I should report to the Israeli Intelligence agency in the Ramallah area. On 15 November 2011, Intelligence officer Noam interviewed me at the Ofar Detention Centre. He said I should wait for the court decision, asserting that I was not banned from travelling abroad for life, but for a limited period of time. On 15 February 2012, I tried to cross the Allenby Bridge in order to travel abroad, but I was banned from travelling once again. I was directed to report to the Israeli Intelligence agency in ‘Gosh Etzion’. On 27 February 2012, an officer called Nir interviewed me. During the interview, he proposed that I may travel only if I agree to be deported from my homeland for a period of three years but I refused. He then offered that I be deported for a period of six months, but I rejected this proposal as well. To allow me to travel, officer Nir demanded that I reveal my position in the Hamas movement. I denied that I had any affiliation with Hamas. I told him that if he has a certain charge against me, then he should file a case and deal with me through the judiciary. I meant that he could arrest and bring me to court instead of dealing with me in this arbitrary manner. [...] Towards the end of the interview, officer Nir threatened to come to my house and arrest and interview me once more. I stated that I would not agree to be interviewed by him in the manner in which he proposed. On 13 March 2012, I filed another application form based on HaMoked’s recommendation. On 17 May 2012, the application was rejected, allegedly for security reasons.It should be noted that I won a scholarship to continue my higher education in Saudi Arabia. I was scheduled to join the university in October 2011. I submitted an application to the Central Court in Jerusalem. In other words, I filed a case before the court. As I mentioned above, the application was refused until a settlement could be reached with the Prosecution. Therefore, I was prevented from continuing my education.I would like to note that I was detained by the Israeli authorities on 7 April 2009. I was sentenced to six months under administrative detention (arrest without charge or trial). At the time, the lawyer filed a case before the Administrative Detention Court and the sentence was reduced to four months. The lawyer decided to institute an appeal to the Military Court of Appeals to release me due to the lack of evidence, but the appeal was refused. My detention was extended for another four months. I filed a case to the Administrative Detention Court, and the sentence was subsequently reduced to two months. The lawyer instituted an action before the Israeli High Court, which decided to release me immediately. I was released on 13 October 2009.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 22 May 2012