Affidavit No. 3001/2006
2006
I live with my family of 20 people in an area called Sour Mou’in in Bani N'eim. I am not married. On 23 March 2006, I was released from Israeli detention after 15 months.On 1 May 2006 at around 6:00 am, while I was at home, I heard through a megaphone a voice saying, “Get out of your house.” The voice was very close and so I realized that we were supposed to get out of our house. I looked through the window and saw the Israeli soldiers surrounding our home and aiming their weapons at us. All my family members started to go out while the soldiers were saying, “hurry up.” In ten minutes, we were all out.When I reached the military car, one of the soldiers ordered me in Arabic to stop. I stopped and the soldier handcuffed me, ordered me to stay in place, and set soldiers to guard me. When we were all out, the same soldier said that everybody had to leave the house. I told him that there was nobody inside. He said that somebody wanted was there and when I insisted that nobody remained he accused me of lying. He then called on the megaphone, saying, “'Abd-al-Naser Zeidat, get out of the house. The house is besieged.” He repeated that call several times and continued for approximately an hour, once every five minutes.At the same time, another Israeli soldier was questioning me and insisting that 'Abd-al-Naser was inside our house and that he must get out, while I was saying that there was nobody inside our home. I was sitting on the ground and after an hour the soldiers started firing at our home in unison and repeatedly. Firing continued intermittently for around 15 minutes. Then the soldiers raided our house. They spent around 15 minutes searching the rooms on the ground and upper floors. Then they exited and while they were leaving, they threw gas bombs on the ground floor. Then the intelligence officer untied my hands and the Israeli soldiers withdrew from the area.For more than two hours, we could not enter our house because of the gas smell that filled it. We entered our home and started to clean it but the smell was very strong. We cleaned several times but the smell remained. We were not able to sleep inside our home for three days even though 11 people used to sleep there.In addition to the gas smell, the bullets destroyed all the window glass, balcony glass and most of the furniture and walls. They did all of this even though there was no wanted person inside our house. The losses (glass, furniture and walls, doors) are estimated at 5,000 Jordanian Dinars. Moreover, while we were fixing and moving the furniture, we discovered that the soldiers took 4,000 shekels that were in the bedroom cupboard. We have not found the money even though we searched everywhere. The money was taken by the Israeli soldiers; no one else could have done it because they were the only ones who entered the house and searched it.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 20 May 2006Signature: Isma'il YousefName not withheldField researcher: Zahi Jaradat