Affidavit No. 7572/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Shaher Na’im ‘Abd-al-Hamid Shalalda, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 944496157, born on 19 May 1968, a farmer, and a resident of the Wadi al-Sharq area, Sa’ir town, Hebron governorate, would like to declare the following:My brothers and I own approximately 150 dunums of land in al-Qanoub area north of our town of Sa’ir. The land has been cultivated with olive and almond trees for many years. With support from the Government of The Netherlands, I received a grant to reclaim five dunums of land from the Land Research Centre. The project provided for building stone walls, cultivating tree seedlings, and constructing a collector well to irrigate seedlings. We completed the construction works over a period of about six months. The project funded construction of a collector well with a capacity of 44 cubic metres. I paid more money and increased the well capacity to 50 cubic metres. I also planted 185 olive, almond and other seedlings.On Monday morning, 16 July 2012, my relative Basem Khalil Shalalda, about 47 years of age, went to his land, which is adjacent to my land. He saw two Israeli civilian cars transporting employees of the Israeli Water Authority and Planning and Zoning Council of the Israeli Civil Administration. They handed him an order for the destruction of his water well. Basem also located a notice for cessation of construction works on my well. Dated on 16 July 2012, the notice gave me a respite to report to the Planning and Zoning Committee on the 31st of the same month. The notice claimed that I had constructed the well without the required licence. It should be noted that I completed construction of the well about a year and a half ago. We have title deeds that prove our ownership of the land. These are taxpayer registration certificates.Agriculture is my sole source of income. My family comprises nine members aged between five and 18 years old. God forbid, destruction of the well will cause me an exorbitant financial loss. Leaving trees without irrigation will debilitate their productivity.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 23 July 2012