Affidavit No. 4424/2008
2008
In the morning of Sunday, 12 October 2008, I received a telephone call from my brother Bassam who told me that an Internal Security force came to our house and served him a summons to report on 14 October 2008 to the Internal Security headquarters in an area called Muharrarat [liberated area] of Neve Dekalim west of the city of Khan Younes. Later, I learned from my colleagues at the Administrative Board of Fateh Youth Organisation at al-Aqsa University / Khan Younes Branch that they had also received similar summons. These were Ahmad Shukri Ahmad, 23 years old, Mamdouh Khalil al-Bitar, 21 years old, ‘Abdallah Mahmoud Abu-Hadrous 20 years old, and Ahmad Anwar al-Ghalban, also 20 years old. A week before the summons were served, a problem took place between students of Fateh Youth and of Islamic Bloc at al-Aqsa University in Khan Younes after members of the Islamic block tore apart posters stating "congratulations for new students on the occasion of the new academic year." The posters were hung around by members of the FatehYouth Organisation. The problem was resolved when students affiliated with the Islamic Jihad intervened.At 10:00 am on Tuesday, 14 October 2008, myself and my colleague Ahmad Shukri Ahmad went to the Internal Security headquarters west of the city of Khan Younes. After we arrived, they took our personal belongings and then blindfolded me and led me into a room, which I felt was an interrogation room. I was interrogated about reasons of the problem, which had taken place on the campus, as well as about my activities in the Fateh Youth Organisation. They charged me with inciting students to create chaos and troubles at the university. They also ordered me not to exercise any partisan activity. Furthermore, the interrogator threatened that he would torture and paralyse me or detain me in al-Mashtal Prison in Gaza if the incident was repeated.He interrogated me for about an hour. Meanwhile, I was beaten on my face and chest. I was also humiliated and cursed at. Later, they placed me in cell, measuring 2x3 metres where I stayed for two hours with a blindfold on my eyes. Then, they took me once again to the interrogation room. I was questioned about the aforesaid issues. This time, they interrogated me for almost an hour, during which I was beaten with sticks on my calves. They also beat me with their fists on my face and chest and they also shouted obscenities at me.Then, they took me to a corridor and removed the blindfold. There, I saw my colleagues Ahmad al Ghalban and Ahmad Ahmad. They stood in the corridor against a wall. They told me that they had also beaten and cursed during the interrogation period. I stayed in the corridor for about half an hour. Then, they took me back to the cell, in which I stayed until I was released at about 8:00 pm on the same day. Later, I knew that they also released three colleagues of mine. However, they continued to detain Ahmad al Ghalban.