Affidavit No. 2624/2005
2005
At approximately 7:30 am, on 17  October 2005, I was driving seven passengers in my car and heading  towards Qalandiya. As I was driving on the main street near Burqa  village in the Ramallah governorate, we saw an Israeli flying checkpoint  positioned on the main road, which surprised us. I stopped my car and  after a few minutes the soldiers signaled me to proceed towards them. At  the same time, many cars came and stopped behind my car. When I reached  the soldiers, one of them told me to turn back because the area was  closed and we were not allowed to drive through it.I had no option but to return to my  village, al-Luban. As I began to return, however, I looked in the rear  view mirror and noticed that there were no other cars returning like I  was. I thought that perhaps the prohibition was over and the soldiers  had allowed the cars which were behind me to pass, or that they had  removed the checkpoint. I tried to go back again but when I had driven  around 20 meters, I met an Israeli patrol coming in the opposite  direction, which began to indicate with its patrol lights for me to  stop.One of the soldiers told me through a  megaphone to stop on the right side. I stopped my car as they told me.  Four soldiers got out of their jeep and asked me to get out of my car.  One of them started to inspect my papers and the papers of the car while  another took off his metal helmet and started beating me with his hands  and helmet on my face and head. At that moment, another taxi arrived at  the same place and the soldiers stopped it and did to the driver what  they were doing to me. While the soldier was beating us, he was asking  us about our destinations. We told him that we were proceeding towards  Qalandiya. He told us that the area was closed and that we were not  allowed to drive through it, whilst at the same time he continued to  beat us. The beatings continued for seven to ten minutes. After that he  told us not to use the road and if we did, he would “break” our cars.