Affidavit No. 1728/2004
2004
I hereby declare that the information  provided by me in this document is true and accurateand any false  declaration of information will expose me to penalty.In 1995, my family decided to invest  its entire savings in opening an excellent supermarketon al-Quds/Jericho  Main Street at a distance of 200 metres from Kabasa “Abu-Dis”  junction,and on 1 January 1995, the shop was opened. My brothers 'Adnan  (35) who is married,Bassam (27) who is married, Basel (25), Nasim (23)  and I worked in this shop, which wehoped to be livelihood of the whole  family (50 persons), most of which are children. Thestrategic location  of the shop made citizens from al-Shayyah quarter, Ras al-'Amoud,  Abu-Dis and al-'Eizariyya do their shopping from it, in addition to  citizens from Jabal al-Mukabber,Wadi Qadoum and Silwan.During  the first five years, work was expanding month after month. The shop  covered all theexpenses of the big family, while a part of the profits  was saved. It is worth noting that al-'Eizariyya and its surroundings  was considered a quiet area and the Israelis called it “KfarHasholam”  which means the Peace Quarter. Our maximum daily sales amounted to  NIS15,000 (equivalent to USD 3,500). Despite the outbreak of the  intifada on 28 September2000, work in the shop was not impacted.We lived on this hope from 26 July  2002 until 28 December 2003. Our sales deterioratedand our profits  dropped, so that we could hardly cover our expenses and the shop  expenses,especially that the annual rent of this shop was JD 10,000. The  shop has almost collapsedbut our dream in the gate encouraged us to  continue. But on 28 December 2003, the Israelioccupying forces announced  Kabasa “Abu-Dis” as a closed military area, and so all theshops located  in that area were closed for 17 days, the period needed for building  the finalWall, which is supposed to be 9 metres. We watched its building  with tension waiting for thegate which was said to be at the junction  of Kabasa “Abu-Dis.” Upon completion of the Wall,all our hopes  disappeared as the Wall was a full wall without gates, extending from  Kabasa“Abu-Dis” to al-Sawahra al-Sharqiyya, completely isolating  Jerusalem from al-'Eizariyya andAbu-Dis towns. Not only this, but the  Wall deprived us of seeing Jerusalem with its mosquesand churches. The  objective of the occupation is not only to isolate  Jerusalemgeographically from the West Bank, but also it went far to take  Jerusalem from our hearts.We later closed the shop because it  was no longer a profitable project that may afford us adignified life.  We will go back and depend on the occupation for our livelihood by  working aslabourers and paid workers with the Israeli occupation.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 8 March 2004.