Affidavit No. 6163/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Iyab Afdal Falah al-Barghouthi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of identity card number 401519228, born on 17 December 1995, student, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh, Ramallah district, would like to declare the following:I recall that on Friday 5 March 2011, I was participating in the weekly peaceful march which is held in the village of al-Nabi Saleh to protest the settler activities on our land. Soldiers, by which I mean Israeli occupation soldiers, fired teargas and sound grenades on the participants that day. At around 3:00 pm, I was in the middle of the village throwing stones at soldiers who were stationed on the second floor of a building. The soldiers were visible through a window where around ten soldiers where firing on us with volleys of rubber bullets and gas grenades. I stood in the front yard of the building the soldiers were in and I could see them above me. One of them pointed his weapon towards me and fired a volley of rubber bullets which wounded me just above my eyebrow. I felt a sharp pain and fell straight to the ground. I fell into a coma which I awoke from around ten days later. Two days after I awoke from the coma I remembered what had happened to me. I remained in Ramallah hospital after that for a period of two weeks in the intensive care ward while I underwent treatment. I was suffering from swelling and bruising in the face and I wasn’t able to speak, and could only see faintly. The metal round inside the rubber covering cut through the area of my eyebrow and settled about six centimetres inside my head. A surgical operation was carried out to remove it, but there is still today pain from the effect of the injury, and from time to time it twitches on the left side where the injury was. I suffer from twitching when I try to move my left eye, and heaviness in my tongue, and the last time I was in this condition was 16 March 2011. I should like to mention that I have been incapacitated because of this and was unable to school during the second term of the 2010 school year. The doctor has put me on a schedule of preventative measures so that my health condition does not deteriorate, one of which is having a hat constantly on my head when I leave the house, not exposing myself to extremes of hot or cold, and not focussing too much on reading or study, and also not using a computer or watching television for a long period because of my weak nerves due to the injury.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 20 March 2011