Affidavit No. 5655/2010
2010
I work in Israel without a permit because the Israeli occupying authorities refuse to issue me a permit to enter and work in Israel. There is no suitable work in the area in which I live or in the West Bank in general, and therefore, I have to sneak into Israel in order to work there. I am married and support a family of four.At around 1:00 am on Sunday 3 October 2010, I left my home-town of Sa’ir, in a rented car along with other workers, and we went to the town of al-‘Eizariyya, east of Jerusalem. I and the other workers walked towards the Wall, west of the town intending to climb over it and enter Israel. I climbed over the Wall at around 2:00 am and walked across the streets which are to the west of the Wall without any problem. I stood on a hill, monitoring the roads and the area around the Wall, and communicated with the other workers by cellular telephone, and waited for them to cross over. They were in an area which was only about 100 metres away from where I was standing. We would then take a public bus to get to our places of work.At around 2:07 am, I saw a group of workers, including my brother Salah (who is about 24 years old) and who I had been communicating with by cellular phone, cross over the Wall. I told Salah not to continue the journey but to hide near the Wall, until an Israeli Hyundai Police van, which was travelling south on a road parallel to the Wall, about 20 metres from where my brother was standing, passed by. After the van disappeared around the corner, I called my brother Salah and asked him to move across the area. Salah and seven other workers then started running towards where I was standing, crossing the lit streets west of and parallel to the Wall. When Salah and the other workers were about 25 metres away from the Wall, I saw the same Israeli Police car as before travelling at great speed northwards. The workers quickly ran in a westerly direction. An Israeli Border Guard officer jumped out of the Police Hyundai car before it had come to a complete stop, and ran after the workers. The Border Guard officer was of a very dark complexion and I believe he was of Ethiopian origin. He was thin and relatively tall and carried a rifle in his hand.My brother Salah was the last in line of the eight workers that were running away, followed by Hasan Saleh ‘Abd-al-Karim al-Kawazba (who is about 30 years old) and his brother ‘Izz-al-Din (who is about 37 years old). After the workers had crossed the streets parallel to the Wall, they ran up a steep rocky road. The Border Guard Police officer ran after them. Having run for about ten metres up the road, Hasan jumped behind a wall beside the road and hid there. My brother Salah ran all the way up the very steep part of the road and ‘Izz-al-Din followed after him at a distance of about 15 metres. ‘Izz-al-Din had run about 20 metres up the road when he was eing followed by a Border Police officer who was running about three meters away from him.I saw the officer point his weapon towards ‘Izz-al-Din. I heard the officer fire a bullet, which did not make a loud sound, and I saw ‘Izz-al-Din fall on his face on the ground. After that, the officer turned around and walked back down the road. He met a colleague who had got out of the same police car and who walked behind him along the side of the paved road. At the same time, another police car arrived from the north and stopped near to the officers at the bottom of the hill. Two police officers and one female officer, who was in civilian clothing, got out of the police car. The three officers walked towards the spot where ‘Izz-al-Din had fallen and then returned to their car. I saw the officer who had opened fire on ‘Izz-al-Din walk towards the car he had  arrived in. He did not have his weapon on him. I think the police officers had taken his weapon for examination. Several minutes later, a large number of Israeli Border Guard officers, police officers, Special Forces officers who were wearing masks, and two ambulances, arrived in the area. The various officers dispersed into the area and separated the workers, who had gathered at the scene and were trying to get to ‘Izz-al-Din. I saw ambulance medics carry a stretcher to the spot where ‘Iz al-Deen had fallen. I could no longer see ‘Izz-al-Din because a large number of security officers had surrounded him. Special Forces officers formed a human barrier around ‘Izz-al- Din, preventing the workers who gathered in the area from reaching him. I talked to a Special Forces officer and asked him what had happened to ‘Izz-al-Din. He said ‘Izz-al-Din sustained a bullet wound in the hand.At around 3:40 am, the officer said he would allow four of the workers present in the area to stay and follow up on ‘Izz-al-Din’s condition. He said that the other workers should leave but they refused to. Special Forces officers chased and expelled the workers to al- Z’ayyem checkpoint on the other side of the Wall. I was allowed to stay with my brother Salah, my uncle Sabri (who is about 37 years), my cousin Fares ‘Abed (who is 35 years), and ‘Izz-al-Din’s brother ‘Abd-al-Karim (who is about 24 years).A little after 4:00 am, an officer demanded that my cousin Fares and I get into a police car. We were taken to the Israeli police station near Herod’s Gate in Jerusalem. In the meantime, ‘Izz-al-Din’s dead body remained in the area. My uncle Sabri, my brother Salah and ‘Izz-al-Din’s  brother ‘Abd-al-Karim left the area and went towards the mountain.In the police station, we were told that an interrogator would come and question us. I found out that Hasan, ‘Izz-al-Din’s other brother, was in the same police station with us. He was handcuffed. At 10:00 am, the three of us were taken to an Interrogations Unit (called “Mahash” in Hebrew) at the Israeli Ministry of Justice. After our statements were taken, we were driven in an interrogator’s car to the Tunnels checkpoint south of Jerusalem, where we were released.When I was in the police station near Herod’s Gate, a police officer informed me that ‘Izz-al-Din had died. At around 3:00 pm the same day, the Israelis returned ‘Izz-al-Din’s corpse to his family. According to the autopsy, ‘Izz-al-Din had sustained one bullet wound in the heart.