Affidavit No. 5888/2010
2010
I had to leave school in the tenth grade. My family consists of 15 members and my father is unemployed. To help my father with the household expenses and to secure food for our family, I collect rubble with my brothers, Nidal and Muhammad. My brothers and I always work in the area of al-Muharrarat [former Israeli settlements] on the remains of the former Eli Sinai settlement northwest of the town of Beit Lahiya, near the northern border of the Gaza Strip.My brother Nidal was collecting rubble when, on four separate occasions, he was injured by Israeli troops positioned behind the border. Israeli troops frequently open fire on my co-workers and me as we collect rubble. After my brother Nidal was injured for the fourth time in August 2010, he could no longer work due to his wounds. My brother Muhammad and I had to continue collecting rubble to provide for the family.At around 6:00 am on Saturday 4 December 2010, my brother Muhammad (20 years old), and I, left our house on a horse-drawn cart, which we use as a means of personal transportation as well as to transport the rubble we collect. As usual, Muhammad and I went to our workplace in al-Muharrarat area (the former settlement of Eli Sinai). We stopped at a distance of approximately 600 metres from the northern border. Approximately 120 workers were also present in the area, collecting rubble. My brother Muhammad and I started to collect rubble, screen sand, extract rubble, and pack it into sacks in order to later sell it to merchants. Due to the Israeli closure and because the Israeli occupying authorities do not allow construction materials to be imported into the Gaza Strip, this rubble is used for construction works.The atmosphere in the area was calm. My brother and I, and our fellow co-workers, continued to collect rubble for about three hours when, at around 9:00 am on the same day, I heard the sound of bullets firing towards us from behind the border. At the same time, I fell to the ground and saw blood pouring from my left leg. Two workers approached me, tied a piece of cloth to the bullet wound on my leg, and put me onboard the horse-drawn cart. On the same cart, I saw my cousin Muhammad ‘Ata Muhammad al-Hassoumi. His leg was bleeding as he too had sustained a bullet wound. The cart moved west for a distance of about 600 metres. I started to feel severe pain in my left leg. After the cart stopped, I saw an ambulance and my brother Nidal standing beside it. My brother Nidal carried me and placed me inside the ambulance, which drove to Kamal ‘Udwan Hospital in the Beit Lahiya Housing Project. Doctors carried out a surgical operation and planted a platinum device in my leg in order to repair the bone fracture.They told me that I had sustained a bone fracture to my leg. On Saturday morning, 11 December 2010, I was transferred to al-Shifa’ Hospital in Gaza city in order to have cosmetic leg surgery. Doctors said that flesh had lacerated in the area of the gunshot wound. I am still at al-Shifa’ Hospital, waiting for the surgery and in the meantime, receiving medical treatment.Now, I am unemployed just like my brother Nidal. Due to my injury I do not know whether I will able to work again. I do not know why the Israeli occupying troops target us by opening fire on and injuring us, despite the fact that we are cautious not to place ourselves in close proximity to the border.