Affidavit No. 2779/2006
2006
On Monday, 23 January 2006, at 8:30 am, I left my village of Kufr Zibad (population of 1,300) and headed to Toulkarem, about 20 kilometres north. At 8:45 am, I reached al-Kafriyat checkpoint located at the southern entrance of Toulkarem. Upon reaching the checkpoint, I got out of the car and walked toward the soldiers standing guard at that checkpoint. I walked because cars cannot pass through the checkpoint, either on their way to or from Toulkarem. I was with five girls from my village.When we were around 20 metres away from the soldiers, I was surprised to see one of the soldiers carrying a camera and taking a picture of us. Another soldier was beside him. He took the ID cards and announced the name and age of the card owner in a loud voice while the camera man took a picture. When it was my turn, one soldier announced my name and age and the other soldier took a photo of me. The same thing happened to the other girls and women who wished to pass through that checkpoint. This procedure was strange and surprising because it was only applied to women and girls. It was not applied to men.It is difficult to determine the reason for such a procedure; however, nothing should be considered strange when it comes to Israeli soldiers at this checkpoint. They are capable of anything. The residents of my village and other villages located south of Toulkarem have been suffering for the past five years. We continue to suffer, to this day, from the collective punishment policies imposed on us by the Israeli soldiers positioned at the Kafriyat checkpoint. Such policies include closing the checkpoint for long periods or not permitting cars to pass through it. This forces us to pass on foot and change cars. Another policy is to withhold citizens for long hours without giving a reason.Many citizens have been killed by Israeli soldiers opening fire on Palestinians passing through the checkpoint. In addition, there are many other procedures used by the soldiers; these procedures are unspeakable and difficult to mention here. I am a student at Jenin Arab American University in al-Zababda village, Jenin Governorate, and I live in a female dormitory in the village. I only come to my village once a week or once every two weeks. Sometimes, I only come to my village once a month in order to avoid the suffering that citizens go through at the Kafriyat Israeli military checkpoint.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 23 January 2006Signature: Tagrid Naser