Affidavit No. 6823/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Ayat Mohammed Al Abed Abdul Hadi Abu Rabi’, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 901694539, born on 08 April 1977, a house wife, and a resident of Dier Al Balah, Middle governorate/Gaza, would like to declare the following:On 15 September 2011, my husband Yousef Abdul-Malik Abdul-Hadi Abu Rabi’ (35 years old) travelled to the Arab Republic of Egypt accompanied by his niece, who was travelling to study at a university in Pakistan, through the Arab Republic of Egypt. My Husband stayed in Egypt for about 20 days. On Wednesday 05 October 2011 at around 10:30 pm, he called me from his cell phone and informed me during the call that he had reached the Palestinian side of Rafah crossing back to Gaza.I waited for him to come home for about an hour, then I rang his cell number to check where he was but I found that it was off. At that time, I got worried about him and repeatedly called his cell phone several times, but to no avail. At around 12:30 pm, four people dressed in black military uniforms, carrying weapons, came to our house in the Brook neighborhood south of Deir al-Balah. They claimed that they were members of the Internal Security services, and demanded to enter the house for inspection. Then they entered the house, and searched each and every room meticulously. This process took about half an hour. They confiscated a computer and a bag full of CDs and some papers, in addition to military pants and a gun pod belonging to my husband, knowing that my husband works as an officer in the presidential guard services related to the Palestinian Authority.They then forced one of our neighbors named Wajdi Saher Idris (33 years old) who was present at the scene, to make a list of the items seized and the items they had confiscated. Before leaving the house, they told me that my husband was being held by them. I asked them about the reason for arresting him, but they did not answer me, and quickly left the house. Then we started searching for the location of my husband and learned through some human rights organizations in Gaza that he was held at the governor's place which belongs to the Internal Security Services, located in Ansar, an area to the south of Gaza city.My husband is still detained by the Internal Security Services, and I still do not know the cause of his arrest.