Affidavit No. 5021/2009
2009
At around 8:00 pm on Saturday, 8 August 2009, I arrived at the area of al-Ram, north of the city of Jerusalem, in order to clandestinely enter the city and reach my workplace. I do not have an access permit because the Israeli occupying authorities do not issue such permits to allow people my age to enter Jerusalem and Israel. I stayed in the area of al-Ram for about two hours, during which time I visited relatives and friends of mine. At around 10:00 pm, I travelled to an area west of the town of al-Ram, where a gate in the wall is located. Situated opposite the Palestine Commercial Bank, the gate is constantly closed. When I arrived there, I met with six other workers who were also attempting to clandestinely enter Jerusalem from the area. They had brought a ladder and fixed it against the Wall. After they climbed up, they lowered themselves down on the other side using a plastic pipe, which was fastened onto the Wall. The gate is approximately eight metres high. A barbed wire fence is installed on top of the gate.Three workers managed to climb to the other side of the Wall. I was the fourth. When I was climbing down, an Israeli border guard jeep arrived and stopped approximately 20 metres south of the area where I was climbing down on the plastic pipe. Two border guard officers quickly stepped out of the jeep. One of these officers pointed his weapon at me and came close. He ordered me to get down. It was difficult to get back because the barbed wire fence was above me and the border guard officer was pointing his gun towards me. I jumped down from an area that was approximately four metres high and ran for about five metres in an attempt to flee. However, I was stopped by another border guard officer who grabbed me. The two officers severely beat me with their feet and rifle butts on all parts of my body, particularly on my feet. As a result, I fell on the ground. The border guard officer demanded that I stand up more than once, but I replied that I could not.About 15 minutes later, a green Toyota arrived at the area. A border guard officer, who was of medium height and in his late twenties or early thirties, stepped out and threw two sound grenades towards the area on the other side the Wall. He then shouted at me in broken Arabic, demanding that I stand up. As I answered that I could not, he kicked my feet while I was lying on the ground. One of the border guard officers, who had first beat me, tried to force me to stand up with his aid, but I fell on the ground. He repeated his attempt three times. The border guard officer who had arrived in the green Toyota picked up a broom handle that was on the ground. He threatened to beat me with it if I did not rise to my feet.“If you do not stand up, I will take you to the prison. I will say that you are a member of Hamas and will let the jailers do obscene acts to you.” The border guard officer threatened me.However, I was unable to stand up. Several minutes later, a third border guard jeep arrived. An officer brought a large police dog with a muzzle on its mouth. He let the dog approach me and threaten me more than once to see whether I could walk and run away. An hour later the border guard officers demanded that I go to the Toyota car, which was five metres away from me. However, I could not stand up and walk. Therefore, the officers grabbed my arms to help me stand, but I continued to fall on the ground. As the border guard officers were insisting and yelling at me, I crawled on the ground towards the Toyota car and climbed to the rear seat. A border guard officer drove the car to the border guard station in the area of Hameshpir in al-Ram. When we arrived, the officer told me to step down, but I said I could not. The driver called two border guard officers to get me out of the car. They made me stand up, but I fell on the ground. The two officers mocked me and alleged that I was lying and that I could walk. Upon their request, I crawled towards a ready-made room (a caravan), which was about three metres away from the car.Meanwhile, I felt dizzy and nearly lost consciousness. Inside the caravan, I managed to climb and sit on a chair. Later, the Border Guard officer who had transported me in the Toyota car took my fingerprints on an electronic device. He also took hold of my hand, forcing me to sign my name on a paper, the content of which I do not remember.I stayed for half an hour at the border guard station. Then, I was ordered to go to the Toyota car. I crawled on my hands and climbed into the car, which transported me to the Qalandiya checkpoint north of the city of Jerusalem. The driver demanded that I step down and wait on the sidewalk. I crawled out of the car to the sidewalk. About half an hour later, a Palestinian ambulance arrived and transported me to Ramallah Governmental Hospital. Having been x-rayed, it appeared that I had sustained bone fractures in my legs. After doctors bandaged my legs in a cast, I spent the night at hospital.