Affidavit No. 2011/6072
6072
I recall that on Sunday 23 January 2011, at 1:00 am, we were sleeping in our house when we were awoken by the sound of violent knocking on the outside doors by hands, feet, and the butts of rifles. I heard from outside a voice shouting in Arabic, “Open up, army!” My husband opened the door, and around eight Israeli soldiers entered the house, all of them in military gear and pointing their weapons towards us. One of them asked my husband where his sons were, at that time he was speaking Arabic, and my husband told him that they were present in the house. They asked for Islam, who is 14 years old, by name, and my husband told them that Islam was in the neighbouring house. So a number of them ran outside the house and entered the adjoining house, where Islam was with his ailing uncle. I followed them, and Islam opened the door. They began to hit him randomly with their hands and feet, and I tried to stop them, but they began to hit me with their hands, feet, and rifle butts, and also to pull my hair. They were saying insulting and offensive words. Among them was a masked man, who was wearing military clothes, and he was the one who confirmed for them that Islam was not present among his brothers when they entered upon us initially. I asked one of them to allow us time to dress Islam in a shirt and shoes, and he said to me that we had a few minutes to do that, so I brought him his shirt and shoes. During that time my son ‘Umar came, who is 24 years old, and asked one of the soldiers the reason for Islam’s arrest. The soldiers began pulling him, hitting him, and putting plastic handcuffs on his hands, and while I was trying to get ‘Umar away the soldiers arrested Islam. This was outside, in the external courtyard, and there were no fewer than 45 soldiers in addition to the large number around the house which I couldn’t count. I should point out here that the soldiers did not present us with any information on his arrest, knowing that they were aggressive to us all, hitting us in addition to hitting Islam, and finally I should also point out that Islam is only 14 years old, and is in the ninth grade, and that his arrest has affected his study year and academic success. I should also point out that around 16 January 2011 Israeli soldiers stormed our house at around midnight, and photographed Islam after asking his father. They also photographed his father, called Saleh Ayyoub Dar Ayyoub, and left without the advent of any chaos. On Thursday, 20 January, 2011 Israeli soldiers entered the village and arrested Islam at 11:00 am. The soldiers detained him for seven hours in an open area in the village, which he did not know, and beat him.