Affidavit No. 2531/2005
2005
On 17  August 2005, I was with my friends Usama Mousa and his brother Bassam  Mousa, Khalil Walwil and Muhammad Hasan and a number of our Jewish  colleagues working together in an aluminium and blacksmith workshop in  the Shilo settlement, located in the West Bank near my village of  Qaryout. After work, we (Bassam, Usama, Muhammad, and I) got in the  workshop’s car, which usually takes us out of the settlement. Khalil  remained in the workshop waiting for the rest of his Jewish colleagues  so he could leave with them; as he lives in Qalqilya, his way home was  different from ours. He has been used to this for a long time.As for  us, we entered the workshop car [Citroen], which our Jewish colleague  Asher was driving. From the West Bank settlement Shavot Rahel, Asher had  been working with us for approximately five months. Asher had worked  with us previously, but he had left work until his recent return. We got  in the car and he drove for approximately 50 metres until we reached  the guarded settlement gate at approximately 4:45 pm. Usama and I were  sitting in the back seat while Bassam and Muhammad were up front. As we  reached the settlement gate, Asher, unusually, got out of the car. I  thought that he wanted to bring us back our ID cards which we leave with  the settlement guard in the morning and take back in the evening when  we depart. I say this is unusual because none of the Jews – Asher or  others – who usually transport us from the settlement, get out of the  car. The driver usually honks the horn and the settlement guard comes  and brings us the ID cards.After  Asher got out of the car, we were suddenly subjected to intermittent  shooting. We were shocked, surprised, and amazed at what was happening.  We did not know where the bullets were coming from. I looked at my  friends and saw that the three of them were bleeding. Usama was shouting  out of pain while Muhammad and Bassam were silent. I realised that  their situation was very dire. Meanwhile, I was looking around me,  bewildered, trying to figure out what was going on. Here was the shock. I  did not believe my eyes when I saw Asher, our colleague and the driver  of the car, who went to get the ID cards, standing approximately a metre  and a half to the right and carrying an M-16 and shooting at us. I have  only seen such a thing in films and dreams.I was hit  by one bullet in my right cheek. After a few seconds, I saw Asher head  into the workshop. I got out of the car, as did Usama, and started  shouting at Asher (although he was 50 metres away from me) for mercy. I  was asking him, “Why did you do this to your colleagues, Asher?” I  repeated that several times but he did not say anything in response. He  only shot one bullet at me and then proceeded towards the settlement. I  went to the guard’s room and found the door closed while the guard was  inside. I looked at him through the window glass. I noticed that he was  in shock. I knocked the window until he opened it. He gave me a bottle  of water and closed the window again. I saw him using his cell phone.I then  looked at my friend Usama, who got up from the ground and asked me not  to leave him. I told him that I want to leave because I was afraid that  Asher might come and kill me. But Usama insisted that I not leave him,  also fearing that Asher might come back and kill him. So I had one  option left, which was to walk with Usama despite his difficult  situation. We walked approximately 30 metres until we were outside the  settlement. At that point, Usama could not walk anymore because he was  bleeding heavily. I put him on the ground and continued walking.  Meanwhile, many settlers passed by in their cars, but none of them paid  attention to us or tried to help. After walking dozens of metres away  from Usama, one of the settlers stopped beside me and asked me what  happened. I told him, and he made a phone call and continued his way.After a  few minutes, many Israeli cars came to the scene. I was taken to Hadassa  Hospital where I was operated on. After I went out of the surgery room,  the Israeli police questioned me, and our employer Ariel also reached  me in the hospital. I asked him about my friends. He told me that Usama  died, that his life wasn’t able to be saved, and that Bassam and  Muhammad died right away after being shot. He said that Asher found  Khalil while he was still in the workshop and shot at him in front of  his Jewish colleagues, killing him on the spot. I did not believe what I  had seen and what I had heard. I imagined that I was dreaming -- four  of my friends were killed by one of our colleagues with whom we worked  and had our breakfast. We considered him our friend. This is not  reasonable. I did not believe what had happened, especially as I hadn’t  noticed any criminal tendencies in him. But the bitter fact is that four  of my colleagues were killed by this criminal. I was saved by God’s  will. I stayed in Hadassa Hospital until 21 August 2005.This is my statement and hereby I sign, on 22 August 2005Signature: Rawhi Kassab