Affidavit No. 6421/2011
2011
I am a resident of al-Burj village, located about seven kilometres west of al-Dhahiriya town. I am married and the father of six children, the eldest of whom is ‘Umar (19 years old). Four of my sons and daughters are less than 18 years of age. Three years ago, I could no longer work due to health problems. Therefore, my two eldest sons were forced to work in order to sustain the family. On several occasions, I would go see doctors to check on my condition in al-Dhahiriya. They would give me cheap medicine and say that I suffered from a tendon strain problem. I also suffered from rapid fatigue when I walked and had difficulty sitting, standing, and carrying objects.On 20 August 2010, I travelled to an area inside the Green Line to visit a Bedouin friend of mine in the Bedouin town of Rahat. At around noontime that day, I completely fell unconscious. I woke up at Soroka Hospital in the city of Bir al-Sabe’. I underwent a catheterization operation and the results showed that all arteries of my heart were nearly closed. I stayed in the Hospital for three days and then returned to my home.On 20 December 2010, I was on my way to Rahat in order to have a medical check up. I felt severe fatigue when I arrived in the town but I managed to reach a local clinic, from which I was transferred to Soroka Hospital again. I stayed at the Hospital for a week. I underwent another catheterization of the heart and continued to receive medical treatment at Soroka Hospital to which I used to report from time to time. I used to access the Hospital by infiltrating through the Wall over the Green Line because the Israeli occupying authorities kept refusing to issue me a permit that could facilitate my entry into Israel. Usually, I gained access to Israel through al-Ramadin village, south of al-Dhahiriya. Al-Ramadin is a village bordering with Israel. Along the border the Wall there consists of wired fences. Palestinian workers make holes in it so as to reach Israel.At around 7:00 am on Monday, 25 April 2011, I arrived at a site near the border in al-Ramadin village. I intended to go to Soroka Hospital to have a medical check up. I had an appointment at the Hospital on that day. I crossed the border on foot. Two meters after I passed the Wall, I was surprised when five Israeli soldiers emerged from a lower location below the other side of the road that runs parallel to the Wall. One of the soldiers had a large black dog on a metal chain.Another soldier shouted at me in Hebrew, which I understood well, demanding that I lift my arms up and turn around. Instantly, I dropped my bag, which contained my medical reports, and raised my arms. Before I turned around, a soldier fired a bullet, which hit my right forearm and exited from the other side. I smelled gunpowder and burned flesh. Having approached me, two soldiers grabbed my right arm; one of them grabbed my forearm and the other my wrist. The soldier who shot me grabbed my forearm. The soldier who was holding the dog brought it near my bleeding arm which was still being held by the two soldiers. He then unleashed the dog by letting go of the chain after removing the muzzle that was on its mouth. The soldier, who had opened fire, ordered the dog in Hebrew to tear my arm apart.“Tinshokh oto!” He ordered the dog, meaning to bite my arm.The dog started to bite my arm repeatedly. Meanwhile, the soldier continued to urge the dog to tear my arm apart. The dog continued to bite my arm for about 10 minutes before letting go.Immediately after I was shot and before the dog was unleashed, I called a relative of mine and reported that the army had captured me and that I had been shot in the arm by an Israeli soldier.I was forced to stay in that area for about 10 minutes. Meanwhile, I began to slowly lose consciousness and gradually fall on the ground. I asked for a drink of water, but the soldiers refused my request. As my arm kept bleeding heavily, my nose also started to bleed. A soldier pushed me with his foot and forced me to lie on my right side after he saw that I was lying on my back. I was able to recognise what was going on around me and sense it, but I could not see clearly. Later, a soldier blindfolded me. Shortly after, I heard the soldiers load their weapons near me. At that moment, I pronounced the Shahadatayn. Thinking that I was going to be killed, I uttered the words of faith: There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. I felt as though the soldiers were going to execute me on the spot. “Let us throw him in the valley and leave the area.” I heard one soldier tell other soldiers in Hebrew.Before I was blindfolded, I saw a Palestinian ambulance move around the border area in the Palestinian territory despite the fact that my vision was partially blurred. I clearly heard the sound of the ambulance’s siren. I continued to bleed heavily and felt that I was about to die. Once again, the soldiers unleashed the dog on me as I was lying on the ground, but this time the muzzle was placed on its mouth.At around 10:00 am or a little later, the soldiers removed the blindfold from my eyes but I was still unable to see clearly. At around 11:00 am, a military ambulance arrived to the area. Medics fixed an IV infusion into my left arm, wrapped my right arm with bandages and gauzes and tightened them hard; they did so without cleaning the wound. The ambulance drove for about 20 minutes, they gave me another IV transfusion, which they connected to my left arm along with a blood bag, and I was then relocated to a civil ambulance. Almost half an hour after I received the blood transfusion and as I was being admitted to the Soroka Hospital, I began to gradually feel better. At the Hospital, my injury was cleansed and bandaged. X-rays were taken of my wounded arm. After about two and a half hours at the Hospital, soldiers arrived and moved me to a military GMC car, which transported me to the Israeli Police station near Kiryat Arba’ settlement in Hebron governorate. The soldier who had shot me climbed into the same car.At the Police station, I was taken to an interrogation room. The soldier who had opened fire on me was admitted to an opposite interrogation room. I could hear a lot of what was said inside that room. The interrogator who questioned me demanded that I recall what had happened to me, which I did. He said that the soldier who had opened fire on me claims that I had tried to hit him, but I denied this allegation. I heard the soldier report this to the interrogator in the opposite room. The interrogator also said that the aforementioned soldier denied that he even opened fire on me. I replied that they could examine his weapon to see that he did indeed open fire.After I stayed at the Police station for about an hour and a half, I was relocated to Kfar ‘Etzion Camp. As soldiers talked to one another, I understood that the camp’s administration refused to keep me detained there. I was then transported to other military camps, which I did not know. However, their administrations also refused to keep me held at their camps.At around 2:30 am the next day, the military car which transported me stopped at a detention centre, which I later understood to be ‘Ofar Detention Centre west of Ramallah. There, I was forced into a detention room. I continued to be detained in ‘Ofar Detention Centre until I was released on 15 May 2011.On Sunday, 1 May 2011, I was brought before the military court in the same detention centre. Based on a deal between the lawyer and Public Prosecutor, I admitted that I had assaulted the soldier despite the fact that I had not. I was sentenced to a jail term of 31 days, a fine of ILS 1,500, and a suspended sentence of four months to six months. My Jail term was cut 11 days short after the Administration of ‘Ofar Detention Centre issued an administrative decision for me to be released 20 days of detention.Almost 10 days after I had been held in custody, my health condition deteriorated due to my heart problems and to the bullet injury. Therefore, I was transported to Hadassah Hospital, where I was admitted for about 24 hours. I received medical treatment while tied to the bed while two soldiers remained positioned near my bed. During the period of detention, I was given tranquilisers. Based on other detainees’ demands, bandages on my arm wounds were replaced every day.