Affidavit No. 5585/2010
2010
My name is Naser Jaber Isma’il Abu-Sa’id and I am 37 years old. I am married and live with my wife and five children in a two-storey concrete house. Built over an area of 100 square metres, my house is located in Juhr al-Deek village of Wadi Gaza area, southeast of Gaza city. It is approximately 400 metres from the Eastern Border Fence, which separates the Gaza Strip from Israel. My parents, my brother Muhammad (25 years old), and  his four family members, also live with us in the house.At around 8:45 pm on Tuesday 13 July 2010, my family and I, including my parents,, my brother, Muhammad’s family, and my sister Amira and her two children, were sitting near the entrance to the house, which overlooks agricultural land in the south. Our house is separated from the Border Fence by farmland, which was levelled by the Israeli occupying forces during previous incursions. Suddenly we heard the sound of loud explosions and intensive fire breaking out from inside the Border Fence. We all hurried into the house. However, my three-year-old son Jaber remained outside. At that time, I noticed my sister-in-law Sana’ (25 years) had injured her left foot and, my sister Amira (30 years), her right shoulder. Blood was gushing from their wounds. I called 101 for an ambulance and reported that two injured women were in my house. Around 10 minutes later, a medic called and told me that ambulances could not access the area. He also said that the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was trying to coordinate with the Israeli side in order to transfer the injured women. Meanwhile, the Israeli occupying troops continued to subject the area to intensive fire. I heard bullets hit the house walls. I was also extremely worried about my son Jaber as I did not know what had happened to him. We could not leave the house because of the intensive fire.Around 15 minutes later, the fire ceased. My wife went outside to rescue my son and bring him in. I followed her and saw that my son was alive and only about three metres from the door to the house. As my wife stepped one metre forward, I heard the sound of a very close and powerful explosion. it was so strong that the force from the explosion threw me back inside the house. Afterwards, I hurried outside to check on my wife and son. I saw my  wife lying on the ground, blood pouring from her body. I also saw my son lying near his mother. However, I was not able to reach them because the occupying forces were still shooting fire and the area was open and exposed to the Border Fence.I also heard the sound of Israeli tanks and patrols moving close to the Border Fence. Shells shrapnel scattered and entered the house, as a result of which my father sustained injuries to his pelvis and feet and blood gushed out heavily from his wounds.I called the ambulance once more and reported that the number of injuries had risen, but they said that the ICRC was still coordinating with the Israeli side. I stayed beside my father inside the house. Around two hours later, two ambulances, including one belonging to the ICRC and the other the Palestine Red Crescent Society (PRSC), arrived and transported the injured to al-Aqsa Martyrs Hospital in Deir al-Balah city.There, it became apparent that my 33-year-old wife, Ni’ma Yousef Mheisen Abu-Sa’id, had passed away due to shrapnel injuries sustained to various part of her body. She also sustained an immediate wound to the back of her head. The other injured members of my family were in a moderate state of health.In addition, shells and bullets caused partial damage to windows and walls of my house. My son Jaber was not physically hurt.