Affidavit No. 4531/2008
2008
At about 9:05 pm on Wednesday 7 December 2008, I was present in my home, located in Bayyaret Mas'oud, Tal al-Za'tar neighbourhood, Jabaliya refugee camp in Northern Gaza Governorate. The situation was calm in the area. Suddenly, I heard the sound of a strong explosion. It was very close. I hurriedly got out of my house to check the source of the explosion. As soon as I was out, I saw dust and smoke rising from the house of my brother Salah, 47 years old. His house is approximately 300 metres west of mine. It overlooks a green area at a distance of three kilometres from the eastern border fence separating the Gaza Strip from the 1948 territory, which is controlled by the Israeli occupying forces. This area is the highest above sea level in the Gaza Strip. I was frightened when I saw dust rising from my brother's house, which consists of one storey. Quickly, I and my brothers, cousins and neighbours went to the house of my brother Salah. I saw the eastern wall of the house – the wall of my brother's bedroom – completely demolished. "Salah is under the rubble!" I heard Salah's wife scream.It was dark. I and others began to search for my brother Salah under the rubble. Meanwhile, an ambulance arrived from al-'Awda Hospital, which is approximately 300 metres away from my brother's house. The ambulance driver directed the vehicle's lights towards the rubble and we continued looking for Salah. Suddenly, a neighbour found torn pieces of my brother's body. Then, we found more torn pieces of my brother Salah – namely his hands- as well as remaining parts of an Israeli  missile under the rubble. About ten minutes later, a neighbour located the lower part of my brother's body, which was torn apart by the missile of the occupying forces. My brother had been irrigating his small garden outside his house.The ambulance driver brought the stretcher. We transported the torn pieces of my brother Salah in the ambulance to al-'Awda Hospital. My brother Salah was father of three sons and four daughters, including three young children. He was unemployed.At the time he was killed, he was irrigating his small garden outside his house. He was targeted by the occupying forces taking position on the eastern border fence with a missile that fell on his house, which consisted of three rooms and utilities. His body was torn to pieces. He did not survive the incident, nor was his small garden spared from the occupation's missile which killed him. My brother left behind his seven children and wife, who now need a bread-winner. As it was shelled, Salah’s house now needs to be restored.