Affidavit No. 1691/2004
2004
At around  2:30 in the afternoon on Wednesday the 10th of March 2004 and while I  was inside my shop, which is located on a crossroad near the tin factory  that is located in al-Maslakh quarters to the eastern side of the city  of Jenin, I heard the sounds of heavy gunfire near my shop. I thought  that there was some kind of row taking place outside, so I stepped out  to the road but I was scared because the shooting was really heavy and  continuous. Therefore, I sheltered myself behind the door of the shop  and I started looking in the cracks between the doors of my shop.I  realized that the shooting was coming from the area which lies to the  southwestern side from where I was near to the tin factory, less than 50  meters away from me. While I was looking towards the west, I saw a  thick wave of dust rising from the ground in the main road 50 meters  away from me, as I have mentioned previously. I realized that this dust  is rising due to ongoing heavy shooting. As I have confirmed previously,  I was looking at the site through an opening between the doors of my  shop, and moments later the gunfire subsided a bit and the dust was  diminishing.I saw two  Israeli soldiers wearing full military uniform. One of them was  standing near the wall of the tin factory, while the other soldier was  carrying his gun; actually, placing it against the head of a young  Palestinian man in the middle of the street. This young man was on the  ground on his knees. Suddenly, the heavy shooting started all over  again, and the dust reappeared. A few moments later, the shooting  subsided and the dust diminished again, and I saw the young man I  mentioned previously lying on the ground, motionless. I realized that he  had been killed, during which I lost sight of the soldier, but I saw  the other Israeli soldier, who had been standing near the tin factory,  halting and he aimed his gun towards a plain near the tin factory. He  started shooting heavily towards the north; this soldier shot around 25  bullets continuously. The gunfire subsided again.I  continued to look towards that site, and I saw three Israeli military  soldiers standing in the middle of the street next to the young man  lying on the ground. Then I saw a beige Toyota jeep, with a yellow  Israeli license plate, approaching from the west to the east and it  passed by those soldiers. It came near me at a distance of 15 meters,  and then it turned to the north and drove towards al-Jalama Israeli  military checkpoint, which is located north of Jenin. I looked closely  at this car and I saw in it two people, one of them was driving the jeep  wearing ordinary civil clothes, which consisted of a blue t-shirt. The  person sitting next to him was wearing a white t-shirt and had a black  mask on his face. I could not identify the features of those two people  and I saw that the front left side window of the jeep had been broken. Immediately  afterwards, I saw a white Volkswagen bus with a yellow Israeli license  plate stopping nearby the three soldiers whom I previously mentioned  were standing in the middle of the street. Those soldiers went into this  bus and it moved after the above-mentioned jeep. I noticed there were  around five or six Israeli soldiers inside the Volkswagen bus.After the  car left the site, I came out from behind the door with the intention  of going to the site of the incident, but while I was walking carefully,  I saw two Israeli military jeeps coming towards the site from the  south, the road leading to Kadim settlement that is located east of  Jenin. At that point, I had to go back again to my shop. The Israeli  military jeeps went towards the site where the above-mentioned incident  had occurred. Then it drove towards the north in the direction of  al-Jalama checkpoint. Immediately afterwards two military cars, a hummer  and an armored personnel carrier (also called Aziza), arrived at the  scene of the incident and left to the north towards al-Jalama  checkpoint.I went to  the scene of the incident and I saw in the middle of the street a young  man on the ground, lifeless and bleeding profusely. I later learned  that he was Amer Qasrawi from Jenin. I witnessed near the site a navy  Volkswagen car that had crashed into an electrical pole, in the entrance  of a dirt road leading to a group of houses in al-Maslakh neighborhood.  I realized that the car had been heavily penetrated with Israeli  bullets, from the front glass window and from the side window to the  driver’s seat. Seated in the car beside the driver’s seat was a young  man, who was dead and bleeding. The young man with dark skin, was  Muhammad Kheir-allah, and was a resident of al-Maslakh neighborhood whom  I had seen before. I saw two ammunition magazines and a mobile phone,  but I did not see any weapons.At that  point I heard as all the other citizens present had heard, the scream of  a woman, located to the south from us in the middle of the  above-mentioned dirt road. When we reached there, we saw a third young  man lying on the ground on his back in the veranda of the house of the  woman who had screamed. This young man was dead due to being shot with  tens of bullets in the head, chest, feet and hands. I later learned that  he was Ayman Saba’na from Jenin. The rest of the young men and I  carried the three dead men and placed them in the ambulances that had  reached the area. I told a group of young men who had gathered around  the site of the incident that I had seen an Israeli soldier shoot  towards the tin factory. Hence we ran there and we found a fourth young  man lying on the flat soil ground, which is located behind the wall of  the tin factory, where the above-mentioned Israeli soldier had shot at.  The young man was dead and he was lying on the ground, ten meters away,  bleeding profusely from different parts of his body. We placed him in an  ambulance and I think that the young man was called Ihab Abu-Ja’far.  The total number of the men killed was four.I  returned to my shop and I was surprised to find out that there was a  fifth man killed, in Jenin Public Hospital, who was identified as 15  year old Basel Khaled al-Mahdi. I was told that ambulances had  transported the boy from al-Jalama checkpoint north of Jenin to Jenin  Hospital. I concluded that the boy who was inside the above-mentioned  jeep, which also had the two other men, Ihab Abu Jafar and Amer Qasrawi,  was sitting in the backseat. It seemed that he had been shot, when this  incident had started, he remained hiding inside the jeep. It seems that  the Israeli soldiers had discovered him when they drove in the car  towards al-Jalama checkpoint and they shot him and handed him over to  the Palestine Red Crescent Society.Although I  had seen everything and I have described everything in detail, I would  like to add that the five young men were inside two cars; the first is a  jeep and the second is a Volkswagen. The Israeli Special Forces and  Army had used a Volkswagen bus, in addition to a civil jeep, which was  driven by the young men. I have not seen any weapon at the scene of the  incident after the withdrawal of the Israeli Army and I do not think  that any of those young men had shot at the Israeli Special Forces,  because the element of surprise is a known tactic of the Israeli Special  Forces. I would like to point out that I have not noticed any Israeli  military movement in the area and I do not know if any of these men were  wanted or not. I would like to add that most of the five men were  executed, especially Basel Mahdi, who was taken alive to al-Jalama and  was executed there. I am originally from Faqou’a village, east of Jenin  and I am an owner of a grocery shop in al-Maslakh neighborhood. Due to  closure, I had to stay over in Jenin to provide income for my children  and myself.Signed by: Nasiem Injiliya on 24 March 2004