Affidavit No. 1688/2004
2004
My  brother Ibrahim, 22, had been arrested at the end of 2002. Since that  time, he has been detained, without a court ruling regarding the charges  against him, which state that he has been involved in preparing and  planning for the martyr operation, which had been executed by Na'el Abu  Hleil in Jerusalem in 2002 and that he is affiliated with Hamas. The  lawyer Usama 'Oda is still pursuing this case and the courts have not  issued a decision convicting Ibrahim.Therefore,  I was surprised on 27 February 2004 at 1:30 am when I heard knocking on  the door of my apartment, where I live with my wife and three  daughters, on the third floor of our three-story family house. My  family, which includes my parents and my five brothers, live in the  first and second floors, where each floor is made up of one five-roomed  apartment that reaches to up to 180 square meters. I woke up and looked  out from the window to find a large number of soldiers surrounding the  house. So I made the first move and said in Hebrew, in which I'm fluent,  "Wait until I wake up the young children", so a soldier answered back  in Hebrew, "Come down quickly and open up the gates (the main entrance  to the house)”.I went  down immediately and I instantly opened the door alone, when the  soldiers then pushed me aside and I fell to the ground. Then the  soldiers entered the first floor directly, where my wife and daughters  had been sleeping alone, because my wife had given birth just a day  before and I didn't want her to have to climb up to the third floor. So I  told the soldiers "Wait, my wife is inside", but they did not listen to  me, so I went after a few soldiers who had entered my wife's bedroom  and she had woken up and remained in bed, while the soldiers surrounded  her. They were wearing regular light green uniforms, their faces were  camouflaged and they were carrying M16s, which I could distinguish  because I knew it. Three of them, who were carrying a big weapon (250),  went up to the roof of the house.My wife  was scared and the children, who had woken up, started crying. A soldier  said, "Get out of the house." My wife who had only recently given  birth, said, "I gave birth to a baby yesterday and so it is less than a  day old, I can't take it out." He insisted and said, "Take them out of  the house." Then he asked, "Who's upstairs?" (Referring to the second  and third floors). I replied, "My family and my parents, who are heavy  to carry down." I left the soldier, who I could not distinguish amidst  the large number of soldiers, there were maybe up to seven in the room  of my wife and children. Then I went upstairs, woke my family up, and  told them to come downstairs immediately. Hence, everyone in the second  floor came down.When we reached the first floor, another  soldier said, "Go into one of the rooms." We went into a room adjacent  to the bedroom where my wife was. Then my wife and our children entered  the room, so we reached to around 10 people in the room. The door  remained open and we had a number of soldiers with us. One of the  soldiers, an officer, who was short probably 165 cm, stout, with a round  face, without camouflage, spoke Hebrew, with two stripes on his  shoulders, carrying a gun, andwearing a  regular army uniform with a military helmet and a bullet-proof vest  like all the other soldiers, told me, "Do you know why we are here?" I  answered, "No." He said, “To improve your financial situation. “ I  replied, “I do not understand.” He said, “Who is Ibrahim?” I replied,  “My brother.” He said, “We are here to execute the court’s decision to  demolish the house.” He was showing me a file in his hand two meters  away from me and that the reason behind the demolishing was that Ibrahim  was a terrorist. I said, “Ibrahim has not been convicted yet.” He said,  “I am carrying out military orders.” He added, “You have 10 minutes to  evacuate the house.” He started looking at the file and continued, “I am  certain,” replying in Hebrew to what my mother had said in Arabic that  “maybe they got the name wrong”, which indicates that he understands  Arabic very well, (probably a Druze).Then I  left along with two soldiers, upon their request, and I found around 100  soldiers, 40 of them located inside the house. They started pointing  out to the neighbor’s houses in order that I ask them to evacuate the  houses. During that time, I saw soldiers carrying black wooden boxes a  few meters away from the street and their faces were not camouflaged.  The seven soldiers who had asked me to inform the neighbors to leave,  accompanied me. I warned six houses and then I went back home, where I  found all of my family in front of the main gate. My wife Sawsan, 20,  told me that she did not get her gold jewelry. I asked an officer, whose  rank I could not identify, but I realized he had stripes on his  shoulders, and who was standing at the door, in Hebrew, to go and get  the jewelry. He said, “Time is over and I cannot allow you to go up.” I  insisted that I needed some documents, then he started talking in his  radio and he requested that I be allowed to enter the third floor. They  allowed me to enter with my wife, accompanied by soldiers. It was around  2:00 am. I went up with my wife and the soldiers and we managed to get  the jewelry.During  this time, which only lasted two minutes, I saw a number of engineering  soldiers who I assume were digging the walls of the house, with the use  of drills (congos). When my wife and I reached the street, I did not  find the rest of my family. Then several soldiers took me to a house, 50  meters away and they made us enter. All the men, 50 of them, were  jammed up in one 8x4 meter room and all the women were in another room. I  do not know how many women were there. The soldiers stayed with us  inside the room, standing at the door. The house belongs to Abu-Mustafa  al-Ghrouz. At 4:30 am, the house exploded. At around 5:00 am the army  left the camp and then I went back to my house but I could not enter  because it was still dark, until sunrise, when we discovered the huge  damage in the second floor; nothing was left of it. According to the  UNRWA’s Committee of Engineers and the Public Works Ministry, the first  and the third floor were also damaged and the whole building was about  to collapse,.Signed on 29 February 2004