Affidavit No. 2453/2005
2005
At the  beginning of 2002, the Israeli occupying authorities completed the other  phase of the Security Fence (Separation Wall) that included the lands  of Jayyous villagers in Qalqiliya governorate. As a result of this  Fence, I lost approximately 3 dunums of my land towards the south-west,  and another part of approximately 2 dunums planted with olive trees fell  inside the Fence in the southern direction. Moreover, the Fence is very  close to my home, only 50 metres away to the south and west and 100  metres to the north, since my home is the last one in the village on the  western side and the Fence is surrounding it from all those sides.A few  months after the occupation authorities completed the construction of  this Fence, it constructed two gates for the residents of the village,  especially for citizens whose lands are located behind the Fence, in  order to enable them reach their lands. One of these gates is on the  western side and the second is in the south. To pass through these  gates, which are under the control of Israeli soldiers, you have to  obtain a special permit. The soldiers control the gates’ opening and  closure and although our permits specify the opening hours (from 5 in  the morning until 7 in the evening), the soldiers do not follow the  directives. This made us wait for long hours for the soldiers to open  the gates. This is one problem. Another is that the permit is usually  effective for six months and when it expires, it is difficult to obtain a  new one.Look at  my disaster, look at my home, look at the Fence which is only 50 metres  away from my home. Look at my land, which the Fence separated from my  home and which is only 70 metres from the Fence. I have to go a distance  of more than 12 kilometres to reach the western gate through which I  can go to my lands behind the Fence. Not to mention the long hours spent  waiting for the soldiers to have pity on us and open the gate. Imagine  this dark and racial reality. Where do such things happen and in which  ethics, customs and traditions can such things happen? My land, which I  used to reach in less than one minute, I now have to cross 12 kilometres  to get to. Not only this, the occupation forces are constructing  another gate to the west of Falamiya village. And now you come as others  to ask me about the impacts of these gates on me and about our  sufferings that result from the Fence. I believe the distance I have to  go is a clear answer that reflects my sufferings and the sufferings of  others in addition to the other matters that I mentioned concerning the  Fence. It is more than 8 metres high and more than 10 metres wide.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 28 June 2005Signature: 'Umar Mustafa