Affidavit No. 2832/2006
2006
I live in Khirbet al-Hijra and I am the mother of 11 children. On Monday, 20 February 2006, at approximately 4:30 pm, while I was at home, I heard firing in the area. A few minutes later I saw a child bleeding. I asked him what happened and he told me he was injured by Israeli soldiers. His right shoulder and both his legs were injured. He asked for some water; after he drank some, my daughter Mana' Thaher Salman al-Mashraqa (28 years) came home and told me that she had been injured in her side. She said that when she had tried to help the injured boy a bullet had also hit her and she started bleeding from her right side.After approximately three minutes, the soldiers reached an area near my home. The injured boy was still standing there. Three soldiers approached the entrance to my home and one of them started kicking the boy with his feet. Then he pulled the boy about two metres, laid him down on the ground and kicked him in the head and the stomach. The boy started yelling and crying. This made us all very sad. Several minutes later the number of soldiers in front of my home had increased until there were about 20 soldiers gathered there. I saw soldiers dressed in official uniforms providing the injured boy with first aid treatment.When I saw the Israeli soldiers giving the injured boy first aid, I told my husband that our daughter was injured too. My husband told the soldiers in Hebrew, which he speaks very well, that our daughter had also been injured. The soldiers told him to bring her outside. The soldiers offered her first aid and after half an hour my daughter and the child were carried on stretchers to an ambulance parked about 150 metres away from our home. There were Arab and Israeli ambulances present but the Israeli officer said that they would be taken to Soroka Hospital in Beir Sheba located approximately 50 kilometres away from Khirbet al-Hijra.I later learned that the injured boy's name is Ashraf Muhammad 'Abd-al 'Aziz al-Najjar and he is 14 years old. His injuries (to the shoulder and legs) were serious and my daughter had been hit with two rubber bullets and stayed in the hospital for 24 hours.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 7 March 2006Signature: 'Aziza Mashraqa