Affidavit No. 5744/2010
2010
My house is located near to a military gate and watchtower installed in 2001, at the western entrance to al-Nabi Saleh village. For four years, I have been suffering from an irregular heart beat; sometimes my heart beats fast and at other times slowly. Therefore, I have to have medical examinations and I receive medical treatment on an ongoing basis.At 2:30 pm on Friday 8 October 2010, I was at home in the second floor of my house. Confrontations were taking place between the village’s youths and Israeli occupying troops as a result of a protest against settlement activity in the area. Israeli troops fired tear gas grenades and other kinds of weapons at the young people who responded by throwing stones.At around 2:30 pm when I was in the kitchen on the second floor of my house (which was under construction), two gas grenades fell into the hallway. The strong, intense smell affected me badly. I went out of the kitchen into the hall, which was the only passageway out of the house.As I went through the hall and down the stairs, I inhaled some of the gas. By the time I had reached the main door of the house on the first floor, I felt an acute shortness of breath. I tried to open the door to get away from the gas but found a gas grenade immediately outside the doorway. The smell of the gas was so intense that I felt very weak and could not get out of the house. I could hardly breathe and tears were streaming from my eyes. I vomited violently.My husband took me outside the house to the yard. However, the smell of the gas was all around. As a result of the weakness that I was suffering from and the presence of a checkpoint that was preventing cars from entering or leaving the village, I could not go to hospital for medical treatment. Also, a large number of soldiers were outside on the street opposite my house. My husband took me to my sister’s house where the smell of gas was less intense. I stayed at my sister’s house until 10:00 pm. During the night my condition did not improve. I suffered from intense pain in my stomach and was unable to move.At 7:00 am the next day, my husband took me to Ramallah Hospital, where I was examined and had my stomach pumped. The doctor told me that the gas had reached my intestines. I had inhaled a large quantity of gas. I stayed at the hospital until 1:00 pm.For almost four months, tear gas grenades have been falling into our houses. Every Friday, at least four grenades fall into my house. The smell stays in the house for almost a week, badly affecting my medical condition. The furniture in the house also stays smelling of gas for a week. This Friday I had prepared food but before we had managed to eat it the tear gas grenades fell into the house. This is the second time that I have had to go to hospital as a result of tear gas inhalation. On a previous occasion, I also had my stomach pumped.