Affidavit No. 5859/2010
2010
I am a resident of Khirbet al-Twayel area, which is located at a distance of four kilometres from ‘Aqraba town and belongs to it. ‘Aqraba is 18 kilometres south of Nablus city and houses 10,000 residents. I tend sheep and have 120 of them. At around 10:30 am on 18 December 2010, I was grazing the sheep on fields in an area, which was approximately two kilometres away from Khirbet al-Twayel. Meanwhile, someone called me, saying “Come!” in Arabic. When I turned around, I was surprised to see four settlers, who were 30 metres behind me. Of these, a settler was almost 10 metres away from me. He was the one who called me.“I won’t come to you.” I replied.“Why?” He asked.“Usually, you kill people.” I said.Once more, he demanded that I come, but I refused and told him to say what he wanted. He carried a long weapon and wore a white shirt and trousers, with thread tying them together, as well as a cap on his head. His face was white and he had sideburns and a light red beard. He was tall – about 180 centimetres. I looked at the other settlers; they also wore civilian clothing.As the settler approached me, I ran away from him in fear of my life. He ran after me for a distance of almost 40 metres. Later, I looked back and saw a fire erupt near my sheep. When I saw the fire, I returned immediately to the sheep and drove them away from the fire. I saw some sheep ablaze and was bewildered of the intensity of the fire set to them. Meanwhile, the settlers stood at a distance of almost 30 metres away from me. I called my brother, Firas Bani-Fadhl, and told him that the settlers had burnt the sheep and asked that he come to help me in this disaster.At around 10:45 am, my brother arrived at Khirbet al-Twayel and came to the area where the sheep had been burnt. We counted the losses: approximately 12 sheep were killed and another five sustained serious burn wounds. A few minutes before my brother arrived, the settlers had left the area, heading south towards the main street which led to the settlements of Ma’ale Efraym and Jitit near Khirbet al-Twayel area. I watched them; they reached a small white car, which was parked at a distance of two kilometres from the place where the sheep had been set on fire. They went into their car and left. After my brother arrived, we counted and collected the sheep. I then took them to my place of residence in Khirbet al-Twayel. My brother reported the incident to ‘Aqraba Municipality over the telephone. At around 3:00 pm, officers from the Israeli District Coordination Office (DCO) arrived, took photographs of the burnt sheep, and took an affidavit about the incident from me. They said that they called the Israeli police, but the latter did not show up. An Israeli officer, called Zahran, told me to go to the Israeli DCO in Huwwara area, file a complaint, and make a statement on the incident.The next day, 19 December 2010, I went to the Israeli DCO in Huwwara. They coordinated with the Israeli police so that I could report and lodge a complaint about the incident. DCO officers told me to be ready and wait on Ari’el junction at around 9:30 on 20 December 2010 in order to report to the Israeli police station. From there, an Israeli police car would take me to the police station in Ari’el settlement.After I arrived at the police station as scheduled, Police officers questioned me about the incident. They produced some pictures of settlers so that I could recognise them. However, the pictures were not of those who burned my sheep. After the investigation, I left Ari’el police station at around 12:30 pm.I should note that Israeli attacks on Khirbet al-Twayel area are numerous and target residents in the area. I believe that the aim is that they do not want Palestinians in this fertile area, which is suitable for grazing and raising livestock. I want to say that the loss I incurred by burning my sheep is almost JD 10,000. On Monday, 27 December 2010, I went to Ari’el Police station as per the Israeli police’s request.During the investigation, police officers accused me of burning my sheep and said that settlers had nothing to do with it. At the end of the interrogation, they demanded that I sign on an affidavit stating that I set my sheep on fire. As I refused to sign the affidavit, I was detained in Ari’el police station from 27 December 2010 until 3 January 2011. On 30 December 2010, I was presented to an Israeli court. As it appeared that there was no evidence against me, I was released on bail, which my brother paid. Then, I returned to Khirbet al-Twayel.