Affidavit No. 6089/2011
2011
In the afternoon of 23 January 2011, I was present in the small village of Maghayer al-‘Abid where several of my family’s houses are located. My nephews ‘Awni ‘Ali Musleh al-Hamamda, 13 years old, and Muhammad Mahmoud Mousa Sh’hada, 15 years old, took the family’s sheep from Maghayer al-‘Abid to a well, approximately 500 metres west of the area, in order to provide the sheep with water. At around 12:30 pm – shortly after my nephews reached  the well – and while I was walking at a distance of about 150 metres east of the well, I saw an Israeli settler who was armed with a rifle. He was walking along a detour road that was approximately 10 metres south of the well. It was on an elevated area that overlooked the well.The settler stopped, gazed at my nephews and the sheep, and opened fire on them. He fired four shots and then started to throw stones at the sheep and my nephews who quickly ran away from the area. When the settler opened fire, I had hidden behind a rock and watched what was going on. I also shouted at the settler. The settler repeatedly kicked a sheep on its head and stomach for about a minute. The sheep could no longer move and fell to the ground. He also pursued my nephews for a short distance before turning around and heading to Havat Ma’on settlement outpost, located west of Maghayer al-‘Abid. He then left as if nothing had happened.After the settler left the area, I ran to the well and found my nephews. I then noticed that the family’s dog had been killed after he sustained bullet wounds by the settler. I also saw the sheep the settler had beaten lying on the ground and incapable of moving; it was pregnant.At around 12:45 pm, I called the Israeli Police and reported what had happened and where. They said they would come to inspect the site and investigate the incident. At around 1:40 pm, an army jeep, a Border Guard vehicle and a police car arrived at the scene. A Police investigator collected cartridges of the bullets that were fired by the settler and took photographs of the site. Another Police officer inspected the dog and the sheep. The sheep died while the Police officers, army and Border Guards were carrying out their investigations at the site of the incident. They took statements from me and my nephew Muhammad about what happened.The settler who opened fire was of medium height, thin and with a black beard. The sheep that was killed was worth around ILS 3,000. I cannot estimate the price of my dog which was killed by the settler; it was dear to my family members.