Affidavit No. 6589/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, ‘Awwad Abdul-Hadi Jum’ah, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 981781719, born on 7 September 1945, an electricity bill collector at the Kufr Qaddoum Village Council, and a resident of the Kufr Qaddoum village, Qalqiliya governorate, would like to declare the following:At around 2:00 pm on 29 July 2011, peaceful demonstrators marched from ‘Umar Bin-al-Khattab Mosque towards the old main street which leads to the village of Kufr Qaddoum in Qalqiliya governorate. The street has been closed since 2002 during Al-Aqsa Intifada (uprising). Residents of the village filed an objection against the closure of the street before the Israeli High Court of Justice (HCJ). The HCJ responded that the street had been closed due to security reasons.In the past, residents used to travel on this street to reach the village. Today, they are forced to take a detour road that passes through Al-Funduq and Hajja villages. This road is 10 kilometres further than the main street to Kufr Qaddoum that the village residents had requested to be reopened.Every Friday, a peaceful demonstration is organised in order to request the reopening of the old main street leading to the village.On the aforementioned day, following Friday prayers, citizens marched towards this street. Approximately 400 citizens, myself included, reached the closed main street. A Dutch music band, made up of about 30 members accompanied us while singing songs for peace. At that time, I saw some 50 Israeli soldiers dressed in their military uniforms, carrying long, black rifles. The soldiers were positioned across both sides of the main street as well as under some olive trees. For about an hour and a half, the Dutch music band performed many songs calling for peace. At the time the band was about to finish, a number of citizens had gathered around it. There was no violence taking place, nevertheless, the Israeli occupying soldiers fired tear gas grenades towards the Palestinians who were surrounding the Dutch music band. I sustained injuries as a result of tear gas inhalation. I could not see anything in front of me and then fell on the ground. About two minutes later, I stood up and walked away from the tear gas smell towards Omar Bin-al-Khattab Mosque.At around 3:30 pm and after the clashes with the Israeli occupying soldiers had ended; I went back to my house in the village. During this peaceful demonstration organised by residents of the village, Israeli occupying soldiers fired tear gas grenades towards non-violent civilians.