Affidavit No. 6024/2011
2011
I live with my husband ‘Umar Salim Suleiman Qawasma (66 years old) and my son Yousef (44 years old) on the first floor of a four-storey building owned by my family. My son suffers from physical and mental disabilities. My husband’s nephew Wa’el Muhammad Sa’id al-Bitar and his eight-member family reside on the ground floor of our family building. My son Subhi and his family live on the second floor and my other son Raja’i and his family live on the third.At around 3:30 am on Friday, 7 January 2011, I got up to perform the ritual cleansing before prayer and returned to my room where I performed a set of night prayers. Meanwhile, my husband was asleep in our bed. I performed my prayers at a distance of about one metre near the bed. After I completed a first set of night prayers, I intended to perform another set of prayers. I was praying facing south; in the direction of al-Qibla. Almost one minute later, I heard some movement inside the house. I stopped praying and stood up to go check if someone was there. When I turned around, I saw two or three Israeli soldiers standing at the door of my room with their weapons pointed at me. They did not say a word to me, instead, they quickly came within less than a meter inside [our] room and began firing their machine guns at my husband as he was sleeping in his bed, facing the east side of the room, only three meters away from the soldiers who shot him. I saw my husband’s blood as well as some of his brain tissue splatter around the room and on my clothes.I went into a state of shock and panic and started screaming “you killed him, you killed him… have some mercy, you killed him.”There were as many as 12 soldiers inside the house. They yelled at me and demanded that I be silent. A soldier tried to shut me up by putting his hand on my mouth. Out of intense agitation and because fire was opened intensively, I could not recognise whether one or more soldiers opened fire. The soldiers then pointed their rifles at me and asked me to give them my husband’s ID. While shaking with fear, I headed towards a chair located near the bed where myhusband’s clothes lay and took out his ID. A soldier grabbed it from me and examined it thoroughly. They spoke amongst themselves but I didn’t understand anything they were saying.Immediately afterwards, they took me out of the room into the living room. The soldiers then entered the room of my developmentally disabled son and dragged him into the living room. They body searched him and kicked him in front of my eyes. I intervened and told the soldiers that my son was disabled. They examined his ID card and left him in the hall near me. A soldier examined files in a small black bag, which was similar to a dossier.“Where does Wa’el al-Bitar live?” The soldier immediately asked me in Arabic. “On the ground floor. Let me show you where.” I answered.After I walked for a few steps to show them Wa’el’s house, the soldier demanded that I return. Soldiers took me along with my disabled son Yousef to my son’s room and partially closed the door on us. I saw a soldier stand near the door and heard others move around the house. About half an hour later, movement calmed down inside the house and I no longer saw the soldier near the door. I quietly went out of the room in an attempt to see what was going on. I did not see any soldier in the house. I went to my bedroom, but I did not find my husband’s body. I saw a large spot of blood that covered the side of the bed where he slept. I also discovered that my husband’s blanket was not available as well. I realised later that the soldiers had taken my husband’s corpse with them after they had wrapped it his blanket.Later, my sons Subhi and Raja’i and their families came to my house. They were shocked at what had happened and left for the hospital in search of their father. At around 5:00 am, the Israeli occupying forces handed over my husband’s body to an ambulance of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. The ambulance transported the corpse to the governmental hospital, where my sons recognised and brought it home. My husband’s body was buried at noon on the same day.I learned that the Israeli occupying troops arrested Wa’el al-Bitar on the ground floor after they had killed my husband. Later, the Israelis announced that they had mistakenly killed my husband during an operation to arrest Wa’el, who had been released from prisons of the Palestinian Authority on the previous day.