Affidavit No. 2790/2006
2006
I live in al-Tweina, which is part of the Yata area, and is located 12 kilometres east of it. Ma'oun settlement is located north east of this tiny village. My family consists of 10 people and I am a member of the Village Council of al-Tweina. The population of this village is 280 people.The people are suffering considerably from the presence of settlers in the area. There is a school in this area that serves 13 villages and these students are regularly harassed by the settlers. The settlers often attack the students and the residents of this village because the settlers are planning to confiscate more land and this village is the nearest to them. In the past, the settlers sprayed poisonous substances in the fields in order to kill the sheep. The sheep are the main reason that Palestinian people inhabit this area and a number of sheep died at that time.On the morning of 27 December 2005, the residents of the village were shocked when we discovered that an olive farm had been damaged. The six dunum farm is located approximately 300 metres from the village and 500 metres from the settlement. One hundred and twenty very old (31 years) olive trees had been cut down. The trees were cut down by hand, with saws, at night. I am sure it was the settlers who uprooted the trees and damaged the farm because no one else has any interest in doing so. On that day, the settlers in the surrounding area of al-Tweina were celebrating upon hearing the news that [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon had been hospitalized.The owner of the damaged farm is Saqer Ahmad Ibrahim al-'Mour (35 years). Saqer submitted a complaint against the settlers with the Israeli police. I was there when the police came to the scene of the incident. A discussion took place between the Civil Administration officer named Tareq and a military officer who said that he had not seen anything in the area that night. The police were accompanied by a special investigator named Hammouda who was from the Galilee. He followed the trail of evidence, which led him to the Ma'oun settlement. We all (soldiers, police, civil administration and citizens) stood watching the man as the traces of evidence led him into the settlement.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 2 February 2006Signature: Na'im Salem