Affidavit no. 7839/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Muhammad ‘Attallah Ibrahim Abu el-Sheikh, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID number (missing), born in 1964, a farmer and a resident of the Abu Samaha neighbourhood in the al-Zawaida village, the Middle Area governorate, would like to declate the following:I am Muhammad ‘Attallah Ibrahim Abu el-Sheikh, 48, married and a father of eight children. I live in the neighbourhood of the Abu Samaha located near the coast, east of the al-Zawaida village in the centre of the Gaza Strip.Around 6:00 am on Monday 19 October 2012, while I was at my house, I heard the sound of an explosion in the sky over the area, followed by the sound of Israeli warplanes. About ten minutes later, I heard children screaming outside and saying that the Israeli airplanes had dropped flyers in the area.  I went outside and saw many flyers falling from the sky and spreading throughout the area. I picked up a number of them and saw what was inside. There were two maps printed on either side of the flyer; one side had a drawing of a map showing the northern part of the Middle Area governorate Deir al-Balah and the entire governorates of the Gaza and the North Gaza, while the drawing on the other side was a map showing the southern part of the Middle area governorate and the entire governorates of Khan Younis and Rafah. On the flyer, the Israeli army warns the residents of the Gaza Strip of the consequences of Palestinian resistance, of launching rockets towards Israel from residential areas and warns against protecting members of the resistance. It also said that they would attack the areas from where the rockets are being launched, and it warned the people of the Strip not to come within 300 metres of the border, saying that they will immediately be shot if they do.I already knew that the Israeli forces had imposed a buffer zone along the eastern and northern borders with Israel early in 2009, following the Israeli war on the Gaza Strip. By doing so, the Israeli forces prevent anyone from coming near the area and shoot at people there. I should point out the seriousness of the occupation forces throwing these flyers. I was concerned and felt that my life and my children’s lives were in danger. We have become accustomed to the fact that when the occupation forces throw flyers in the Gaza Strip, they then carry out bombings or ground operations in the Strip.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign on November 2012