Affidavit No. 4019/2008
2008
On 25 December 2007 at approximately 11:00 am I was with Husein Ayyoub, 45 years old, and 15 year old ‘Amro, on our land which is called “Kafro” and located at two kilometres southwest of our village Tel. I was working on my land while Husein and ‘Amro were grazing their sheep at a distance of 20 metres from me. 20 minutes after our arrival, we were surprised to see around five settlers wearing black masks and carrying clubs accompanied by a big black dog. They were wearing light coloured shirts and jeans and were coming towards us from the settlement outpost called Gil’ad located around 800 metres to northwest of my land. I did not notice that the settlers were carrying weapons.When the settlers were 10 metres away from Husein and ‘Amro and 25 metres away from me, they started shouting at us in Arabic and Hebrew and telling us to leave the place.All of a sudden, one of the settlers, who was carrying a small tube, came closer to Husein. When the settler was one metre away from him, he opened the tube and sprayed gas in Husein’s face. Immediately, Husein fell to the ground. Then he got up and fled with ‘Amro. As for me, I took a stone and threw it toward the settlers. The settler who was carrying the tube and a club came closer to me. From a distance of less than half a metre, hesprayed the gas on my face. The gas entered my right eye. I immediately closed my left eye to prevent more gas from entering. Thus, I could only see with my left eye.At that moment, all five settlers attacked me. They threw me on my back, to the ground and started beating me with their hands, feet and clubs. They continued to beat me for about five minutes. I was screaming out of pain and my head was bleeding. Then the settlers left me and went back to their settlement. When they were 100 metres away, Husein and ‘Amro arrived and took me to the village. Then they took me to Rafidiya Hospital in a private car. The doctor discovered a big wound in my head which needed 16 stitches to be treated and a fracture in my left arm above the elbow resulting from the beating of the settlers.