Affidavit No. 6769/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Ahmed Mohammed Hasan Hilwah, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 991235292, born on 2 December 1966, a poultry breeder, and a resident of the 네nata village, Jerusalem governorate, would like to declare the following:I am a Palestinian citizen and a resident of 네nata village, northeast of the city of Jerusalem, occupied in 1967. On 25 October 2011, the Israeli occupying forces demolished my house and poultry farm, which were located north of the village of 네nata. The demolitions took place under the pretence that my house and poultry farm had been built without the required construction permits. The details of the incident are as follows:At 8:00 am, an Israeli occupying force, including 10 jeeps of the Israeli Border Guard unit, raided the area. I could distinguish these jeeps by their green colour. I estimate that each jeep transported six Border Guard officers. Additionally, three GMC cars from the Israeli Civil Administration and five Israeli bulldozers accompanied the Israeli Border Guards. These included two small bulldozers, a large bulldozer, and two crawler bulldozers. The occupying force imposed a complete siege on the area. It should be noted that the poultry farm and the house are at a distance of about 300 metres from the Separation Wall and an Israeli army camp which is constructed on 네nata village land. The occupying forces started to evacuate pieces of furniture from the house. They carried pieces of furniture and threw them outside. The house was used as residence by a worker and his family who worked on the poultry farm. The worker뇹 name is Mohammed Abu 네li, he is a father of four.When I arrived, I quarrelled with an Israeli soldier. I believe he was an Israeli Border Guard officer. I requested that he show me the demolition order, but he refused to show me any papers. My relatives, neighbours and I evacuated about 5,300 chickens from the poultry farm. Some of them perished during the evacuation, which lasted for about two hours. At 10:00 am, the Israeli bulldozers started to demolish the house and the poultry farm. The house had a surface area of about 80 square metres. Constructed a year and a half ago, the house was built of bricks and concrete and was roofed with zinc sheets. It consisted of two rooms, a kitchen and a bathroom. The poultry farm, which I constructed eight months ago, was completely demolished by the Israeli occupying forces. It was built of zinc sheets. During the demolition, the Israeli occupying forces also destroyed a wall made of barrels covering about two dunums of the land. They also demolished a 530-metre-long concrete wall that had been constructed around the poultry farm. The bulldozers also uprooted a number of trees. Confrontations with the Israeli occupying forces did not take place during the demolition process.Seven months ago, I received an order from the Israeli Civil Administration, stating that I should halt construction of the poultry farm. However, when I received that order, I had already finished the construction of the poultry farm and started to operate in it. On two occasions, an Israeli officer from the Israeli Civil Administration visited me. He suggested that if I agreed to collaborate with the occupying authorities by providing information they seek against Palestinians, he would not demolish my poultry farm and would, instead, legalise the construction of the poultry farm, allowing me to expand it and build more structures near the public road. I declined his offer.It should be noted that I was detained on several occasions on charges of affiliation with the Fatah movement. I spent a total of seven and a half years in Israeli prisons.The poultry farm which had been demolished provided a source of living to many people: my family, including my wife and 10 children; my 27-year-old son Mohammed and his four children; my elderly parents; the farm worker and his family. I have seven children under the age of 18. I got married when I was 15 years old.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 25 October 2011