Affidavit No. 2427/2005
2005
I have  been working as an employee at al-Ahli Club in Hebron for approximately  one year (since mid 2004). I am responsible for organizing club work  during work hours. The club is located in the Bab al-Zawiya area in the  center of Hebron. During the past year, the Israeli army has broken into  the club about 30 times and usually invasion takes place during work  hours. During the intrusions, the Israeli soldiers order the Club  employees, members, and visitors to stand close to the wall then the  soldiers inspect them all, as well as inspecting the Club. The  inspection takes at least two to three hours.One day  at the beginning of May 2005, at four in the afternoon, six Israeli  soldiers broke into the club. There were six youths present at that  time. The soldiers withheld these youths, (as well as me) inside the  corridor and inspected us. Two soldiers remained to watch us while the  other four entered the room that contains the billiard tables and  started playing. I heard them laughing and playing while we remained  standing at the wall until the soldiers finished playing. I then saw the  soldiers leaving while putting their military equipment on their backs  as it seems that they put them down when they started playing.On 8 June  2005, the soldiers broke into the club at approximately 11:30 am. At  that time there were 10 youths present. As usual, the Israeli soldiers  inspected the young men and the club. They found a picture with the club  slogan which they broke, and then played with billiards for five  minutes. After 45 minutes, they left us and went up to the club hall  that contains tennis tables. There was nobody in the hall at the time,  and they spent an hour and a half playing without us knowing what they  were doing.I called  the International Emergency Forces in Hebron and they came and stayed in  the club until the soldiers left, without being able to ask the  soldiers about what they were doing in the club. In April of this year,  six soldiers also broke into the club and have stayed in it for four  hours. When they went out of the hall, I entered to check to see what  happened and found that one of the soldiers had urinated in a tea glass.  I know this from the smell and colour, and with the knowledge that I  cleaned the hall before the soldiers came.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 13 June 2005Signature: Jamil Faraj