Affidavit No. 3983/2007
2007
On Saturday, 24 November 2007, at 9:30 pm I was at home with my wife, my kids Lara, Mahmoud, Sarah, and Tala, and my old parents. Our house is located in the middle ofal-Funduq village, Qalqiliya Governorate. We heard the sound of stones crashing into second floor of our three-story house in which we live. These stones broke the windows of our home. I looked through the broken window of the living room and saw Israeli settlers accompanied by the Israeli army and police. There were more than 200 of them filling the al-Quta’at Street.Next to our home my brothers and I own a shop where we work with granite, which is our only source of income. I was very scared that the shop would be harmed, so myfather and I went to the roof of the house to observe what was happening. My wife placed the children in a safe place in the house that could not be reached by the stonesthrown at our house. When we arrived on the roof, we saw the settlers, and the Israeli army and police, breaking the granite slabs that were in front of the shop.In front of the shop were three cars, one public and two private, which belong to people from Hajja village. These cars were left in front of the shop since the roads were closed. During the incident the settlers were shouting in poor Arabic, “We do not want Arabs! Death to Arabs!” A female settler was saying through loud speakers in Hebrew, which I understand, that this would be repeated every day. Also next to the shop was a car with a yellow Israeli licence plate, which belongs to our neighbour who holds an Israeli ID. An Israeli policeman told the settlers not to go near that car and stood next to it to protect it.There was a female Jewish settler who wanted to break a huge granite slab but was unable to do so. She was around 18 years old. An Israeli soldier then helped her andthey broke it together. We were watching them from the roof of our house but could not do anything because there were so many of them and they were accompanied by the Israeli police and army. They continued breaking our slabs until 11:00 pm. They also broke several kitchen granites which we intended to deliver the next day. Our loss was estimated at NIS 50,000. We were unable to find out which settlements the settlers were from.According to some people they assembled and came to our village together from the settlements of Kidoumim, Ytsahar, and Alon Moreh. A Jewish settler from the settlement of Kidoumim had been killed by some people from the village of Kufr Qaddoum, which is almost four kilometres from our village. It is noteworthy that another granite shop, named Daliya, was attacked and damaged four days prior to our incident. We are now working on new kitchen granites to replace those that were broken, which takes a lot of time and money. All of them could have been saved. Michael Sfard and Natali Rozen, lawyers from some kind of organisation called Yesh Deen [an Israeli human rights organisation] approached us. We did not really know anything about the organisation but we granted them power of attorney to submit a case against the Israeli settlers and soldiers in front of an Israel court. They will now follow up on the issue. I request the help of human rights organisations in this matter.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 3 December 2007.Signature: Majed Thiyab