Affidavit No. 5400/2010
2010
At around 08:00 pm on Wednesday, 7 April 2010, I left my family’s shop, which is located in front of my house with my cousin Shadi Hasan ‘Abd-al-Razzaq al-Muhtasib, who is 26 years old, and headed towards the Israeli military checkpoint south of the al-Shuhada’ Street, which denies access to Palestinian vehicles to the area. My father and mother intended to come after us. We wanted to hire a taxi, which stopped behind the checkpoint, in order to bring some goods to my family’s shop. After my cousin and I had walked for about 40 metres, we saw an Israeli settler walking in the same direction. He was between 20 and 25 years of age and I knew the settler by face; he was a resident of an Israeli settlement outpost in the old city of Hebron. The settler cursed us in Arabic so I asked why he had, at which point he started to shout at me.Meanwhile, another settler of about the same age ran from an area south of our shop towards us and forcefully punched me above my left eye. I fell to the ground. Within moments, a green jeep transporting settlers arrived from the southern area of the street. The jeep, which had civil registration plates, belonged to a person who works in an Israeli settlement resting area, opposite our shop and home. Four people stepped down from the jeep and severely beat me and my cousin. Later, about seven settlers arrived and joined them in beating us. As I was being severely beaten I did not know what was happening to my cousin Shadi. Settlers kicked me and punched me for about four minutes. Then, two Border Police officers, who used to take position at the checkpoint in front of our house, pulled me and Shadi out and took us southwards to the checkpoint near our shop. My father followed and took us back to our home.Later, I learned that the two settlers, who had first assaulted us, had also attacked my father with a sharp tool around the time where we were attacked, causing a small wound and contusions on my father’s left hand. While I was being beaten, I felt an intense pain in various parts of my body, especially in my back and right knee. I also partially lost the ability to concentrate.After the two Police officers had taken Shadi and I away to a location near their checkpoint and our house, the settlers chased us and attempted to assault us in the presence of the two Police officers. The police officers attempted to separate them from us.Later, almost six Border Guard officers arrived to the location and managed to prevent the settlers from attacking us and as a result the settlers began to leave one by one. The Border Guard officer requested that the settler, who had first cursed us, waited in the area and so he did. Later, soldiers from the regular army arrived on foot and released the settler from the northern area of the street. A Border Guard commanding officer arrived and I requested that he call the Israeli Police. Having tried to call them on his wireless telecommunications device for about 15 minutes, the officer told me that the Police did not have a car to travel in.Shadi and I were suffering from intense pain but nevertheless we walked towards the checkpoint south of the al-Shuhada’ Street, which was at a distance of approximately 500 metres from our shop. After we crossed the checkpoint, a private car transported us to the Hebron Governmental Hospital. At the hospital, we had x-rays and medical examinations. In addition to contusions on various parts of my body, my left eyebrow was swollen. Shadi also sustained contusions on various parts of his body. About three and a half hours later we left the hospital which was around 12:50 am.At around 09:00 am on Thursday, 8 April 2010, Shadi and I went to the Israeli Police station near the settlement of Kiryat Arba’ and filed a complaint against the settlers, who had assaulted us. At 04:00 pm, we left the Israeli Police station.As a result of the Israeli settlers’ attack, I have been suffering from back pain.At around 11:30 am today, 9 April 2010, while I was in our shop in front of my house, the settler, who had first cursed me and my cousin, passed by and threatened me.