Affidavit No. 2803/ 2006
2006
On 19 February 2006, I was with my family consisting of five persons including my three children and my husband Raslan, at our home located on the second floor in Balata camp. Due to the curfew imposed on the camp by the Israeli occupying forces, we stayed at home and did not go out to work. At approximately 7:00 am in the morning, I was moving from window to window in our bedroom overlooking the eastern, northern and western directions of the camp to learn what was going on, especially since I saw one of the patrols passing through the adjacent street to our home. Moreover, one of the women in the camp informed me that the occupying soldiers were positioning on the fifth floor of the Jamil Al Tirawi building, located to the eastern side of our building and at approximately 20 metres from it.At around 8:00 in the morning, while I was looking through the northwest bedroom window, I saw our neighbour’s son Ibrahim and his friend Mohammad An-Natour standing on the roof of Ibrahim’s home, specifically on the north balcony opposite our home and which is not more than two metres from the northwest window through which I was looking. I saw them drinking either coffee or tea. This was at around 8:00 in the morning. After I realised that the Israeli soldiers were positioned in the Al Tirawi building, I tried to look through the northwest window of our bedroom, out of curiosity, to see the Israeli soldiers. At around 9:00, I noticed that one of the northern windows of the Al Tirawi fifth floor apartment was opened a little and a soldier wearing medical glasses or putting a telescope looking through the window and then closing it. I saw that soldier doing that three times between 9:00 and 11:00 in the morning. These are the times I saw the soldier doing that because I was not always standing at the window. I did not see the soldier carrying arms or putting them through the window. I also could not distinguish the soldier clearly. During that time, I saw Ibrahim and Mohammad standing in the north balcony and talking with the neighbours in the buildings opposite them in the northern direction.At approximately 12:30 pm, I heard the shooting of two or three bullets after each other. The sound indicated that the shooting came from a nearby place. After a few moments, I heard our neighbour the mother of Ibrahim, his sisters, and brothers yelling, shouting, and asking for help and an ambulance. I knew later that Ibrahim, his brother Othman, and his friend Mohammad were shot by the Israeli soldiers while they were standing on the balcony on which I had seen them before. I was shocked because 10 minutes before, I saw them standing on the balcony.After the shooting, Ibrahim’s family and neighbours carried the three youths to the southern side of their home and after another two minutes, I saw an Israeli patrol coming toward the place and trying to reach the injured, but the neighbourhood residents, especially women, prevented them from reaching the injured youths until an ambulance came and carried them to one of Nablus hospitals. But after half an hour, I was informed that Ibrahim and Mohammed had been killed by the Israeli soldiers. I was astonished because there were no confrontations in the neighbourhood and I had not seen any guns in the hands of the three youths and I only saw cups of coffee or tea in their hands.It is worth mentioning that I saw one of the Israeli patrols passing from time to time (approximately every quarter of an hour) through the street adjacent to our home. This happened may times and I am not sure if this patrol is the same patrol that reached the place after a short time after the opening of fire at the three youths.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 1 March 2006Signature: Fatima Qandil