Affidavit No. 5214/2009
2009
My name is Ibrahim Ghuneim Khader al-„Aqqad. I am 39 years old, married, and a father of 8 children. I am an employee and member on the Palestinian Football Association and live in the city of Khan Younis. I was assigned by Brigadier General Jibril al-Rujoub, Head of the Palestinian Football Association, to chair the Palestinian youth team to participate in the Asia finals, which were scheduled to take place in Nepal on 25 October 2009. Through the Palestinian Ministry of Civil Affairs, we coordinated with the Israeli side, in order to receive permits. I submitted all papers and passports to the Ministry of Civil Affairs so that 15 footballers and I could leave the Gaza Strip. On 21 October 2009, Mr. Amin Siyam, Assistant to the Undersecretary, told me that seven of the players from the Gaza Strip, as well as myself, had secured the necessary permission, and he requested that we travel to the Erez Crossing point at 3:30 pm on the same day. I prepared my luggage, contacted the others, and travelled to the Erez Crossing point. When we arrived at Beit Hanoun crossing, border officers at a police checkpoint of the Gaza government stopped us. I gave a police officer a list of our names and personal ID cards and told him we were a delegation of Palestinian footballers. Following examination, the police officer returned and told me to report to the Internal Security office on the Crossing. I went to the office and saw a person talking on the telephone. I heard him talk about me. Then, another person, called Abu-Khaled, arrived and asked if I had a bag in the car. I told him yes, so he told me to fetch it. I went to the car and I brought the bag for him. After searching it, he returned the bag and said that I would be prevented from travelling.“Go back to Gaza.” he continued.“I am the head of the delegation!” I replied. “I travelled about a month ago and I was not prevented.” I went on.I asked about the reason and he said that instructions from the Administration of the Internal Security agency had thus prescribed. Then, I called a number of my colleagues in the Association and reported the incident to them. It was agreed that members of the team be allowed to travel, so that they would not be delayed. Meanwhile, I returned to the Internal Security room in order to receive my ID card and return to Gaza. When I requested my ID card, the police officer told me to go to the Internal Security headquarters in Khan Younis and take it from there. Two days later, I accidentally met with the responsible Internal Security officer in Khan Younis and inquired about my ID card. However, he said it had not yet arrived at Khan Younis.So far I do not know why I had been prevented from travelling, despite the fact that I am a member on the Palestinian Football Association. On 28 April 2009, the Association held an election in agreement between Fatah and Hamas movements.