Affidavit No. 2027/2004
2004
On 28  August 2003, I experienced increased labour pains and thought I was  going to give birthto my baby. For that reason, my husband Daoud and I  left our home located in Salem village atapproximately 5:40 a.m. and  took a taxi driven by a village resident, Muhammad Fawzi, to theBeit  Fourik checkpoint. An ambulance was waiting for us on the other side of  the checkpoint,because my husband called the Palestinian Red Crescent  Society before we left home and toldthem that I was in labour. They told  him that the ambulance would be waiting for us within tenminutes. My  husband called for the ambulance so we would quickly reach the  hospital,considering that Nablus was under siege and Israeli soldiers  had imposed a curfew.Upon  reaching the checkpoint and getting out of the taxi that drove away, it  appeared to us thatthere was not any ambulance. We tried to cross the  checkpoint, but the soldiers shouted at usand ordered us not to proceed  and told us to stay where we were. My husband started talking tothem in  Hebrew about my condition, but they were ambivalent towards what he said  and did noteven allow my husband to approach them, as the distance  between my husband and the Israelisoldiers was around 40 metres to the  east. My pains increased and my shouts became louder,and my husband  tried to convince them to let us pass to the hospital or go back home.  But noanswer came.After  half an hour of pain and humiliation, I had no option but to go towards  one of the concretecubic stones at the checkpoint, and sit behind it to  hide myself from the soldiers, and there Igave birth to my baby girl  whom I wanted to call Mira. I put my baby inside my clothes to  protecther. I was crying from pain, feeling that I may die at any  moment. Moreover, blood coming frommy daughter’s mouth, while my husband  was unable to do anything but to repeat what I wassaying to make the  soldiers understand and feel pity towards me.After few  minutes, one of the soldiers approached towards me to make sure if what  my husbandwas saying is true. The soldier was carrying a cup of coffee  or tea. As he was close to me hestepped over the placenta, which may not  have been intentional, and then left. He allowed myhusband to go and  bring a car from the opposite side, about 100 metres from us, to take us  tothe hospital. In fact, my husband brought a Ford driven by a man  called Jbara, and beforecarrying me to the car my husband cut the  placenta with a stone. The car hurried to Rafidiyahospital in Nablus.  But when the doctors examined the baby, she was dead.I would  like to say that this was the worst time of my life while I was at the  checkpoint, due to thehumiliation and oppression I was subjected to by  the Israeli soldiers, who do not have anyminimal signs of humanity,  values and morals. They did not offer me any kind of assistance, andonly  humiliated and oppressed me, and practiced against us a systematic  crime, resulting in theloss of my daughter Mira. Believe me when I say  that as long as I am alive, I will not forget whathappened and that I  will never forgive that. Imagine how much fatigue and pain the  motherendures until her baby sees light, but when she gives birth she  forgets all that pain. Whathappened to me cannot be forgotten, and I  can’t expect it to be, because of the humiliation,oppression, and  killing of my baby by those occupation soldiers who have lost all their  humanity.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 8 November 2004Signature: Rula Muhammad Ghazi Suleiman Shtayya