Affidavit No. 4900/2009
2009
I have been suffering pain in my back and right leg. According to Dr. Tawfiq Rahhal, who has been following up on my condition for three weeks, my pain results from an acartilage disease referred to as chondropathy, which appears to be in its early stages but requires further medical examination.On 26 April 2009, my nephew Raja’i Taleb Abu-‘Arqoub, a resident of the village of Wadi al- Shajina, which is located five kilometres south of the town of Doura, accompanied me to the doctor in the city of Hebron. The doctor prescribed me a cross section photo done of my back, which I postponed until the next day.After we left the doctor’s clinic, my nephew Raja’i invited me to his house in Wadi al-Shajina. I thought that this would be a good opportunity for me to see my sisters Siham, who is Raja’i’s mother and Iman, who is married to Raja’i’s uncle. Both lived in the same house. I decided to stay for one hour before returning to my house in the town of al-Sammou’. At around 3:30 pm, Raja’i and I arrived at the house. Shortly afterwards, Raja’i left for the town of Doura to do some shopping.At around 4:00 pm, a number of children came and told us that the Israeli army had arrested Raja’i near the house. My sisters and I hurried out of the house to find out what was happening. I saw two soldiers on the street, which is about 100 metres away from the house. They were dragging Muhammad Isma’il Abu-‘Arqoub, about 17 years of age, to a military jeep. I knew Muhammad; he was my sisters’ neighbour. When my sisters saw this, they asked me to come back so that the Israeli army would not arrest me. A number of citizens tried to intervene and demanded that the soldiers release the detainees, but it to no avail. Based on my sisters’ request and in light of the soldiers’ conduct, I decided to return to the house. Having walked four or five steps, I heard a soldier shout at me. “Come here!” he said. Two other soldiers ran towards me. One of them tried to grab me violently and tie my hands. I told him in Hebrew – which I speak well - to treat me gently and that I was sick. I also showed him a medical report, written in English, revealing my health condition. I made the soldier understand that I was not from the village and that I did not intend to cause any problems. The soldier told me to keep silent. He presented my medical report to an officer.Later, the soldier gave the report back to me and took me to the jeep. As the rear door was open, I saw Raja’i inside the jeep. He was blindfolded and handcuffed. I was also blindfolded and my hands were tied with plastic handcuffs behind my back. Within moments, I realised that there were several other detainees. The soldiers ordered us to stand in a queue and to walk while holding on to the clothes of the respective person behind us.Upon the soldiers’ order, we walked for a distance of approximately 300 metres. Then, we were forced into an armoured personnel carrier, also referred to as APC, and ordered to sit on the floor. A soldier gave each one of us a number and told us to remember our respective numbers as we would be called by these numbers. I was Number 1. Based on the distribution ofnumbers, I realised that a total of six people had been detained.The APC moved for about five minutes and took us to al-Majnouna Military Camp, which the Israelis refer to as Aduraym Camp. There, we were forced into a hall. Without removing our handcuffs or blindfolds the soldiers ordered us to sit on chairs. As they were talking to one another, I understood that they were accusing us of having thrown stones and of being troublemakers. Whenever they were referring to us, the soldiers would use obscene words,  such as “bastards”.During our detention, soldiers would constantly walk into and out of the hall. Some of them beat and mocked us. At the time of the dusk prayers, I asked a soldier to allow me to pray, but he said that he would do so five minutes later. More than five minutes later, I asked him again. This time he responded that praying was prohibited. A soldier sarcastically asked me what would happen if I did not perform the prayers. I said that God would forgive me. “So ask God to forgive you!” he replied.During the period of our detention, soldiers did not allow me, or any of the other detainees, to pray. Therefore, we did not perform the afternoon, dusk or evening prayers. At the time of my arrest, I was wearing a hat. A soldier took this hat and put it on another soldier’s head telling him to keep it as his own. The other soldier, however, replied that the hat was red and that he did not like that colour.From time to time, I asked the soldiers about the reason of our detention, inquiring whether we would be held for much longer. Each time, they would tell me to keep silent and beat me with a stick on my right leg and on my head. I was also kicked and punched - I am not sure whether it was in response to my questions or without any reason at all. I told the soldiers that I was sick and that I needed my medicine. I also explained that I had an appointment for a cross section photo of my back the next day. Soldiers mocked me and called me a liar. “Do you believe him?” they asked one another and laughed.At one point during my detention, a soldier tampered with my ear using some kind of a stick, hurting me badly. I screamed because of the sharp pain I was feeling. The soldier hit me with his hand on the head so that I would keep silent. I heard another soldier tell the one who tampered with my ear to leave me alone. “Because of these bastards, I spent eight hoursoutside the camp.” The second soldier replied. “What is the fault of these people? They say they were taken from their houses and did not do anything.” The first soldier commented. Then, the other soldier said we were liars, putting an end to the discussion.We sat on chairs in the same position for a prolonged period of time. Around midnight, my backache intensified and I requested that my handcuffs be removed for five minutes in order to rest my back. “You want to escape?” a soldier asked, refusing my request. Late at night, we got tired and fell asleep on the chairs. Whenever we slept, soldiers kicked and punched us. After midnight, the soldiers turned on a television set in the hall and started to watch a football game. They shouted and laughed and talked about famous football players and clubs.Moreover, the soldiers would regularly tell us to say our respective numbers out loud, that is the numbers they had assigned to us, in order to ensure that we had not fallen asleep. One time, I did not respond. As I was assigned Number 1, the counting was not concluded. As a result, the soldiers punished all detainees by forcing them to stand on their feet for almost ten minutes. “We will release everybody expect for this bastard. He will stay in prison until Gil’ad Shalit is released.” I heard a soldier say, referring to me. He said this in response to my behaviour and also because I had debated with soldiers and protested against their bad treatment of the detainees. I later learnt that Muhammad - who snored while he was asleep - had been kicked in the chest and was wounded in the left eye.At around 4:30 am the next day, Monday 27 April 2009, soldiers called out the detainees holding Numbers 3 and 4 and led them out of the room. I, on the other hand, had to stay inside until around 5:00 am. Then, I heard a soldier call for Numbers 1 and 2. We were taken out to a military jeep, being violently pushed into its rear part and forced to sit on the floor.While I was sitting in the jeep, one of the soldiers punched my head so forcefully that he caused my head to hit the car body, causing me great pain. A short while after the jeep moved, I received another very painful hit, this time on my right shoulder. The jeep moved for a period of about seven minutes and then came to a halt. The soldiers forced us out of the jeep and pushed us to the ground. One soldier ordered me stand against a low wall. Meanwhile, I heard other soldiers beat the other detainee who was taken with me in the jeep. I heard him scream of pain.He was beaten for a period of about three to five minutes. Then, I heard soldiers order him to leave. The soldiers then approached me and kicked me on my legs. Another soldier asked me for my ID card. I said it was in my back pocket. He searched my pockets, took my wallet, and returned it shortly thereafter. Later, a soldier cut off my plastic handcuffs and hit me with the butt of his rifle on my left armpit. When I turned around, another soldier hit me with the muzzle of his rifle on my right waist and I fell to the ground out of severe pain. I told these two soldiers that I was sick, but they ordered me to shut up and continued to kick me on my left leg after I had fell to the ground. I screamed of sharp pain. I felt infuriated, helpless and wrathful because of what they were doing to me.Later, one of the soldiers ordered me to lift my blindfold. As I removed it, I saw two soldiers, one of whom punched me on my head and then told me to leave. Having walked one step, I was struck on my back.When the jeep finally drove off, I checked my wallet. I initially had a sum NIS 620 in my wallet, NIS 600 of which were now missing. I figured that the soldier must have stolen the money from my wallet when he took it under the pretext of verifying my ID. I remember having had one banknote of NIS 200 and four 100 bills. This was the sum that had been stolen. Only onebanknote of 20 NIS was left in my wallet. I had kept this money in order to pay my medical treatment and the cross section photo, which was scheduled for that day – Monday, 27 April.I walked a little, but since I did not know where I was, I called my brother-in-law, who is Raja’i’s father. I told him that I was near a petrol station and described the surrounding area. He concluded that I was at the Abu-Sharar Petrol Station in the nearby village of Kharsa. Shortly thereafter, Raja’i’s father arrived in his car, together with a person called ‘Ali. I realised that he was the one who was released together with me. Raja’i’s father took me and the other detainees to his house, where we stayed for a short while.Eventually, he drove ‘Ali to his house, and I accompanied him during the ride. Then we decided to go to the hospital. Meanwhile, Majed who is the brother of Muhammad Abu-‘Arqoub, one of our fellow detainees, called Raja’i’s father on the mobile telephone. He requested that we meet him in an area in the village of Wadi al-Shajina. After we met him, I went to Majed’s car. Muhammad Abu-‘Arqoub, Midhat Shahin, and my nephew Raja’i, who had also been detained with me, were in the car. We then drove to the Hebron Governmental Hospital.We arrived at the hospital around 6:00 am. There, we were diagnosed and x-rayed and also received medical reports before we left to our respective homes. Until today, I still suffer pain in various parts of my body. I have sustained several contusions under my left armpit, on my right shoulder, my left thigh, and on my head.