Affidavit No. 5221/2010
2010
I saw the police officers severely beat Muhammad and I could not stand to watch. I intervened and tried to talk to the force commander and persuade him not to arrest my brother. However, the commander ordered police officers to arrest me and place me onboard the jeep along with Muhammad. The police officers also beat me with clubs and dragged me forcefully inside the jeep.When she saw that Muhammad and I were arrested inside the jeep, my mother, Nathira (56 years old) hurried to ask the police officers to release us. When she tried to pull us out of the jeep I saw a police officer push her violently against the jeep. Her chest hit the rear seat forcefully and she fell on the floor. The officer then ordered his colleagues to arrest my mother and they pulled her inside the jeep beside us. At this time, Muhammad and I were being beaten and did not manage to save our mother from the police officers. I saw my mother put her hand on her chest: she was in pain and could hardly breathe. I begged the police officers to let her go and arrest Muhammad and I. I told them that my mother was ill and suffered from diabetes, high blood pressure and heart problems, but they did not listen to me.The jeep drove for a distance of 150 metres and stopped. I heard a person talking on a wireless telecommunications device. He ordered the jeep to stop, the police officers to disembark and for one officer to stay to guard my brother Muhammad, my mother and I. The person ordered all police officers to return to the same area; i.e. to our house. The police officers stepped out and one officer, in addition to the driver, remained in the jeep, guarding us, and pointing their weapons at us.I heard my mother say that she felt suffocated and wanted to go to hospital as soon as possible. I told the police officer this.The officer replied: “We will teach you good manners at the station first. Then, you can go to hospital!”My mother continued to request that I take her to hospital. I begged the police officer to allow my mother to go to hospital, even if alone, but it was in vain. Almost half an hour later, police officers arrived and climbed onto the jeep, which proceeded to al-Tuffah police station. I continued to beg them to allow my mother to go to hospital, but no one responded to me.