Affidavit No. 3961/2007
2007
I live in the town of Jalboun, which is located nine kilometres east of Jenin city and has around 2500 inhabitants. My five brothers and I are the owners of a 71 dunum piece of land located to the south of Jalboun, planted with olive and almond trees as well as grape vines. In the past we used to have access to this land, take care of it, safeguard it, and harvest its crops of olives, almonds and grapes, which were our main source of income. This piece of land has around 450 productive olive trees, 100 almond trees, and 150 grape vines.When the Israeli occupying authorities started the construction of what is known as the Annexation and Expansion Wall in the area of Jalboun, this land was located to thesouth of the Wall and became completely isolated. By the end of 2003, the Wall passed by the southern, eastern and the northern sides of Jalboun, leaving only one side, the western side, open for us, and linking us to the Governorate of Jenin and its villages. My land and that of my brothers were completely isolated behind the Annexation Wall, and we were deprived from reaching it. After the completion of the construction of the Annexation Wall in the area, 2700 dunums of land were isolated by the Wall. By that time, at the end of 2003, the Israeli occupying authorities built an iron gate into the wall south of the town. This iron gate, numbered 2301, became the only way to reach Jalboun’s lands.During the current olive harvest, which started in November 2007, my brothers, myself and our kids were allowed to pass through the gate and access our lands for threeconsecutive days, from 7:00 am until 4:30 pm, as determined by the Israeli soldiers. When we wanted to go back to our lands on the fourth day, in order to continue with theolive harvest, we were surprised by the Israeli soldiers telling us that we were no longer allowed to pass through the gate to reach our lands. This prevented us from continuing the olive harvest for this season. There were tens of trees that still needed to be picked, but the measures taken by the Israeli occupying soldiers at that gate prevented us from doing so. The gate opens only seasonally, at the time of the olive harvest. This hindered our ability to take care of the trees, led to the deterioration of their production and caused damage to many of them. We go to our lands with special permits issued by the Israeli occupying authorities that enable us to pass through the iron gate. These permits are only temporary, and for a very limited period of time.Many Israeli settlers, residing in several settlements located behind the Wall, let herds of cows graze on Jalboun’s land isolated behind the Wall, damaging many of the olive and almond trees. Lately, when I entered my land I noticed that tens of olive trees were damaged because of goats grazing between them, causing an increased loss of trees.And although we, the residents of Jalboun, submitted a complaint to the District Coordination Office at the Salem Israeli military camp to the west of Jenin, the Israeli side did not prevent the settlers from letting their cows graze between our olive trees. On Tuesday, 27 November 2007, I saw with my own eyes, from my house in Jalboun, herdsof cows wandering on my land. The Wall surrounding Jalboun is constructed of barbed and electronic wire, an asphalt road and a ditch, which prevents us from seeing our land clearly.The Annexation Wall deprived us of our land and the product and harvest of the trees. As well, we suffer from continuous losses and daily damage to the trees caused by thepresence of the cows of Israeli settlers’ on our lands, while the Israeli soldiers watch and do nothing to stop this. With our own eyes we see our land and the lands of ourgrandfathers confiscated. We enter our land at specific and limited times of the year, and everything is subject to the will and the mood of the Israeli occupying forces. Today, we are prevented from entering the land even though we have special permits that allow us to pass through the gate. We lost the land, the trees and our source of income, because the construction of the Israeli Annexation and Expansion Wall has swallowed the land and the trees.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 29 November 2007.Signature: Muhammad Abu-al-Rub