Affidavit No. 5744/2010
2010
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Halima Yousef Mahmoud ‘Oda al-Tamimi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 959227430, born on 15 November 1961, housewife, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh, Ramallah district, would like to declare the following:My house is located at the western entrance to al-Nabi Saleh, close to the military gates and watchtower which have closed off the entrance to the village from that direction since 2001.For around four years I have suffered from irregular heartbeat for which  I have had repeated examinations and undergo continuous treatment. At around 2:30 pm on Friday 8 October 2010, I was on the second floor of our house, while confrontations between the youths of the village and occupation soldiers were going on outside. The demonstration was against the settlement, during which the soldiers were firing teargas grenades and other types of weapons, and the youths were responding by throwing rocks. While I was upstairs on the second floor standing in the kitchen, which is under construction, two teargas grenades entered the sitting room. I went down the stairs outside the house, after having inhaled more gas while trying to get out.  Suffering from severe shortness of breath I arrived at the main door to the house on the first floor. When I opened the door to try to escape from the gas, I found another gas grenade in the entrance room. The smell of the gas was intense, and I felt severe faintness when I could finally go in. Breathing with great difficulty from the streams of tears, I began to vomit copiously at which time my husband carried me outside, to an outdoor space, but the gas had spread everywhere. Despite the severe, continuous faintness I was unable to go to the hospital because of the wall blocking the entrance and exit of vehicles to and from the village. There were a great number of soldiers outside the houses in the street parallel to the house, so my husband took me to my sister’s house where there was less gas, and I stayed there until 10:00 pm. However, during the night I did not improve and felt a great pain in my lungs and was unable to move. The following day at 7:00 am, my husband took me to Ramallah hospital and, after carrying out initial investigations, they pumped my stomach and the doctor informed me that due to the large amounts of gas I inhaled, the gas had reached my intestines. I remained in the hospital until 1:00 pm. For around ten months we have been suffering from gas grenades that are fired directly at the house. No less than four gas grenades are fired every time, and out of each round, one of the grenades falls inside the house. The smell remains absorbed in the house and the furniture for around a week, and greatly affects my health. Even when I prepare food on Friday, before we consume it, the smell of the gas has gotten into it. This is the second time I have been taken to hospital to have my stomach pumped because of gas inhalation.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 10 October 2010