Affidavit No. 5332/2010
2010
Since then, the Israeli factories have increased and expanded in a gradual but persistent way. Now more than ten factories are operating in the area. The factories are established across the Green Line that separates the territory occupied in 1948 from that occupied in 1967. These factories are built on the Palestinian territory occupied in 1967. As far as I know, the factories produce chemical fertilisers, pesticides, construction materials, agricultural insecticides, and many other unidentified, hazardous chemical products.Since the Israeli factories started operating, new phenomena have appeared in the western area of the city of Toulkarem. Some residents, including my family members, have started to suffer from new ailments, which had not affected us before. These include illnesses of the respiratory system, causing symptoms such as shortness of breath, allergic reactions affecting the nose and skin and general infections in the eyes. In addition to headaches, we have suffered from some problems in our ears, including dryness of ear wax.The Israeli factories expanded their operations in early 1994 with the launching of the Oslo Agreements between the Palestinian and Israeli sides. The group of factories belonging to the so-called Gishori are still running. Furthermore, the industrial area has expanded with the establishment of other factories that belong to other Israeli individuals. Combined, these factories produce waste in the form of smoke and dust, which is released in the surrounding area. The smoke and dust appear in various colours, including black and red. Each colour has its own distinctive malignant smell. As I have been living in the area since 1989, I know well the smell of each type of dust produced by the factories.For example, the black smoke produces a very bad smell and causes severe headaches. The red dust engenders nervousness and feelings of discomfort, resulting in an inability to sleep, especially when these materials are in the air. I have used some equipment, including air conditioners, air purifiers and certain aromatic materials, inside the house in order to mitigate the effect of the smell on my family.The factories also produce waste in the form of liquid material, which is discharged onto the surrounding land. In particular, the production of “sulphuric acid” results in waste in the form of smoke, which is carried by the wind towards the city of Toulkarem and directly towards my house and neighbouring houses in the western area of the city. Inhaling this smoke has caused my family members and I severe headaches, high temperatures and redness and dryness in the eyes. When this happens we are forced to stay inside our home, keep all the windows closed and use medication to try to alleviate our symptoms.The material produced and released into the air is usually heavy and saturated with water and other liquids. As a result it drops on the ground, sometimes in the yard of my house and on the windows. In addition to the malodorous smell, the removal of this material is difficult and needs time and strenuous effort.Before the Israeli factories were established in the area, we did not suffer from any diseases. Since they have been built and have started generating waste, we have suffered from illnesses. I should mention that my wife and I do not suffer from any genetic diseases of the respiratory system or from any of the abovementioned illnesses. The Israeli chemical factories and the waste that they produce are the cause of all of the ailments from which we now suffer. I should also note that this area is classified as Area (C) in accordance with the Oslo Agreement. This means that this area is subject to full Israeli control.I regularly buy medicine for respiratory system-related illnesses. Members of my family use this medicine on an almost daily basis to ameliorate the adverse effects of the wastes of the Israeli factories. Amongst the very expensive drugs my family uses, we buy Ventolin, Prikalin and Zincsim consistently. Because I do not have health insurance, I am obliged to buy the medicine at my own expense. In addition, I have bought medical equipment for my family to use when they suffer from shortness of breath after inhaling the waste products of the Israeli factories.I regularly take members of my family to the high mountainous areas surrounding the city of Toulkarem so that they can breathe fresh air. I often take my daughter „Afaf to the mountainous area of Kufr „Abboush so that she can have some fresh air. My son, Wasim, suffers from a recurrent and severe lung infection, which reoccurs about twice a year. On these occasions, I am forced to take him to hospital at my own expense. There, he receives the required medical treatment and antibiotics to tackle the symptoms from inhaling the smoke and the dust produced by the Israeli factories. We all, and I especially, suffer from permanent infections that appear on our blood tests. I have these blood checks regularly in order to determine our health condition. My son, Amir, suffers from recurrent infections in the eyes because of the waste originating from the Israeli factories. Now, he is in need of prescription glasses.The malodorous smell in the area has prevented many friends and relatives from visiting me in my home. The noise and waste produced by the machines in the factories have isolated me socially from my surrounding environment. However, I cannot leave the area because all of my property, including my house, land and workplace, are here. Many residents have moved because they could no longer bear the harsh living conditions.In late 2001, the owners of the Israeli factories constructed a five-metre-high wall around their installations. During al-Aqsa Intifada in 2001, confrontations took place between Palestinians and the Israeli occupying forces. As a result, the area around the factories was converted into a military camp, from which the Israeli occupying forces raided the Toulkarem area. During the confrontations, Israeli soldiers killed many Palestinian civilians in the area near the factories. At the same time, however, the factories continued to operate under the protection of the Israeli troops, who opened fire on any person who tried to come close to the factories. Also, Israeli troops frequently raided and searched my house.Furthermore, the Israeli occupying authorities have constructed the so-called Annexation and Expansion Wall along the Green Line at a distance of 300 metres west of my house, behind the factories. I would also highlight that the wind direction in the area is from west to east, thereby blowing the waste from the factories towards the city of Toulkarem, particularly the western quarter.Early in 1999, I talked to the son of the owner of the Gishori factories about reducing the smoke produced by the factories. He promised that he would install filters to cleanse the dust and waste from the factory chimneys. After he installed them the factories no longer generated smoke. Two months later, however, the smoke started to be produced again. I would like to note that a solution to problem of the damage caused by these factories is to install such filters again.Our suffering persists with the continued presence of these factories. The most recent incident took place three days ago, on 3 March 2010. In the early morning, the wind carried very intensive waste products towards us and everyone suffered from shortness of breath. In particular, my daughter „Afaf suffered an allergic reaction in her nose and redness and irritation in her eyes. I gave her the alleviating medicine that I mentioned above.