Affidavit No. 3471/2007
2007
I am a resident of al-'Beidiyya village and am 43-years-old. I am married and have twelve children. My husband's name is 'Abdallah Sbeih, and he is 50-years-old. Our house is located roughly 500 metres from my brother's house. My brother, Daoud Sbeih, has been wanted for security reasons by the Israeli military forces for six years. Because of this, he does not live in his house. However, his wife and children live in it. My other brother, Saber Sbeih, lives in the house next to Daoud's house with his wife and children.At approximately 9:00 am on 21 March 2007, while I was around one kilometre away from my brothers' houses, I was informed by some of the families in the village that my brothers’ houses were being besieged by a huge Israeli force. I started walking towards my brothers' houses, and arrived there at around 10:00 am. From roughly 100 metres away, I could see that the houses were being besieged by a huge number of Israeli soldiers and approximately 15 military jeeps.I tried to reach the two houses, but was prevented from doing so by the soldiers. Then, I went up on the rooftop of one of our neighbour’s houses, which is located around 100 metres away from my brother’s houses. There were a number of journalists on the roof taking photos of the soldiers around Daoud's home. The soldiers were about twenty metres from the house and they were calling on Daoud through loudspeakers in Arabic, "Get out of the house Daoud. Otherwise we will demolish the building."At around 12:00 am, I saw a green military bulldozer, which had huge wheels, approach Daoud's house and start to demolish it. I went down from 'Umar 'Awadallah's roof and stood near another house located 50-70 metres away from Daoud's house. There were approximately 50 Israeli soldiers present, who were wearing green uniforms and were armed. They stood near me, only twenty metres away from the house, while the bulldozer was carrying out the demolition. I could not do anything, but started to recite the Qur'an in a low voice.The soldiers were shooting and throwing sound grenades into the house. After the bulldozer had knocked a hole in one of the walls of Daoud's house, it drove away. I saw a military jeep and a number of Israeli soldiers as well as a dog near the house. The dog accompanied the soldiers to the house. The dog, which was lead by a soldier, was chained with an iron chain and had a leather muzzle over its mouth. The soldiers tried sending the dog into the house, but it did not go. The dog was brown and it was about half a metre in height. The soldiers took this dog away and brought another huge black-brown dog that looked like a wolf and did not have a muzzle on its mouth.At approximately 3:00 pm, the soldier in charge of the dog unleashed it. After this, he took a small stone and threw it inside Daoud's house, while the other soldiers remained around ten metres away from it. The dog entered the house, stayed there for about one minute, and then returned outside. They repeated this process severaltimes. Then, the dog went back to a group of about ten army soldiers. I was about 50 metres away from them. I saw one of the soldiers take a small stone and throw it towards me. The dog came towards me and attacked me. It stood on its back legs and put its paws on my shoulders. I pushed the dog away. After I pushed the dog away, it started biting my arm fiercely. It bit me ten times while I was screaming and trying to run away. All the while, the soldiers were watching.Initially, the soldiers did nothing to stop the dog and simply stood watching it biting me. After seven to ten minutes passed, I heard the soldiers calling the dog in Hebrew, which I do not understand. Then, four soldiers came and caught the dog, which was still biting me while I was standing and trying to pull my arm away. It bit me on both my left and right arm and it took the soldiers around four minutes to rescue me from the dog after using a lot of force and even hitting the dog’s jaw. Then, one of the soldier said, "Come" in Hebrew and because he pointed at me with his hand, I went towards him. We walked approximately 100 metres to a military car to receive aid. In fact, it was actually a blue civilian car.They made me get inside the car, which contained medical tools. One of the soldiers in the car said that he was a doctor and told me not to be scared. He ripped the sleeves of my shirt open as my hand was bleeding and it felt as if it was broken. He gave me a glucose injection and gave me oxygen. He told me to take a breath in broken Arabic. Then he gave me another two injections. I was not fully conscious due to the incident. Maybe, I was in the vehicle for half an hour. They bandaged my hands and took me down on a stretcher. The soldiers then brought me to the medical staff of the Red Crescent, who were present in the area.During the treatment I received from the Israeli soldier, none of the captains came over to talk to me. Only the soldier who had introduced himself as a doctor made any attempt to calm me down. He had been wearing a military uniform of course. I was not able to identify any of the soldiers who were with the dog or who rescued me, because of the shocking situation I was in. At around 4:00 pm, I was brought to al-Hussien hospital in order to receive the necessary treatment. My wounds were treated and wrapped with bandages and I was given three injections to prevent poisoning. In fact, I only received one of the injections that day, the other two I received later.I remained under supervision and treatment for five days, and left the hospital on 25 March 2007. I go daily to change the bandages. However, my arms were not broken. The incident was documented on video by journalists and was shown on TV. After I returned home, I discovered what had happened to my brothers' houses. I still suffer from a severe pain and I cannot sleep at night. This is not to mention the horrible physiological condition I am in. I have nightmares and think about the dog’s vicious attack. Some of my children saw me being attacked by the dog. Several of them fainted. Furthermore, my children and husband are still shocked.Finally, I want to point out that I did nothing to the soldiers or the dog. I was simply watching what they were doing to my brother's house and I have no idea why I was attacked by the dog and why the soldiers did not prevent the dog from attacking me. I was unable to properly observe the soldiers’ behavior while I was being attacked because I was so shocked.