Affidavit No. 4363/2008
2008
On 5 August 2008, I was present in my house along with my family members: my husband Zaki, 62 years, and my children Firas, 22 years, Suha, 26 years, and her child Wadi', 4 months, Fatima, 28 years, as well as her children Nabila, 4 years, Mu'ayyad, 2 and a half years, and Fadi, who is a year and a half old. My son Taysir's mother in law, Um-Hani, 40 years, and her child Rani, about 10 years, as well as my son Taysir's fiance ‘Ala', about 16 years, were also invited to our house. We were all present in our flat on the first floor of al-'Aloul Building on Feisal Street in the city of Nablus. We were sitting at the dining table in the sitting room. Only Firas sat beside us, about 2 metres to the west. He had only been in the house for ten minutes. I asked him to sit at the table to have his lunch, but he said he did not want to eat then.At about 2:00 pm, my husband returned home from his workplace and took a shower. While we were sitting at the table, I heard Firas' mobile telephone ring. I heard him receive the phone call, saying "Hello". My watch read around 2:25 pm. Immediately after that word and without a prior notice, a very strange incident took place at the entrance to our flat. The flat shook. The metal door was stormed in. An air pressure device was pointed to the door. An explosion did not take place; there were no signs for an explosion. After the door opened, over 15 soldiers entered. They were all masked, in military uniform, carried long weapons and shouted at us in a language which I did not understand. A number of soldiers turned the dining table over. Another three soldiers approached Firas, flung him to the ground on his face, surrounded him and demanded his ID card. I saw him take it out of his pocket and give it to them.Then, they heaped up beating him with rifle butts and with their fists and feet on all parts of his body. "Why are you doing this?" I screamed. A number of soldiers came along and grabbed me. I was nervous and did not conceive what was going on. Even though I was held, I managed to access the place of my son. "Why are you beating him?" I shouted. Soldiers shouted obscenities at me. Others besieged my members of my family. Other soldiers took my husband out of the bathroom. He did not put on his shirt. I and the children and everybody in the house were crying. Soldiers were dispatched around the flat. They broke window glass and threw our clothes from cupboards."Why are you doing this? You can arrest him, but not beat him and destroy our house," I shouted. At this point, a tall soldier with insignias on his shoulders approached me. He partially uncovered his face. "I know who you are." I told him. "You came to our house on 4 January 2008 in search of my son Firas, but did not find him. Here he is now. Why are your soldiers doing this? Why are they cursing and beating my child? You can arrest him." I continued. "Yes, I am the officer in charge of the unit", he answered in Arabic. Later, I heard that officer, who was about 30 years of age, talk to soldiers loud. Their treatment of us changed afterwards. Then, they forced us into a room in the houseand closed the door. I continued to hear things break in the house. At that point, I opened the door a little. I saw the soldiers tamper with contents of the house and damage some beds. This lasted for approximately ten minutes. Thereafter, they withdrew, taking my son Firas with them.After they withdrew, I looked through the south-western window overlooking the street; I saw a number of patrols withdrawing eastwards. In the house, damage was grave. All contents of the house, including clothes and pieces of furniture, were scattered on the ground. Three wooden beds were also destroyed completely. Moreover, five windows and three wooden doors were damaged. The dining table and food were on the ground. I should note that my son Firas suffers from damaged retina in the right eye as well as allergies. Therefore, he is on medication. I would also mention that Firas has been considered as wanted by the occupying forces since 4 January 2008, after a number of soldiers raided our house but did not find him. The same officer whom I mentioned was with them. In the afternoon on the same day, we went to the Governor and told him of the incident. As a result, my son was placed in Jneid detention centre for a period of five months. We were only allowed to visit him. After that period, Governor Jamal al-Mheisen informed us that my son Firas was included in a partial amnesty and that he could be at home from morning till evening. However, he should stay inside Jneid detention centre overnight until he is fully discharged.