Affidavit No. 4167/2008
2008
I live in Jenin Camp, near Jenin City, in the north of the West Bank. I am married but I do not have kids, for the time being. I am the owner of a carpentry shop, which is located at the main roundabout in the centre of Jenin City. This carpentry shop has been functioning for around 40 years. I inherited it from my father, who was working in the same business.Since the Israeli military attacks on the Palestinian villages and cities at end of 2000, Israeli occupying forces have been imposing all kinds of collective punishments on Palestinian civilians over the last eight years. This has included imposing curfews, increasing numbers of military checkpoints and imposing a stiff and firm siege, especially in the Jenin area, as well as the establishment of the Israeli Annexation and Expansion Wall in 2002. All this has led to the gradual decrease in work, until it reached zero.All the above mentioned Israeli military acts have led to the deprivation of tens of thousands of Palestinian workers from work, especially inside the Green Line. As well, the siege and daily attacks on Palestinian citizens have led to the lack of job opportunities in the West Bank. All this led to the decrease in the purchasing power of the Palestinians. This carpentry shop is one of the oldest shops in Jenin, and it is well known to everybody. That is why before everything I have mentioned, we used to work daily, and our monthly income was estimated at a minimum of around NIS 5,000.As for now, after the last Israeli incursion, our income gradually decreased until it reached zero, which forced me in the end to gradually sell my work tools. As you can see, the shop has become completely empty of any kind of tools, except this chair that I am sitting on.I support my wife, Kheiriyya ‘Izzat Abu-Salah, aged 35 years, and my father, Najib Mahmoud Matahen, aged 80 years, who is sick and who continuously needs treatment and medication, as well as my mother, Fathiyya Najib Qasem, aged 75 years, who also needs continuous treatment. I further support my three sisters, Ramziyya, 30 years old, Nazmiyya, 28 years old, and Reem, 25 years old. I support the whole family. We do not have any other source of income at all, especially after the work at the carpentry shop stopped completely.I currently rely on the basic food supplies, which I get from the Palestinian Ministry of Social Affairs, and which cover the minimum of the whole families needs. I also get some food supplies from UNRWA, at Jenin Camp. All this does not cover the family needs, especially the medication, the treatment, clothes and daily expenses, which are known to everybody. The reason behind all this is the Israeli occupation and its practices against us, the Palestinian civilians, which have led to our arrival at this miserable economic situation. As you can see, there is no active commercial movement in the city’s markets. Everybody suffers as I do, especially in light of the rise in the prices of all food supplies, which have burdened me even more.