Affidavit No. 2056/2004
2004
I have  been living with my husband Muhammad in our home in southwest Masha  village foraround 20 years, and our home is considered to be the last  home in that village. Duringthese 20 years, we made a family of six  children: Nidal, Hisham, Asya, Ishaq, Maysa' andShaddad. We continued to  live in our home despite the existence of al-Qana settlementnearby. We  used to live our life in a normal way, like all the other residents of  the village,until 5 August 2003, the beginning of the construction of  the tragic and racist SeparationWall, which no words can describe. I say  this because this Wall has transformed our life intoa hell through the  confiscation of two dunums of our land and bulldozing of our  gardennursery that contained hundreds of trees and flowers. This nursery  was completelybulldozed for the benefit of the construction of the  Wall. Our losses were estimated at100,000 shekels, and now we live on  one dunum instead of three.On the  other hand, now we live inside a besieged and isolated prison, away from  the rest ofthe village residents and our relatives. Imagine the Wall is  in front of us at a height of 6metres and length of 20 metres, while on  the other three sides we are surrounded by barbedwire of over two  metres in height. On the east side, the soldiers made a gate to enable  us goto and from our home. But that is ridiculous, because at a distance  of eight metres awaythere is an iron gate that controls entry and exit.  This gate is controlled by the Israeli army.Therefore, we are suffering  a lot, especially when one of us is outside home. It is  particularlydifficult for our children. Hisham, Asya, Maysa', and Isaac  are students at schools. Shaddadgoes to the kindergarten while Nidal is a  worker and my husband works in agriculture. Whenthey go to their  schools of work, my children and husband often wait for a long time  beforethe soldiers open the gate for.Moreover,  I do not dare to go out of my home in order to avoid what happens with  myhusband and children. Our friends and relatives do not visit us, in  order to avoid this bitterexperience. We live at the mercy and under the  oppression of the soldiers who open thegate whenever they want and  close it whenever they want. I always ask what will we do ifsomebody is  ill and in need of a doctor. I will give you an example of the way we  live. Twomonths ago a French delegation visited us, along with an  Israeli from the Peace Nowmovement. While they were visiting us, the  Israeli soldiers intentionally closed the gate andthe delegation was  stuck in our home for three hours. During this period, they were  makingcontacts with different sides until the soldiers came and opened  the gate for them. Thesoldiers also arrested the Israeli Peace Now  activist. Then the soldiers entered our homeand started to threaten us  by closing the gate forever if we receive anybody else.Moreover,  they closed the gate for one complete day as punishment. Therefore, I  call uponall the international, humanitarian, and media organizations,  and all peace loving movementsto support us in order to get out of this  tragedy. We are isolated from our village, relatives,and friends, in  addition to the harm we face everyday from the children of the settlers  whothrow stones at us, considering that our home is only four metres  from the houses of thesettlement to the east. When my children respond  by throwing stones at them, the Israeliarmy comes and threatens us. The  settlers are allowed to throw stones at us but my childrenare not  allowed to do the same to them.All these pressures are put on us to  make us move and leave our home. It is worth notingthat the settlers are  bargaining with us to sell our home at any price we want. But I say  thatthis is our home and we started our life in it, gave birth to our  children here, and we are notgoing to leave it, even if the settlers pay  all the treasures of the world for it. For this reason, Icall upon all  to come and visit us to get acquainted with our situation and work on  removingthis Wall and the prison in which we live. Additionally, there  is no specific time for opening orclosing the gate, and the matter is  left to the mercy and oppression of the soldiers who openand close it  whenever they want.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 7 November 2004Signature: Munira Ibrahim Yousef 'Amer