Affidavit No. 5167/2009
2009
On the evening of Friday, 18 December 2009, I went on a picnic with my friends. At around 8:30 pm, I left my friends and travelled on foot from the area of Bab al-Zawiya neighbourhood to an area along al-Shuhada’ Street, where the Israeli occupying forces allow us to walk through. My house is located at a distance of about 120 metres west of the Israeli army’s checkpoint, which is set up at the western entrance to the Ash Shuhada’ Street. When I reached the staircase that leads to the water spring, called ‘Ein al-Jadida, and just before I got to the stairs, I saw six occupying soldiers at a distance of about 35 metres west of the Israeli military camp, which the occupying authorities had installed at the beginning of 1980s in place of the Palestinian bus station. The soldiers wore brown berets, indicating that they were members of the Golani unit. They were pointing torch lights fixed on their weapons at wild dogs that roamed the area near the city’s cemetery. However, they did not wear body armour, which meant that they were not on an official mission. Of these, a soldier who had a three-stripe insignia on his sleeve pointed his weapon and torch light at me from a distance of less than one meter and demanded that I present my ID card, which I gave him. He looked at the ID card and told me to stand against the wall of a nearby house, and I did. Thinking that they intended to search me, a soldier hit me on the upper part of my head with a sharp tool he carried in his hand (Later, I discovered that it was a dagger). He was tall, of strong build, of light complexion and in his early twenties.I felt blood flowing from the upper part of my head, felt dizzy and bent down as if I was about to fall on the ground. After I came around and stood up again, the same tall soldier hit me twice with his dagger on the back of my head, after which I fell on the ground on my face. Then, he pressed my back with his knee and hit me with the same dagger on the back of my head more than once. The other soldiers also kicked me with their feet, while they shouted jovially. As I was being beaten, my head was bleeding heavily and I felt that I would die. After about five minutes of sporadic beatings, a neighbour turned on the external light of his house. At that point, soldiers threw my ID on the ground, left me and went up the staircase towards the west, where the Tal-Rumeida settlement quarter and a nearby army camp are located.I walked for about two minutes, but stumbled and fell. Then, I started to call for a resident of a neighbouring house, whom I was familiar with. He and other residents arrived and helped me walk to a house belonging to Bassam al-Sharabati, which was approximately 50 metres away from the location where I had been beaten. In that house, I was given some paper tissues, with which I tried to stop the heavy bleeding on my head. Then, residents called an ambulance of the Palestine Red Crescent Society, which arrived about an hour later. They also called the Israeli police. Police officers, accompanied by soldiers, arrived at the house. At the same time, ambulance medics arrived and bandaged my head. The medics arrived on foot and said that the occupying soldiers had stopped their vehicle at the checkpoint set up at the western entrance to the al-Shuhada’ Street and would not allow them to enter. The residents who gathered in the house requested that the police and soldiers intervene and allow the ambulance to reach the house and transport me to the hospital, which they did. The Israeli police officers took my personal information and the telephone number of my brother Kheiri, who arrived after some residents had called him.Medics transported me to the Hebron Governmental Hospital, which I reached some time before 11:00 pm. During this time, I suffered from pain and contusions in various parts of my body, and bleeding wounds in my head. At the hospital, I was examined and had x-rays taken. Four injuries in my head, each measuring three centimetres in length and two centimetres in depth, were stitched. There were also smaller wounds in my head, but these were not stitched. Doctors advised me to stay at hospital for surveillance purposes, but I refused and left the hospital. My injuries prevented me from attending university lectures until Monday, 21 December 2009.This morning, I received a telephone call, summoning me to report to the Israeli Civil Administration headquarters in Hebron. There, I met with an officer, called Kamil al Hajj, at the Civil Administration, who took my statement about the attack. An Israeli Police interrogator also took my affidavit at the same headquarters.