Affidavit No. 2054/2004
2004
On 1  January 2004, while I was semi-asleep in my home located on the third  floor in al-Yasmina Quarter, I woke up hearing the sound of gunfire  around our home. I looked at my watch; it was around 9 pm. I then looked  through the window overlooking the southern side and saw three persons  firing at Fadi Serwan and Majdi Mir’i, whom I know very well, from close  range. At the beginning, I thought that a certain problem happened, so I  went outside my home that was only around 50 metres from where the  incident was taking place. As I went out, I saw a number of Israeli  soldiers at the top of the stairs, at a different distance than the  firing was taking place, especially at Fadi and Majdi, which was a  distance of less than 15 metres. I immediately realised that those  shooting were the Israeli Special Squad forces. In fact, I saw one of  these forces disguised in women's clothing. He was not firing.The  shooting at Fadi and Majdi continued heavily although they had fallen to  the ground. A distance of around seven metres was between Majdi and  Fadi. I would now like to mention that I cannot forget the assassination  that was happening in front of my eyes. Fadi and Majdi were subjected  to wilful killing and the firing at them continued despite that they had  fallen on the ground, bleeding. Firing was taking place by the Special  Squad forces from very close range that did exceed centimetres. This  criminal operation and thirst for blood continued several minutes before  the forces withdrew. I cannot forget what happened, especially when I  saw one of these forces, after he finished the magazine of his weapon,  filled it again and empty more rounds in Fadi’s and Majdi’s bodies.It is  worth mentioning that I did not hear any of the Special Forces soldiers  ask anything from Fadi or Majdi or search them for anything. Through my  witnessing the incident, all evidence points to the conclusion that the  aim of these forces was the killing and exemplary punishment for these  two young men and not their live arrest. In the wake of this crime, many  persons arrived to the scene, including Fadi’s family, because the  crime took place in front of their home. After the withdrawal of the  Special Squad Forces, those of us who were present carried the two young  men to a private car and took them to Rafidiya Hospital, although we  were sure that they were dead.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 23 November 2004Signature: Muhammad Radhi Qasem Shiqqo