Affidavit No. 6043/2011
2011
I am a resident of ‘Iraq Bourin village south of Nablus city.I am a second year student at the Department of Geography at al-Najah National University in Nablus city. At around 8:00 am on Thursday, 27 January 2011, my cousin ‘Uday Maher Hamza Qadous, 19 years old, and I went to my family’s land, which is located approximately 200 meters south of ‘Iraq Bourin, in an area called Wadi ‘Alloush. My cousin had 10 sheep, which he wanted to graze on the neighbouring fields of Wadi ‘Alloush. The day started with ‘Uday and I building a wall of stones around my family’s land. At around 12:00 pm, we finished our building the wall.When we were done, we realized that the sheep had gone out of our sight. ‘Uday told me that he would go and search for the sheep. He headed south east of the land and was absent for about a quarter of an hour. He returned with seven sheep and led them near the land where I was present. He said there were three more sheep missing and that he wanted to go back and look for them. He left and was absent for about half an hour. He was taking too long and so I decided to go and look for him. I climbed a mountain near the land in order to search for my cousin and reached the mountain top about 15 minutes later. At that moment, I saw ‘Uday standing near a detour road which connects the Israeli settlement of Bracha in the east to an Israeli military post in the west called Tel Military Camp. Residents of ‘Iraq Bourin are forbidden from going on that road. ‘Uday was at a distance of about two metres from the road and there was an Israeli settler standing at a distance of about 10 metres immediately opposite ‘Uday. The settler was wearing civilian clothes, had blond hair that was combed back, and he had a cap on that is commonly worn by religious Israelis [skullcap]. He was around 30 years of age, about 1.65 centimetres tall, and had a white complexion. He also carried a black bag on his back and had a pistol on his waist. I was standing about 40 metres away from both ‘Uday and the settler.As I was walking towards them, the settler saw me. I called my cousin ‘Uday several times, but he did not hear me. I saw him run away from the settler towards a heap of high rocks. The  settler pursued my cousin. They then disappeared behind the rocks and that was when I heard the sound of a gunshot. Without fear, I ran towards the area they had disappeared into. I found my cousin lying on his back on the heap of rocks. I saw blood gush out of his mouth and he produced a gasping sound. He then stopped breathing. I did not see any trace of the settler and thought that he must have fled the area. I tried to carry my cousin, but I could not. I lifted him from the ground, then put him down, and hurried to the village.“My cousin ‘Uday has been shot.” I screamed on top of the mountain.About five or 10 minutes later, Mufid Ibrahim Qa'dan, 30 years old, and Nabil Jabr Qadous, 42 years old, arrived and tried to carry him, but they could not. Then, Mufid telephoned the Palestinian police so they could bring an ambulance. He also telephoned some people from the village. About 10 minutes later, a person from the village arrived on his horse. We carried the dead body and headed towards ‘Iraq Bourin. On our way we were met with a large number of residents and young people from the village, who helped carry the body. An ambulance was waiting on the main street in the village. I climbed onto the ambulance with ‘Uday’s corpse. The medics transported his corpse to al-Rafidiya Hospital in Nablus city. I left the hospital about half an hour later for my house in ‘Iraq Bourin.With respect to the sheep, a resident of the village found and brought them back to my uncle’s house in the village.