Affidavit No. 6772/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Ibtisam ‘Ayed Hammoudeh Jaber, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 904893955, born on 17 September 1979, a grocer, and a resident of the Jaber neighbourhood, Hebron city, Hebron governorate, would like to declare the following:I am married to Tareq Rasmi Jaber (40 years old). We have six children, the eldest of whom is called Rasmi (15 years old). I am also two months pregnant. My brother-in-law is Hani Jaber (36 years old). He was detained about 18 years ago and was sentenced to two terms of life imprisonment in addition to 15 years after he had been convicted for the killing of an Israeli settler.Hani was released on 18 October 2011 in the prisoners’ exchange between Hamas and Israel. In this exchange, the Israeli soldier Gil’ad Shalit, who had been detained by Hamas, was also released on the same day. At around 11:00 am on Wednesday, 26 October 2011, I was in our grocery shop on the main street of Jaber neighbourhood when an Israeli settler entered the shop. He was of a large build, bearded, and tall. Another 10 settlers, including men and women, stood at the door of the grocery shop. The settler who entered the shop spoke to me in Hebrew and asked about the prices of some goods. Although I did not know Hebrew, I understood what he meant as he was pointing to the goods. I could also understand him by his body language, especially when he approached me and threw a set of papers in front of me. He also showed me a paper which had the following content written in Arabic:Wanted. Anyone who knows about the place of the murderer Hani Rasmi Jaber, please let us know at 0522258183. Valuable Reward.The settler started to shout at me and presented the paper to me in an aggressive manner. I thought that those people were relatives of the settler who was killed by my brother-in-law, and that they have now come to murder me. I was extremely frightened.Within five minutes, the Israeli Police arrived and asked the settlers to leave my shop. The settlers withdrew gradually. A TV team was accompanying the settlers. Later, I knew that they were from the Israeli Channel 2. Still in shock, I sat on the chair inside the grocery shop for about an hour and a half. Meanwhile, I felt an intense stomach ache.At around 1:00 pm, my neighbours came in and helped me walk for a distance of about 350 metres to a car that transported me to the Hebron governmental hospital. I walked to the car because Israeli authorities prevent Palestinian cars from driving along our street except with permits that are granted to a very limited number of residents. I stayed at the governmental hospital until around 5:00 pm. There, I had some medical examinations which showed that the foetus was unharmed by my emotional state. The doctors told me that the pain I felt was caused by fear. Later, I learned that the settlers walked around the neighbourhood and distributed the papers that asked for Hani’s location. Later, I learned that the Israeli TV broadcasted a report showing the settlers who came into my grocery shop. The report stated that the settler who had shouted at me was Baruch Marzel, a resident of the settlement outpost of Ramat Yisahai in Tal Rumeida, in the centre of Hebron city. Knesset Member Michael Ben-Ari was accompanying that settler.On the day Hani was released, Israeli Police and members of the army went to his parents’ house. His parents were not there as they had left along with other relatives in the neighbourhood to Ramallah in order to greet Hani after coming out of prison. On that day, the soldiers told us that they did not want Hani to come back to his parents’ house. They said that they did not want disturbances and that they were not responsible for his safety if he had decided to come back to the house. At around 4:00 pm, soldiers and Police officers came back and repeated the same message. When the soldiers and Police officers arrived for the second time, I was at my father-in-law’s house.My grocery shop and my father-in-law’s house are located on the main street in the neighbourhood. Usually, settlers travel along this street at their free will. I am always in a state of fear and anxiety and I worry about my children; I am afraid that settlers might assault or harm them one day. I am also worried that settlers might attack or burn my father-in-law’s house and my grocery shop. After he had been released, Hani did not move to his parents’ house fearing settler attacks.