Affidavit No. 2828/2006
2006
I am a resident of Marj Na’ja village, one of the northern Jordan Valley villages known as the al-Aghwar villages. My village is located near a number of settler farms and very close to the Harkman agricultural settlement. On 15 December 2005, after I fell into hardship as a result of the lack of work, I went to the settlement in search of employment. In the settlement, I was arrested by the settlement security men who, with the Border Guard forces, investigated me. As I did not have a permit, they hit me and detained me in the Ariel settlement detention centre, where I was held for eight days.Our life in North al-Aghwar villages is very difficult and dire. In the past, we relied on work in Israeli farms. But for six years, we have been prohibited from working there. In 2003, I tried to earn my family’s living by selling vegetables in a stall. I used to buy vegetables from village citizens and sell them in the stall that I set up at the entrance of Marj Na’ja village in the vicinity of bypass road No. 90. Many Israelis drive on this road when they move between northern and southern Israel, in addition to Palestinians living within the Green Line and Jerusalemites going to and coming from Tiberias and Bisan.In June of that year, as I recall, at around ten in the morning, a Border Guard car arrived to the stall and an Israeli officer ordered me to leave because I was threatening the lives of the Jewish citizens and I was violating orders by setting up the stall on Israeli land and that I needed a permit for that. I told the officer that my stall was on the lands of my village, but he insisted that I was at the edge of road No. 90 and that the road is within Israel’s lands. After arguing, the officer attacked my stall with his car, damaging it along with the vegetables inside. Since that day, I have stopped selling vegetables, due to the continuous presence of Israeli soldiers on that road.Not only has my family experienced economic strangulation, but the occupation has fragmented us as well. We in north al-Aghwar are besieged by a number of barriers that constrain freedom of movement. Toward Nablus and Toubas in the north, there are two barriers, al-Hamra and Tayasir. Towards the south, there is al-Dyouk barrier, which only allows us to go southward. As for al-Hamra barrier, only persons whose addresses on their I.D. cards read al-Jiftlek can pass, while citizens whose addresses are Toubas or Bardala cannot, and they have to pass through Tayasir barrier.My sister married a citizen from Tammoun village ten years ago. I have visited her only twice since 2001. During the last two years, visiting her has become impossible, especially for my father and mother. I have been trying to obtain a permit to pass through al-Hamra barrier for two years but without any result. On 13 February 2006, my father, wife, and myself tried to visit my sister in Tammoun after she had a baby. We arrived at al-Hamra barrier without any permits. We were held for four hours in very cold weather. After a lot of arguing and humiliation, the soldiers allowed us to pass, provided that we would not return through the same barrier and instead go to Nablus and pass through Huwwara barrier. If we came back through al-Hamra, we would be arrested by the soldiers.This is what we did, and the second day we returned to Marj Na’ja through Huwwara and Qalandiya barriers and entered Jericho through al-Dyouk barrier. This was a difficult trip and took us around six hours with a lot of waiting at Huwwara and al-Dyouk barriers.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 4 March 2005Signature: Yousef 'Oda