Affidavit No. 5447/2010
2010
I am a spokesman for the Fatah movement and an academic lecturer at the Al-Quds Open University and at the Palestine Academy for Political Science in Jericho. I hold a Ph.D. degree in law. I was also Chairman of the Beit Lahiya Municipality.On Wednesday morning, 5 May 2010, I returned to the Gaza Strip because my father was sick; he died two days after I had arrived in Gaza. After I had passed the Erez Crossing, Police officers of the deposed government stopped me at a Police checkpoint on al-Jamarik junction, which leads to the Erez Crossing north of Beit Hanoun. They confiscated my ID card and some press reports recorded on tapes and CDs. They also ordered that no mass gatherings take place in front of my house. I was not to allow slogans be chanted against the Gaza governorate, nor was I supposed to deliver speeches in mass gatherings. They told me to report to the Internal Security agency at the Jabalya centre on Saturday morning, 8 May 2010. However, I could not report to the Internal Security agency because my father died on the allotted day. Through certain persons, I was informed that I should report to the Internal Security agency at the Jabalya centre on Wednesday morning, 13 May 2010. Indeed, I went to the Internal Security offices in Jabalya refugee camp north of the Gaza Strip and met with a person who introduced himself as Abu-Ja’far al-Ghandour. For almost half an hour, we conversed about general political and media issues. Then he told me that I should report to the Internal Security offices at the Abu-Khadra Governmental Compound in Gaza the next morning. After that I left and returned to my house.As scheduled, I travelled to the Internal Security agency offices at Abu-Khadra Compound on Thursday morning, 14 May 2010. After I arrived, Internal Security officers took me to a room, in which I met with three persons from the agency. I did not know their names. In an impolite manner, the three persons started to interrogate me about my relations with the Ramallah Government and with Egypt as well as about my function as a spokesman for the Fatah movement. I was interrogated at the agency from 9:30 am until 5:30 pm. They later demanded that I report back to them on Sunday morning, 17 May 2010.I returned to the Internal Security agency offices at the Abu-Khadra Compound at around 9:00 am on Sunday in line with the given appointment. By the same interrogators, I was questioned about the same topics of the previous days and in the same manner. Similarly, I was interrogated the day after, Monday 18 May 2010, for an extended period of time. After the interrogation, the officers demanded that I report back once again on Thursday, 20 May 2010. On Wednesday evening, 19 May 2010, when I was in my house, I received a telephone call from a person, who identified himself as ‘Abu Abdullah’ from the Internal Security Agency. I recognised his voice and could tell that he was the person who interrogated me several days earlier at the Abu-Khadra Compound. He told me that I was prohibited from leaving my house and that I were under house arrest by an order of the Internal Security Agency. He also said I had to report to the Internal Security the next morning.On Thursday morning, 20 May 2010, I reported to the Internal Security Agency offices at Abu-Khadra Compound. As soon as I arrived, I was interrogated by the same people about press statements I had made as a Fatah spokesman and they charged me with distorting the image of Hamas in the media. They took out the press statements I had given to media outlets and put them in front of me. I replied that this was a legitimate media activity, especially in light of the split government. I was interrogated for extended hours about the same topic. Then they demanded that I come back and report to them on Monday, 24 May 2010. Once again, they confirmed that I was under house arrest. On Monday morning, I reported to the Internal Security agency. After I had arrived, I was questioned about the same topics again, including my work as a spokesman for Fatah and about the nature of different functions carried out by the Fatah Culture and Media Commission. Before I left for my house, they demanded that I return on Tuesday, which I did. After I arrived, they detained me in a room alone from 9:00 am until 7:00 pm. The same incident recurred on Wednesday and Thursday.Now, I am under house arrest and I am prohibited from leaving my house except to report to the Internal Security agency.