Affidavit No. 6048/2011
2011
I am a resident of ‘Ein-Yabous village, located at a distance of approximately 10 kilometressouth of Nablus city. I own a house in the northern quarter of ‘Ein-Yabous. My house is alsolocated about one kilometre south of the Israeli settlement of Yitzhar.At around 3:30 am on Thursday, 27 January 2011, my neighbour Khaled Rashdan telephoned me, but I did not answer. However, I got up after the telephone rang and saw a light or flash near my bedroom’s window. I opened the window and saw my 2007 white Peugeot car on fire. I fetched a fire extinguisher from my house and tried to put out the fire with my neighbour’s help.After about 10 minutes from putting out the fire, I began to check whether anything else around the house was damaged. I discovered that the wire fence around the house had been cut off and found slogans written in Hebrew [on the house’s exterior wall]. I know Hebrew well and I could read that they wrote “‘Aleh ‘Ayin lo nishkah”, which means “we will not forget what happened in ‘Aleh ‘Ayin”. ‘Aleh ‘Ayin was an Israeli outpost that was dismantled by the Israeli occupying forces near Qusra village south of Nablus.I telephoned Anwar ‘Ayyad, who worked with the Palestinian police force. ‘Ayyad reported the attack to the competent Palestinian security agencies. At around 5:00 am, the Israeli District Coordination Office (DCO), Israeli police and the Palestinian DCO contacted me and I gave them my address in the village. About an hour later, an Israeli army force, including five military jeeps from the DCO and police, arrived. Israeli officers read the phrase which was written on the wall of my house and explained the meaning of the phrase to me. I asked them about the result of their inspection and photography of the site. They said that the result was clear. Then, they took my statement, put my fingerprints on papers, and examined the burned car. A fingerprint expert, who was accompanying the Israeli DCO and police officers, took fingerprints off the car.He explained in Hebrew that he was a fingerprint expert. I then spoke with an Israeli soldier. “What did you find?” I asked him.“What do you want me to do?” He replied.I said that I wanted them to guarantee my and my family’s security, but he did not respond.“What is the solution in your opinion?” I inquired.“We have a problem with settlers every day.” He replied. “They are driving us crazy.” He wenton.I asked him if his reaction would be the same if I had gone to a settlement and burned down acar there.“Of-course not.” He answered.At around 6:30 am, soldiers wiped the phrase written on the wall of my house after they received an order from a higher authority to do so. I realised that I did not wish the phrase to be wiped away because it was evidence that settlers had raided my house and burnt my car. A soldier, or an Israeli officer as I believed he was, told me that those were the orders. He repeated the order to an Israeli soldier to wipe off the phrase. Meantime, I took footage of the soldiers while they were wiping the phrase and concealing the evidence which convicted the settlers. At around 7:00 am, the Israeli army withdrew from the area.I would like to state that the officer, known as Zeid, who had questioned me and took my statement in the house also did not want the soldiers to wipe the phrase off. However, the soldiers convinced him that those were military orders that must be adhered to.