Affidavit No. 7123/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Saber Mousa Saber Hasan “Az Za’anin”, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 900582750, born on 10 May 1978, Coordinator of the Local Initiative Against The Buffer Zone, and a resident of Beit Hanoun, Northern Gaza governorate, would like to declare the following:At around 10:30 am on Tuesday, 24 January 2012, the weekly demonstration against the buffer zone marched from the Agriculture Secondary School in the Beit Hanoun towards the northern border of the Gaza Strip. A weekly demonstration is usually organised by the local initiative against the Buffer Zone as a form of popular resistance against the Israeli occupying authorities, which have confiscated vast areas of citizens’ land in the border area. About 60 persons, including five international activists from the International Solidarity Movement (ISM), ten journalists and national figures, took part in the demonstration, which marched towards Beit Hanoun (Erez) Crossing north of Beit Hanoun.About 20 minutes later, participants headed north and were at a distance of almost 100 metres from the border fence. Israeli soldiers positioned on the watchtower, opposite the area where protestors gathered, fired a number of tear gas canisters, forcing us to get away to the south. In a state of panic, we tried to rescue some participants in the demonstration who had sustained injuries as a result of tear gas inhalation. Then, protestors marched for 150 metres along the eastern border fence. To escape the tear gas, we went to the old dumpsite. Having rested for several minutes, protestors began chanting slogans against the buffer zone and held up flags of Palestine and of friendly foreign countries. Meantime, a number of Israeli occupying soldiers came down from a watchtower opposite the area where we gathered and opened fire. I saw bullets hit the sand around us. We had to get back southwards in fear that participants might be injured. We continued to walk eastwards until we reached the area opposite the Israeli military transmitters. When we stopped at a distance of almost 200 metres from the border fence, I saw a number of Israeli military jeeps behind the border. A large number of soldiers got out of these jeeps and opened fire with their machine guns towards us. Everybody ran away from the area.We continued to march south and reached the al-Sha’afah area (also known as the Ummah Land), opposite the Israeli Sderot compound at a distance of 250 metres from the eastern border. We chanted slogans against the buffer zone. Several minutes later, a large number of Israeli military jeeps, which had arrived from the area behind the border, stopped in front of us. Soldiers started to open fire and fired numerous tear gas canisters towards us, injuring many participants as a result of tear gas inhalation. From close range, the Israeli soldiers also opened sporadic fire. Therefore, we went south in groups, one after the other. As soon as we reached the Memorial site southeast of Beit Hanoun, I saw a large number of infantry soldiers taking position behind the border fence. After they opened fire towards us, we moved away and continued to walk southwards. We reached the outskirts of the Abu Safiyya area at a distance of 200 metres of the eastern border southeast of Beit Hanoun. The Israeli occupying soldiers, who had arrived on military vehicles, continued to open fire towards us. After we had walked for a distance of about 8,000 metres along the border fence, we decided to return and get away from the area. The Israeli soldiers chased us and we were afraid that participants in the weekly demonstration might be injured. It was 1:40 pm.This was the first time tear gas canisters were fired towards participants in the weekly demonstration. Since demonstrations have been organised against the buffer zone, this was also the first time protestors reached the border area and walked for such a long distance. The Israeli occupying authorities have imposed the buffer zone in the aftermath of the war on Gaza.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 28 January 2012