Affidavit No. 4148/2008
2008
On Wednesday 27 February 2008, at approximately 10:25 pm, I was at home with my wife Iman al-Bur’i and my son Muhammad, who is six months old. My house is located on Tareq Ben-Ziyad Street in the vicinity of the Gaza Boys Elementary School “C”, supervised by the UNRWA, and located opposite to the Deposed Interior Ministry, nearby the Medical Relief amid Gaza city. As I was sitting in my bedroom with my wife and child, I heard a very strong explosion very close to my house. The explosion was so strong that the florescent light fell down, the electricity cut off and dust spread all over the room. Fearing that something might have happened to our child, my wife started to scream.Then I heard another explosion of the same strength, followed by a third, which was also very strong. As a result, the shards of the furniture in all the rooms spread all over my house. It was very dark and I started searching for a lighter or any source of light to look for my son but I could not find him. I touched the bed on which my son was lying beside me with my hands but I did not find him. I continued searching for my child under the rubble in the very dim darkness but I could not find him. Then, all of a sudden I heard the voice of Muhammad moaning from under the rubble.Following the sound of his voice, I found Muhammad and pulled him out of the rubble while my wife was screaming and crying. It is worth noting here that my wife gave birth to Muhammad after five years of our marriage and of waiting for a child. I carried my son to take him to al-Shifa’ Hospital, which was only 350 metres west of my house. As I was leaving home I ran into my brother Muhammad, 24 year old, who was coming to see what had happened to me and my family. My brother took my child and hurried to the hospital while I stayed with my wife. She had fainted and fallen to the ground out of fear for her child and of the string explosions, which had targeted the Ministry of Interior located opposite of my house. I stayed with my wife at home for around 15 minutes until she regained her consciousness. Then we went to the hospital together to see what happened to our son. As we arrived, my brother told me that our son was in the Intensive Care Unit. We went to see him in that room and found seven doctors trying to save his life and to revive his heart but he was motionless. 15 minutes after reaching the Hospital, one of the doctors told me that my child had died. His body could not bear the three consecutive explosions that targeted the Ministry of Interior, the rubble that fell on his head had caused severe damage and he was unable to breathe because of the dust caused by the explosions. When my wife heard that her son died, she fainted and fell on the ground, motionless. Doctors carried her and gave her the necessary treatment. She stayed at the Hospital for three days.The explosions that targeted the Ministry of Interior damaged my house, which consists of one floor and is built on a land of 190 square metres; it encompasses six rooms, a kitchen, bathroom and a salon. I live in this house with my extended family, comprising 11 people, including four children, two males and two females, my father and mother, my wife and brothers.It is worth noting that my house was completely damaged, including the destruction of its furniture, and has become inadequate for living. Now I am living with my family in a small rented house nearby our demolished house. Currently, we are trying to re-build our house at a time when the people of Gaza are suffering from a severe lack of cement, iron and other construction materials due to the strangulating siege, which has been imposed on the Gaza Strip for more than nine months.I would also like to mention that I later found out that the Israeli reconnaissance planes targeted the headquarters of the Ministry of Interior in Gaza with four rockets; three of them detonated and resulted in the complete destruction of the headquarters of the Interior Ministry, which consisted of four floors.