Affidavit No. 5232/2010
2010
At around 8:00 am on 10 January 2010, my mother, Wasfiyya, who is 65 years old, and my brother, Ibrahim, who is 23 years old, and I were present in our house. The house was built of bricks, measured approximately 40 square metres, and consisted of two rooms. We also had a barracks, measuring about 70 square metres and built of zinc plates to shelter our sheep. Our house was located in the village of Khirbet Tana, which is approximately seven kilometres east of the village of Beit Fourik.While my mother was preparing breakfast for us, my attention was drawn to more than 16 dark green and white Israeli army patrols and three yellow bulldozers that were approaching the area. I saw the bulldozers demolish several of our neighbours’ makeshift houses, which were built of zinc plates or bricks. As a result of the impending danger, my brother and I immediately evacuated the sheep, fodder and simple furniture from our house and from the barracks. About five minutes later, a bulldozer and a number of soldiers approached our house. A soldier wearing civilian clothes and carrying a long weapon looked at the rooms and barracks and pointed to the bulldozer driver, who was also wearing civilian clothes, to demolish them. Immediately the bulldozer driver started the demolition process, which lasted ten minutes. In the company of several patrols, the bulldozers, including the one which demolished our place of residence, moved on to demolish many other makeshift houses belonging to residents of Khirbet Tana village. These included houses built of zinc plates and bricks as well as tents. Furthermore, the bulldozers demolished the village’s primary school, which consisted of four rooms. In about three hours, approximately 18 makeshift houses, barracks, tents and the school were pulled down.I should note that our house, which we had constructed in 2000, was demolished in 2005. It was of the same area I mentioned above. Back then, many other houses were also demolished in the village of Khirbet Tana. The Israeli authorities claimed that the area was a military zone and the owners did not have the required construction licences. Several months later in 2005, we rebuilt the house. Later, we also filed a case through a number of lawyers before the Israeli High Court of Justice, protesting against the demolition of our home. On 26 January 2009, the Court made a decision on the demolition of 18 houses and barracks. These included our house and the houses of others. The decision was implemented a year later – on the date I mentioned above – without any prior notice.