Affidavit No. 6363/2011
2011
At 1:30 pm on Friday, 13 May 2011, confrontations between the soldiers and Palestinian youth broke out in Silwan neighbourhood, south of al-Aqsa Mosque compound in Jerusalem; which was occupied by Israeli forces in 1967. Palestinian young men threw stones at Israeli soldiers, who were firing tear gas grenades. I sat on the roof of my home along Batn al-Hawa Street in Ras al-‘Amoud, which is considered part of Silwan. I was watching what was going on along with a number of my neighbours and friends.My house is located at a distance of 50 – 70 metres from the Yonatan building in Silwan, which has been seized from Palestinians by Israeli settlers. Confrontations specifically took place in Bir Ayyoub neighbourhood and Wadi al-Rababa area in Silwan, which I could see from the rooftop of my house.At around 3:30 pm, I saw two young men walk downhill in front of my house. It seemed as though they were heading to Maragha neighbourhood in Silwan, where the settlers’ building is located. A young man carried a closed box, which I thought might have been a box for biscuits or candy. The young men’s faces were uncovered. At the same time, I saw people at the left corner of my house throwing stones at the Yonatan building. Soldiers positioned on the building’s rooftop fired tear gas grenades and rubber-coated steel bullets at these young men.Three or four minutes after the two young men walked down, I saw a Molotov cocktail being thrown at the settlers’ building. It was ablaze while it flew in the air. I did not know from where this Molotov cocktail was thrown. Additional Molotov cocktails were subsequently thrown. I should note that I did not see the location of the person who threw the Molotov cocktails. Within a few seconds, I saw the window shutter on the third floor of the Yonatan building open. Thewindow was situated on the left side of the building. I heard the sound of four live bullets fired, but I did not see who opened fire because there was a grille on the window. At the same time, I heard a woman scream that “a young man was hit.” I did not know where the woman’s voice came from, but it was close. I believe it came from one of the houses downhill, which were  closer to the Yonatan building. I climbed down from the rooftop and ran with other young men downhill, towards Silwan neighbourhood, as we thought that the person who had been wounded would be there. Tear gas grenades were being fired intensively in that area. When we reached the staircase leading downhill to Silwan, the other young men stopped, but I continued to walk in spite of the intense gas grenades that were being fired at us by the Israeli soldiers. I saw a young man lying on his right side. The other young men shouted at the Israeli soldiers, who were positioned on the roof of the Yonatan building, to stop firing tear gas grenades because there was a person who needed medical assistance but to no avail. I should note that the place  where I found the boy was at a distance of almost 20 metres [from Yonatan building].“Where are you hit?” I asked the boy because I did see traces of blood. He could hardly speak and pointed to his waist.Although tear gas grenades and rubber-coated steel bullets continued to be fired, I carried the boy and climbed the staircase. A tear gas grenade landed between my legs. I felt suffocated, but thank God the young men who were on top of the staircase came down and took the boy from me. They climbed up to Batn al-Hawa Street where a number of cars were parked. They put the boy in my brother’s car and I followed in mine. Other people followed in their cars.While we were travelling to al-Tour neighbourhood where al-Maqased Hospital was located, we saw an Israeli Mitsubishi military car, which tried to travel behind us near Ras al-‘Amoud roundabout. Young men, who were driving behind my brother’s car and mine, blocked the road and stopped the Israeli military car from following us. Accordingly, we managed to reach the hospital and deliver the injured boy to the Emergency Room. The boy was relocated to the intensive care unit as he was unconscious. He was then moved to the operations room.I was informed that he was martyred at dawn on the next day.