Affidavit No. 2482/2005
2005
I have  been working as a taxi driver for approximately seven years. I am  married, have three children and I live in Deir Samet village located  four kilometres away from Dura. On 21 July 2005, at around 1:15 in the  early morning, I went out of my home and drove my car (a Fort Transit). I  was alone driving and after four minutes, Israeli soldiers stopped me  where I saw six soldiers in the street aiming their guns towards me and  lifting their hands ordering me to stop. After I stopped my car, a  soldier approached me while I was still sitting behind the gear and hit  me on my face under the right eye with his fist and asked me to stop the  car engine and get down of the car. He said that in Hebrew. I  understood what he ordered me to do although I barely understand any  words in Hebrew.After I  got down, three soldiers started beating me with their hands and feet on  most parts of my body. I believe that the beating continued for five  minutes. Then one of the soldiers told me to take out all I have from my  pockets and put them in the car. Actually, I took out my ID, others  documents, money (490 shekels) and my Jawwal (cell phone) and I put them  in the car. After that, one of the soldiers told me to take off my  clothes while two other soldiers were aiming their guns towards me. I  took off my shirt first and refused to take off my pants. But one of the  soldiers put the muzzle of the gun on my back and threatened to shoot  me if I do not take off my pants, as I understood from him. I lowered  the pants until they were bunched at the bottom of my feet and then the  same soldier told me to kneel with my face towards southwest, which is  opposite to the direction where they are standing, and to remain in the  same position. I did what they ordered me to do.Meanwhile,  I heard them inspecting the car sometimes and hitting it some other  times. All of a sudden, I felt that one of them was urinating beside me  and then finished by urinating on my back. When I felt wet, I tried to  get up but the soldier was ready and hit me on my head and put the gun  to the back of my head and so I sat again. The soldier went away and  joined his group who started to laugh at me. This situation made me feel  bad. I tried to talk to the soldiers several times but every time the  soldiers beat me and gave me more orders and threatened to shoot me.After  approximately 40 minutes, one of the soldiers ordered me to get up  quickly into the car; I tried to put on my clothes but the soldier  prevented me from doing so and threatened to shoot me again if I do,  saying “Hurry up.” I took my shirt in my hand and walked with my pants  at the bottom of my legs until I reached the car. I got in and they  ordered me to drive away while aiming their guns towards me. As soon as I  moved my car away, I saw two cars for border guards soldiers. I hurried  away from these two cars. After half a kilometre, I stopped and put on  my pants and shirt and searched for my papers, money, ID and Jawwal but  the only things I found are the papers and ID, while the money and  Jawwal disappeared.I did not  work on that day as I used to do. I only visited the doctor who  examined me; the injury of my face was the worst. The second day, I  submitted a complaint with the Palestinian Liaison. My story was  published in the Arabic and Israeli press. On Tuesday, 26 July 2005, I  went to the Israeli Ministry of Justice in Jerusalem, where I submitted a  complaint against the Israeli soldiers. I will follow up this case  against the criminal soldiers. It is worth noting that I did that in  coordination with an Israeli human rights organisation, ofwhich I have the address but I am not going to mention the name of the organisation or its address.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 27 July 2005Signature: Ibrahim Fou'ad Ibrahim Rayyan