Affidavit No. 2843/2006
2006
At approximately 7:30 pm on Friday, 17 March 2006, my brother 'Abd-al-Rahman Zayed called to ask me to go to his home located in the Zayed quarter of the village of al-Yamoun, west of Jenin. He wanted me to take his nine-year-old daughter Akaber Zayed to the clinic of Dr. Iyad 'Oda, located in the Zayed quarter, to remove stitches from her lower jaw. Akaber had wounded her jaw when she fell down 20 days earlier.I am a taxi driver, also living in the village of al-Yamoun. When I reached my brother's home, Akaber got into the passenger seat of my car and I headed to Dr. 'Oda's clinic, located only about 500 metres away. I was driving my yellow Reno, model ‘98. When I reached the clinic, I parked beside a wall. On the other side of this wall are agricultural lands belonging to al-Yamoun citizens.As I was trying to carry Akaber from the car, I saw an Israeli soldier in military uniform emerging from behind the wall. The soldier was standing to the south of where Akaber and I were located. He was only 50 metres away from us on our right side. This soldier opened fire on us and another soldier joined in too. The firing was very heavy and aimed directly at us. Approximately 40 bullets were fired at us. In addition, bullets were being fired in the air.Even though I felt I had been shot in my right shoulder and my right thigh, I continued to carry Akaber, who had been hit in the back of her head. She was bleeding and was not moving. Carrying Akaber, I got out of the car. I started shouting, "The girl died!" Approximately 30 soldiers approached me and ordered me to put the girl on the ground and to lie down on my stomach on the ground. These orders came from a close distance under the threat of arms and amidst heavy firing. I realized that Akaber was dead. I put her on the ground and then lay down on the ground myself. All the while, Israeli soldiers were looking at me from a distance of not more than two or three metres away.Many Israeli military jeeps arrived. The Israeli soldier who first opened fire on Akaber and myself was of brown color. I think his name is al-Koushi because I heard the other soldiers calling him by that name. The soldiers told me to get up, lift up my upper clothes, and turn around. I did as I was told and saw the soldiers draw back and gradually leave the scene.After the soldiers withdrew, a stranger approached and carried the child to Dr. Iyad 'Oda's clinic. I followed them and found Dr. Iyad administering first aid on Akaber. Then the doctor called an ambulance from Jenin. The ambulance arrived half an hour later and carried both Akaber and myself, but Akaber was dead.On the way to the hospital, the road was blocked by an Israeli jeep. The Israeli soldiers in the jeep told me, over a microphone, to get out of the ambulance. I did so, and as requested, headed toward them and handed them my identity card. Then the soldiers told me to get into the back of the jeep. Three Israeli soldiers were sitting in the back. When I got in, they started beating me in the face and in my right thigh and shoulder where I had just been injured. I felt severe pain. While beating me, the soldier asked in Arabic, "Where are the youths?" I replied that I had not seen any. There was also a very large dog in the jeep that kept trying to come near me.The soldiers did not give me any medical treatment. The jeep moved about 50 metres and then stopped. I was held in the jeep, bleeding, for around two-and-a-half hours. Whenever I asked the soldiers to untie the plastic handcuffs they beat me on my injured shoulder and thigh. At approximately 11:30 pm, I was handed over to a Palestinian ambulance. The ambulance took me to the Jenin governmental hospital where I have been undergoing treatment. Regarding Akaber, she died as a result of being shot seven times in the back of her head.The name of one of the soldiers is Raslan. I know this because the other soldiers were calling him by name, just like they called the other soldier (Al-Koushi). Al-Koushi was the one who first fired at us and was one of the soldiers who beat me while I was in the jeep. I was also subjected to insults and curses by the Israeli soldiers. Finally, I affirm that the soldiers did not ask me to stop or do anything before they opened fire on me and Akaber Zayed.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 19 March 2006.Signature: Kamal Zayed