Affidavit No. 2107/2004
2004
In April 2002, the Israeli army  started to build the Separation Wall in the Toulkarem areabefore its  approval by the Israeli Knesset, which took place on 12 June 2002.  Theconstruction started in Far'on village, located south of Toulkarem,  in April 2002, when theWest Bank was subjected to a broad Israeli  military campaign. After 17 days of curfew onFar'on village, after the  withdrawal of the Israeli army from the village, citizens were shockedby  the Israeli military orders of the confiscation of the lands located  west and south thevillage. These lands are located only about one  kilometre from the green line that separatesthe West Bank from the area  occupied in 1948.This was  followed in August of the same year with the issuing of a number of  Israeli militaryorders, which confiscated hundreds of dunums of land  from the villages of al-Jaroushiyya,Deir al-Ghsoun, 'Attil, Qufin,  Nazlet 'Isa, Zeita, and Baqa al-Sharqiyya, in addition to  severalvillages located north of Toulkarem. Land is confiscated for the  benefit of the construction ofthe Separation Wall and for security  reasons, according to the Israelis. Confiscation andconstruction  continued until the official completion of the Wall in August 2003. This  Wallstretched in Toulkarem from the 'Qaba village, north Toulkarem, to  Kufr Jammal village,south of Toulkarem, at a length of 27 kilometres,  and different depths, which sometimesreach seven kilometres. The  construction of the Wall resulted in the confiscation of 40,000dunums of  land, the destruction 65,000 fruit trees (mostly olive trees), and the  destruction of 20 kilometres of water pipelines. This is in addition to  the destruction of all the agriculturalroads that connect the  Palestinian localities to the lands located behind the Separation  Wall.The construction of the Wall resulted also in the destruction of  the agricultural sector in theToulkarem area, especially by isolating  the lands located behind it. This is due to the greatpains which  citizens undergo in order to reach their lands, as they have to pass  through irongates built in the Wall for this purpose, but have not been  opened for a long time. In Far'onvillage, the gate has never been  opened. Moreover, many farmers were denied permits,which the Israeli  authorities give to farmers so they may access through the gates their  landconfiscated for supposed security reasons.The  Israeli Knesset officially announced the completion of the Wall in the  Toulkarem area on1 August 2003. Officially, it was completed, but on the  ground it was not because after thatdate tens of Israeli military  orders were issued for the confiscation land located east of theWall,  and orders for demolishing houses have been issued. For example, two  houses weredemolished in Far'on village, on the pretext that these  houses did not have building licenses.But the reality shows that these  two houses were demolished because they are locatednearby the Wall.  Another ten houses in the same village are threatened to be demolished  forthe same reasons and pretexts. The cases of these houses have been  taken to the IsraeliHigh Court.Also a  number of similar yet more dangerous military orders were recently  issued, statingthat construction is prohibited in the vicinity of the  Wall from the north of the West Bank to itssouth, and at 500 metres deep  to the east. These orders were issued a month and a halfago during the  sickness of the late President Yaser 'Arafat. Initially, they were  issued inToulkarem, Jenin and Qalqiliya. These orders prohibit any  building using cement or iron, andalso prevent erecting a fence of mesh  or wood, or anything that may change the contour of the land.This area  was called the blue area on the Israeli maps attached to the orders  that preventbuilding. The area of these lands will form eight percent of  the West Bank area once the Wallis completed. Recently, military orders  have been issued in the Shofa village, southeastToulkarem, stating the  confiscation of 305 dunums of the eastern village land without  givingreason for its confiscation. Now the bulldozing and leveling of  the confiscated land is takingplace, and according to my estimates, a  camp for the Israeli army will be built on this landand maybe a bypass  road. A week ago, the Israeli army started to destroy lands locatednorth  of the Jbara barricade (al-Kafriyat), located south of Toulkarem, where  trees wereuprooted and the land is being leveled for the construction  of a tunnel that connectsToulkarem and al-Kafriyat area (south Toulkarem  villages) with Qalqiliya. This tunnel will beunderground in order to  prevent any friction between the Palestinians and the Israeli settlers.There are also talks about the  construction of 20 tunnels in the West Bank for the samereason. This is  new, and has long–term objectives, the most important of which is that  theIsraelis are not going to evacuate the settlements in the West Bank.  Therefore, I request youto observe and monitor this issue and its  results during the coming few months. Moreover,two weeks ago, and  specifically at the beginning of December, the Israeli army built a  newiron gate on the bypass road linking Toulkarem and the south  villages. It also links theterritories occupied in 1948 with the West  Bank and the settlements in the north West Bankand the territories  occupied in 1948. This is new evidence of the Israeli government policy  ofexpansion, settlement, and partitioning the West Bank into separated  cantons.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 26 December 2004.Signature: Suheil Salim 'Abd-al-Fattah Salman