Affidavit No. 2275/2005
2005
I am a  resident of the Al-Wata area located 100 metres from ‘Ayda Camp in the  Bethlehem governorate. Al-Wata is considered as being within the  Jerusalem borders, but I hold a West Bank Identity card and so does my  family. There are 13 members of my family, including 3 children. Another  three families live in our vicinity, numbering approximately 40-50  persons; two of these families hold the West Bank identity cards, and  the third one holds Jerusalem identity cards. Since beginning the  construction of the ‘Separation Wall’ in 2002, our sufferings started  with the Israeli army, which has tried to put pressure on us to abandon  our area under the pretext that it is a Jerusalemite area.The  construction of the Wall - it is a huge wall made up of concrete, nine  metres in height and extending from Barrier 300 north of Bethlehem,  until Beit Jala. Only a small opening was left for us to pass through to  ‘Ayda Camp and Beit Jala, and this opening will be closed when the  construction of the Wall is completed. The construction of the Wall  resulted in closing the street that connects Al-Wata with ‘Ayda camp in  such a manner that we have to walk one kilometre through rough land to  reach ‘Ayda camp. In the past, the way to Bethlehem took us only 10  minutes and now it takes 30 minutes. Moreover, the military patrols on  the roads in this area, which always harass us, make many of us stay at  home to avoid them.The only  employed person in my family is my father (51 years); while three of my  brothers, my uncles, and I are unemployed. Moreover, our social  relations with our relatives have been disrupted because none of our  relatives who live in ‘Ayda camp and Bethlehem dare to visit us. On the  other hand, if we visited them, we have to return back before sunset  because the Al-Wata area is located behind the Wall and is considered a  dangerous military area. These difficult circumstances have obliged 5  members of our family to leave our home in Al-Wata (we have two houses  and a piece of land of approximately 7 dunums). These 5 persons left  Al-Wata to live in ‘Ayda camp. My sisters (18 and 14 years old) are  school students, and it became difficult for them to reach their school  due to the difficultly of movement; my cousins (twins, 12 years old)  [children of uncle Fou’ad]; and my nephew ‘Anoud (4 years) who attends  the kindergarten. All these five persons are now obliged to live with  our relatives in ‘Ayda camp in order to be able to go daily to their  schools in the camp.As for  the medical services, we face a big problem. Lately, my grandmother  (Fatima ‘Issa Hasan Jadour, 71 years) who lived with us in our home in  Al-Wata, died. She was in good health, but on 3 April 2005 (her  birthday) she was at home and at 11 a.m. she started to have pain in her  chest, because she had problems with her heart and arteries. My uncle  Fou’ad Jadour (43 years), my brother Mahmoud (29 years), and I carried  her across the mountains to reach ‘Ayda camp (a distance of one  kilometre) until we reached the opening through which we can pass.We did  not call the Palestinian Red Crescent ambulance, or the Israeli  ambulance, because we had bad experiences with them in the past when we  had health problems. We used to call them and they would say that they  need security coordination, which requires several hours. This also  happened with my uncle Fou’ad in 2004 when he had a heart attack while  he was at home. When we called the Red Crescent ambulance, we were told  to wait until they coordinated with the Israeli side, which usually  takes hours, and so, we had to carry him through the rough road on the  mountain until we reached ‘Ayda camp.For that  reason, and to save time, we carried our grandmother until we reached  the opening in the Wall through which we can pass, and there we felt  that she died. It was midday, which means that our journey took us an  hour. Had the ambulance been able to reach our home, we might have saved  my grandmother’s life. We carried her from ‘Ayda camp to Al-Hussein  Governmental Hospital. The distance from our home, or from ‘Ayda camp,  is approximately five kilometres and takes only five minutes, whereas it  took us an hour and a quarter to reach it from Al-Wata. The doctor said  that she was dead when we reached the hospital (clinical death). We are  still living in our home despite what happened and despite that the  future waiting for us is unknown; we do not have permits to pass from  Jerusalem to Bethlehem; we do not know if a gate will be allocated for  us to pass through the Wall; or if we will be obliged to abandon our  homes (forced to evacuate).