Affidavit No. 7921/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Nasir ‘Ayyad Yahya al-Hashash, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 945097194, born on 7 December 1963, unemployed, and a resident of the al-Hashash neighbourhood, Rafah city, Rafah governorate, would like to declare the following:My name is Nasir ‘Ayyad aihya al-Hashash. I am 51 years old, married and the father of eight children, including six minors. I live with my wife and children in a one-storey house, which is roofed with asbestos sheets. With a surface area of 120 square metres, my home consists of four rooms, a kitchen, a bathroom, and a living room. In a rural area surrounded by open farmland, my home is located in the al-Hashash neighbourhood northwest of Rafah city in the southern Gaza Strip.At around 9:00 pm on Saturday, 17 November 2012, during the Israeli war on the Gaza Strip, I was in my bedroom. My wife Fayzah Muhammad Salman al-Hashash,46, and I watched the news on the TV. My children were asleep in the other rooms inside the house. As was usual since the war had been launched, I heard the sound of a large number of Israeli military aircrafts patrolling the skies over the area. Suddenly, I heard the sound of a very strong explosion near to my home. It was followed by a loud noise and destruction of the walls and roof of my home. I saw the roof collapsing on top of us. I rushed out to check on my children. I heard them screaming out of intense fear and panic. I saw that four of my children had been injured from scattered shrapnel, smashed glass and the roof of the house, which had collapsed on top of us.“I’m injured… I’m injured.” I heard my wife shouting.When I approached her, I saw blood gushing out of her head. It all happened in a few moments. I started to shout to my neighbours, who arrived to help me rescue my wife and children.“Help me… Bring an ambulance.” I shouted.A number of my relatives and neighbours helped me get my wife and children out of the house. About ten minutes later, a number of ambulances arrived and moved my injured wife and children from the area. I then went to the Abu Yousef al-Najjar hospital in the city. In the meantime, I saw the ambulances transporting my brother Awad’s wife Amnah Suleiman Salim al-Hashash,42,, his son Tal’at,15, and his daughter Sarah, two and a half, from their home, which is next to mine in a westerly direction. I followed them to the hospital. There, it appeared that my wife had sustained bone fractures in the head. My son Ibrahim, four, was wounded in the face; Ranin, 11, in the back, head and knee; Hadil, 14, in the back; and Ghadir in the left foot. Doctors said that their wounds were light. It appeared that my sister-in-law and her children mentioned above also sustained light wounds. About three hours later, they all left the hospital. My family and I went to the house of my brother Muhammad, 50, in the same neighbourhood.The next morning, I went to check on my home. I saw that it had been destroyed. The roof was completely destroyed. I also saw the grave damage caused to the walls of the house, windows, furniture and contents. About ten metres north of my home, I saw an almost eight-metre-deep hole on adjacent agricultural land, which belonged to my family. It appeared that the Israeli military aircraft had fired two missiles towards the land. Additionally, I saw that the house of my brother Awad, 53, was destroyed. With the roof ripped apart, the house windows, walls, furniture and contents were gravely damaged. My brother’s one-storey house had a surface area of 120 square metres and was roofed with tin and asbestos sheets. He lived in the house along with his wife and seven children.I would like to note that my home is no longer fit for residence. My family and I now reside at my brother Mohammed’s.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 26 November 2012