Affidavit No. 3975/2007
2007
On Thursday 22 November 2007, I was at home, located in the middle of al-Far’a Refugee Camp, Jenin Governorate, in the vicinity of Toubas city. I was with my mother Yusra ‘Isa, 62, my sister Iman Subhi ‘Abd-al-Jawad, 23, and my sister-in-law Risal Muhammad As’ad, 25. At 3:30 am, I heard loud knocking on the door and someone shouting “Open the door; we are the Israeli Defence Army! Anyone who tries to run away will subject his life to danger. This place is under siege.” At that moment we realised that the Israeli army was raiding al-Far’a Camp. We then heard the sound of explosives in the vicinity of our home. It seemed to me that these were sound bombs launched by the Israeli soldiers to wake up the residents of the camp.The soldiers tried to break down the door by fiercely kicking it. I quickly ran to the door and opened it so it would not be broken by the soldiers. As soon as I opened the door, I saw about 20 soldiers in the area around my home and in the narrow streets nearby. All the Israeli soldiers were wearing the regular olive green military uniform and carrying modern weapons that were black. Several of these soldiers had painted their faces black and others were wearing black masks, which frightened us. One of the soldiers shouted in Arabic, telling me to leave with all those who were in the house. Together with my mother, sister and sister-in-law, I went out into the severe cold. One of the soldiers inspected me by passing his hands over my body, and then asked if there was anybody at home. I said no, and he threatened to kill me if he found anybody inside the house. Then the Israeli soldiers sent my sister Iman to the house and told her to open all the doors and switch on all the lights. Meanwhile, the soldiers held us outside the house while a large number of them, around 15 soldiers, entered the house to search it.The search took around half an hour, during which we were held outside in the very cold winter weather. The soldiers searched through everything, and at approximately4:30 am they left the house. As they were leaving, one of the soldiers approached me and introduced himself as officer “Shalom”. This officer was of medium size, withwhite skin, around 30 years old and he spoke Arabic. He showed me two photos of two young men from al-Far’a Camp: Hamada Milhem and Samer al-Ghoul, both of them Islamic Jihad activists and “wanted” by the Israeli occupying forces. Immediately, I recognised both of these two young persons, and told the officer that I knew them because they are citizens of my camp. I also said that I do not have any relationship with them. Two Israeli soldiers then put me inside one of their jeeps, after which they cuffed myhands and covered my eyes. The jeep moved and left the camp while the soldiers were beating me all over my body. We reached an Israeli military camp, which I had not known of before. They put me inside a room where I recognised eight other young people from al-Far’a Camp. All had been arrested with me on the same day, as I discovered when one of the Israeli soldiers registered our names.Our detention continued for 12 hours under very bad conditions. During that time the soldiers only gave us water and no food. They continued to cover our eyes and cuffour hands for the entire 12 hours. I felt that there were persons taking photos of us. At approximately 6:00 pm on the same day, the eight young men and I were put in amilitary bus which drove around for one hour. Then the bus stopped and one of the soldiers told me and another guy called Naser Ishteiwi, a citizen of al-Far’a camp, toget out. After we got out one of the soldiers uncuffed our hands and uncovered our eyes, and told us to return to our camp.I then realised that we had been inside a white bus with protective mesh around all its windows and were now released in al-‘Oja village in the Jordan valley district. Naser Ishteiwi and I returned to al-Far’a Camp, arriving at 10:00 pm of the same day. When I arrived home, my mother told me that the Israeli soldiers stole 300 Shekels, a golden chain and another piece of gold, “a golden bead,” while they were searching our home. This was in addition to inflicting heavy damage on the house’s furniture and other contents. It is worth noting that neither I nor my brothers are wanted by the Israeli soldiers or belong to any Palestinian resistance movement. This military  operation led to the arrest of eight young people from the camp, five of whom were released. Moreover, the Israeli soldiers searched many of the houses and damaged their contents and furniture, and filled the hearts of the camp citizens with fear with their brutality and the way they raided the houses.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 8 December 2007Signature: Majdi ‘Abd-al-Jawad