Affidavit No. 4308/2008
2008
On Friday 11 July 2008, I was at the wedding party of a friend of mine in al-Laqlaq Tower, in the old city of Jerusalem. At about 1:00 am on 12 July 2008, a number of my friends and I left the wedding hall. We went to my friend's car, which was parked near the Lion's Gate. Approximately 300 hundred metres away from the car we encountered three Israeli Border Guard soldiers. When we were three metres away, they shouted and ordered us to stop. A soldier ordered us to go back home."In order for me to reach my home, you have to allow me to reach the car. We live in the area of 'Atarot," I said in Hebrew. "Go home!" he yelled. While I tried to talk to him, he attacked me. He beat my back with a club. My friends and I fled to al-Laqlaq Tower. The soldiers chased us for a period of 300 metres and then they stopped.Our friends were still in al-Laqlaq Tower. They informed us that a state of alert was declared among occupying troops. Two soldiers had been injured during a Palestinian attack. I waited in al-Laqlaq Tower for about an hour an a half. Then, a group of youths and I decided to leave for our houses. I believe there were about 40 of us. I estimate that it was between 2:30 am and 3:00 am when we reached Herod's Gate.When we arrived at the al-Sa'diyya neighbourhood, we encountered four Border Guards and Captain Shai, officer of the Haram Police. Most of the youths fled, but Mu’tasem al-Atrash and I remained. I stopped and raised my arms. A Border Guard approached me. Another pushed me against a wall and ordered me not to move.Captain Shai came along and took my ID card and Mu’tasem's ID card. Then he left along with two soldiers. The two other soldiers stayed with us. Minutes later, the soldiers escorted us to another area near al-Laqlaq Tower. There the soldiers took me to a corner, where Mu’tasem could not see me. A soldier ordered me to stand against a wall so he could to search me. He also ordered me to separate my legs. He kicked my feet apart. I raised my arms. As he started to search me, he punched my waist and back with his fist. I felt an immense pain. Then, he pulled me from behind and told me to go and sit with my friend. The soldier was of white complexion and tall. A black soldier came along and took Mu’tasem to the same corner where I had been and brought him back beside me several minutes later. Afterwards, the soldiers took us back to the yard of al-Laqlaq Tower.Having entered, we saw youths sitting on the ground. We sat with them. They told us that the soldiers took their ID cards. For almost an hour, we were prevented from talking to one another or moving. Soldiers ordered us to switch off our mobile telephones. Then, they took us all to the Lion's Gate and assembled us in a line until a number of interrogators arrived. The interrogators sprayed a substance on our hands to show if we had used any weapons. They also questioned us. A soldier called us one by one, according to the sequence of the ID cards which he held.However, he did not call my name and I was the last to be summoned to interrogators. "Come," the soldier shouted to me. "Where is your ID card?" he asked me. "Captain Shai took it," I answered. "Captain Shai gave me all the ID cards. Yours is not with them. You are lying." he said. I could not find my ID card. No police officer said that they had taken my ID card. As the next day was a Saturday, I could not report to any Israeli department. Since I live in the area of Kufr 'Aqab and have to cross Qalandiya checkpoint, I stayed at my grandfather's in Shu'fat. On Sunday, 13 July 2008, I went to the Ministry of Interior offices and obtained a new ID card, after eight hours of questioning about how I had lost my old ID card.