Affidavit No. 7170/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Muhammad Hasan Qirresh Bazzar, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 986146314, born in 1944, a livestock breeder, and a resident of the Betillo village, Ramallah governorate, would like to declare the following:I own and tend eight sheep as a hobby. I am an old man and my left hand is amputated. We use the sheep milk at home. At around 3:00 pm on Thursday, 19 February 2012, I took the sheep out to an area called Ath Thuhour east of the village. I was at a distance of about one kilometre from the Israeli settlement constructed in that area, which is known as the ‘Nahla’il’ settlement. I was about 200 metres away from the last house in the village. It was very cold and windy in that open area. About an hour later, when I was turning my head towards the village, I felt a strong blow on the left side of my waist and fell to the ground. When I looked up, I saw five masked Israeli settlers, who were between 15 and 20 years of age. They started to beat me with their feet on all parts of my body, especially on the left side of my waist. I shouted at them, but could not defend myself due to my disability and old age. No one in the village could hear me because of the cold and windy weather. The settlers continued to beat me for about half an hour. Then, a settler sprayed gas in my face and my eyes started to shed tears. I could not open my eyes. A settler told me in broken Arabic “Go home”. Later, the settlers left the area. I saw them going to the ‘Nahla’il’ settlement.I got up and returned to my home. I leaned on a stick and could hardly walk because of the severe pain. I reached my home after I had walked for almost half a kilometre. My brother took me to the Ramallah Governmental Hospital. Based on medical tests, it appeared that I sustained contusions on the left kidney and spleen as well as a bone fracture on my left ribs. I stayed at the hospital for three days for medical attention and treatment. On Sunday afternoon, I was discharged from the hospital. I continue to receive medical treatment at home.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 22 February 2012