Affidavit No. 1647/2004
2004
I am one  of the residents of Yamoun, which lies to the west of Jenin and has a  population of 17,000. My eight brothers, six sisters, elderly mother and  I had relied on the produce of our agricultural land as a source of  income. This land lies in Ben-‘Amer valley to the northern side of  Yamoun and reaches up to 24 dunums where we used to grow wheat, barley  and the like. Ever since we were born, we worked in our land, which lies  on the Green Line that separates [Israel] and the West Bank.In the  past, we were not subjected to any harassment by the Israeli Army until  the outbreak of the al-Aqsa Intifada. When Ariel Sharon, who heads the  current Israeli government, started talking about his intention of  building a Separation Wall on the length of the Green Line to limit  suicide attacks, according to his claims, we felt afraid and worried to  the fate of our land. Our fears were manifested one day when we found  the bulldozers and Israeli vehicles digging up our land, which we had  inherited from our ancestors and our fathers. We tried several times to  stand in the face of these machines, but the border police of the  Israeli army were forcing us to leave under the threat of weapons and  such. We had found out that a Separation Wall was erected in the area  where our land is located and that more than 20 dunums out of 24 had  been confiscated and is now behind the wall, i.e. annexed to [Israel].  This traumatized us and inflicted a dire financial situation upon us.  Due to grief on the loss of her land, my elderly mother, Zlikha Saleh  ‘Abahra, aged 70, developed diabetes.Two weeks ago, my brothers and I  headed towards our land, or the four dunums left of it, in order to  cultivate it. The border police came to us and asked us the reason we  are present here near the Separation Wall. We replied that we want to  cultivate our land, but they prevented us by threatening us with  weapons, therefore we had to leave the area.Our agricultural land used  to generate a profit of approximately 2000 JD a year, on which we lived  on all year long. Now, my brothers and I are deprived of this income; we  are unemployed and have no other source of income. Then I had to work  in the municipality of Yamoun, with a salary of NIS 1300 per month,  which I divide among us in order to meet their basic needs.I  remember once while the Israeli bulldozers were digging our land, I went  to the Jewish contractor in charge of the work, and I told him “this  land is ours and do not dig it.” He replied sarcastically “Get out of  here! You do not own any land. We are the true owners of the land.” He  asked me to leave and threatened to summon the Israeli soldiers if we  did not leave the land. Now after the finishing of the Separation Wall  in that area, the land is no longer ours. Moreover, now that the  construction of the Separation wall in that area has finished a street  has been built on vast parts of it, as well as a metal fence along the  Green Line. Our land is number 36 in plot number 7. In addition, 24  dunums of land, owned by my uncle Yousef Suleiman ‘Abahra were  confiscated. This led to the deterioration of our financial and  psychological state. Currently my brothers, sisters andmyself  live with the hope that one day our land will return to us, but when  will that day arrive? We have been waiting for the return of Palestine  for a long time, but now we are waiting for the return of only 24 dunums  of Palestine.Signed on 17 February 2004