Affidavit No. 1561/2004
2004
On Sunday  30 November 2003, at around 12:00 midnight, I woke up from my sleep by  the sounds of Israeli military vehicles and the shooting of live  ammunition directed at Al Ama'ri refugee camp. I could not sleep during  that night and at around 2:00 am on 1 December 2003 [2 hours later], I  heard Israeli soldiers impose a curfew through their loudspeakers until  further notice. They came back at around 4:00 am and confirmed the  curfew. Throughout that period I heard showers of live bullets in the  eastern side of the camp.After I  made some phone-calls to inquire, I found out that the Israeli soldiers  were besieging Al Ramahi building which is on the eastern side of the  Jerusalem - Ramallah Road (the camp being on the western side). At  around 8:00 am, people were watching the proceedings of the Israeli  military operation against Al Ramahi building. I intended to meet with a  group of people in a neighborhood known as "Al Hadathiyah", and which  is located in Al 'Odeh camp, in front of the eastern entrance to Al  Ama'ri refugee camp. When I reached the street that is only 150 metres  away from Al Ramahi building and the Al 'Adassi Brick Factory, I saw  Israeli military vehicles, eight military jeeps, two military  bulldozers, two dark olive green "border police" jeeps, a Hummer jeep  and a GMC military car. There was random shooting of live and  rubber-coated metal bullets and tear gas grenades towards the young men  and children who were throwing stones at the Israeli soldiers. After the  news of the death of the two cadres from Hamas, Salah Al Talahmeh &  Sayyed Sheikh Qasem, had spread, I saw a child standing next to Al  Anwar supermarket on the main street get shot by a live bullet in his  left foot.At round  1:00 pm, I was standing near Al Hanash Gas Station in Al Hadathiyah  neighbourhood, watching the movement of the Israeli occupying forces. In  addition there were around 30 children in the whole area, and the  situation was relatively calm with no stone-throwing and no shooting. In  addition, the large number of soldiers and military vehicles were  withdrawing form the area. A group of four to five children standing on  the sidewalk of a small road directly opposite Al 'Adassi Brick Factory  where two Israeli "border police" jeeps were located, 130-150 meters  away form the children. One of these children was Mo'ayad Hamdan (9)  from the camp, and he stood there facing the Israeli soldiers. When the  sound of gunfire was heard, the child Mo'ayad, fell to the ground on his  back, bleeding from his head. Then I shouted as loud as I could:  “Ambulance! Ambulance!” All the children surrounding him fled the area  and while a man standing next to me called Sabr Mohammed Jibrin ran  towards the child and carried him in his arms. I called an ambulance,  which transferred him to the hospital. Twenty minutes later I learned  that the child Mo'ayad has become a martyr.