Affidavit No. 2777/2006
2006
On Monday, 6 February 2006, at around 7:00 pm, I arrived at the Barta'a checkpoint, positioned at the Separation Wall, on my way back to my home in Barta'a. The village of Barta'a is located in Jenin Governorate, behind the Separation Wall, about 28 kilometres to the south of Jenin city. Barta'a has a population of 4,500 people. One of the soldiers at the checkpoint asked me to pass through a metal detector. I did so without setting off the alarm indicating I was carrying metal. In spite of this, the soldier told me to pass through the gate again. I did so three consecutive times without setting off the alarms.The soldier gave me my ID card and asked me to enter a room for further inspection. He opened the door to the room and I entered. He closed the door and then opened another door. I felt as if I was inside a labyrinth. There were many doors and they all opened and closed electronically. It was as if I was in a castle with many doors and windows. After entering and exiting three rooms, I entered a fourth room where I found a female Israeli soldier. A sheet of glass extending from the floor to the ceiling separated us. The room was 1.5 metres high and 1.5 metres wide.The female soldier was seated on a chair at a table where there was a computer. This soldier is known by the residents of Barta'a. Her name is "Innab" and she is around 20 years old, of medium build and has brown skin. She speaks Arabic with difficulty. She asked for my ID and I gave it to her through an opening in the glass. Suddenly, another door opened and the soldier asked me to enter a fifth room where I found two male Israeli soldiers. The room was made of cement and heavily fortified. One of the soldiers was carrying a comb and combing his hair.A piece of glass was attached to a cement wall in the middle of the room. The glass sheet, 30 centimetres wide and 30 centimetres long, separated me from the soldiers. I knew these two soldiers. One was a white man of medium build in his twenties. He spoke Hebrew. He asked me to take off my jacket and I did as he said. Then he asked me to remove the clothes from my upper body and my pants. I did as he said and was left in my underwear.The two soldiers started laughing at me hysterically. Then the same soldier who ordered me to remove my clothes asked me to take off my shoes and turn around. I saw writing in Arabic and Hebrew on the wall of the room. It said, ‘Additional Inspection.’ Believe me, even if you shouted in your loudest voice, no one would hear you from inside that small room. The soldiers did not find any metal objects on me throughout all the inspection processes I went through. I remained naked for around half an hour. After that, without any instruction from the soldiers, I put my clothes on. I believe that this room contained surveillance cameras. After half an hour, the Israeli soldiers returned my ID and allowed me to pass through the gate to Barta'a.These inspection rooms were constructed by the Israeli occupying forces at the barrier of Barta'a just two months ago. They were constructed to humiliate and suppress the citizens of Barta'a. This situation has had a negative psychological impact on its citizens. The people have become afraid to leave their village because they don't want to be subjected to humiliation in those closed rooms when they return to their village.We residents of Barta'a live in a state of upheaval as a result of the oppressive measures used by the Israeli soldiers. We fear that one day our women and girls will be obliged to enter that room and will be inspected in the same manner. All the male residents of Barta'a have been subjected to this type of inspection for approximately one month. Such electronic gates are typically installed at borders separating countries. The Israeli occupying forces have installed them at the entries to villages and cities to humiliate the Palestinian people. Who knows what the occupying forces will invent in the future to humiliate the residents of Barta'a. We appeal to human rights organizations, particularly Al-Haq, to immediately and rapidly intervene to save the residents of this town from further humiliation.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 7 February 2006.Signature: Mahmoud Ibrahim