Affidavit No. 3908/2007
2007
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Bahi Shihda Isma’il Zibdiyya, of Palestinian nationality, holder of Jordanian ID No 2970104054, born on 3 December 1970, a worker and a resident of al-Dhahriyya, Hebron Governorate, would like to declare the following:I support a family of four members: my wife and three children. I have been living in al-Dhahriyya since 1997. I was born in Jordan and came to Palestine for a visit and have not left since. I married a girl from al-Dhahriyya. Since 1997, I have been working in different places. Sometimes I work in the area of al-Sabe’ and other times I work in al-Dhahriyya. Al-Sabe’ is an Israeli area and I don’t have a permit to work there. The last time, which was a month ago, I worked in Tall al-Sabe’ which belongs to Bir al-Sabe’ city, with a Bedouin called Nayef al-A’sam.On Sunday, 21 October 2007, while at work, I heard that my name was on the list of persons who had been approved for “family unification”, which meant that I was now eligible to obtain a Palestinian identity card. On that day, I noticed extra movement by the Israeli army in the area. For that reason, I preferred to return home in the evening. I used Israeli transportation until I reached an area separating the lands occupied in 1948 and those occupied in 1967. This area is known as al-Ramadin.While I was walking alone at sunset, I did not see the Israeli army in the area. The car that had dropped me off had left, and after I walked approximately 300 metres I saw Israeli border guards. I recognised them from their uniforms. They came out from a hole in the ground. There were three or four of them, but I don’t know the exact number because they began beating me as soon as they saw me. They beat me with their hands, batons and feet. I fell on the ground and screamed in pain as two soldiers grasped my left leg and started to twist it at the ankle until I heard a noise from the joint that was accompanied by severe pain. I screamed.After that, the soldiers left, leaving me behind in pain. I tried to get up on my feet but could not. The pain was severe in both legs but worse in the left leg. I fell. I could not see anybody. I started to crawl toward al-Dhahriyya and specifically to al-Ramadin, trying to get away from that place. After I had managed to walk a few steps I saw a car approaching me. It was going to al-Ramadin, which is an Arab area. The car was transporting Arab workers who disembarked and headed to Bir al-Sabe’. I waited until the car came toward me and got into it.I asked the driver to take me to the nearest medical centre. Accordingly, he took me to al-Dhahriyya Medical centre in the municipality. The ride took about 20 minutes. I called my father who immediately came with my 29 year old brother Majdi and carried me in a taxi to the Hebron Governmental Hospital. The doctors there told me that I had a fracture and dislocation in my left ankle and another slight fracture in the right leg. I remained in the hospital until 25 October 2007. Until now I am still in bed. The doctor recommended that I stay in bed until 12 December 2007 without any movement, until I get re-examined. It is worth noting that I have undergone surgery so as to return the joint to its normal place and put gypsum on it.