Affidavit No. 3952/2007
2007
I am Ahmad Jum’a Ahmad al-Najjar, 64 years old and a citizen of Khuza’a, east of Khan Younis city. On Tuesday, 20 November 2007, at 12:10 pm, I was sitting in the living room of my home which is east of Khan Younis and approximately 800 metres from the border of the territories occupied in 1948 and now under Israeli control. In this area, we are used to the penetration of occupying forces and undercover IDF units sneaking through the border.At that time, I heard some people saying “Boina, Boina”, meaning “come on” and other words in Hebrew which I did not understand. I looked through the window  overlooking an eight-metre wide street opposite my home, and saw my 20 year old nephew Muhammad Zaki Jum’a al-Najjar, who is a second year engineering student. He was standing in the middle of the street about six metres from me. He was wearing civilian clothes and was raising his empty hands while looking to the left of my home towards the olive trees in the north. I heard Muhammad say in English “no problem” and he repeated this phrase seven times in a loud voice. I heard another person say “ha, English” and then “come here,” but I could not figure out the source of the voice as the persons were standing to the left side of my home where I could not see them.All of a sudden, I heard a bullet shot and saw Muhammad falling on the ground in the middle of the street, and placing his hand under his stomach. While I was watching, Iheard another shot and this bullet penetrated the window through which I was looking.  I fell on the ground and started to crawl, fearing that a bullet might hit me. I crept towards the door of my home and heard intense shooting from one side. I also heard the footsteps of more than one person speaking in Hebrew, which I did not understand.Then I heard three consecutive bullets on the door of my home. I remained lying on the floor behind the door for more than half an hour. At that point I heard an ambulance which stopped in front of my home. I went out and saw Muhammad lying on the ground about two metres from my home. He had put his right hand under his head and his face was facing the door of my home. He was bleeding from his chest, the bottom of his abdomen and from his head. He had been shot with several bullets and was lying in blood. I saw more than one patch of blood from the middle of the street to the place where Muhammad fell on the ground in front of my home.The attendants and I carried Muhammad into the ambulance. As the ambulance moved, I heard my cousins, who were standing 50 metres from us, shouting for the  ambulance to stop, saying “there is another wounded person”. I saw them carrying my cousin, Nidal Muhammad Salman al-Najjar, 37 years old. He was hit with a bullet in the back of his head and was bleeding. My cousins put their brother Nidal into the ambulance next to Muhammad, and it then headed to Naser Hospital in Khan Younis. On the second day we received news from Naser Hospital that Nidal had died as a result of being shot in the back of his head.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 22 November 2007Signature: Ahmad al-Najjar