Affidavit No. 2594/2005
2005
At  approximately 10:20 pm on Saturday, 6 October 2005, I was with my family  (my wife, five daughters and a little boy) at my home located in the  South Quarter of Toulkarem near al-Zakat hospital. Everything was normal  at home. While we were getting ready to go to bed, I heard knocking at  the door. I asked through the intercom who was knocking and a voice  answered, "We are your friends." I asked who these friends were and the  voice replied, "Get down and you will know." At that moment I became  suspicious of these people.I looked  from the balcony of our home, which is located on the second floor of  our family building. I saw three masked and armed people and a fourth  person sitting in a white car, Subaru model 83, which was parked in  front of our building. I repeated my question, “Who are you?” Then one  of the three men fired in the air saying, “Get down or I will shoot at  you.” Then another armed man fired two bullets at the downstairs door to  open it but he did not succeed as it was tightly closed with a security  lock from the inside.At that  moment I left the eastern balcony and went to the western balcony which  overlooks our neighbors. My wife, children and I started shouting for  help. The neighbors came but the armed men fired at anyone who tried to  approach the place. No one was injured, though. I called the Zakat  hospital and asked for an ambulance. An ambulance came but the armed men  also fired at the ambulance, preventing it from coming closer.  Suddenly, I sensed somebody jump into the kitchen through the balcony.  My 18-year-old daughter, Abrar, screamed when she saw an armed man come  toward the living room, which we were in. I went to the kitchen and my  wife, daughters and I started fighting with the armed man. The armed man  tried to pull me to the stairs but he was unsuccessful as I was able to  resist him. He then went down the stairs and opened the door, allowing  another armed man to enter.The two  men pulled me down despite my resistance and one of them hit me in the  eye and the other hit my leg with his gun, in addition to several blows  in different parts of my body. I would like to note that the armed men  were carrying Kalashnikovs. They put me in the back seat of the car, I  was put in the middle while two armed men sat both to the right and left  of me. Immediately, the armed men put a black mask with no openings  over my head. The car started to move and I believe that it moved toward  the south east of Toulkarem. They drove for approximately seven  minutes, during which the four armed men used bad words against me which  I find difficult to repeat. These words hurt me and the only thing I  said was, “Who are you?”In the  area south east of Toulkarem there are orchards, olive groves, and wild  areas, as well as the Palestinian Intelligence Forces headquarters. I am  familiar with every areaof  Toulkarem. They then took me out of the car and after two or three  minutes I heard people shouting and yelling, “You traitors, you spies,  we know who you are!”. The armed men fired toward those people and the  people responded by shooting back. Less than five minutes later, I was  moved to another car, still blindfolded.After the  car drove five minutes, I was again taken out of the car and proceeded  to walk with several persons for approximately four minutes in an area  planted with trees. I was walking on rocks and thorns with bare feet.  After a short period, one of the armed men asked me to sit on the ground  and lower my head. Then he made one guard watch me while the others  left. That guard was holding the mouth of his gun close to my back.  During my detention, which lasted around three hours, I asked twice to  urinate and was allowed while under guard. By then, I believe it had  become 11:00 pm. During the time I was held in this area, I heard mosque  loudspeakers call for my release, in addition to calls for people to go  on marches and call for my release and to protest against my detention.  When this happened, I heard crowds of people demanding my release. I  realized that I was in a place very close to Toulkarem. I also realized  that my kidnappers were Palestinian.This  situation continued until 2:00 am on Friday, 7 October 2005, when  several people arrived and two men, including the one who was guarding  me, helped me walk for approximately seven minutes without talking to  me. We stopped and one of the men said, “We know that you are a  respected man and we only want to apologise to you for what happened and  hope that the men have not hurt you.” I said, “There is no harm more  than the harm that my family and I have sustained." I told them that the  armed men assaulted my wife and daughters by beating them and asked  them under which law this could take place. One of the men said, “You  know the circumstances, and this operation is a message to Hamas." I  said, "But this message was sent to the wrong address," meaning that I  am not one of Hamas' symbols; therefore, a message to Hamas should not  be sent through a person like me. The same man said, “Anyhow, we believe  that you want to maintain our safety, so don’t take off the mask for  the next five minutes."After  they left, I took the mask off and found myself in an area planted with  trees in the Naser orchard, south east of Toulkarem. I walked until I  reached the main street and returned home with the help of my friends  and relatives. I arrived at my home at 2:20 am. On my way home, I felt  that all of Toulkarem was awake: there were people and cars on the  streets, and all houses were lit. At home, I found hundreds of people  waiting for my return.I call  all the honest people and all the Palestinian people to national unity  and cohesion, and to avoid such operations which will have negative  impacts on the society. I do not accuse anybody of kidnapping me but at  the same time I say that the kidnappers wanted to send a message to  Hamas through me. I don't think that anyone could commit this act unless  they were well-prepared and organized. What happened to me has also  happened to other people in Hebron, Bethlehem, Nablus, and Jenin.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 14 October 2005Signature: Riyad 'Awad