Affidavit No. 3394/2007
2007
At the end of 1999, I decided to build a house on the land I own beside my home in Sour Baher village, which is located to the south-east of Jerusalem. The plot of land on which I wanted to build is located amongst several houses that were built a long time ago. To the west of the land in question, there is a road linking the southern and the western sides of the village. This road is approximately 600 metres from the land on which I decided to build.The actual work started with the excavation of the land. Construction of the building began in 2000. I would like to emphasise that before starting the construction work, I went to the relevant institutions of the Jerusalem Municipality responsible for issuing construction licenses. I wanted to obtain details regarding the procedure for obtaining a license. I also wanted to know the cost and fees required for obtaining a construction licence. At that time, I discovered that the fee for obtaining a construction license from the Jerusalem Municipality was 150,000 shekels. The procedure did not require the submission of an application or any supporting documents. Accordingly, I decided to build without submitting documents or applying for a license. The construction of the basic frame of the building was completed in mid-2001. It consisted of four floors. Each floor consisted of two apartments, of approximately 180 square metres each. The estimated total area of the building was therefore intended to be over 1300 square metres, so that my four sons, Muhammad, Saber, Ahmad and Mousa, could live in it and rent the houses.On 30 November 2004, officials from the Jerusalem Municipality came to the building and posted a demolition order issued by the mayor of Jerusalem in the name of the Jerusalem Municipality. The order was to be implemented within 30 days of being issued. I was not at home when the municipality officials came, so I only saw the demolition order posted on the building when I came home. It is worth noting that the demolition order was not directed towards a specific person. It did not bear the name of the landlord of the building.I immediately went to a lawyer, Samer Irsheid, and showed him the demolition order. The lawyer submitted a request to the District Court of Building Affairs to postpone the demolition. At each subsequent session of discussion, we succeeded in obtaining six-month postponements on the demolition. However, this was under the condition that we obtain a building license.At the first court session, we began work on obtaining a building license by applying to the Jerusalem Municipality. The District Court continued discussing our case until 13 September 2006, upon which date the case was transferred to the Israeli Central Court, which further postponed the demolition order to November 2006. During the postponement and extension periods, we tried to obtain a building license through the relevant institutions of the Jerusalem Municipality. Each one of the institutions requested special procedures such as a land survey and the submission of a non-objection document from the neighbours.All of these requirements entailed the payment of various fees. I believe it was on 29 November that the Israeli Central Court ruled that the case should be closed until 22 January if no progress was achieved in obtaining a building license.I was unable to obtain a license due to the bureaucratic obstructions of the Jerusalem Municipality that exist with regard to obtaining a building license for East Jerusalem. On the morning of 22 January 2007, at precisely 8:00 am, more than 100 Israeli military and police vehicles, in addition to border police jeeps that were carrying soldiers in green border police uniforms, came to the building. Some of the soldiers were carrying small guns, which I believe were automatic guns. Others were dressed in grey, the uniform of the Israeli special squads. They were accompanied by four dogs and two yellow bulldozers. “Volvo” and the name of the contractor, “Peres,” were written on one of the bulldozers, while “Caterpillar” and the name of the same contractor were written on the other. The Israeli officers besieged the entire area and prevented residents from coming near.I was in my home, located near the building. I went outside and saw the large number of soldiers and policemen. As I approached a yard that leads to the building, a soldier dressed in grey grasped my hand strongly and then grabbed me forcefully by the neck. Approximately ten soldiers carrying batons and guns then gathered around me. They pushed me away from the yard, and then prevented me from returning to my home. The soldiers began to push me and beat me with their hands and batons on various parts of my body until I fell to the ground. While I was lying on the ground, a soldier tied my hands with plastic handcuffs before lifting me up and forcefully pushing me into a jeep that had arrived in the meantime.After a few minutes in the jeep, the soldiers brought my son-in-law, Abu-Zeid 'Awadallah. He also had his hands cuffed and they pushed him into the military jeep. The jeep then headed towards an Israeli police station located in the vicinity of Sour Baher. There, we were put into an uncovered yard where we remained for about ten hours without charge, and without any food and only one bottle of water.After our release, at 8:00 pm on 22 January 2007, I returned home to find the four-storey residential building demolished along with all of its contents, including furniture and household appliances. I estimate that the losses resulting from the destruction stand at about 3,000,000 shekels. This material damage is in addition to the physical and psychological impact of being beaten, after the soldiers assaulted me on 22 January 2007, the day of the demolition.