Affidavit No. 6779/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Nahil Dawoud Ra’fat Bazbazat, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 300500899, born on 04 November 1987, an administrative assistant at Al-Shou’a’ Women’s Society, and a resident of Wadi al-Jouz, Jerusalem governorate, would like to declare the following:On Tuesday 25 October 2011 at 12:30 pm, Israeli occupying forces broke into Al-Shou’a’ Women’s Society headquarters located in Shu’fat Refugee Camp to the northeast of Jerusalem. Details of what happened were as follows: I was at the Society’s offices, accompanied by a volunteer and Ms. 'Abeer Abu Khadir as a visitor, when I heard a knock on the society’s door and a person shouting: "What’s this place?”. I answered: "Al-Shou’a’ Women’s Society", and immediately headed to open the door without even looking through the magic eye. I was surprised to see members of the Israeli occupying forces entering into the headquarters of the society. While one of the occupying soldiers was asking me "What are you doing here?” Within a few seconds, there were several more soldiers inside the building. The headquarters is located on the second floor, and is composed of a reception hall and three rooms. I witnessed about twenty members of the Israeli occupying forces; about ten of whom were wearing green uniforms from which I could tell that they were Border Guards. There were also about ten members of the Israeli Special Forces; I was able to identify them through their black uniforms. Additionally, I estimate that there were about four or five members from the Israeli Intelligence as they were dressed in civilian clothing. The Border Guards and members of the Israeli Special Forces were carrying machine guns and I noticed one of the intelligence officers holding a gun; I did not really pay attention to the others. When I asked one of them who they were, he showed me an identification card written in Hebrew. Although I do not know Hebrew, I realised that they must have come by an order of the Israeli Police Force, as I could identify the police logo displayed on the card.The Police Officer did not show me any search warrant. Despite my repeated requests: "Why are you here, and what are you doing?,” he kept answering: “Now you will see”. He never showed me a search warrant, and began to ask me, the volunteer and the visitor for our identity card numbers, our phone numbers and about the phone number of the head of the society, Mrs. Nufouz Al-Maslamani.I told him that I can call her for you, and indeed I dialed her number from my own cell phone, and he started talking with her in fluent Arabic, explaining that there is a closure order against this society because it is allegedly affiliated to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP). He mentioned several influential names working in the society and affiliated to the PFLP, like the head of the society: Mrs. Nufouz Al-Maslamani, Mrs. Basima Shalaldeh, Mrs. Abeer Abu Khadir and Mrs. Mageda Alqam.During this operation I was waiting at the reception hall, the volunteer was in the conference room and ‘Abeer Abu Khadir was in the corridor. We were not personally searched, but soldiers were aggressively talking to us saying "we want to close this place, take your belongings”. I noticed that the occupying forces did not inspect the headquarters carefully did not inspect any papers, but they entered rooms and checked our Identity cards. The operation lasted about half an hour, and then the occupying forces took the key of the headquarters from me and said: "come on, get out". They then attached a paper in Hebrew and another in Arabic on the door of the society. The paper in Arabic – which I was able to read since I cannot read Hebrew stated that the society is affiliated with the PFLP, and that it will be closed for a period of 30 days with a possible extension of one year, and that an appeal against the decision must be lodged within 15 days.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 27 October 2011