Affidavit No. 5027/2009
2009
On Monday, 20 July 2009, I left the city of „Amman, Jordan and travelled to King Husein Bridge to get back to the Palestinian territory. According to applicable procedures, I had to cross the Israeli border after I left the Jordanian border and before I entered the Palestinian territory. On the Israeli side of the borders, I waited for about an hour and a half to have my ID card returned. During this time, no one talked to me.Later, two persons in civil uniforms requested that I bring my luggage and accompany them. I did not ask who they were, but I had a sense they were from the Intelligence. When we reached a room, they thoroughly searched and inspected my luggage for almost half an hour. During the search, an Intelligence officer found two DVDs. On a wireless radio device, he told someone about what he had found in my bags. He spoke in Hebrew, which I understood. Officers kept me at a distance when they searched my luggage. They also searched me.At around 2:00 pm, the Intelligence officer left the room and did not ask me about anything. They left me alone in a corridor for almost four hours. At around 6:00 pm, the Intelligence officer came along with two border guard officers. Immediately, they tied my hands with iron handcuffs and blindfolded me.Taking me outside, I felt that they were putting me into a military jeep. After it drove for about 15 minutes, the jeep stopped. Officers made me step out into an open area. I heard the sound of vehicles as well as conversations in Hebrew. Despite the fact that I was blindfolded, I felt that there were persons crossing in front of me and felt that others were standing directly in front of me. As I also heard the sound of a camera, I felt that they were taking photographs of me. I did not talk to anyone in that area. I was there for about an hour and a half. They then took me to a room where they removed the blindfold and handcuffs.I realised I was in a medical examination room. There was some medical equipment and a doctor, along with the two Border Guard officers, who had arrested me on the bridge. A nurse measured my blood pressure. The doctor asked if I had had any surgical operations. The diagnosis did not exceed 15 minutes, during which the doctor filled out an application that had been placed on his desk. Thereafter, the two Border Guard officers blindfolded and handcuffed me. They took me out of the room, and I felt that I was in the open yard again. About 45 minutes later, they dragged me to the jeep again, which drove for almost half an hour.So far, I did not know why I had been detained. No one questioned me. I also did not know where the jeep was travelling. After it stopped, I was forced out. As I was still blindfolded, an officer told me that I was then in „Ofar Prison in Beituniya. Having walked for several metres, I felt myself entering a closed place. They removed my blindfold and handcuffs. I found myself in a large container, where they took my personal belongings and filled out a relevant list. Again, they searched my luggage. As they moved my belongings onto the table, I did not see the DVDs, my cellular telephone, or either of my two telephone SIM cards. Meanwhile, a soldier told me that I was being detained and that I would be sent to prison. I requested that I call my family, but they refused. They took me to Section 5 in „Ofar Prison, which is comprised of tents. I believe it was 10:30 pm. I was exhausted and fell asleep.At noon on Tuesday, 21 July 2009, a prison officer told me that a lawyer was waiting for me in the visiting room. I met with Lawyer Miri, who had been delegated by a human rights organisation. Police officers were also present in the room. The lawyer inquired about what had happened to me from the time I had been arrested on the bridge until the time of his visit. He also informed me that I would be interrogated the next day and later brought to the court.I said that all demonstrations I had participated in were peaceful, but soldiers open fire on us in an excessive and indiscriminate manner.