Affidavit No. 4008/2008
2008
I support a family of nine members, comprising my wife and children. My three brothers and their families, counting 22 persons, and I collectively own 140 dunums of land. This land is located 1.5 kilometres north of al-Rihiyya town and south of Hagay, or the Beit Hagay settlement, established in 1983. This land is planted with fruit trees such as olives and almonds. These trees are 20 to 30 years old. I surrounded the land with barbed wires to protect it from wild animals and shepherds who used to graze their cattle in the vicinity of the land. In April 2007, while my 66 year old mother was on the land and in the presence of other Palestinian citizens who were nearby, five Israeli settlers destroyed a part of the wire. These settlers were carrying machine guns and started cursing my mother.Following that incident and specifically on 20 April 2007, my brother Mousa al-Hallaq, who is 27 years old, submitted a complaint to the Israeli police. Consequently, and at the request of the Israeli police who wanted to verify the damage, I accompanied them to the land. As they saw the damage, they wondered why the settlers had committed such acts especially considering the fact that the land is far from the settlement. On 15 June 2007, I found a notification fixed on the barbed wire of the land. I did not understand what this announcement meant. In July 2007, I went to the Israeli civil administration in ‘Atsyon where my brother had previously inquired about the notification.The spokesperson of the civil administration in ‘Atsyon accused me of having planted new olives trees that year. I denied this assumption, reassuring him that I had not planted any new trees and that all the trees were older than 20 years. After this discussion, the person in charge of properties, whose name I do not remember, told me to submit an objection. I submitted a written objection explaining the ownership history of my land as well as a description of the kinds of trees planted on the land. In the morning of 31 December 2007, I was surprised to see a large number of Israeli soldiers accompanied by two yellow Caterpillar bulldozers coming towards my land. They started removing the barbed wire surrounding it. Many citizens gathered in the area. There were confrontations between citizens throwing stones at the soldiers and the soldiers who responded by opening fire and spraying tear gas at the Palestinian citizens. Four citizens fainted because of the gas. In addition, the bulldozers uprooted the olive trees from the land of Jamil Hallaq whose land is neighbouring ours. The soldiers stayed for more than two hours before they left.When they finally left, I discovered that 145 of the iron bars holding the wire had been destroyed. In other words, 650 of the total 1300 metres of barbed wire surrounding the land had been destroyed.I will continue to submit complaints to the Israeli police because my brothers and I inherited this land from our father. For 50 years, we have been using, planting and taking care of it. No military order was ever issued to confiscate our land.