Affidavit No. 1886/2004
2004
At 1:30  am Thursday, 10 June 2004, my 25-year-old son Ma'moun Abu-al-Hasan came  to my home, which is located in Ein Ninah at the South entrance of Jenin  near al-Jabriyat. Ma'moun is fugitive and wanted by the Israeli army  due to his being an activist with the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades. Ma'moun  sat at home and his mother made dinner for him and as he was finishing  his dinner, at exactly 2:00 am, I sensed movement in our front yard.  This was followed by fierce knocking at the door, accompanied by someone  yelling, "Open the door, and open the door." We realised that the  Israeli army came to arrest my son Ma'moun Abu-al-Hasan.Ma'moun  answered, "Yes, I am going to open." But instead, Ma'moun went to the  kitchen located in the southwest direction of our home. He opened the  kitchen door and went out. This door leads to a wall that separates my  brother Hasan Yousef Abu-al-Hasan's home from mine. Immediately, I heard  heavy gunfire, and immediately I realised that something happened to my  son Ma'moun Abu-al-Hasan. My wife opened the home's eastern door where  eight military soldiers, with their faces painted black, entered our  home. At first, soldiers asked us to go out of our home. There were  three of us at home: my wife, daughter and me. We went out to our  eastern yard where soldiers asked us, in Arabic, to sit down on the  ground. I told one of the soldiers who was tall, with his face painted  black, and spoke fluent Arabic, that I was sick and cannot sit on the  ground. He said to me, "Shut up." So I was obliged to sit on the ground  and the same soldier asked me if there was anybody at home and I told  him that there was nobody. He answered, "If I find anybody, even a  child, I will kill him".Five  soldiers broke into the home and started to search it thoroughly. The  inspection process lasted half an hour and then they went out of our  home. Then I saw them heading towards the home of my son Mou'tasem  Abu-al-Hasan, married with five children. His home is located close to  mine to the north. The soldiers evacuated my son, his wife, and children  from their home and made them sit beside us on the ground. Mou'tasem's  children, the eldest being five years, were crying out of extreme fear.  The soldiers broke into Mou'tasem's house and searched it as they did  our home. The Israeli army stayed in the area of our home until 4:30 am.  Two soldiers were leading my son Mou'tasem to the southwest direction  of our home, from where my son Ma'moun escaped, and suddenly I heard  Mou'tasem shouting, "Ma'moun, Ma'moun." Then Mou'tasem was taken towards  the military jeeps that were positioned on the asphalt road to the  south of our home. The Israeli forces left, taking with them my son  Mou'tasem.We  returned first to our home where we found extensive damage everywhere as  a result of the brutal search operation, and then I heard my brother  Hasan Abu-al-Hasan shout, "Ma'moun, God almighty." I hurried towards him  where I found my son Ma'moun Abu-al-Hasan lying with his face down on  the ground behind the wall separating my home from my brother's. Ma'moun  was lying at the southwest side of the wall, in my brother's yard. My  son Ma'moun was shot from the back and killed with bullets in his head,  back and feet. We carried him to Jenin Governmental Hospital by a  Palestinian ambulance and buried him on the second day in the Martyrs'  cemetery. I thought that Ma'moun had been able to escape.It is  worth noting that Ma'moun was not armed when he was shot, and the  soldiers did not ask him to stop; they opened fire on him directly  without any warning. It seems that the Israeli army had besieged the  area around our home half an hour before the incident, but nobody was  aware of their presence. Moreover, the collaborators played a great role  in watching and liquidating my son Ma'moun Abu-al-Hasan. I am also the  father of Mahmoud Abu-al-Hasan, known as "the Zari'ni." He was the  leader of the Black Leopard group during the first intifada, and Israeli  soldiers assassinated him on 22 July 1992.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 29 June 2004