Affidavit No. 2955/ 2006
2006
I work as a teacher in the Arab Orphan School located in 'Atarot industrial area north of Jerusalem. According to the classification of the Israeli occupation, the area in which the school located is part of Israel. I have been working at the school since 1981 (for 25 years). I live in Ramallah, which is in the jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority. Since starting to work at the school, which provides educational services for students from the West Bank and Jerusalem, I have experienced periods of radical change. The most difficult of these was in 2002 when the Israeli occupying forces invaded Ramallah and positioned barriers between it and Jerusalem. Before that, it took me only 10 minutes by car to go from home to school. Since 2002, I have not been able to reach school by car because the Qalandiya barrier prevents the passage of Palestinian cars. I am a West Bank Palestinian and my car holds a Palestinian registration plate, so I am prohibited from passing by car through Qalandiya. Since 2005, when construction of the Wall in North Jerusalem area began, the Israeli occupying authorities have tightened the restrictions that prevent vehicles with yellow plates from carrying Palestinians from the West Bank and prevent Palestinian vehicles from reaching the 'Atarot area, so I have been obliged to walk from the Qalandiya barrier to school in 'Atarot area.Since 5 April 2006, after the completion of 90% of the Wall in North Jerusalem and the opening of the so-called “'Atarot crossing,” reaching my school has become very complicated. I cannot go through the 'Atarot crossing, as it is only for people who hold permits, so I can only go from Ramallah to Bir Nabala through the new Rafat road. From there, I sneak through 'Atarot buildings near Bir Nabala village. Whether or not this route works depends on what presence the Israeli army has there on a given day. Between 5 April 2006 and 6 May 2006, I have been absent from school six days. On each of these days, I came from Bir Nabala and reached the beginning of 'Atarot but because there was such heavy Israeli army presence there, I returned home.In addition, I have not been able to obtain a permit that would allow me to travel through the ‘Atarot crossing. Another difficulty is the cost of transportation. Right now I pay 13 shekels from Ramallah to Bir Nabala and back while in the past through the Qalandiya road I only used to pay 4 shekels. More importantly, the current situation has forced me to set aside several alternative plans to deal with this situation. The school annual plan has become difficult to implement. Every day a new development occurs that forces us to change our plans accordingly. I consider every day that I spend at school my last day there.Since the beginning of the academic year, I have been living in a state of emergency. The effects of this have been reflected in the students’ performance and achievements. I expect that in the next academic year (2006/2007), after a fence is put around the 'Atarot industrial area that completely isolates it from Bir Nabala, the school will be no more.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 6 May 2006Signature: Mahmoud Khader