Affidavit No. 5150/2009
2009
My name is Tharifa Rashid „Abd-al-Fattah al-Katnani. I am 52 years old, married and mother of six children, including four sons and two daughters. I live in a rented flat in the al-Rimal neighbourhood near the Complex of Security Agencies (al-Saraya) in the centre of Gaza city.Then, he inquired about my husband. I said my husband suffered from a heart disorder. For a long time, he had been under medical treatment at the Nablus Specialised Hospital in the West Bank. He could not leave the hospital because of his deteriorating health condition. Later, the Israeli Intelligence officer demanded that I wait in my place. I waited from 8:30 am until 2:00 pm on the same day. Then, the same person came back along with two other Intelligence officers, including a female officer. They led me to a place, where I went down a staircase underground, and then walked through narrow passageways and corridors and entered a small room. The female officer searched my body with her hands and with a small electronic device, which she moved over my body several times. Then, she thoroughly searched my bag, including my personal belongings. Thereafter, the officers took me with them to a small room, where a television screen and a DVD machine were inside. After they closed the door from the outside, they demanded that I sit down. I sat down in front of the television screen, which showed pictures and shots of members of the Hamas Movement, as well as security officers of the Gaza government, while they were assaulting wedding parties in areas north of the Gaza Strip and beating children and civilians in the Gaza Strip following the military takeover. The television screen also showed pictures of Shalit, the abducted soldier. I remained in that position for about two hours, after which the same Intelligence officers came back and led me to a room, where a person wearing the civil uniform sat at a desk with a laptop on. This person requested that I sit down and said that he was an Israeli Intelligence officer and his name was Moti.“We know everything about you. I will ask you. If you do not speak the truth, I will arrest you.” He went on.Having inquired why I would leave the Gaza Strip to Israel, I said I was sick and wanted to leave for Jerusalem, not for Israel, in order to receive medical treatment. I presented my medical papers and patient transfer report. However, the officer accused me of paying a bribe to obtain the patient transfer report in order to enter Israel. He then asked me about the doctors who supervised my health condition and showed me pictures of famous doctors in Gaza on the computer, which was in front of him. He demanded that I point to the physician who followed up on my condition. He was Dr. Khamis al-Sheikh Deeb, a neurologist, and I recognised him in a picture. Later, the officer inquired as to why my husband was present in the West Bank. I said he suffered from a heart attack and that he has been subject to ongoing treatment for some time at the Nablus Specialist Hospital.“Everything you have said is a lie. You will not obtain the permit and I will return you to Gaza. When your husband comes back to Gaza, you can enter Israel and receive medical treatment. Now, get out of this place.” The officer said.Having instructed them, Intelligence officers led me to the waiting hall, where I sat down for about one hour. Then, an Intelligence officer came, gave me my ID card and medical file, and ordered me to leave the area and go to my house in the same way I had reached it.