Affidavit No. 3028/2006
2006
Since 2000, I have been married to a woman called Nariman 'Umar 'Leiyyan Rigitis, who has Spanish nationality. I submitted a family reunion application for her on 1 April 2000 but I have not received any response. I submitted the application to the Palestinian Ministry of Civil Affairs in Ramallah.From the time we married until 7 May 2006, my wife obtained entry visas for three months at a time. When the visa expired, she used to leave for Jordan or any place outside Palestine and then return after a few days with a new visa. She has never violated the regulations or stayed beyond the duration of the visa. From 2000 until 7 May 2006, she did not face any difficulties, either in Jordan or on the Allenby Bridge through which she used to leave the Palestinian territories.On 7 May 2006, while she was returning from Jordan with our daughter Salma (2 1/2 years old), as she reached the Allenby Bridge, she called me, telling me that the Israeli authorities had denied her entry and that she had to return to Jordan. I advised her to try to explain to the Israeli soldiers that she is married to a Palestinian and her family is based in Ramallah, but they did not listen to her and ordered her to return to Jordan.She told me when I called her in Jordan later that the Israeli authorities told her, “Because you are married to a Palestinian, he has to submit a permanent residency application for you,” without clarifying for her the nature of these documents.Since 7 May 2006, my wife has been in Jordan waiting for the Israeli authorities to give her an entry visa to come back to Palestine. Currently, she is living in Jordan with her family. Our child Salma used to go to a nursery in Ramallah.On 10 May 2006, I went to Beit El to apply for a permit for my wife and daughter. The soldiers at the entrance told me that they do not receive or handle visit permits. I went several times to Beit El; the last time was on 17 May 2006. There, I met with a person wearing the Israeli police uniform. I talked with him in English, which I speak very well. I explained to him that I wanted to submit a visit permit application for my wife. He answered by saying that they do not receive any such applications in Beit El.Last week I went to Amman to see my wife and daughter. I stayed there for three days. On my return, at Allenby Bridge, I asked an Israeli policeman how I could bring my wife from Jordan. He transferred me to the Liaison Office at the Bridge. I went to the Liaison Office and explained the issue to them. They told me that I should go to the Liaison Office in Ramallah, but so far I have not gone there.I feel that if the Israeli authorities continue their position, denying an entry visa for my wife, they will destroy a home and a family, because I cannot have Jordan as aresidence and I also cannot live in Spain. My life is here; my job and my extended family are all here.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 5 June 2006Signature: Rami Yazbek