Affidavit No. 4660/2009
2009
My name is Samir ‘Ali ‘Ashour al-Sultan. I am 58 years old, married, and the father of three children. My eldest child is Khitam, 32 years old, and the youngest is Manar, 25 years old. I live in a three-storey house built over an area of 160 square metres. The first floor contains a large salon, while the second floor contains three bedrooms, a kitchen, and a bathroom. The third floor is a finished residential flat. My house is located near al-Imam Mosque in al-Salatin neighbourhood in Beit Lahiya in the northern Gaza Strip.At about 6:00 pm on 3 January 2009, my family and I were in our house when an Israeli combat aircraft dropped small flyers near my house. The flyers stated that residents of the neighbourhood should evacuate their houses immediately in preparation for the Israeli military operation called “Cast Lead.” The flyers did not mention the area where we should go after leaving our houses. I waited a little while, not taking these flyers seriously. At 9:00 am, however, I heard the sound of successive explosions. Through loudspeakers, I heard Israeli troops order residents to leave the neighbourhood at once. My family and I went to a house belonging to my neighbour from the family of Abu-Zeid and spent the night there. It was a very tough night; the gunfire and shelling did not cease. At about 8:00 am on Sunday, 4 January 2009, my family and I went to my daughter Manar’s house, located near the junction with al-Salatin neighbourhood. Before we left Abu-Zeid’s house, we tried to access our house in order to get some clothes and blankets. However, we were unable to do so because the occupying tanks that were raiding the area were firing heavily at my house and other houses in the neighbourhood.My wife, children, and I reached my daughter Manar’s house in Beit Lahiya. We stayed there until 5:00 pm on the same day, when – once again - the same flyers ordering residents to immediately evacuate their houses were dropped in the area. Through loudspeakers, the Israeli army ordered residents to evacuate, without mentioning any place where we could go. To save our lives, I left the house along with my family, my daughter Manar, as well as her six children and husband. We went to the house of our relative, Abu-Sa’d Ahmad in al-Shate’ refugee camp west of Gaza City and spent the night there. It was another tough night. The occupying aircraft and tanks did not stop shelling Gaza City. At about 8:00 am, on 5 January 2009, I heard a call from my neighbours and on local radio stations from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the United Nations Works and Relief Agency (UNRWA), stating that families and persons displaced from Northern Gaza, including those from Beit Lahiya, Beit Hanoun, Jabailya, and eastern Gaza, where the Israeli occupying army had carried out an incursion, should go to UNRWA schools in Gaza City. These schools were being used as shelters for displaced persons.Myself, my family, and my daughter Manar’s family immediately went to Asma’ Bint Abu-Bakr School in al-Shate’ refugee camp west of Gaza City, where we were registered as displaced persons on some UNRWA lists. My family and I stayed in a classroom with no mattresses or blankets and were compelled to sleep on benches in the chilly weather. Dozens of families, including many women and children, gathered in this shelter at Asma’ School. The school janitor shouted that no one should leave the school because the Israeli aircraft and tanks continued to shell Gaza City.At about 9:30 pm on the same day, my wife told my son ‘Abed, 19 years old, to go to the school facilities and fill a bottle of water for her. In the very cold weather, my son took the bottle and went along with his cousins Husein al-Sultan and Rawhi al-Sultan, both 22 years old. At this time, I heard the sound of a very strong explosion very close by. It shook the classroom where my family and I were staying. At first, I did not pay attention because the sound of air raids and tank shelling did not stop. Then, I heard the sound of ambulances, which arrived about ten minutes after the explosion. I expected that the ambulances had arrived to deliver aid to the shelter where we were staying, such as blankets, food, water, milk, etc. Half an hour later, I realised that my son and his cousins were late. My son Hamada, who is 20 years old, went out to look for them and bring water for his thirsty mother. About half an hour later, he came back and said he heard that three persons had been killed in the explosion that I had heard earlier. As he was worried about ‘Abed, Husein and Rawhi, he went to al- Shifa’ Hospital where he was immediately able to identify the torn corpses of my son ‘Abed as well as the bodies of Husein and Rawhi. Upon hearing this, my wife and I fainted and were transported to al-Shifa’ Hospital. After I came around, I went to the mortuary rooms in the hospital. There I saw my son ‘Abed torn to pieces along with his cousins Husein and Rawhi.In the afternoon of 6 January 2009, I received the dead body of my son and my family received the bodies of Husein and Rawhi. We buried them in al-Shuhada’ Cemetery in al-Sheikh Radwan neighbourhood. Neither myself nor my wife had thought that our son ‘Abed would be killed on his way to bring water for his ailing mother. I do not know why the combat aircraft fired a missile at the northern wall of the Asma’ School, which was being used as a shelter for those who had been forcibly displaced from their houses due to the air attacks and incursions during the Israeli military operation in the Gaza Strip, "Cast Lead." Having buried the martyrs, my wife, children and I returned to the Asma’ School. We were unable to receive condolences for the death of our son because of the ceaseless and unmerciful attacks and shelling. It should be noted that the occupying aircraft and tanks shelled houses where people were offering condolences for the death of martyrs killed during the operation.My wife and I were in a miserable psychological state. We could not stay at the Asma’ School where our son had been killed the day before. Thus, I requested that those in charge of the shelter transfer me and my family to another shelter in Gaza City. My family and I moved to the Gaza Boys Preparatory School “B” near al-Shifa’ Centre in al-Rimal neighbourhood in the centre of Gaza City. My family and I, along with my daughter Manar’s family and some others from the al-Sultan family, stayed in a single classroom. We were approximately 45 persons in all. Like scores of other displaced people in the shelter, we were given some blankets and mattresses. My family and I lived under harsh conditions in the shelter; the electricity was cut off and drinking water was lacking. Only one bathroom was available for men, so I, as did others, had to wait for a long time to use it. Furthermore, my family and I had nothing other than the clothes we were wearing. We stayed at the shelter for three consecutive weeks.On Sunday morning, 18 January 2009, I heard on local radio stations that the Israeli army had withdrawn from the area where I lived. My family and I immediately returned to our house. To further my suffering, my house was completely destroyed. So we went back to the shelter. As the UNRWA school was about tor resume classes, the ICRC gave us a tent. Until now, my family and I have been staying in this tent near my house, which the Israeli army destroyed during its operation "Cast Lead."