Affidavit No. 2317/2005
2005
I am a  citizen from Far'on village located south of Toulkarem city. In the  beginning of 2000, I built a house on a plot of land 80 square metres  wide, which I own and which is located to the south-east of Far'on  village. I got married in this house, which has three rooms and a  kitchen. At the end of 2000, the Israeli occupation started the  construction of what is called the Separation Wall south-west of Far'on  village with the aim of separating the lands occupied in 1948 from those  occupied in 1967. With the termination of the Wall construction, my  home was only 20 metres away from the Wall towards the south. But that  did not form any obstacle for me to continue living in my home and  continue my life as usual.But on 3  April 2005, when I came back from my work in Toulkarem, I was surprised  when a number of citizens from Far'on village told me that Israeli jeeps  were standing in front of my home. On that day my wife was visiting her  family in Sabastiya village in Nablus governorate. I hurriedly went  home where I found a piece of paper under a stone. I read the paper and  discovered that it was a notification to stop the construction of my  home and another similar paper concerning the sheep enclosure of four  square metres built close to my home [such notifications are usually  followed by a demolition of the house]. I was shocked by the threat of  demolition of my house because it is not licensed.Since  then, I have been doing all that I can to stop the demolition. I  informed the Palestinian Agricultural Relief Committees in Toulkarem  about the notification; they in turn communicated with lawyer Fathi  Shbeita from the territories occupied in 1948. This lawyer undertook to  follow up on my home’s file and to work hard in order to stop the threat  of demolition. My home is built on plot 62, land no. 8471, which means  that it is located within the structural planning of Far'on village.  Since receiving the notification, I have been living in continuous fear  and worry with my wife Iman Taysir Mahmoud and my daughter Rawan who is  10 months old. If my home is demolished, we will become dependent on my  family or my wife’s family. Please help me to stop the Israeli threat to  demolish my home under the pretext that it is not licensed. I am sure  that the real reason for the demolition is its proximity to the  Separation Wall.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 23 April 2005Signature: Basem 'Awad