Affidavit No. 5367/2010
2010
I am the owner and director of the al-Nour pre-school in the village of al-Jalama, north of the city of Jenin. The pre-school has been in operation since 1998 when it received a license from the Ministry of Interior. Ever since, we have performed our role of teaching children between the ages of three and five years old. The pre-school accommodates approximately 90 children.Usually in April of every year, we apply to renew the pre-school’s license at the Ministry of Interior without any obstacles. In April 2008, however, I submitted an application to renew the pre-school’s license at the Ministry of Interior office in the city of Jenin, but they refused to renew it. In April 2009, the Ministry of Interior’s staff told me that the license would never be renewed because the Preventive Security agency of the Palestinian Authority refused to do so. Furthermore, they demanded that I report to the Preventive Security agency. On many occasions, I tried to call the offices of the agency to find out why the renewal of the license was rejected. I also went to the Preventive Security offices in Jenin. After several attempts, they told me that they did not object to renewing the license and demanded that I submit a new application this year, 2010, which I did.Employees at the Ministry of Interior told me to report back on 18 February 2010. On the allotted day, I was surprised to learn that this time, the Palestinian intelligence agency had refused to renew the pre-school’s license. I went to the intelligence offices in Jenin, where officers told me they were not in charge of the Institutions Security division and referred me to the Director of the Ministry of Interior office in Jenin. There, employees refused to talk to me about the license renewal without the approval of the intelligence agency. Therefore, I returned to the intelligence agency. At the gate, intelligence officers refused to let me enter and demanded that I report to the intelligence headquarters in the city of Ramallah. At present, however, I have not yet gone there.During my conversation with the Preventative Security officers, I asked them why the renewal of the pre-school’s license had been rejected. I was surprised when they said that my husband’s political affiliation was the reason. My husband, Hani Salim Qasem Abu-Farha, is a member of the Hamas movement and an elected member of the al-Jalama Village Council. At the intelligence agency's offices, female employees told me that if I could prove to them that I was independent and not a member of any movement or political faction then the license would be granted. If it appeared that I was affiliated with any movement, the license would be rejected. They said that the intelligence officers would not take my husband’s affiliation into account.Currently, I carry out my role at the pre-school with the knowledge of the Ministry of Education until a solution can be found for the licensing problem.I appeal to Al-Haq to quickly intervene with official authorities to resolve the problem so that I can be granted the license as it had been granted in the past. I reiterate that the revenue generated by the pre-school is the sole source of income for my husband, my five children, and I. Three female teachers, who also must provide sustenance for their families, work at the pre-school. I repeat my appeal to Al-Haq to take swift action to resolve this problem.