Affidavit No. 7509/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Muhammad ‘Afif Taleb ‘Ali Ahmad, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 907941405, born on 22 May 1979, an employee, and a resident of Kufr al-Dik town, Salfit governorate, would like to declare the following:I am one of the heirs to a piece of land, measuring approximately 200 dunums. Though cultivated with olive trees, a portion of the land is fallow. The land is located in an area called Daher Subuh, north of Kufr al-Dik village. Around a year ago, I agreed with the other heirs that I would reclaim a portion of almost six dunums of the land. In the context of a project supported by the Representative Office of Netherlands to the Palestinian Authority, I received a grant from the Palestinian Agricultural Relief Committees. The piece of land, which we chose to reclaim, is located near an olive grove belonging to my late father. At the time, I wanted to expand and benefit from the land. The project supported construction of a water well and stone support walls around the reclaimed land. My nine brothers and I used to benefit from this land; however, I did not know that reclamation of the land needed a licence from the Israeli authorities. I started construction of the water well and support walls. I completed construction of almost 360 metres of support walls. I also made necessary preparations to dig the well. These installations cost me approximately ILS 15,000, including equipment and transportation fees. Transportation is expensive. The land is almost two kilometres away from the village and it is difficult for vehicles to move on the rough road leading to it.At around 9:00 am on Monday, 16 April 2012, some village residents told me that the Israeli occupying authorities, including soldiers and officers of the Planning and Zoning Departments of the Israeli Civil Administration raided the area, levelled the reclaimed land, and demolished support walls. At that time, however, I was at work outside of the village. I did not receive a notice for cessation of construction or a demolition order when I was constructing the aforesaid installations.I would like to note that the settlement of ‘Bruchin’ lies on land belonging to the towns of Broqin and Kufr al-Dik. Expansion works are now underway and houses are being constructed within boundaries of the settlement. We are not allowed to dig water wells. The Israeli army demolishes any agricultural premises or wells we construct. On the other hand, settlers can expand in the area.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 15 May 2012