Affidavit No. 1853/2004
2004
On 14  June 2004, at 9:40 pm, I was sitting inside Abu-Usama Café near the main  street in the north part of Balata Camp, opposite Ya'qoub Well. While I  was talking with the owner of the café, I saw strong light coming from  the sky towards the ground, heading to the street near us. This light  was accompanied by very loud explosion. I immediately went out of the  café and many other persons who were also inside followed. I saw a car  driving on the street adjacent to us, and it was coming from the west,  heading east. Many parts of this car were missing, especially on its  right side. The car swerved uncontrollably about 20 metres and then it  collided with another car that was owned by a camp resident and was  parked on the side of the street.When the  car stopped, many people, including me, approached the car. I saw the  driver in a very terrible situation: his face was burned and his face  bent on the gear of the car as if he was carried by another person.  Promptly, I looked at the back seat where I saw another person whose  body was also burnt. I asked him if he was still alive and he moved his  eyes. I knew that he was still alive, so I began with the help of the  many others who crowded around the car to take him and the driver out of  the car. As we moved the driver, we saw another body turned black with  its left hand and leg almost amputated. We could not identify these  young men because they were burnt beyond recognition. Later on, I found  out that these men were Khalil 'Araysha, Muhammad Safwat and the driver  'Awad Abu-Zeid. I was astonished because I could not recognise my fellow  camp residents and my friends Khalil and Muhammad, indicating the  extent to which their bodies were disfigured.After few  minutes, we were able to carry the three men by ambulance and a private  car to Rafidiya Hospital in Nablus City. We transported Muhammad by the  private car and did not wait for the ambulance, because he was alive  yet in very critical situation. Although we were sure that they were  dead, Khalil and 'Awad were transferred by the ambulance, which arrived a  few minutes late. As for Muhammad Safwat, he is still alive and he is  recovering.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 21 June 2004