Affidavit No. 2383/2005
2005
I own 40 dunums of land, planted with  olive, almond, and vine trees. This land serves approximately 100  members of my family, particularly from the olive oil produced. I  inherited this land from my father and it is located on the western side  of the village at a distance of three kilometres from the village and  one kilometre from Alfe Minasha settlement. Due to the construction of  the ‘Separation Wall’, which began on our lands in mid-2002 and was  completed in 2003, my land and the lands of many others from my village  ended up behind the Wall. To be able to reach our lands located behind  the Wall, we had to get permits from the occupation authorities. At the  beginning, they gave us permits only for three months but then they  began giving them for six months.Until 28 February 2005, we had permits  and were able to reach our land. When my permit expired, I went to the  Palestinian Liaison to renew my permit and my family’s permits. After a  week, I was told that our permits were rejected by the Israeli side.  Four days after that, I went to Qadumim settlement and submitted an  application to obtain permits for me and my family members. After three  days, the Israeli official told me that our applications were rejected  for security reasons. One week later, I went to the same settlement and  applied for the permits but again we were denied access to our lands. I  repeated this process several times in April 2005, but they continued to  reject us for security reasons.After these attempts, I hired an  Israeli lawyer called Batya from Alfe Minasha settlement to help me in  obtaining permits but I have yet to receive any response from her. One  month later, I also hired another lawyer called Jamal Ibtilli Qalqilya  from whom I also have not received any response. I am surprised that the  occupation authorities rejected us for security reasons knowing that we  have no security problems with them. I am sure that the rejection is  just harassment, meant to make us abandon our land which is our main  source of living and very important for us as a family.Consequently, I appeal to all  organizations and individuals to support us and help us in reaching our  land to take care of it and harvest the crops. Here it is worth noting  that the ‘Separation Wall’ consists of 70 cm high concrete base with an  iron fence above and surrounds our village from three sides. I would  also like to mention another problem that confronts us due to the  construction of the Wall. The problem is that we have to walk a distance  of nine kilometres to reach our land while the distance was only three  kilometres before the construction of the Wall, without any obstacles,  gates, or permits. Lastly, the members of my family who used to have  permits allowing them to reach the land are the following: My wife Hilwa  60 years and my children Muhammad 30 years, Maysa’ 20 years, Fatima 20  years, Marwa 25 years, Rima (my daughter in law) 27 years and Arij (my  daughter in law) 23 years.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 20 June 2005Signature: ‘Umar Qatesh