Affidavit No. 7573/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, ‘Umar Khalil ‘Abed Rabbo al-Shalalda, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 965270986, born on 2 November 1966, a farmer, and a resident of the Wadi al-Sharq area, Sa’ir town, Hebron governorate, would like to declare the following:My brother Basem, the rest of my brothers and sisters and I own approximately 100 dunums of land in al-Qanoub area north of our town of Sa’ir. The land is cultivated with trees, but lacks a water source. About two years ago, my brother Basem (about 47 years of age) and I submitted an application to the Land Research Centre to develop, reclaim and rehabilitate our land. We also applied for construction of a water well on the land. In the context of a project funded by the Government of The Netherlands, the application was approved. We constructed a well with a capacity of 80 cubic metres, built walls, and planted olive and almond seedlings on approximately 10 dunums of the land. We completed construction works about a year and a half ago. Thereafter, my family and I continued to work on the land and tend trees.On Monday morning, 16 July 2012, my brother Basem received a telephone call from shepherds in the area of al-Qanoub, reporting that two Israeli cars were making a tour around our land. My brother Basem arrived at the land at around 11:00 am. He saw officers from the Israeli Planning and Zoning Council and Israeli Water Authority moving around in two civilian cars. These were a 4x4 Mitsubishi Pajero and Isuzu. Officers handed my brother a notice entitled “Notice for Cessation of Work (Construction)” regarding the water well on our land. The notice stated:Whereas you are the owner/contractor/disposer/manager of work on the said real estate, on which work has been or is being performed as is detailed above without a licence, in contravention of the content of the licence, in violation of the regulations, orders and instructions in force and/or in breach of the scheme of the land of construction, height / number of storeys / site / setback line / a prohibited construction, you are therefore required in accordance with Article 38(1)T(3) of the Law on the Planning Cities, Villages and Buildings No. 79 of 1966 to cease construction immediately as is detailed above.According to the notice, a session was scheduled at the Planning and Zoning Council at 9:00 am on 31 July 2012. Currently, we are preparing our papers and documents to submit a challenge against the order mentioned above.We use the water well to irrigate the 10 dunums which we reclaimed as well as the adjacent land. My brother Basem and I support our families that comprise 20 members, including 11 children under the 18 years of age. God forbid, destruction of the well will cause us an exorbitant financial loss and will negatively affect productivity of the trees on the land. Construction works cost us more than ILS 15,000. My brother and I paid more than two thirds of this amount.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 23 July 2012