Affidavit No. 2818/2006
2006
On Wednesday, 22 February 2006, I left the city of Jenin and was heading toward Nablus. I am a taxi driver and I was working that day so I had some passengers in my car. I left Jenin at eight in the morning because the main road joining Jenin and Nablus (Jenin Nablus road) has been closed by the Israeli soldiers for five years. Just as other taxi drivers going to Nablus do, I took the Jenin-Toubas road to the Wadi al-Bathan road east of Nablus.When I reached half way on the Wadi al-Bathan road, I saw a long queue of cars waiting at an Israeli military checkpoint installed in the middle of the road. The cars were in the hundreds on both sides of the road. The Israeli occupying forces intentionally delay the cars. The inspection process is boring, long and very slow.At 11:30 am, my turn for inspection came. I proceeded as instructed by a hand gesture from one of the Israeli soldiers. When I was approximately 10 metres from the soldiers, one of the soldiers asked me to get out of the car. He told the passengers to do so too. Once we got out of the car, one of the soldiers asked us to lift our upper clothes and turn around. Then the soldiers verified our identity cards and allowed us to pass through the checkpoint to Nablus. This process, from when I arrived until I was allowed to pass through, took two hours.After I dropped off the passengers in Nablus, I retuned to Jenin by way of the same road. I arrived at the same checkpoint at noon. I waited for around an hour and a half until it was my turn to be inspected. The checkpoint was crowded with Palestinian cars and people were complaining the entire time. After the Israeli soldiers thoroughly inspected me and my car, I was allowed to pass though. It was 3:00 pm. It took me three hours to get through al-Bathan checkpoint.When I arrived at Toubas, I was surprised to find another checkpoint, a flying checkpoint. It took me around an hour and a half to pass through this checkpoint. As I reached the southern entrance to Jenin, specifically the Shuhada' Junction, I was surprised to find another Israeli military checkpoint. It was difficult and boring. I was inspected by the soldiers and arrived in Jenin at approximately 5:30 pm.Travelling from Jenin to Nablus and back took me approximately nine hours. That's incredible. It would take any person less time to travel from one to country to another than it would take Palestinians travelling from Jenin to Nablus and back. The Israeli occupying forces have been imposing a tight military hold on the borders of Nablus and Jenin for over one month. In addition, Toulkarem is surrounded by barriers on all sides.This closure has clearly impacted every aspect of citizens' economic lives. For example, my income has dropped due to long hours waiting at checkpoints. The Israeli occupation imposes collective punishment on the Palestinian people and the excuse is that it is necessary for Israeli security. We pay the price for this security with the livelihoods of our children, wives and families.Moreover, the Israeli army has checkpoints spread out over all the entrances and roads leading to Jenin and the surrounding villages. The residents of these villages arrive in the city of Jenin with difficulty and under danger. This situation is reflected in all aspects of life in the city. I hope this siege ends very soon so that we can live our lives in a better way then we do now.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 25 February 2006Signature: Ahmad al-Ghoul