Affidavit No. 5265/2010
2010
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Manal Abd-al-Hafith Hasan Tamimi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of identity card number 934160714, born on 18 June 1973, housewife, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh, Ramallah district, would like to declare the following:On Friday 21 January 2010, I went to my father’s house, Hussein al-Tamimi, which is around 70 metres from our house, for the start of the confrontations which occur in the village during the protests carried out against the activities of settlers on village land. When I went to my father’s house it was around 12:30 pm, and the confrontations had just begun. My mother, sisters, and some women were present on the roof of the house to observe the events. I joined them and they were around nine women, my relatives, in addition to a number of children whose ages ranged between three and six years. After around an hour my sister noticed one of the soldiers outside the house fire a teargas grenade towards the house, which she told us of, and after that we heard the sound of an explosion coming from below. My sister quickly set off and descended the stairs to the street, and I joined her and noticed a fire in the house, so I opened the door quickly, put out the fire, and my mother and aunt joined me. Part of the curtains had caught fire, a window had been broken, and there was glass all over the floor. Less than two minutes later we heard the sound of my sister Maha shouting outside, so we headed towards her and when we arrived outside the house I noticed that a large number of occupation soldiers in riot gear had surrounded the house and military jeeps had also stopped. Around ten soldiers had surrounded my sister, and others were holding her, hitting her with batons and the butts of rifles, and kicking her. I moved towards her to release her from their hands. I tried to pull my sister out from among the soldiers who were holding her tightly, during which I heard the officer in charge saying to one of the soldiers to arrest this one; he was indicating myself. I knew that he was the officer because I saw him from the roof giving orders to the soldiers and talking with the people. Although I was not sure that he was the officer, that’s how it appeared to me. After that three soldiers headed towards me, grabbed me, and pulled me towards the jeep. My mother, aunt, and other women headed towards me, trying to free me from the soldiers’ hands, and the people began to come out and gather around us. The soldiers hit everyone present with batons and rifle butts, with a great deal of force, and they also hit me and kicked me until they dropped teargas in the middle of the crowd. One of the soldiers grabbed me by both hands, tied them behind my back, and pulled me towards the jeep, but the people of the village were able to release me from their hands at the last minute. Some of those present were saying that they had arrested my sister Maha, and the crowd began to head towards her as they had done to me as well. I followed them, and heard the officer saying to the soldiers to arrest me, which he said in Hebrew and indicated towards me. Four soldiers surrounded me, hitting me with sticks and rifle butts and kicking me. I fell down on the ground and the soldiers spread out around me, two of them carried me by my hands, two others by my feet, and they dropped me into the jeep. There was noone from the village around me at that point since everyone had followed Maha to release her. When the people became aware of my being in the jeep, they came over to me but the soldiers surrounded the jeep and formed a barrier between the people and the jeep which set off quickly. In the jeep one of the soldiers bound my hands behind me with plastics ties. They took me to the settlement of Halamish, which lies around one kilometre south of the last houses in our village. During these events I did not see any female soldiers, they were all male. In Halamish they took me out of the jeep, and my sister Maha was sitting bound on the floor while my cousin Nariman was getting out of another jeep, she was also bound. They put us in the yard of the settlement. We remained bound, and at a close distance to us my cousin Murad was sitting along with another person from the village called Atallah, and they were also bound. After around half an hour in Halamish, they moved us all in a large military lorry to the Benjamin police centre, and told us they were moving us there. A female soldier oversaw our transport from Halamish to Benjamin. We were bound the whole time and the handcuffs were extremely painful. We arrived at Benjamin at around 3:30 pm and there we were taken for interrogation. The interrogator accused me of trying to grab a female soldier’s weapon. I told him there were no female soldiers in the village when the clashes occurred and when they arrested me but he insisted on his position. He accused me of hitting the soldiers and resisting arrest. After the interrogation, they gathered myself, my sister, my cousin, my other cousin, Atallah in the courtyard and moved us to the settlement of Beit El, where they put us all into a room what seemed to us to be an office. We were all bound. They took Maha and went with her in a jeep, while they transported myself and my cousin in a different jeep, and the men in another. My cousin and I were taken to Hashiron prison together, as they told us. I was bound up the entire time, which was over an hour. In Hashiron prison they refused to accept us on the pretext of not having free space, so they moved us all to al Jalama prison, where they also refused our entrance, with the excuse of not having space for us. They returned us to Hashiron prison once more, and there we remained under arrest in the women’s section, as the person responsible for the department informed us, until Thursday 28 January 2010, when they released us on a bail of 15,000 shekels for each one of us. The bail was paid for us and we are waiting for the decision of the court, with the condition imposed that I must remain under house arrest until the issuance of a decision on my case.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 31 January 2010