Affidavit No. 4479/2008
2008
On 26 October 2008, myself, my wife Fatima and my son Sami, who is 5 years old, went to our land called “Jabal Muhammad,” measuring approximately 20 dunums and cultivated with olive, almond and fig trees. The village council had coordinated with the Israeli District Coordination Office and fixed a date for olive harvest on this land. We arrived on our land at 7:30 am and discovered two Israeli vehicles, including a Hummer and a jeep, as well as Border Guard officers positioned in the area. Immediately after we reached the land, we saw a huge black saluki dog tied with a one-metre long chain to the trunk of an olive tree on my land. At a distance of about 200 metres, another saluki dog of a reddish colour and of the same breed was tied with an approximately 150-metre long chain to another olive tree. When they saw us, they started to bark and move in all directions. We ran away in panic and my son started to scream and hanged to his mother's neck. As a result, we could not harvest our olive crops and left the land. I approached the soldier who was present near the Israeli vehicles, approximately 600 metres away and told him, in Arabic, about the dogs. He said he would follow up on the matter tomorrow. I then returned home with my wife and son.The next day we went to our land again and saw the dogs tied in the same places, but with shorter chains than the previous day. As before, the dogs started to bark  when they saw us, at which time an Israeli soldier of medium height came and stood near them. The soldier carried a weapon, the type of which I could not know. We began to harvest our olive crops, although we could not harvest more than half of the  olive trees due to the dogs' dung. The dogs moved everywhere and their droppings were under most of the olive trees. During harvest season, olives drop on the ground, although we could not pick them as they were mixed with the dog dung. This has gravely affected our olive harvest as most olives were not harvested as we could not place mats under the trees. Furthermore, we were afraid that the olive’s would mix with the dogs' dropping, which would affect the quality of olive oil. The presence of the dogs negatively impacted our economic situation, as we rely on the olive crops as our main source of income. This year, however, we could only harvest half of the crops as we normally had over past years. My family is demanding and my son is still young and needs many expenses.