Affidavit No. 5151/2009
2009
My name is Mahmoud Muhammad Khalil al-Shawish. I am 29 years old, married, but do not have children. I work as a farmer and live on the main street opposite the Beit Hanoun Municipality north of the Gaza Strip.At around 10:30 am on Sunday, 15 November 2009, I was at work on an agricultural land, which belongs to the family of al-Silawi from Khan Younes and rented by my neighbour ‘Awni Abu-Saffiyya. The land measures 50 dunums and is located at a distance of about 850 metres from the eastern Israeli border with the Gaza Strip, east of the town of Beit Hanoun. Six farmers, my neighbour ‘Awni and I were ploughing the land, which was cultivated with wheat crops, using two tractors. The other workers and I sat down to rest. During this time, ‘Awni and another worker continued to plough the land with a tractor. Suddenly, occupying troops who were positioned behind the Israeli border fired a bullet towards them. The bullet hit and damaged a wheel of the tractor. My neighbour ‘Awni decided that we all should leave the land, fearing that the Israeli troops would open fire again and injure one of us. The other farmers and I are accustomed to harassment by Israeli soldiers, who are positioned behind the border. They frequently open fire in order to prevent us from working and making a living. While my colleagues stood and prepared themselves to leave the land, I went to the second tractor in order to drive it to a safe place further away. As I sat in the driver’s seat and drove the tractor for a distance of almost one metre, the Israeli soldiers opened intensive fire on us. I sustained bullet wounds in my feet and fell on the ground. My colleagues arrived and transported me in a civilian car to the Beit Hanoun Hospital. When I arrived there, doctors assessed my condition and decided to transfer me to the al-Shifa’ Hospital in Gaza city due to my serious condition. Having conducted a medical examination, doctors at the al-Shifa’ Hospital told me that a bullet had hit my left foot and penetrated through my right foot (i.e. a bullet wound with an entry and exit on each foot). I am still staying at the al-Shifa’ Hospital and receiving medical treatment.