Affidavit No. 4457/2008
2008
At about 2:30 am on Thursday, 16 October 2008, I was in my house in the village of Kufr Malek, east of the city of Ramallah. My brother Ahmad, 17 years old, came in and told me that ‘Abd-al-'Aziz Yousef, 21 years old, was waiting for me outside. ‘Abdal-'Aziz said that Israeli occupying soldiers were in the village. Immediately, I, ‘Abdal-' Aziz, and my brother Ahmad went to the village centre, to the Abu-Falah junction.There, we found a number of youths from the village preparing to confront the occupying soldiers. I talked to the youths about what we would do. We looked towards the Abu-Falah junction, trying to see the soldiers. As we could not see them, we decided to move to another area in the village where we could watch what was going on in the village. We were about 15 youths in all. In that area, we saw two Israeli occupying patrols. It was clear to me that these were patrols of the regular Israeli army. From the jeeps' lights, we estimated that they were at a distance of about four kilometres away. I saw the two patrols coming from the village of Turmus'ayya in the North.Then, we decided to disperse in various areas of the village in preparation to confront the occupying soldiers who were coming to the village. We prepared stones, which were our only weapon. ‘Abd-al-'Aziz and I took position on the roof of an uninhabited house in the village centre. I saw the two patrols cross the northern entrance to the village and heard the sound of a bomb. It was 3:00 am then. The house, of which ‘Abd-al-'Aziz and I were on the roof, was near the village's cemetery. I was on the edge of the roof and ‘Abd-al-'Aziz behind me. Then, I heard the sound of five live bullets fired. I immediately felt something hit my chest. I also felt general languor in my body. I fell on the ground and saw blood oozing out of my mouth. Then, I saw ‘Abd-al-'Aziz lie on the ground too. He was one metre away from me. My head was to the west and ‘Abd-al-'Aziz's to the east. I uttered “There is no God but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.” I tried to stand up and reach ‘Abd-al-'Aziz, but I was unable to do so because I had lost my physical strength. Thus, I crawled towards him. He had sustained a bullet wound in the thigh. I told him, "Don't be afraid. I will call the youths to rescue you.” However, ‘Abd-al-'Aziz was unable to talk to me.After I was wounded, I no longer saw the patrols of occupying soldiers. Later, I could stand up and get down from the roof. I ran towards a number of youths, fell on the ground and told them that ‘Abd-al-'Aziz was injured on the roof of the house . Some youths hurried to rescue ‘Abda-l-'Aziz while others remained by my side and tried to offer me first aid. I immediately called my father on my mobile phone and asked him to come and take me to the hospital in his car. My father took me to the village of al-Tayba, which was about three kilometers from our village. There, a doctor said I was in a critical condition and should be transported to hospital.I remained in al-Tayba for about an hour and a half as we searched for an ambulance. During this period, I was still bleeding. My father finally fetched the ambulance driver from his house and at about 5:00 am, the ambulance arrived and transported me to Ramallah Public Hospital, where I underwent a surgical operation.It appeared that the bullet entered from the left side of my waist below the armpit and came out through the middle of my back. I stayed at the hospital for four days. The youths told me that ‘Abd-al-'Aziz had been martyred at about 11:00 pm, while I was in the intensive care unit. It should be noted that while I was waiting, injured, for my father to arrive in the village, I called one of the youths who had gone to rescue‘Abd-al-'Aziz. He said they could not access the area where he was because a number of occupying soldiers were deployed there. He said that the occupying soldiers had taken ‘Abd-al-'Aziz.