Affidavit No. 2321/2005
2005
I am a  citizen of Nazlet 'Isa village located north of Toulkarem city. My  family’s and my sufferings began when the Israeli army started the  construction of the Separation Wall in our village on 24 August 2002 to  separate the Palestinian territories occupied in 1948 from those  occupied in 1967. This Wall is located west of Nazlet 'Isa, which  originally is located close to the Green Line. With the completion of  the construction of the Wall in our area, my family and I found  ourselves behind the Wall. That means that our homes came to be situated  west of the Wall and our life became extremely difficult.Due to  the Wall, we currently move from our homes located behind the Wall to  our village and the remaining parts of the West Bank through an Israeli  military Gate No. 13. Our life became complicated because going out or  coming to our home must take place through Gate 13 and by using permits  issued by the Israeli Civil Administration that allow us to enter a  closed military area. Our life turned upside down. Everyday we have to  pass by the Israeli soldiers and be exposed to inspection, which is what  we have gotten used to for the last three years. During these years we  were given annual permits renewable every year.But at  the beginning of 2005 and contrary to what happened to my other six  brothers, their wives and children and contrary to what I am used to,  the Israeli occupation issued a two-month permit for me. I have extended  it twice since the beginning of this year. I ignore the reasons for  this situation as I do not have any security problem. And why me and not  others in my family? Recently and for the last two months, the Israeli  army has been absolutely rejecting to give workers from Baqa  al-Sharqiyya and Qufin, who work in the aluminum workshop owned by my  brother Nafez and myself and which is located behind the Separation  Wall, permits to pass through Gate 13. These two workers used to have  permits that qualify them to enter through Gate 13 for working in our  workshop. I personally talked to the Israeli soldiers at the gate about  this issue and they told me that it is because of security warnings,  without specifying what that means.Under  this pretext, the Israeli occupation soldiers close the gate for many  hours everyday making us wait several hours when passing in or out.  Moreover, the soldiers at the gate have recently started to ask us to  get permits for the children, regardless of their age. For example, the  soldiers asked my brother Jihad Husein to get a permit for his son who  is only two months old, otherwise they won’t allow him to enter or exit  through the gate. We feel like the Israeli occupation forces tighten our  siege and strangulate us in an attempt to force us to abandon our land  and homes but no matter what they do we will not give up.