Affidavit No. 6062/2011
2011
I live in Zbuba village west of Jenin city. The Israeli military camp Salem is located at a distance of about 500 – 600 metres west of Zbuba. As a result, the village is subject to raids by the Israeli army almost every night. Usually three or four Israeli military jeeps would enter the village during each raid and patrol the streets.At around 7:00 pm on 28 January 2011, I was present at home with my wife Subhiyya Rashid Sha’abna. In addition to my son Ibrahim who lives with us, my son Muhammad, his wife Jamila and their children Sadil (12), Juman (6), Ahmad (4) and Ilaf (2) were also present in the house. We were all sitting in the TV room near the house door which is made of glass and overlooks the main street in the centre of the village when suddenly, the electricity was cut off. We heard the glass door break and I could see something on the ground in the guest room opposite the TV room. It spun around in its place very quickly on the ground and produced very strong and thick gas.“A gas bomb!” My son Muhammad shouted.We began to inhale the gas in immediately. In the midst of utter darkness, I tried to reach for our house door. I managed to open it and got out of the house. My son Muhammad then started to move his children out of the house. We almost died because of the intense gas and due to the shortness of breath we were experiencing. I could hardly breathe. The children were in mortal danger. We gathered in the small yard in front of the house. For about 20 minutes, we all lay on the ground. No one knew or heard about us, especially because electricity had been cut off in the whole village. After my son Muhammad was able to breathe, he called the Palestine Red Crescent Society in Jenin city on his mobile telephone. About 10 minutes later, an ambulance arrived and stopped in front of the house. Medics started to transport us one by one into the ambulance. We received first aid; we were mainly being given doses of oxygen to breathe. As I was being transported into the ambulance, I saw four Israeli military jeeps opposite the entrance of our house but I did not see any Israeli soldier come out of any of the jeeps. When the village residents gathered around us, the Israeli occupying troops demanded through megaphones that they leave the area. However, no one listened to them and all of us, including the children, continued to receive medical treatment. Half an hour later, the military jeeps left in the direction of Salem military camp.We discovered later that the Israeli army asked a local person about what had happened to us. He explained that a gas bomb fired by the army had penetrated through our house door and into the guest room. It almost killed every one inside the house, particularly the children – it should be noted that all windows and doors of the house were shut because it was so cold outside. We left our house for a period of four days and stayed at my son Muhammad’s house in the village. Meanwhile, my daughters had to clean up and air the house daily before we could go back and live in the house. Even though my wife, my son and I returned to the house, the gas smell is lingered in the house and on the furniture.The Israeli occupying force almost killed a whole family as well as innocent children. We did not know what was going on outside. No matter what the circumstances were, why did the soldiers fire a gas bomb into a house where older people, children and women were present?!!!