Affidavit No. 6096/2011
2011
I am a resident of the small village of Tana, located near Beit Fourik town, eastern Nablus governorate. My seven-member family and I live in a cave in Tana and we rely on our agricultural barracks as a source of living and to support our children. We raise livestock and own 70 goats as well as around 40 sheep. We produce cheese and dairy products. We also sell sheep.At around 10:00 am on Wednesday, 9 February 2011, an Israeli bulldozer arrived with seven military jeeps. The yellow Israeli bulldozer demolished some of the structures we use to shelter the goats and sheep. Workers from the Israeli Administration and Building Regulation were with the Israeli bulldozer and jeeps along with an Israeli female soldier. Before the bulldozer arrived, my children and I had emptied the contents of the structures. For about half an hour, the bulldozer and occupying forces were positioned right beside the cave where my children and I live. The Israeli bulldozer also demolished a stone wall north of the agricultural barracks.After the bulldozers and Israeli army left the area, my husband ‘Abd-al-Hafith Hasan ‘Abd-al-Rahman Hanani and my children started to rebuild what the bulldozers had demolished. They erected a tent, measuring approximately 45 metres, in order to shelter the goats and sheep. The weather was cold and rainy.I should note that this was the fourth demolition in Tana. I should also state that the suffering my family and I face cannot be measured or assessed. By continuously demolishing agricultural installations and barracks, the occupying forces seek to drive out the residents of Tana; forcibly transferring them and annexing this land which has several water springs.I demand an end to the demolitions by the occupying authorities. I have been in this area ever since I was a little girl. My grandparents also lived this simple life inside caves and tents. The Israeli demolitions will not bear an influence on us and we will persevere in the small village of Tana against the Israelis’ will. However, we need protection from the attacks of the Israeli army and settlers from Mekhora settlement, located approximately two kilometres east of the village.During the demolition process, I heard an Israeli soldier say that he would come every other month and demolish structures if we rebuild them.