Affidavit No: 2495/2005
2005
As the  war started on 5 June 1967, Israeli aircrafts started bombing and  destroying the Egyptian airports. Jordan joined the war at approximately  10:00 am of the sameday. Families started to get ready for the upcoming  confrontation and to assist theJordanian army that was present at the  Latroun police station. Spirits were high atthe beginning, but at dusk  things started to change as no help had arrived in ’Imwas.At  approximately 10:00 pm, the Jordanian soldiers started to withdraw from  'Imwas,knowing that the village's young men were still at the  roundabouts and outskirts ofthe village. The residents got confused  after the withdrawal of the Jordanian army.People started to transfer  women and children to shelters and caves. Another groupof people sought  refuge in Latroun monastery, which is located near 'Imwas. I was among  them.My house  was located near the monastery. Before we could enter, missiles started  to fall on Latroun castle and on the centre and edges of the village.  There was no firereturned from our side. We managed to get safely inside  the monastery while the Israeli tanks and soldiers began to occupy the  castle, as well as the centre of thevillage and the roads. At dawn the  following morning, 6 June 1967, some of the nunswent outside to inform  the Israeli soldiers that several residents of ’Imwas village were  present inside the monastery. The soldiers asked us all to get out.  After we haddone so, we were told by one of the Israeli captains to walk  along the road to the cityof Ramallah. He told us not to return to our  houses and threatened to kill us if we did.The captain spoke in English.We  continued our way towards Kharbatha al-Misbah, Beit 'Our al-Tahta, Beit  'Our al-Foka and al-Tira, which we entered as the sun was setting. We  started looking formilk, water and bread for our children. We obtained  some after a lot of suffering. Atdawn on Wednesday 7 June 1967, the  Israelis entered al-Tira and asked us tocontinue our way to Ramallah. As  we approached Bitouniya, the soldiers started togive orders to some of  the young men. I was one of them. I was holding two of mychildren. They  told me to leave my wife and children. They blindfolded me and tiedmy  hands, as they did to the others. They arrested us and threw us into  trucks thatbrought us to al-Ramla prison.The next  day they took us to 'Atlit prison without giving us food or water.  There, wefound 23 people from ’Imwas. Most of them were my relatives. We  remained in 'Atlitfor a month and were then sent to Ramallah. The other  families from ’Imwas, whoremained in their houses or shelters and  caves, were expelled under the threat offorce. They were naked and  barefoot. The expulsion was part of the plan to destroy’Imwas. The  destruction of the village started approximately one week after  theexpulsion. ’Imwas was completely destroyed over the heads of those  who wereunable to leave their houses.At the  beginning of the occupation, the Israeli authorities tried to contact  the residentsand offered to resettle them elsewhere in the West Bank.  They even offeredcompensation but the residents refused any alternative  to their right to return to’Imwas. We have managed to make our ends meet  through hard work, without anyexternal aid. To this day, we are not  recognised as refugees or displaced persons.The Israelis have also  constructed a park on the land of ’Imwas village and haveexploited its  wells and springheads.I used to  own several plots of land comprising 90 dunums in 'Imwas. The total  surface area of the land of the village was approximately 35,000 dunums.  Itcontained two schools: one elementary school for girls, and another  one for boys(details are attached in the appendix). The invasion  occupation of the villageoccurred without any resistance. The leader of  the campaign was Uzi Narkiss.'Imwas village had approximately 4,000  inhabitants. That population now exceeds13,000; 2,000 of whom reside in  Bitouniya, Ramallah and other areas of the WestBank. Others live in  Amman, al-Zarka and the Diaspora.