Affidavit No. 2373/2005
2005
I study  at Qurtuba Basic School for Girls which is approximately 50 metres from  my home located in Martyrs Street in Hebron City. It used to take me  about four minutes to reach my school. But since the Israeli army closed  Martyrs Street in October 2000 in addition to the closure of  side-streets leading to it, I have to walk a distance of approximately  two kilometres to reach my school. This requires at least half an hour.  Consequently, I have to go through checkpoints (five of them) and small  settlements, which exposes me to inspection.Sometimes  when I pass by the small settlements, I am beaten by the settlers and  their children. This happens at all times but I am most often beaten and  assaulted on Saturdays and on holidays. When I was in the eighth grade  in 2004, I was beaten by three settlers who were in their twenties. They  hit me with their hands and feet until I fell down on the ground and  they did the same to the girl students who were with me. I got up and  ran away but the settlers followed me and threw stones at me. Many  stones hit me on my back. That happened on 29 March 2004. After the  settlers attacked me, an Israeli police car arrived and the police saw  the marks of the beating to which my friends and I were subjected to.  The police just accompanied us to our homes and left.On 23  April 2005, I was also beaten by settler children in front of the small  settlement called al-Daboya, which is only 50 metres away from our  school. That happened at the end of the school day when I and other  students and teachers were leaving the school and all of a sudden  approximately 20 settlers attacked us with their hands, feet and stones.  I was hit with many stones on my back and I protected my head with my  bag which I put on my head for that purpose. I felt severe pain and I  was very afraid of these settlers while the Israeli soldiers and police  were looking at them without preventing them from doing what they did. I  also saw one of the police taking photographs while the settlers were  assaulting us.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 23 May 2005Signature: Hiba Marwan