Affidavit No. 6492/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Marwan Ahmed Mahmoud Abu Haddah, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 958977332, born on 9 August 1963, Public Relations Manager at the Paris Gardens Resort, and a resident of An Nuseirat refugee camp, Central Gaza governorate, would like to declare the following:I work as the Public Relations Manager and Deputy Manager at the Paris Gardens Resort. The resort is a place of entertainment for families and has a surface area of nine dunums. It is surrounded by citrus trees and covered with grass. It is comprised of three swimming pools, a playground for children, a private chalet, arbours, a cafeteria, a store and two kitchens. The resort is situated on Al-Rayyes land, behind Al-Bashayir Wedding Hall, east of Al-Tuffah neighbourhood east of Gaza city. It is owned by Mr. Imad al-Wazir.On Tuesday, 26 July 2011, at around 3:00 am about 30 masked persons carryingsledgehammers, stormed into the resort and assaulted the resort guard Salamah ‘Ubeid. After they incapacitated Salamah and two other guards, who were also working in the resort, they started to destroy the entire resort, including its arbours, the cafeteria, the chalet, the store, the guards’ room as well as chairs and tables (including 100 bamboo chairs, 25 wood tables, two marble tables and 50 nargiles). They also damaged the interior of the private chalet, including a sofa set, two beds, a 21-inch TV set and a receiver. The kitchens were also destroyed, including the dishes, glasses, nargiles, refrigerators, a water heater, a gas stove and an oven. What is more, they set fire to the resort. We estimate that in total the losses and damages caused to the resort amount to, approximately USD120,000.In a previous incident 20 July 2011 in the early morning masked and armed individuals raided the resort and destroyed a computer set, a refrigerator display case and a beverage cooler, ruined fruits and ice cream, and set the guest arbours and cafeteria on fire. They also told the guard to deliver a message to the resort owner, Imad al-Wazir.“We are members of the Jaljalat Group – an armed Jihadist Salafi group. Tell the owner of the place to not open it once again. Otherwise, we will burn it down” the message stated.Then, the police arrived and launched an investigation into the incident. Fearing that the incident would be repeated Mr. Imad al-Wazir asked them to appoint policemen to guard the resort. The police director recommended that the resort be opened again and resumes business as usual.The resort was again damaged and set on fire less than a week later despite the fact that it is located in a military area that is used by militants on a daily basis. Because the resort is located in al-Rayyes Mountain area near the border, militants are always positioned in the area.Police forces did not come after the masked individuals had attacked the resort for the second time. Until this moment, the police have not carried out proper investigation necessary to uncover the circumstances of the attack on the resort that led to the destruction and the burning of its properties.