Affidavit No. 2661/2005
2005
On 8  November 2005, my friends (Ahmad and Ramzi) and I decided to go to the  public park located in the north area of Nablus. As we reached Ahmad’s  home, also located on the North Mountain and only 500 metres or a little  bit more from the park, Ahmad stopped and called our other friend,  Mohammad Abu Salha, in order to join us. Mohammad accepted and came with  us.After we  walked several meters, we stopped for a drink at Mohammad’s father’s  workshop where he works as a watchman. His father gave us a bottle of  water, which we all drank from, and then we separated. Ramzi and Ahmad  went to the park while Mohammad and I went to the castle located about  200 metres away from the park.At  approximately 3:00 pm, as soon as we began to part, I heard intensive  gunfire near us. The four of us were still very close to each other. I  looked around and saw a number of Israeli soldiers opening heavy fire in  all directions. The Israeli soldiers were only around 100 metres away  from us. As a result of this heavy fire, I was hit in my abdomen while a  bullet hit Mohammad in his head. Mohammad instantly fell to the ground  without uttering one word. He was bleeding heavily.I was  shocked and felt incredibly frightened about what was happening in front  of me. I saw the occupying forces looking at us whilst we were  bleeding, without coming near us to see what happened. I heard them  speak in their megaphones in Hebrew, which is a language I do not  understand. As a result of my injury, I started to lose consciousness.  When I regained consciousness I discovered I was in the Ittihad Hospital  in Nablus, being treated for the injury in my abdomen.I stayed  in the hospital for eight days. As for Mohammad, I was informed when I  asked about him that he was killed. I was not surprised, because when he  was hit in his head, I saw him vomiting food and blood together. As for  the other two friends, I found out that Ahmad Fakhouri was not injured,  but Ramzi Saqqa was hit in his left leg by a bullet, and that he was  undergoing treatment in the Evangelical hospital in Nablus city.With  regards to the gunfire we were subjected to, it came as a surprise for  all of us and it was unjustified, especially considering the fact that  we were not armed and the area we were in was not banned. Moreover, both  before and during the firing, the soldiers did not ask us to stop or do  anything.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 27 November 2005Signature: Ala’ Basel Salman