Affidavit No.: 2071/2004
2004
On 28  October 2004, I drove my uncle's wife Samira in my taxi to their nearby  home, located in Kafr Saba quarter in Qalqiliya. It was around 7:30  p.m., or a little earlier. At that time, my uncle Ibrahim was sitting on  the ground drinking coffee, and Hussein and his friend Iyad were  standing beside him. I came and stopped my car at a distance from them  of four or five metres to the northeast. When Iyad saw me, he came close  to me and we started talking together. After few seconds, I saw my  uncle Ibrahim bending backwards and fall with his back on the ground. I  was not realizing what was going on but I saw a laser light directed  towards him. I also heard a light sound like (susurrus). Then I heard  gunfire. Immediately, Iyad, who was armed, shot into the air, not  realizing what was going on around us. He was surprised when he saw  Ibrahim fall backwards. Upon seeing this, I got out of my car and  approached my uncle, who was lying motionless on his back, with many  shots all over his body. Iyad, Hussein and I carried him and put him in  my car and we immediately drove to the Emergency Hospital in Qalqiliya.  But the medical efforts did not succeeded in saving his life. As for me,  I did not see how my uncle was subjected to shooting. I only saw light  beams coming from the north to the place where we were standing. But  while I was carrying my uncle, I learnt from Hussein that my uncle was  shot from a white Ford car that was standing at a distance of 70 metres  to the north. Also while I was in my car, I noticed a station wagon,  coming from the south, and when I stopped the car, I felt that it  withdrew to the back rapidly. This means that in that car were Israeli  Special Squad forces and that gunfire from it shot my uncle from the  back. It is worth noting that firing took place without any warning and  that it was willful killing.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 2 December 2004Signature: Muhammad Mustafa Muhammad 'Isa