Affidavit No. 5285/2010
2010
I am married and the mother of two children: Naser (about eight years old) and Ala’ (about three years old). Our house is located in the north-western part of Safa neighbourhood, which overlooks the settlement of Bat ‘Ayin, north of the town of Beit Ummar. Every Saturday, the Israeli army and Israeli Border Guard forces set up checkpoints in the northern area of our neighbourhood and prevent Palestinian farmers from accessing their land in and around Wadi Abu-al-Rish area. Often, the Border Guard officers and soldiers assault farmers on their way to their land. They also fire sound and tear gas grenades as well as rubber-coated steel bullets at them.Since he was born, my son Naser has suffered from a chronic disease, called glycogen storage disease-1b. It causes a permanent deficiency of blood glucose, severe immune deficiency, permanent intestine infection, weak absorption and short growth. Ever since he was born, he has been treated at the Caritas Hospital in Bethlehem and at Hadassa Hospital in Jerusalem. When Naser is not in hospital, I take care to give him various treatments at home. Naser has two injection devices, including one connected through the nose to the stomach and the other through the stomach to the heart. With these devices, I give him the necessary medicine.On the morning of Saturday, 20 February 2010, Israeli soldiers and Border Guard officers chased Palestinian farmers along the neighbourhood streets to prevent them from reaching their land. At around 8:30 am, some boys started to throw stones at the soldiers and Border Guard officers, who had pursued the boys and farmers along the neighbourhood streets. At around 9:00 am, I heard the Israeli soldiers open fire and smelled tear gas. I firmly closed the house doors and windows so that my children, especially Naser, would avoid the gas.At around 10:00 am while I was busy administering medicine to my son Naser in his room, I heard the glass window of the western balcony break. Immediately, a very strong tear gas smell spread around the house. I was utterly overwhelmed; I carried my son and ran from my house to my brother’s-in-law’s, which is adjacent to mine. At the moment the tear gas grenade was thrown (I realised it was thrown into the house because it broke the glass window), I had been opening the injection device that was connected to Naser’s heart. I closed it immediately before I injected the medicine. The effect of the gas on the child was very bad; he started to cough, cry and suffocate. I felt he was in imminent danger.After I took Naser to his uncle’s house, my niece collected my daughter Ala’ and took her to their house, making sure that the house windows and doors were firmly closed so that gas did not penetrate inside. Thereafter, I quickly returned to my house to bring Naser’s medicine. Using a special device, I gave him oxygen to help him overcome the effect of the gas, which he had inhaled. A few minutes after reaching the neighbouring house and inhaling oxygen, Naser’s condition improved. However, my children and I stayed there for three hours because of the intense gas smell which had spread inside my house. Later, I returned to my house and opened all the windows and doors to ventilate it so that the gas smell would fade away. At around 7:00 pm, my children, my husband and I returned to our house despite the fact that the gas smell did not go away completely.I found the tear gas grenade that had been thrown onto the balcony. There was no justification for throwing it. There was no one in our house who threw stones or performed any action against the soldiers or Border Guard officers. Throwing such a kind of a grenade, which is usually thrown by hand, could rarely be a mistake.To ensure that Naser did not suffer from any further complications, I took him to the doctor today. The doctor conducted some medical examinations and gave Naser some medicine.