Affidavit No. 3404/2007
2007
I live in a private house in Ramallah al-Tahta, in a quarter called Dar Jiryes. At approximately 2:00 am on Wednesday, 7 February 2007, my mobile phone rang. The caller was a friend of mine. He told me that there were a number of Israeli jeeps near my home and asked me to investigate what was happening.As soon as the call ended, I heard a loudspeaker announcing, "Everyone inside the house get out." I looked from the kitchen window, which overlooks the street, and saw several regular Israeli army jeeps stationed in front of my father's house, which is a few metres from my house. Then, I saw my mother Fawziyya 'Amr (60-years-old) leaving the house along with my brothers Sami (17-years-old), Muhammad (16-years-old) and Mousa (34-years-old). It was cold and raining outside. I saw Captain Rami, who is an investigator in the 'Ofar military camp in Bitouniya, amongst the Israeli soldiers. Captain Rami has investigated me several times. I saw my brothers lifting up their tops and taking down their trousers. Then, I saw my brothers and my mother left standing outside their house.There were six regular army jeeps in total. Suddenly, I heard stones being thrown at my house and heard a call in Arabic through the loudspeaker saying, "Ra'ed’s family, come out of your home." I walked out of my house and saw three Israeli soldiers at my gate. They were aiming their weapons at me and were carrying flash lights. One of the soldiers told me to lift up my top and drop my pants and then ordered me to approach him.I obeyed his order. As I was walking towards him, he asked if I was Ra'ed and if I was a policeman. I replied, "Yes.” Then, he asked me if I knew him, to which I replied, "Yes, you are Captain Rami.” He then said, "It is cold, don't make much trouble and tell me where your brother is." I swore to him that I didn’t know. But he persisted and repeated his question several times. Then, he ordered the soldiers to accompany me to my house and to bring all those who were in house, outside. I told him that my children, Kamel (9-years-old), Muhammad (6-years-old) and Aya (one and a half-years-old), were small and were all sleeping. Captain Rami said, "Fine, where is 'Ala'?" I swore to him that I didn’t know. He ordered me to enter the house and tell my wife and children to get out. I obeyed him under the threat of force. I walked towards my children, who were frightened when they saw the soldiers aiming their weapons at me. I carried Aya and took Kamel by his hand. My wife carried Muhammad. We all walked out of the house while the Israeli soldiers, who were behind us, were aiming their weapons at us.The soldiers made us stand beside my mother and brothers. Captain Rami called me and ordered me to go back into my house, open all the doors and cupboards, pull out all the drawers and turn the lights on. I did as he ordered and returned outside. He then told me to stand beside my family. I went to stand beside them but saw that they were gone.One of the soldiers told me to enter our neighbour’s house. All my family were there. It is worth noting that it was raining very heavily at the time. I estimate that the time between leaving our house and going into our neighbour’s house was roughly 45 minutes. At about 4:30 am, I heard the noise of the jeeps driving away.Immediately, I returned to my house with my family, while my mother and brothers returned to theirs. As I walked into my house, I saw that all our clothes had been thrown out of the cupboards onto the ground and that the mattresses had been turned upside down. My wallet had been thrown behind the TV, and 800 shekels and my mobile phone had been stolen. Then, I went to my family's house and found that it hadn’t been vandalised to the same extent as mine. The Israeli soldiers had taken my brother 'Ala's photo album. It is worth noting that my brother 'Ala' is wanted by the occupying authorities for his participation in the resistance.