Affidavit No.3479/2007
2007
In 1967, I was living in my village 'Imwas, located west of Ramallah. I was 27 years old. I was working in the village junior high school. I was living alone because my mother was dead and my father had re-married with another woman and was living in Ramallah.On 5 June 1967, the war broke out between the Arab and Israeli armies. On 6 June 1967 at around 2:00 am, while I was at my uncle Raghib Abu-Qteish’s home, weheard stories that were spreading amongst the citizens that the Israeli soldiers were approaching the village from the west. I checked and saw that a number of Israeli tanks were indeed proceeding towards our village. As a result, my uncle Ragheb, my uncle Abed and I left the village to go to the orchards area known as "'Ein al-'Aqed", which is only a kilometre and a half from the village. There, I found hundreds of villagers from my village of all ages. It seemed that all the villagers had left their houses like me, without carrying anything. Many of the fathers and mothers were carrying their children on their shoulders. Fear was dominating all of us and it was clear in the faces of each of the citizens including me. Fear and panic took us over as a result of the stories we had heard that the Israelis would kill, demolish and force out the residents of the village out as they did in the wake of 1948 war. We were all silent out of shock. I imagined that day as if it were Judgment Day.The sun rose and I was still in 'Ein al-'Aqed with hundreds of villagers. From that place and from amongst the trees, I saw Israeli military jeeps and tanks coming toour village through the mountain roads. Some of them were coming via the 'Imwas -Yalo road. There were no flags on the tanks and jeeps indicating that they wereIsraeli. However, I knew that the Jordanian army had withdrawn from the area and there was no Arab army presence in the area. There was no resistance from thevillage and I did not hear any firing. All I heard was the sound of explosives.After dawn, dozens of our villagers, including myself, showed up from amongst the trees and proceeded towards the village. On the way, I saw a man from our village bleeding from his back. His name was Ahmad Husein. I carried him with the help of other villagers and took him to an Israeli First Aid Centre located in the vicinity of 'Abbas al-Sheikh on the edge of the main street of 'Imwas. The Israeli soldiers refused to help him and told us in Arabic: "Go back to your homes." That man [Ahmad Husein] died later on. As I was returning home, I heard heavy firing and showers of bullets. I found refuge in the house of 'Isa Yousef, who was at home with his wife and two daughters aged between 18-20 years old.After approximately 15 minutes in 'Isa Yousef’s home, two Israeli soldiers raidedthe house with their weapons pointed at us. These two soldiers were wearing olive green uniforms and iron helmets of the same colour. The two soldiers threatened us with their weapons and asked us to leave the house and go out to the main street of the village. They said in Arabic: "Out… out!" We left without taking anything with us. On the main street of the village, I saw many women without veils on their heads carrying their children. At 8:00 am, when the number of villagers outside had reached hundreds, dozens of Israeli soldiers told us to walk towards Ramallah, which was approximately 25 kilometres from our village. There were villagers of all ages and the Israeli soldiers threatened us with their weapons.I walked in the company of our villagers, lifting a white flag and sometimes carrying a child or helping an old man so as to protect myself. Whenever, I got tired fromcarrying the flag or the flag dropped down a little, the women told me to lift it up. After walking about 5 kilometres in the sun, I reached Beit Nouba village. Afteranother 3 kilometres, I reached Beit Liqiya village. All along that way, I did not hear any firing. I saw the Israeli tanks and jeeps going towards Palestinian villages. At the end, I reached Beit 'Our village. I reached it thirsty, hungry and exhausted. I saw people drinking from a well and I quenched my thirst from it as they did. Then I continued my walk until I reached al-Tira village in the vicinity of Beit 'Our village.There I bought bread and chicken and entered an open house. There were no residents in the house and I spend the night in the company of 'Abd-al-Rahman  Ragheb. At around 11:00 am on 7 June 1967, we learned that the Israeli army was besieging al-Tira village and were ordering the village residents to leave it and go towards Ramallah. We did as the others did and left al-Tira village with Nihad Abu-Ghosh, one of our villagers, who joined me on the walk to Ramallah with dozens of men and women and children. We walked toward Ramallah until we reached the borders of Rafat village in the vicinity of the military camp. It was approximately 4:00 pm when a number of Israeli soldiers stopped us. They took my Jordanian passport, watch, and my boot-laces and forced me, along with another 23 men, to kneel down and put my hands on my head. They forced us under the threat of weapons.At that moment, I felt that my life had come to an end, especially given that the Israeli soldiers were pointing their weapons at us. What increased my fears is that they erected a big automatic gun in front of us. The soldiers cuffed our hands behind our backs, blindfolded us and forced us into cars. The cars moved, stopping in more than one place before we reached Sarafand, where the soldiers untied our hands and removed the blindfolds from our eyes.On the morning of 8 June 1967, we were taken to 'Atlit detention centre. This centre was a British military building to which a prison was attached. In that centre, I met many Egyptian and Syrian detainees; some of them were injured but were offered no treatment. If any of the detainees did not obey orders, the Israeli soldiers would order him to stand out in the sun carrying a large stone.After one month of my detention in 'Atlit, I was taken with others in buses to Ramallah where they dropped us near Ramallah Park. Immediately, I proceeded towards my father's home located in Qaddoura Camp. I learned from my father that our village was destroyed and that there was no way to return to it. After that, I moved to live with my cousin Husein 'Abd-al-'Aziz located in al-Bireh in the al-Sharafa quarter. After that, I rented a house in Ramallah and moved between Ramallah, Jerusalem and Abu-Ghosh, where my aunts live.\I remember that in September 1967, I made the first visit to my village 'Imwas. I saw that it had been leveled with the earth. Since I was moving from Abu-Ghosh toJerusalem, I was counted in the population census conducted at that time and was given the Israeli ID, which gives me the right to live in Jerusalem. Since then, I have lived in Ramallah and worked in Bitouniya Boys School. As I hold the Israeli ID, I occasionally visit 'Imwas, which is now known as "Canada Park" and I also visit the Latroun Monastery from time to another.