Affidavit No. 5486/2010
2010
I am an 11th grade student at al-네rroub Secondary Boys School in al-네rroub refugee camp. This morning, I sat for my end of semester examination on the subject of administration and was done at around 9:30 am. After the examination, I went with a group of my classmates for a picnic in a forested area at al-네rroub Agriculture School. The Agriculture School is located west of al-네rroub refugee camp but is separated from al-네rroub by the main Hebron-Jerusalem road, which is also called Road # 60. Among those who were participating in the picnic were my classmate Hisham Jamal al-Titi, who was about my age, along with Mu뇺az Mousa 넷mran and Ibrahim Muhammad 네li al-Biss who were a year younger but also students at my school.When we reached the edge of the main street near the military watchtower and before we crossed the street west heading towards the Agriculture School, I saw a white car with a rear cabin. It was a Citroen car with yellow (Israeli) registration number plate. The driver moved slowly, stopped on the street at a distance of about three metres opposite our location, took out his pistol, and opened fire on us. The driver was a bearded man. After we heard the first bullet, we sat on the ground. However, the settler continued to fire bullets. At that moment, I saw and heard Mu뇺az fall on the ground and scream. My classmate Hisham and I approached him after we realised he was injured. I saw blood gush out heavily from his right thigh. After the settler had ceased fire, Hisham and I carried Mu뇺az and ran towards the refugee camp. The settler fired more than 20 bullets at us.After carrying Mu뇺az for a distance of about 20 metres, I saw Ibrahim al-Biss, who was running behind us, pass us and grab his waist in pain. I realized then that he was hit as well. Afterwards, the settler drove north towards Bethlehem. Meantime, a group of young men escaped to the refugee camp. After carrying Mu뇺az for a distance of about 60 metres, we saw a car which belongs to a resident of the refugee camp. We put Mu뇺az in the car and drove to a private clinic, but the doctor was not available there. We found Ibrahim at the private clinic and we ended up transporting both Mu뇺az and Ibrahim to al-Ahli Hospital in Hebron.There was no justification as to why the settler opened fire at us. He had a white beard and wore a small cap on his head, which indicated that he was a religious Jewish man. There was no one else with him in the car. We could not have done anything to aggravate him especially with our location near the military watchtower which is always full of soldiers at the entrance to the refugee camp.After Mu뇺az and Ibrahim finally arrived to al-Ahli Hospital, the injured young men were immediately admitted into the operations room. Mu뇺az had his main artery cut off and his condition was described as critical.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 3 June 2010Signature: Mahmoud TafeshName not withheldField researcher: Hisham SharabatiI, the undersigned 네ref Mahmoud Tafesh, declare that my son Mahmoud has made a statement to the AL-HAQ.네ref Tafesh