Affidavit No. 4920/2009
2009
I am married and the father of one child. Her name is Lama and she is about 2 years old. For about ten years, I have been working in the construction sector in Israel because it is difficult to find work in the West Bank. To access my workplace inside Israel, I travel from my town of Tarqoumiya to the town of al-Dahriyya, where cars bearing Israeli registration plates transport workers to the Separation Wall. Most, if not all of these cars are not registered at the responsible Israeli licensing departments, and therefore lack the required licences.I infiltrate into Israel on foot through an incomplete section of the Wall. Each time I travel, transportation cost me about 200 shekels to access my workplace. Usually after I would reach my workplace, I would stay there one or two weeks. I would sleep at the construction site, which is usually unfinished. Construction sites are subject to frequent raids by the Israeli Police and Border Guard forces. They search for workers who reside inside Israel without permits, arrest them and return them to the West Bank. In most cases, Israeli Police and Border Guard officers physically and verbally abuse workers.At around 5:00 pm on Monday, 18 May 2009, I left the town of Tarqoumiya along with three other youths, including my relative Muhammad Hasan Fatafta, about 25 years old. We arrived at the town of al-Dahriyya at around 6:00 pm, where we waited for about an hour and a half. A Toyota pickup transported us. We were seven passengers, including four who sat inside the cabin and three others who were sitting on the uncovered rear part of the pickup. I sat on the rear part and my cousin Muhammad Hasan was inside.Within 15 minutes, the pickup travelled south from the centre of al-Dahriyya, passing the village of al-Ramadin. Before we reached the Separation Wall, which is constructed south of the village of al-Ramadin, the driver stopped and reversed the pickup. At that point, the Wall is made of barbed wire and a 300-metre-long fence. The driver said that he had received a call from a friend, who said that there was an Israeli army jeep in the area. He advised us not to take the risk and come back another time. We were supposed to cross into Israel after crossing through the incomplete section of the Separation Wall by foot. I heard the driver talk to his colleague on a wireless telecommunications device.The pickup drove us back to the village of al-Ramadin. It drove slowly at a speed that did not exceed 50 kilometres an hour and crossed a low dirt barricade somewhere across the road. Five minutes later, I saw three Israeli soldiers on the left side of the road and 2 on the right side. Hiding behind the dirt barricade, they opened fire towards the pickup after it passed them. I and the other two workers on the rear part of the vehicle lied on the floor. The soldiers opened fire for a short time that did not exceed one minute. I estimated that dozens of bullets were fired on us. However, our driver continued to drive although one of the tyres was hit the rear window glass was broken. After the first bullets were fired, I felt a sting in my right hand, realising that I had been injured. I looked at my hand and it was bleeding. After the pickup was at a distance of about half a kilometre, I realised that my cousin Muhammad Hasan sustained a bullet wound in his left ear. The ickup went on towards the village of al-Ramadin, which was at a distance of about two kilometres. Having arrived there, my cousin Muhammad Hasan and I took another car that transported us to the clinic of al-Dahriyya Municipality. After we were x-rayed and diagnosed, we received first medical aid. Doctors told me that a bullet had penetrated through my right hand and went out from the palm. They also told Muhammad that he bullet shrapnel hit his ear. A Palestinian ambulance transported us to the Hebron Governmental Hospital. Muhammad Hasan left the hospital on the same night. However, I spent the night at the hospital and left it at noon on the next day.At the hospital, the other workers told me that bullets had also hit the upper part of the driver’s seat and the seat beside him. I believe this was why the driver continued to drive after fire was opened towards us. He might have feared that the risk of casualties would be higher if he actually stopped. The soldiers who opened fire on us never ask us to stop. Had they done so, I would have been the first one to hear them because I was sitting on the rear part of the pickup. Now, I receive medical treatment and report to the outpatients’ clinic at the Hebron Hospital. To date, I have been unable to get back to work.