Affidavit No. 5812/2010
2010
At around 2:00 pm on Saturday 30 October 2010, I left my home in the company of my brother Marwan (who is about 12 years old). We headed for al-Natsha Grocery, which is approximately 200 metres north of our house. About 70 metres away from the grocery I saw an Israeli Border Guard jeep. Two Border Guard police officers got out of the jeep and demanded that I go into an empty alleyway. One of the police officers asked for my ID card, but I said I was a minor and did not have one. He asked me for my birth certificate. I told him I did not carry it on me in case I lose it. The officer punched me hard in the chest. The two officers then beat me, threw me to the ground and kicked me. The officers continued to beat me whilst I was on the ground. For about 20 minutes, they pulled me up off the ground and threw me back down. During the last five minutes of being beaten up, I asked some women in the area to rescue me but they were unable to. Whilst they beat me, the officers laughed and mocked me.After the officers had captured me, my brother Marwan went home and told my family what had happened. The soldiers left and women from the neighbourhood came to help me. They took me to my neighbour’s house to rest. They gave me some water. I stayed there for about 15 minutes. My brother Muhammad (who is 16 and a half years old) came to take me home.On our way home, we saw a group of Israeli occupying soldiers and Border Guard officers, including the two officers that had beaten me up. There were about six soldiers and officers in total. They stopped and searched us, and then pushed us and told us to go away.After being at home for a short while, I went to the Hebron Governmental Hospital because I was suffering from severe pain in various parts of my body. I was examined and given an x-ray and medical treatment. I had sustained bruises on my right shoulder and foot and a cut under my knee on the same leg.Later, I discovered that the two officers who had beaten me up, had also beaten up my brother Muhammad when I was at the neighbour’s house, and he was on his way to check on me. The officers had also pointed their rifles at my little brothers who were standing at the window of our house protesting about the beating up of my brother Muhammad. The Border Guard police officer who beat me up was about 27 years of age. He was tall, had a white complexion, was somewhat thin, and wore (seeing) glasses. The other officer who beat me up was of medium height, almost the same age as his colleague, chubby, and had a brown complexion, and a light beard.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 10 November 2010 Signature: Murad Ja’bariName not withheldField researcher: Hisham SharabatiI, the undersigned, Manal Nu’man Ja’bari, hereby declare that my son Murad made the abovesworn statement to Al-Haq.Manal Ja’bari