Affidavit No. 4156/2008
2008
I was at my mother in law’s house for a visit on 14 April 2008 at around 4:00 pm. Her house is located 70 metres away from my home. While I was there my neighbour’s son came and told me that soldiers from Israeli occupying forces are in front of my home. I panicked because my children were home alone. I headed home quickly. Hiyam, who is my sister in law, accompanied me.When I arrived at the house I saw nine Israeli soldiers carrying long weapons and wearing Israel’s military uniform. I did not see any military vehicles accompanying them. I noticed two soldiers knocking on the door. My sons: Hassan, who is 13 years old, Mohammad, who is 15 years old, Muqiz, who is six years old, and my daughters: Aza, who is 16 years old, Raya, who is 13 years old and Karmel, who is four years old, were alone at home and they refused to open the door for the soldiers.A black, well built, and tall Israeli soldier asked me who I was in Arabic. He spoke with a Bedouin dialect. I told him that I was the owner of the house and that my children were inside. He told me to tell them to open the door or else the soldiers would open it using their usual way. When I asked him why they wanted to enter he told me to shut up. I yelled out to my children and told them to open the door. When the children opened the door the soldiers entered rapidly.The same soldier who talked to me asked them about their ages. I answered his question. The same soldier then asked my son Hassan about the children who threw stones at Israeli vehicles on the main street. Hassan told him that he did not know because he does not leave the house often. The same soldier then threatened to arrest and beat Hassan. He also had his machine gun aimed at Hassan. I was terrified and feared for my son’s safety so I interfered and told the soldier that Hassan already told him that he knew nothing.This soldier then told the other soldiers to climb the roof of our home. It is two stories high. All of the soldiers climbed the roof and none of them remained with us on the first floor. The soldiers remained on the roof for an hour and a half. They were also carrying a big telescope, which I had noticed while they were still inside the house. While the soldiers were on the roof, some of our neighbours and village inhabitants came to see what was happening. The soldiers prevented them from entering and shouted at them from the roof.My children and I sat in the salon on the first floor for an hour and a half. After that, the soldiers quickly descended the stairs. At that moment my husband, who works with the International Relief Agency, arrived at home and asked them why they were there. The soldier aimed his weapon at my husband and told him to shut up. When my husband started arguing with the soldiers one of them shot in the air. Seeing that, I fainted and fell to the ground. I regained consciousness when my daughter Azza poured water on my face. I looked around and saw some of the village’s citizens gathering around the soldiers. I saw the soldiers withdrawing toward the west, where the village olive trees are located. That area leads to the main street.