Affidavit No. 4078/2008
2008
I live in the western quarter of Qabatiya town, located south of Jenin city. My home is on the second floor of a building, the first floor of which consists of commercial shops. The windows of my home overlook the surrounding area from all sides. On Monday 4 February 2008, at approximately 2:30 am, I was woken up by the sound of one bullet being fired, closely followed by the sound of two further bullets being fired.Then the shooting stopped. Our neighbourhood has witnessed continuous, almost nightly, armed confrontations between the Israeli military raiding the neighbourhood and Palestinian armed men, who are known to be present in the area. When I heard the shooting, I looked through the south window of my house but I did not see any Israeli military jeeps. When I looked through the western window, I saw around 12 Israeli military jeeps positioned right next to the walls of some commercial shops located west of my home.The soldiers were dressed in typical military uniforms that we are familiar with and were carrying weapons. Some of them were using night vision binoculars to help them see in the dark which made them look very scary. I instantly realised that something was about to happen but until that moment I did not see any Palestinian armed men in the area. In the vicinity of my house and west of the place from where I was observing the situation, there was a narrow path leading to the eastern quarter of the town, namely to Zakarna quarter. It was calm in the area. From time to time, I would look through the window. Everything remained calm until 3:00 am when I heard very intense shooting outside accompanied by the voice of a man saying “God is great”. I hurried to the southern window and looked outside. I saw a Palestinian young man lying on the ground while Israeli soldiers were heavily firing at him. The shooting was intense but lasted only for a few sudden moments until the young man stopped saying “God is great”.I saw the young Palestinian man lying on his left side on the ground and a long weapon lying beside him. None of the Israeli soldiers - who were around 60 metres away from him - to the west, approached him. A horrible silence dominated the area. Then the silence was broken by the arrival of eight big Israeli military jeeps, driving around in the quarter’s streets. One of these jeeps stopped beside the aforementioned young man. A soldier opened the door of the jeep, reached out and grabbed the weapon from beside the young man. Then the jeep left, without any more firing. The operation of the Israeli force persisted until 3:30 am that morning, when they finally left the area.Like all other men and women of the quarter, I hurried to the street. I was the first to reach the young Palestinian man who was lying on the street. He was dead and was bleeding heavily from his head, chest, abdomen and legs. His name, as I later learned from the other citizens gathering in the place, was ‘Ammar ‘Abd-al-Rahim Zakarna. The citizens were shouting “God is great”.Then, a Palestinian ambulance arrived and carried ‘Ammar Zakarna to the hospital. At that moment, I discovered that another Palestinian young man called Ahmad Abu-Zeid had been killed in the same incident but I had not seen how he was killed. The corpse of Abu-Zeid was discovered at 40 metres north east of Zakarna in front of an open square located nearby Hafez Nazzal’s house. I knew from the citizens that the two young men were killed by the Israeli occupying soldiers who had secretly occupied the roof of Walid Muhammad Nazzal’s house located in the middle of the quarter, at approximately 100 metres south of my home. It is astonishing that I did not notice the presence of these soldiers on the roof although the roof is directly opposite my house.It is worth noting that no armed confrontations took place in the area and that I did not perceive any warning prior to the shooting. I would also like to mention that martyr ‘Ammar Zakarna was shot by the Israeli soldiers who were hiding next to the commercial shops and by the soldiers who had deployed on the roof of Walid Nazzal’s house. This was confirmed by many citizens. I also learned from the citizens that Naji Samir Nazzal, 24 years, who lives in the same quarter was wanted by the Israeli occupying forces because of his participation in the Palestinian resistance. He had been injured during the first shooting, in the vicinity of his home. After Naji was injured, the two young men had come to the place of the incident in order to save Naji’s life.Ahmad Abu-Zeid came from the east side of the location while ‘Ammar Zakarna came from the north through the path leading to Zakarna quarter beside my house. When Israeli soldiers, deploying on the roof of Walid Nazzal, saw the two young men approaching, they opened fired on them without any prior notice or warning. Zakarna was also shot by the Israeli soldiers who were hiding behind the shops located west of the place. I would also like to point out that after the rapid gunfire that killed Zakarna and Abu-Zeid, no further shooting occurred. At the end, my information indicates that the Israeli soldiers did not recognise Naji Nazzal. They did not arrest him and he was taken to the hospital for treatment.