Affidavit No. 4451/2008
2008
I live in the village of al-Tayba, west of the city of Jenin. The village is located near the Green Line, which separates the territories occupied in 1948 and 1967. I own an area of nine dunums of land cultivated with olive and almond trees. Approximately 150 producing olive trees are planted on the land. My land has been isolated behind the Israeli annexation and expansion wall, which was constructed in the area in mid-2002 as part of the Israeli occupation. This wall isolates and annexes approximately 750 dunums out of a total of 4,000 dunums of land belonging to the village.The Israeli occupying army also installed an iron gate bearing the number 154 in the wall. The farmers whose land has been isolated behind the wall use this gate to access their land, especially during the olive harvest season. I possess a permit to cross this gate and access my land, in order to harvest my olive crops. We obtain such access permits through the village council, which applies for them at the Israeli District Coordination Office at the Salem Military Base.The situation with me is that on 1 October 2008, I wanted to access my land to harvest my olive crops. At 8:00 am, I arrived at the gate and presented my ID card and my special access permit to cross the said iron gate to the Israeli soldiers. However, the soldiers seized and confiscated my special access permit, claiming that I had used it to access the territories occupied in 1948 and stayed there overnight. This claim is not true. I have never used the special wall permit to stay overnight, as I enter my land in the morning and return at 4:00 pm. I asked the soldiers for the date on which I was believed to have spent the night on the other side of the wall.However, they did not specify a date, which indicates that their allegations are false. From that day on, I have not been able to retrieve my permit, despite having repeatedly reported to the Israeli District Coordination Office at Salem Military Base, which is located two kilometres north of al-Tayba village. As a result, I have not been able to reach my land since that date. Consequently, I will not be able to harvest my olive crops this season, which will be a great loss for me.