Affidavit No. 2737/2005
2005
I am a  citizen of Al-Ras village located nine kilometres south of Toulkarem  city. The village population is only around 500 persons. I work as a  farmer on my land, amounting to 200 dunums planted with olive trees and  containing greenhouses. My family, brothers and I used to rely on the  income generated from the crops of this land.At the  beginning of 2002, however, the Israeli occupying forces embarked on the  construction of the so-called Separation Wall. This Wall stretched  along the west side of Al-Ras village, causing the confiscation of  thousands of dunums in that area, including agricultural lands. The  Israeli occupying forces constructed the Wall in the Al-Ras area, in the  form of barbed wires and asphalted roads. Moreover, along the entire  Wall surrounding the village, only one iron gate was erected in order to  allow the Palestinian farmers to pass to their agricultural lands  located behind the Wall.The gate  is located two kilometres to the west of the village. At the beginning  of 2004, the occupying authorities completed the construction of the  Wall in our area. The Israeli occupying authorities issued military  orders stating that every farmer who wants to cross through the gate  (No. 753) to his land, has to obtain a permit. Like all other villagers,  I applied through the Palestinian Liaison in Toulkarem to obtain a  permit but the Israeli authorities rejected my application and refused  to give me a permit, alleging that I was rejected for security reasons.Since  then and until now, I have submitted around 20 applications to obtain a  permit that allows me to go to my land, and every time the Israeli  authorities have rejected my application for security reasons. I also  attempted to obtain a magnetic card through three lawyers, but all my  attempts have failed. I have never been arrested and I am not an  activist nor affiliated to any political party. Currently, and for the  past four years, I have not been able to pass through the gate in order  to go to my land and take care of it, which led to the destruction of my  crop. The cause of this lack of care is the Israeli occupation, the  Wall and the gates.I appeal  to Al-Haq and all other law organisations to immediately intervene to  force the Israeli authorities to issue me this permit. It is very odd  that a Palestinian citizen needs to obtain a permit in order to reach  his own land and his livelihood as a result of the construction of the  Separation Wall.Moreover,  for more than two months, the Israeli army has prevented granting any  citizen from Al-Ras village permits to pass through the gate. This  measure has specifically been taken against the citizens of Al-Ras,  which has been subjected to strict and tight military measures for an  extended period of time. These measuresinclude  the erection of checkpoints at the village's entrances, raiding the  village, and other acts that violate the rights of Palestinian citizens.It is  also worth noting that these measures have deprived me and my family of  our source of livelihood as I rely on the income generated from the land  to feed my four small children. I have no job other than cultivating  and planting that land.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 20 December 2005Signature: Ihsan Amin Mahmoud