Affidavit No. 3907/2007
2007
On Friday, 12 October, which was the night before the al-Fiter feast, I was at the market in Qalqiliya city, accompanied by some friends. We were enjoying our time, celebrating the release of my brother, from Israeli jail. Our gathering ended at 2:00 am. I went back home. I live with my brothers, their wives and children in a four-story house in Qalqiliya city. My wife and I live on the fourth floor.As I was on my way home, I was surprised to find a large number of armoured Israeli hummer jeeps in our neighbourhood, accompanied by a large number of Israeli soldiers. The headlights of the jeeps allowed me to see the soldiers and the jeeps, but there were too many of them for me to actually count them. One of the soldiers, who was carrying some kind of weapon I could not identify, and wearing the regular Israeli military uniform asked me, in broken Arabic, where I was going. I told him that I was going home, and he let me go. When I reached my house, I opened the main door, entered and closed the door behind me. I quickly climbed the stairs to my apartment, on the fourth floor. I knocked on the door and my wife Nida’ opened. She told me that my sons, 6 year old Islam and four year old ’Izz-al-Din, had gone to sleep early to celebrate the al-Fiter feast the next day.I sat down and chatted with my wife in the living room. I told her about the soldiers and the Israeli jeeps that were positioned in front of the house. As I was talking, we heard loud knocking on the main door. We also heard our windows break; someone was throwing stones at our house. I hurried downstairs and opened the door. There were armed Israeli soldiers carrying sledge hammers and wearing the usual Israeli military uniforms.They entered the house in a hurry and climbed the stairs to my apartment. I followed them. They hurried into the apartment and broke the windows of my house with their sledge hammers. When they entered, my wife quickly woke up the kids and took them into the living room. The children, standing right next to me were trembling out of fear. One of the Israeli soldiers, who was of medium height and armed, told us and everybody else in the building to go down to the street. Since they had woken up  all my brothers, there were 19 of us. So we all went down to the street, escorted by Israeli soldiers.As we were standing in the street, we heard the sound of the sledge hammers damaging our house. Since the feast’s prayer was due at the mosque, I asked the soldier who was watching us if we could go to the mosque, but he refused.We stayed outside in the street for four hours. When one of the soldiers came out of the apartment and approached us, I asked why they were raiding our house and breaking our property. He answered that they were looking for arms. Another one of my brothers, not the one released from prison, is wanted by the occupying forces. The soldiers did all this to us, just to pressure us to tell them where he was. Finally, the soldiers left in their jeeps. We then hurried to the house to check whatthey had done. They had displaced our carpets, poured oil on the floor, and spilled all kinds of seeds, such as lentils and rice. They had also thrown our clothes on the floor, hammered a hole in the wall with their sledge hammers and had broken wooden decorations. Although my wife spent three days cleaning the house, all the harm was done within minutes.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 20 October 2007.Signature: ‘Abd-al-Rahim ZeidName not withheldField researcher: Husniyya ‘Ali Ahmad