Affidavit No. 4165/2008
2008
My house is located in the al-Harayek area, at the northern edge of Qabatiya town, south of Jenin city. On Thursday, 17 April 2008 at around 2:15 am, I was awoken by a strong explosion, which was directly followed by intermittent firing.I immediately looked from the window of my house to see a number of Israeli military jeeps and a number of Israeli soldiers in military uniform. I saw these soldiers deploying in the surroundings of three commercial shops, belonging to Kamal ‘Abd-al-Khaleq Abu-Zeid, located 40 metres from the northwestern side of my home. These three shopswere under construction and thus empty.Following the explosion, I heard a voice saying in Arabic, through loudspeakers, “Give up, open the door and get out.” I continued watching and saw three Israeli soldiers, in full military uniform and carrying weapons, standing north of my house, at the edge of the aforementioned shops. They were aiming their weapons at these shops. The firing had stopped completely and no armed confrontation had taken place. The firing that I had heard came from the Israeli soldiers, who were raiding the area and had opened fire as soon as they arrived.The Israeli calls, through the loud speaker, were repeated from time to time, “Give up, get out of the house! It is a pity to demolish the house!” and, “Open, open!” and other similar calls. I could not identify to whom the Israeli soldiers were shouting, especially as the shops were empty. The soldiers were deployed around the shops and at 4:00 am a military bulldozer arrived and started demolishing the shops. Then another bulldozer arrived at the site and participated in the demolition works. I then realised that the shops were the target of the military operation.The Israeli army did not raid my house and did not come close to it. Their concentration was on the commercial stores. There was no further gunfire but from time to time the soldiers threw sonic bombs, and loud explosions were also heard around the stores. This military operation continued until 7:30 am. Because the doors of the stores are located on the main street, west of my house, I could not the doors.At this time, I saw the Israeli force withdrawing from Qabatiya via the Arab-American University Street, north of our neighbourhood. I saw approximately 15-20 Israeli military jeeps, of different sizes, and two bulldozers: one with rubber wheels and the other one with chain wheels. As the Israeli occupying forces left, dozens of citizens, including myself, went out to see what had happened.As I reached the stores, I was shocked when I saw two young Palestinian men lying on the ground beside each other. I was the first to reach them. The two young men were lying at the north side of the stores. Five metres away from them I could see a white car that had been completely damaged and had been transformed into a pile of metal by the Israeli bulldozers. The two young men were bleeding and there was a pool of blood around them. They were dead. A number of young men and an ambulance of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society arrived.The corpses of the two young men were carried to the ambulance and taken to Jenin Governmental Hospital, in Jenin. I knew from the citizens who had gathered that these two young men were Bilal Saleh and ‘Izz al-Din Zakarna ‘Weidat. Both of them are from Qabatiya, and activists of al-Quds Brigades, the military wing of the Islamic Jihad.It is worth noting that the stores were partially demolished but their ceilings were not. I inspected the site. We realised that the two young men were sleeping inside their car in one of the stores, probably in the first one, which does not have a metallic door. It also seems that the Israeli occupying forces secretly sneaked into the store without being noticed and killed the two young men without any warning.Then the Israeli force performed a masquerade by pretending that they besieged the stores and had called for people inside to give up. The Israeli soldiers wanted to make it look like these two young men were killed during an armed confrontation. This is not true, however. No armed confrontation took place in the area. We, the Palestinian citizens, have become capable of distinguishing the confrontations that take place between Palestinian fighters and Israeli soldiers.This means that the two young men were assassinated while they were sleeping inside their white car. I later discovered that one of the Israeli tractor pulled the car out of one ofthe storage rooms, onto the street, and the soldiers dragged the two young men out. Then the Israeli bulldozer completely destroyed the car to hide the aforementioned assassination operation.