Affidavit No. 6422/2011
2011
I work at a factory in Hebron city and live in Khallet Hadour neighbourhood northeast of the old city of Hebron. According to the Palestinian-Israeli agreements, this neighbourhood is located in Area H2, which is under the Israeli security control.At around 4:30 pm on Sunday 15 May 2011, I left the factory and headed home. On the way, I met with my friend and neighbour, Ahmad al-Shweiki (22 years old), who worked in the shoemaking industry. I met him near al-Manara roundabout, which is in the H1 area of Hebron that is controlled by the Palestinian security. My friend Ahmad and I walked southwards to our homes. As we walked in ‘Ein al-Qurna area and before we reached the line separating the area under the Palestinian control (H1) from the area under the Israeli control (H2), I saw two Israeli military cars enter the H1 area. The car, which was closer to the H2 area, stopped at a distance of almost seven metres inside the Palestinian-controlled area. It was a relatively large vehicle. A military jeep stopped at a distance of about five metres in front of that car.My friend suggested that we change tracks and go a different way in fear that we would be attacked by the soldiers but I answered that we had not committed any crime and we were not doing anything unlawful so there was no need for us to take a different road. When we got closer to the military jeeps, around 14 soldiers got out and began kicking and beating us with their hands and rifle butts. I felt a very strong hit with a rifle butt on my head that caused me immense pain and gave me blurry vision. The soldier dragged me in the military jeep and I regained the ability to see clearly immediately afterwards. I was forced to sit in the jeep and I noticed that there were two other detainees being forced to lie face down. Three soldiers, who came into the jeep behind me, kept beating me. One of them hit me hard on the left side of my chest with the barrel of his rifle. The beating continued for about five minutes. Thereafter, they tied my hands behind my back with plastic cuffs and then blindfolded me.Before I had been hit on the head, I saw soldiers move my friend Ahmad to the military jeep. The car in which I was sitting moved and travelled for several minutes and then stopped. The other two detainees and I were forced to step down. While I was inside the car, I felt blood gush out heavily from my head because of the blow to that area.After I was forced out of the car, I was seated on the ground. An officer approached me, removed my blindfold, and demanded my ID card. Around me, I saw approximately 20 young men and boys who had also been detained. I realised that we were in an Israeli army camp on al-Shuhada’ Street. The officer blindfolded my eyes again. Another two young men and I were relocated to a military jeep. I could see the young men from underneath the blindfold. A little before 6:00 pm, the car moved and then stopped. Two young men and I were forced to step down after the soldier removed my blindfold. I realised that we were present at the Israeli Police station near Kiryat Arba’ settlement. The soldier who removed the blindfold from my eyes inquired about the wound in my head, and I answered him.A number of detainees and I were forced into a ready-made room (a caravan), in which seven of us were held. After our handcuffs had been removed, our hands were tied up with cloth strips. My friend Ahmad al-Shweiki was among those present in the caravan. Soldiers brought more  detainees into the room where we were being detained. Ultimately, we were 14 detainees inside an area of about 12 square metres. Among those brought in were my brother Mohammed, about 16 years of age, as well as my cousins ‘Ali Basem al-Haddad and Yaser Taysir al- Haddad, both also approximately 16 years of age. They were forced into the detention room at around 9:00 pm. Due to the rising number of detainees in the small place, detainees were then taken out of the room and we were seated on the ground in between the caravans. At around midnight, Israeli Police officers started to take detainees for interrogation. Meanwhile, I suffered from intense pain in the left side of the chest and in my bleeding head. I also felt hungry and exhausted. No treatment was offered for the injury on my head. At around 1:00 am the next day, I was relocated to an interrogation room, in which a police interrogator accused me of throwing stones from a roof at the soldiers, who said they saw me do so. I explained the conditions of my detention to the interrogator and said I was prepared to face the soldiers who claimed they had seen me. I was interrogated for about 10 minutes. Then, the interrogator demanded that I sign on a paper printed in Hebrew, which I did. When I was taken out to the yard, I found out that agroup of detainees, including about nine persons, had been moved from the place. My cousins, my brother, my friend Ahmad al-Shweiki, another young man, and I continued to be held in the same place until around 4:00 am. We were then relocated to a prisoner transport vehicle with two cages inside. Our feet and hands were tied up with iron shackles inside the vehicle. The vehicle drove towards Kfar ‘Etzion Camp, which we reached at around 5:00 am. All detainees were forced out and led to a remote place. As for me, I was forced to stay inside the vehicle.I was wearing a dark blue jacket that was similar to the police jackets. It was produced by a local company and they you receive it with a label once you buy it.. The soldier in ‘Etzion inquired about the jacket’s label, and I said it was at home. The soldier forced me out of the vehicle and took me to a room, in which I was searched and my personal belongings were taken from me. A soldier also took my jacket outside. I demanded that he give me back my jacket, but he said he will throw it in the trash.I was then admitted to a detention room, in which my brother, my cousins, my friend Ahmad, and two other persons were being held. That was at around 7:00 am. I lied on a bed and fell fast asleep for about an hour and a half. I got up when I heard a knock on the entrance to the detention room. A jailer, who opened the door, called my name and led me out of the room to a prisoner transport vehicle, where I found five other detainees. My feet and hands were tied up with iron shackles before I was admitted to the aforementioned vehicle, which then drove off. The vehicle reached ‘Ofar Detention Centre at around 11:00 am. The other detainees were forced out of the vehicle at ‘Ofar Detention Centre while I remained in the vehicle for about one hour. The vehicle then travelled to a hospital. I asked the soldier about the name of the hospital and he said I was at the Hadassah Hospital. At the Hospital, a female doctor cleaned my wound and sewed it with three stitches. I stayed at the hospital for about two hours: sometimes receiving treatment and sometimes waiting between treatments. Later, I was taken back to Kfar ‘Etzion Camp, which I reached at around 3:00 pm. There, I was admitted to a different detention room, in which three other detainees were being held.I continued to be detained in Kfar ‘Etzion Detention Camp until the morning of Thursday, 19 May 2011. During that time, I did not receive any kind of treatment. At around 7:00 am on Thursday, I was taken out of the room where I was detained and led to a prisoner transport vehicle. My hands and feet were tied up inside the vehicle. Another six detainees were also in the same vehicle, which drove off to ‘Ofar Detention Camp. The other detainees and I were forced to step down in the detention camp, where we were admitted to a room near the gate of the prison. I waited in the room until around 4:00 pm. While I was inside the room, officers demanded that I sign a pledge stating that I would pay an amount of ILS 2,000 as a fine in case I carried out any activity against the occupation again; I signed in front of a police officer, who spoke in Arabic. Other detainees, including my friend Ahmad al-Shweiki, were also told to sign a similar pledge. My friend Ahmad, another young man from Hebron, and I were then relocated to a prisonertransport vehicle that drove us to Qalandiya checkpoint north of Jerusalem where we arrived at around 8:00 pm. From there, we travelled with a family that were waiting for their released son to the central station in Ramallah. My friend, the other young man, and I travelled in a taxi to Hebron. I arrived at my home at around 1:00 pm on Friday 20 May 2011.In the morning of Saturday, 22 May 2011, I went to al-Ahli Hospital in Hebron city. My injury was examined and I received a medical report. I was asked to return tomorrow Monday, 23 May 2011, for further treatment.