Affidavit No: 5833 /2010
2010
I, the above mentioned citizen, am a resident of Tana village, which is located approximately eight kilometres east of Beit Fourik town in Nablus governorate. At around 7:00 am on Wednesday, 8 December 2010, we saw Israeli army force, including around four jeeps of the Israeli Civil Administration (which are known by their white colour), about six Israeli military jeeps, and three small yellow bulldozers. These bulldozers demolished a sheep barracks, which belonged to me and my family. I possess 70 sheep and tend them in Tana village. The Israelibulldozer took half an hour to demolish the barracks, which measured approximately 90 square metres.Then, the bulldozer moved to my neighbour Muhammad As’ad ‘Abd-al-Razzaq Hanani’s land, and demolished his sheep barracks, which measured about 90 square metres, as well as his tent house [makeshift house]. Later, the same bulldozer demolished another 90-square-metre sheep barracks and two rooms, which were built of bricks, roofed with metal plates, and measured about 45 metres. The bulldozer then moved to a sheep barracks, measuring about 100 square metres and belonging to Fayez Yousef Sa’ada, demolished it, and buried it in the soil. After that, the bulldozer moved to and demolished a room belonging to ‘Atef Husein Ahmad Hanani. The room was built of brick and had no roof. Another bulldozer went to Tana village’s school, which consisted of two classrooms with a concrete ceiling and two external bathrooms.The bulldozer completely demolished the school and its facilities, including the school furniture. Later, the Israeli bulldozer moved to and demolished a sheep barracks, which measured around 100 square metres and belonged to Fozan Mousa ‘Isa Nasasra. This same bulldozer moved to the sheep barracks of Majed ‘Afif ‘Aref Hanani’s barracks of about 100 square metres, and demolished it. The bulldozer also dismantled a tent house that measured about 40 square metres and was located beside the barracks. Later, the Israeli bulldozers moved to Radi Mahmoud Suleiman Hanani’s 100-square-metre sheep barracks and destroyed it. The Israeli bulldozers also demolished a room, built of bricks and roofed with metal plates. Measuring approximately 40 metres, the room belonged to Mahmoud Ahmad Mahmoud Nasasra. A third Israeli bulldozer demolished a 70-square-metre sheep barracks, belonging to Isma’il Mousa ‘Isa Nasasra. It then demolished the sheep barracks of ‘Abd-al-Hafith Hasan ‘Abd-al-Rahman Hanani, the area of which was approximately 100 metres. Later, the Israeli bulldozers moved to Firsan Fares Husein Hanani, who had a 150-square-metre sheep barracks and a 40-squaremetre room, and destroyed them. The room was built of bricks and roofed with metal plates.Then, the bulldozers demolished a room, which was built of bricks and belonged to Shaher Fayeq Taher Hanani. The bulldozers then pulled down Ra’ed ‘Afif ‘Aref Hanani’s 60-squaremetre sheep barracks.The Israeli force, which carried out the demolition process, comprised approximately 15 Israeli soldiers. Eight wore military uniforms and carried weapons, and the other seven were armed and wore orange civilian clothing. I think the latter were not Israeli soldiers, but workers. Of these, two workers guided the Israeli bulldozers in order to carry out and complete the demolition process in each area.At around 8:15 am, an Israeli soldier called me and asked where I was from. “I am from here – Tana village.” I answered. The soldier demanded that I present my ID card, which I did. He looked at the ID card and returned it to me. Another person took a video camera, which belonged to the Israeli Information Centre for Human Rights in the Occupied Territories (B’Tselem), from me. I am a volunteer for this organisation. He took the camera and returned it to me. Later, I moved to take footage of the Israeli bulldozers, while they were working. A soldier asked where I got the camera from.“It is a property of B’Tselem and I am a volunteer with them.” I replied. After the Israeli bulldozers completed the demolition process in Tana village, they moved along with the Israeli jeeps to an area called Ja’wana, which was an extension of the land belonging to Beit Fourik town and located at a distance of one kilometre north of Tana village. After they arrived in that area, the Israeli bulldozers demolished a barracks and tent house, which measured approximately 100 and 40 metres respectively and belonged to ‘Atef Husein Ahmad Hanani. Then, the bulldozers moved to Shaher Fayeq Taher Hanani and demolished his 120- square-metre barracks and 40-square-metre tent house.I followed the Israeli bulldozers and saw them demolish these barracks and tent houses in Ja’wana area. Meanwhile, an Israeli jeep arrived and a soldier took the ID card of Mrs. Salma al-Dib’i, an employee at B’Tselem. She was with me in the area, where these structures were being demolished. The soldiers onboard the jeep told us to follow them. They took us to an area, from which we could no longer see the Israeli bulldozers that were implementing the demolition process. As we were travelling in the car with Mrs. Salma, we saw an Israeli bulldozer and two jeeps move to an area called “Shi’b al-Bir”, where a sheep barracks belonging to Najeh Sabti Yousef Khatatba was located. I do not know whether the Israeli army and bulldozers demolished it or not because I could not access that area.