Affidavit No. 2053/2004
2004
On 1  November 2004, I was talking with my friend Amjad Ghafri in al-Yasmina  Quarter beside 'Abd-al-Mughith al-Ansari School in the old city of  Nablus. Fadi Serwan and Majdi Mir’i were standing at 15 metres from us  to the south. At around 9:00 pm in the evening, my friend Amjad and I  were surprised when we saw three people, two men and a woman, passing in  front of us. One of them was had a beard and was wearing civilian  clothes, the second was also in civilian clothes and was carrying a  packet of sweets, and I thought that the woman was a bride due to the  heavy make up she had on her face. She was wearing a gown and had a  scarf on her head.While  these three people were walking in front of us, the leg of the woman  bumped my foot. I then realised that they were members of the Israeli  Special Squad Forces and from the hair I noticed on her legs, that the  woman who was with them was not actually a woman. I whispered to Amjad  what I had noticed. When these three people were two metres away from  us, I saw the one who was disguised as a woman take off the gown and get  out a weapon that was under the gown. I saw clearly that the one  disguised as a woman was wearing a bullet-proof vest under the gown.Without  asking us for anything such as to stop or show our identity cards or any  similar thing, the three people started shooting at us and at Fadi and  Majdi. I was shot in the muscle of my left hand and ran away, followed  by my friend Amjad. We ran for a distance of 50 metres to the south.  There I was surprised to find Israeli army soldiers in their military  uniform, coming down the opposite stairs. They asked us to stop, but we  did not obey their orders and we ran away. They followed us for a short  distance.I hid  beside al-Khadra’ Mosque under the adjacent stairs. At that moment the  soldiers arrested my friend Amjad but they did not find my hiding place,  although they were standing in the same place at a distance of only  half a metre from me. I was hearing the sound of shooting from my hiding  place. I stayed in my hiding place for two hours while I was bleeding  heavily and experiencing severe pain. I was imagining that I was going  to die due to the large amount of blood I was losing, to the point that I  thought of surrendering, hoping that they may help me, but fear  prevented me from doing that.After two hours, the soldiers withdrew  from the place and I hurriedly ran to the street to find somebody who  might help me. An ambulance immediately arrived to the scene, and I was  taken to al-Ittihad Hospital in Nablus where I have stayed for two  weeks. That period I had many surgeries in my hand. Despite the  treatment I received in the hospital, I still, after six months, need  further treatment.As for  Majdi and Fadi, I was sure right after it happened that they were dead  due to the intense fire that was directed at them. This was affirmed to  me during my stay in the hospital. It is worth mentioning that Majdi’s  right hand was in a plaster and he could not lift it. Majdi and Fadi  were surprised as we were at the presence of the Special Forces. I say  this as a result of what I saw during those first moments, and also  because Majdi was said to have been carrying a pistol, though he would  not able to use it, and I had not seen any weapon on him. I say this  because Majdi was wanted by the Israeli army and the wanted persons  usually carry weapons with them.After I  hid, I had not seen anything except the sound of bullets. I would like  to point out that what we were subjected to had the aim of killing, and  the evidence is that they did not check our identity cards or ask us for  anything. Moreover, I am not wanted and I was not armed; knowing that  my friend Amjad was wanted by the occupying forces, he may have been  carrying a pistol on his waist but that pistol was not at all visible  and he did not try to use it.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 25 November 2004Signature: Karim Ghazi 'Abd-al-Rahman Abu-'Isa.