Affidavit No. 4925/2009
2009
I am the wife of the 52-year-old and deported prisoner Muhammad Sa’id ‘Azzam. On 29 October 1997, my husband was arrested in our hometown of al-Sila al-Harithiyya, west of Jenin city. He was detained until 26 May 2009. That day, the Israeli occupying authorities decided to deport him to the Gaza Strip and released him there at around 12:00 pm.My husband spent all those years in different prisons of the Israeli occupying authorities without any specific or clear charges filed against him. All these years he spent in prison, until, finally, the advocate Sana’ Dweik from Jerusalem managed to obtain information about the decision to deport my husband to the Gaza Strip. This decision had been taken after Jordanian authorities refused to receive my husband on Jordanian territory, stating that he was Palestinian and had the right to reside on Palestinian territory and not outside.In spite of feeling happy about the release of my husband, and feeling relieved at the prospect of our suffering soon coming to an end, my seven children and I were thus deprived from seeing Muhammad, who instead of being released here was released in Gaza. We wish that he had been released here in the West Bank and that he could come back to his house in al-Sila al-Harithiyya. We were hoping that he would come home and embrace us. However, the Israeli occupying authorities have deprived us of this opportunity. Not only did they deprive me of my husband for a total of 12 years and robbed my children of their father, but now they have deported him to the Gaza Strip, where we cannot visit him. The Gaza Strip is under a complete siege imposed by the Israeli occupying authorities. Even if we managed to enter Gaza, we would not be able to leave the territory again. My sons and daughters attend schools here in the West Bank and we cannot take the risk and stay in the Gaza Strip for an unlimited period of time while the Israeli siege on the territory is ongoing.Now, the only contact between my husband and I is by telephone. No one in the world can understand what it means for a wife to be deprived of her husband. I cannot describe what it means for me that my husband has been held behind bars for so long and when he was finally released, he was immediately deported by the Israeli occupying authorities, to an area in the Palestinian territory, where I cannot visit him. The Israeli occupying authorities are making me suffer and I am scared that eventually my husband or myself will die before ever seeing one another again.