Affidavit No. 2527/2005
2005
At  approximately 11:30 p.m. Wednesday, 24 August 2005, I was sitting with  my friend Abu-'Ala’ Haron and his son in front of their shop located in  al-Shuhada’ Quarter on the main street in the center of Toulkarem Camp.  We were surprised when a white car of a new brand [GMC] with a  Palestinian license plate stopped three metres from us. The car came  from the northern entrance of the camp via the Toulkarem-Nablus Street. I  also saw the driver, who was wearing a white T-shirt, and two other  young men sitting beside him in the front seat who were also wearing  white T-shirts. I could not see those in the back seat because there  were curtains on the back windows.As soon  as the car stopped, the windows rolled down and weapons were aimed at  us. Meanwhile, Israeli soldiers wearing military uniforms got out of the  car. One of the men in plain clothes shouted at us, “Lay down on the  ground”. At the same time, several soldiers got out of the car and  started shooting southwest, towards the shop of 'Abd-al- Rahman and the  Hudeib family’s house, where a number of young men were sitting.  Abu-al-'Ala', 'Ala', and I obeyed the orders and laid on our stomachs on  the ground. The same soldier shouted, “Don’t look, and if anyone lifts  his head, I will shoot him”.Meanwhile,  continuous, intense shooting was taking place near us and many soldiers  were running around. A military jeep then came Then five additional  military vehicles, and approximately 15 jeeps, including white jeeps  [Israeli intelligence forces jeeps], and an ambulance [belonging to the  Israeli army] came to the scene. I looked with alarm and saw the  ambulance enter via a narrow road opposite to where we were lying,  adjacent to the Hudeib house the youths were sitting when the shooting  occurred. From time to time, the soldiers shouted at us, saying, “Don’t  lift your heads up”. This situation continued for approximately an hour  and a half.At  approximately one a.m. 25 August 2005, the Israeli jeeps, military  vehicles, and soldiers’ carriers started to withdraw towards the north.  An Israeli military jeep stopped near us, and an officer and two  soldiers got out and the officer ordered us in Arabic to stand up. He  asked if any one of us had been hit, and when we told him that none of  us was injured, he told us to lift our hands over our heads and enter  the shop [Abu-al-'Ala’ shop] located directly behind us. We entered the  shop, shaking with extreme fear. Then the Israeli army left the scene.When we  were sure that the army left, we hurried over to see what happened. To  our surprise, we saw blood flowing down the street and a large amount of  blood in front of the Hudeib family’s house and the 'Abd-al-Rahman  shop, without seeing any bodies. I then realized that the victims had  been taken in the ambulance to inside the Green Line. This is in fact  what happened.At two  a.m. Thursday, 25 August 2005, the Israeli liaison located west of  Toulkarem handed over the bodies of four victims to the Palestinian Red  Crescent Society, and at four a.m. that same morning a fifth body was  handed over. Later that morning, welearned  the names of the five victims: 'Adel al-Ghawi “Abu Khalil” from 'Attil  village, Toulkarem governorate, who resided in the camp to protect  himself as he was wanted by the Israeli army; Majdi Muhammad Husein, an  activist with the Aqsa Martyrs Brigades who was wanted by the Israeli  army; Anas Abu-Zeina; Mahmoud Hudeib; and Muhammad Tareq. The last three  victims were not activists and were killed because they were sitting in  the same location as the two wanted victims.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 26 August 2005Signature: 'Amer 'Ata