Affidavit No. 5337/2010
2010
On 20 March 2010, I was present in my house, east of the village of „Iraq Bourin. At around 11:15 am, my friend Muhammad Ibrahim Qadous visited me. He was about 15 years of age, my classmate and a resident of my village. Muhammad and I climbed onto the roof of my house and sat together for about half an hour. During this time, we saw more than 30 Israeli soldiers, who were wearing the standard military uniform and carrying long weapons, positioned at a distance of approximately 400 metres east of my house. About 50 to 100 metres away from them, dozens of young residents of the village were throwing stones at the soldiers. From time to time, we heard the sound of many live bullets as well as tear gas and sound grenades fired by a number of soldiers.Later, we went to a commercial shop east of the village and stayed there until after 1:00 pm. Muhammad told me that he wanted to eat so we returned to our house. I prepared some food and we had lunch together. About half an hour later, we went to the area where the confrontations were taking place. About 100 to 150 metres before we reached the area, Muhammad stopped near a house because he did not want to go to the confrontations site. I joined the other young men and threw stones at the Israeli soldiers. A number of soldiers fired live bullets, rubber-coated steel bullets, and tear gas and sound grenades towards us from time to time. I took part in the confrontations for an hour or so. Later, confrontations started to calm down and fewer stones were thrown at soldiers. I withdrew from the site of the confrontations and returned to the place where Muhammad had been present. He told me he wanted to go to his house, west of the village, in order to recharge the battery of his mobile telephone. We went to his house and he recharged his mobile.“Amir...” he said (I am nicknamed as Amir).I carried him for several metres and fell on the ground. I did not understand what was going on. Nevertheless, I got up once more and repeated the same question to Muhammad.“Amir...” he said, looked at me and smiled.At that time, blood was streaming heavily out of his mouth and nose and he breathed heavily. I realised that he was about to die. Several minutes later, a number of persons arrived and carried Muhammad with me. Others carried „Usayd and a few minutes later both (Muhammad and „Usayd) were put into a Ford car belonging to Mr. Zakariyya, a resident of the village, who transported them to a hospital in the city of Nablus. Several minutes later, the patrols and soldiers withdrew from the village.About two hours later, a friend of mine told me that Muhammad and „Usayd had been transported to the Nablus Specialist Hospital in the city of Nablus and that Muhammad had passed away. „Usayd was in very critical condition. About an hour later, I went to the hospital and saw my friend Muhammad, who was a dead. „Usayd was still in very critical condition. Several hours later, I left the hospital to go back to my house. I could not sleep that night.Finally, I confirm that Muhammad and „Usayd did not take part in any kind of confrontations on that day. The only two bullets that were fired by either one or more soldiers were aimed to kill them without any justification. I did not see any of the soldiers who had opened fire, or how many they were. I do not remember the faces of the soldiers who chased us.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 21 March 2010Signature: Theeb QadousName not withheldField researcher: Yousef QawariqI, the undersigned, „Aref Mustafa Qadous, hereby declare that my son Theeb has given the above sworn statement to Al-Haq and signed thereon before me.„Aref Mustafa Qadous