Affidavit No. 2695/2005
2005
On 24 August 2003, while I was at my  brother 'Adnan’s Cassette Shop located in Paris Street in the Toulkarem  city center, I was surprised when an Israeli squad wearing civil uniform  broke into the shop. I was arrested and taken to the Israeli Liaison  headquarters located west of Toulkarem where Sharon, an Israeli captain  who is in charge of the Toulkarem area, detained me. I remained in there  for half an hour, whilst photographs were taken of me. I was treated  well, to a certain extent, by the Israeli soldiers. At around 3:00 pm,  the soldiers blind-folded my eyes, cuffed my hands, put me in a jeep and  took me to a detention center in the Kadumim settlement near Toulkarem.As soon as I reached the detention  center, the soldiers told me that I had been put under administrative  detention for six months, without giving me any reasons. I stayed in the  Kadumim detention center for three days without any interrogation.  After that, I was transferred to the 'Ofar detention center near  Ramallah. There an administrative ruling against me, without any  investigation, was issued by an Israeli court located in the detention  center. I stayed in the 'Ofar detention center for four days and was  then transferred to the Naqab desert detention center where I also  stayed for three days. After that, I was transferred to the Salem  detention camp west of Jenin for interrogation. In Salem, I stayed for 7  days without any investigation.As a result of these unjustified  transfers from one detention center to another, I became very sick and  my temperature rose to 41 degrees Celsius. I was in a dangerous state.  The only treatment I received from doctors was Acamol tablets. This  critical situation continued for 20 days. Again I was transferred to the  Naqab detention center and my health situation deteriorated. My  worsening situation, as well as pressure from the other detainees,  forced the Israeli soldiers to take me to the Soroka Hospital in an  Israeli army ambulance. I lost consciousness as a result of the high  fever.I stayed in the hospital while I was  in a partial state of coma. I lost about 19 kg. After several tests, it  was shown that the contaminated water of one of the detention centers  caused my sickness. I spent six months in the Naqab detention center and  after I finished the term (six months), another term was added. This  second period was reduced to four months because the evidence against me  was weak. I finished the second period, but my detention was renewed  twice, each renewal lasting three months. To sum it all up, I have been  in administrative detention for 16 months without knowing the reasons  why and without any justifications.I was released on 20 December 2004,  and returned back to Toulkarem to my normal life. I have a degree in  Theater and Direction from Holland. Three days after my release, Ireturned to work in the Qindil House  for Culture and Arts, a civil society organization based in Toulkarem  and funded by European countries interested in culture and arts. During  my work with this organization, I traveled from one place to another,  and used to cross the Israeli barriers. The soldiers used to verify my  ID card but I did not face any problems.On 12 July 2005, I left Toulkarem in  the morning, heading toward Allenby Bridge in Jericho and from there to  Amman, and then to France in order to participate in a training course  for work. At the Bridge, I submitted my documents including my visa to  France. I was surprised when the Israeli soldier who checked my passport  asked me to wait. After about 20 minutes, an Israeli intelligence  officer came, gave me my Palestinian passport and told me to go back to  Toulkarem claiming that I was prohibited from traveling. I was shocked  and I tried to talk with that officer but he absolutely refused to talk  to me. I returned back to Toulkarem. Due to that prohibition, the  Israeli occupation deprived me of my right to develop myself by  receiving training courses in my specialization, which is rare in the  West Bank.I do not know what to do, I am at a  loss. The continuation of this situation will adversely affect my  practical and professional life, especially as the field of my  specialization continuously needs follow-ups and updating, in addition  to participation in relevant training courses. For this reason, I call  upon Al-Haq to immediately and rapidly intervene to find a solution for  this problem. I also call upon Al-Haq to address all concerned law  organizations to intervene in order to enable me to travel. I believe  that banning me from travel is not justified.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 6 December 2005Signature: Ghassan SubuhName not withheldField researcher: Tareq al-Haj Mahmoud