Affidavit No. 7918/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, ‘Atiyyah ‘Abdul-Raziq Barak Abu Khousah, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 928151057, born on 6 May 1963, unemployed, and a resident of the al-Nafaq Street, Gaza city, Gaza governorate, would like to declare the following:My name is ‘Atiyyah ‘Abdul Raziq Barak Abu Khousah. I am 50 years old and father of eight sons and daughters. I am a resident of the al-Nafaq Street near to the Isleem junction north of Gaza city. I’m blind since a very long time.At around 2:25 pm on Wednesday, 21 November 2012 – the last day of the Israeli aggression on the Gaza Strip, my children and I were at our home in the centre of a residential area. It was calm and no resistance activities were taking place in the area. I heard the sound of a large number of Israeli aircrafts patrolling the skies over the area. In the meantime, I heard my six-year-old daughter Wafa’ asking her brother Mahmoud, 13, to go out and buy her a pencil so that she could complete her homework. On that day, we heard a talk about Tahdi’a (ceasefire) between the resistance factions and the occupying government. My daughter Wafa’ wanted to make sure to complete her homework before she would go to school the next day. Indeed, Mahmoud went out to buy a pencil from a shop near to our home. Five minutes after Mahmoud had gone out I heard the sound of a very strong explosion near to our home. I called my son Muhammad, 20, to go out and check on Mahmoud as I feared that he might have been hurt as he returned home. The shelling was close to our home. Muhammad went out to check on my son Mahmoud. I went after him to see what was going on. I felt that Muhammad was close to me while I was shouting and asking him about Mahmoud but he did not answer me. I asked him again about Mahmoud, but he did not reply. It seemed as if he had seen something, but did not want to tell me about it. Leaning on my crutch, I walked along the street opposite our home. I heard some residents of the area rushing around me and saying that an aircraft had fired a drone towards the area. They said a little child was lying on the ground.“This black boy is our neighbour Abu Maysarah’s son.” I heard a citizen saying.He meant my son with this description and I was sure that my Mahmoud had been injured. Then, I headed to the area where the citizens gathered.“Father, it is Mahmoud who is injured.” I heard my son Muhammad saying.I ran my hands over my son Mahmoud, who lay on the ground. I felt blood gushing out heavily from his head and chest. Then, my children and some neighbourhood residents carried Mahmoud and transported him to the al-Shifa hospital. I followed them. When we arrived, doctors confirmed to me that my son Mahmoud was martyred after having sustained shrapnel wounds in the head, chest and various parts of his body.Later, we received Mahmoud’s dead boy and buried it in the al-Sheikh Radwan cemetery. Mahmoud is my seventh son. He is an outstanding student at the second preparatory grade.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 2 December 2012