Affidavit No. 1980/2004
2004
At 5:15  p.m. Monday, 13 September 2004, I was standing in front of the Marj Ben  'Amer Taxi office where I work, regulating the movement of the public  cars and answering the telephone. All of a sudden, I heard a very loud,  huge blast. When I looked to the south, I saw a car burning and heavy  smoke filling the area in the middle of the street near Jenin  municipality, about 80 metres from me. I immediately realised that this  was an Israeli army assassination operation. I hurriedly went to the  scene, like tens of others who ran to help extinguish the fires with the  municipality fire engines.At this  point, I saw a most terrible and painful tragedy. First, I saw the body  of a young man lying on the ground directly beside the car. The body was  in very bad condition; the upper part of the chest was missing, in  addition to the upper limbs. I looked inside the car and I saw something  that is very difficult to express. The only remaining part of the right  head of the driver was the skin. As for the left side and the back of  head, it was totally gone, in addition to the upper limbs, which I could  not find. Moreover, I noticed holes in the chest, back and the various  parts of the body. The third body was not in any better condition; in  addition to what happened to the first two persons, the lower limbs of  this body were amputated.The  entire situation was very painful for anyone who saw it. The car that  the three young men were driving was completely damaged and burned,  especially from the upper side. The bodies of the three men were also  subjected to several burns. The car was Mazda Model 2001 and has yellow  Israeli registration plates. Later on, it was revealed that the car was  illegal and stolen from inside the Green Line. Then ambulances came and  carried the remaining parts of the three persons, because many parts of  the flesh were stuck on the wall of the nearby buildings, and bystanders  tried to collect as much as they can.The  ambulances carried the three martyrs to Jenin Governmental Hospital,  where it was found that the three martyrs were Mahmoud Abu-Khalifa,  Amjad Husni and Yamen Feisal, all al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades activists and  leaders in Jenin city and camp. They are all residents of Jenin Camp,  and all are well known amongst the people of that area, especially  Mahmoud Abu-Khalifa (entitled by the Sheikh). The Israeli army admitted  its responsibility for the assassination of the three martyrs, which is  considered a painful blow to the al-Aqsa Brigades.It is  worth noting that I had not seen any Israeli helicopter in the sky above  Jenin, but I heard the noise of a reconnaissance plane since noon that  day. At the same time, there were rumours that the blast resulted from  an explosive charge that was planted in the stolen car. This belief came  due to the huge damage inflicted on the bodies of the three martyrs,  especially the upper parts.