Affidavit No. 3024/2006
2006
On Saturday 27 May 2006 at 10:00 am, I left Jenin city in my taxi (Volkswagen, Model 2000) with one passenger heading toward my village, 'Arraba. 'Arraba is located 14 kilometres south of Jenin. On my way, I arrived at an Israeli military barrier at the 'Arraba junction situated on the Jenin-Nablus road. I had passed through this barrier on my way from 'Arraba to Jenin where I had to wait for an hour and a half after a thorough search of the car and passengers, which had caused congestion at the barrier.During my return and in order to avoid the long queue and long wait at the barrier, I decided to use a dirt road through the 'Arraba plains. I started driving through the plains, and when I reached almost half way I was surprised to see an Israeli military jeep speeding toward me from the south. One of the soldiers who was in the jeep, sitting beside the driver, signalled for me to stop. I stopped immediately and the jeep stopped to the south of my car. A soldier got down from the jeep and threw a stone at my car. The stone hit the body of my car. That soldier proceeded toward me followed by two other soldiers. The three of them were aiming their weapons at me.One of the three soldiers asked me in Arabic, “Why are you driving your car in the plain?” I told him it was to avoid the traffic jam at the barrier and that I wanted to return to 'Arraba, and take passengers in my car back to Jenin. This same soldier asked me to leave my car and I complied.As soon as I left my car, without saying anything, the soldier slapped my face. That soldier was in his twenties, of medium height, had tanned skin, wore a helmet, and spoke Arabic with difficulty. I did not say anything but all of a sudden another soldier hit me on my back with the butt of his gun. The blow was very strong, such that it made me fall to the ground shouting of severe pain. As I fell down on the ground, the soldiers started to beat me with their feet and the butts of their weapons all over my body. The soldiers continued to beat me and cursed me using bad words for several minutes. The young man who was in my car was not subjected to any acts like I was.After that the soldiers told me to follow them toward the barrier positioned at the 'Arraba junction, which was approximately 700 metres to the southwest. I returned to my car and drove behind the jeep, which was a regular army jeep. We reached the barrier and the soldiers there took my ID card and told me to stay in the car and not to leave it. The soldiers who hit me handed my ID card to the soldiers at the barrier and went back to 'Arraba plain in search of another citizen and in order to assault him as brutally as they did me. I was detained in my car with the young man for two and a half hours at the barrier. After this time, the soldiers returned my ID card and asked me to go to 'Arraba.I would also like to mention that when the Israeli jeep reached my car on the 'Arraba plain, it intentionally crashed into the left side of my car, inflicting enormous damage on its left side. This is what has happened to me. Finally, I would also like to point out that the Israeli occupation has been operating this barrier for over one month and on a daily basis at 'Arraba junction. It is worth mentioning that the junction links Jenin city with a number of southern villages such as 'Arraba, Ya'bad, 'Anza, 'Ajja, Jaba’ and Silat al-Thaher. Moreover, it also links the cities of Jenin, Toulkarem and Nablus. Any citizen who tries to avoid this barrier will be subjected to what I have been subjected to.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 3 June 2006Signature: Fadi Yihiya