Affidavit No. 1755/2004
2004
My family  and I own a land of around 117 dunums in an area called Khirbet Jbara,  south ofToulkarem. We inherited this land from our father, who inherited  it from his father and hisgrandfathers. My family consists of 40  persons (my sons and grandsons). Due to theexpulsion and exile  circumstances imposed on the Palestinian people, I am a displacedperson.  In 1964, I left the West Bank, having been affiliated with the  Palestinian Resistance,and came back in 1994 after 30 years of exile.When I came back, I found that the  land had been deserted for tens of years. Being afarmer, I worked on  rehabilitating the land. During the last ten years, I worked hard  onrehabilitating the land, which cost me approximately 60,000 Jordanian  dinars. This land gaveme a crop of 30 tons of olives, 30 percent of  which has been pressed into oil, giving myfamily and me a good financial  return and financial support.In 2002, the Israeli occupation forces  started the construction of the Separation Wall andopening of the  bypass roads. One of those roads was nearby my land and resulted in  thecomplete isolation of Jbara village. In order to reach my land and  take care of it, I have tocross the bypass road. This has caused a lot  of troubles for me. Not only this, but from timeto time the Israeli  soldiers issue an order preventing Palestinians from walking on that  roador crossing it. This resulted in me being away from it during 2002  and 2003. As it is locatedon the border of al-Tyba village inside the  green line, I went in the company of the olivepicking season and found  around 50-70 persons there from al-Tyba village picking theolives.After  long deliberations, I could only take one percent of the crop. The loss  of this landmeans that I lost all the land I have. This makes me a  refugee in my own land and in myhomeland. All the work I have done  during the last ten years, and the money I invested in it,has gone and I  will not be able to bequeath it to my children and grandchildren. This  hasdepressed me and also frustrated my children. It is worth noting that  the Israeli occupationsoldiers intentionally close that road at the  beginning of the agricultural season with thepretext that they are  defending the Palestinian farmers from the attacks by settlers.Signature: Muhammad 'Abd-al-Mun'em Yousef al-Tawil