Affidavit No. 4439/2008
2008
In 2006, I graduated from al-Quds Open University with a 'very good' average in mathematics. In 1996, or a year earlier, I obtained a bachelor's degree in electric engineering. I am married and mother of five children, the eldest of whom is almost ten years and the youngest about two years old. My husband is Maher Yasin Radayda, 37 years old. He has been detained by the occupying authorities since 11 July 2007. On 20 October 2006, I was appointed as a teacher at Rawabi al-Quds Secondary Girls School in my town. I worked in my position until the day on which my appointment was cancelled (to be correct, until I was notified of the cancelling of my appointment) on Wednesday, 22 October 2008.In the morning of the said Wednesday, the school headmistress handed me a letter entitled "Cancellation of Nomination/Appointment". The letter stated that my appointment at work was to be cancelled "in light of the disapproval of the competent authorities". The letter also requested that I return the school's properties that I had. I asked the headmistress about the reason of the dismissal, but she said she did not know. The headmistress phoned the Director of the Ministry of Education District Office in Bethlehem to inquire about the letter. The Director, however, said that he did not have any information about this issue and that the decision was issued by the Ministry.After I left the school, I went to the offices of the Ministry of Education in Ramallah and went to the Department for Personnel Affairs. There, an employee explained to me that the competent authorities, which where mentioned in the letter of dismissal, referred to the Palestinian Preventive Security and Intelligence agencies. Then, I decided to go to the Prime Minister's Office. Addressing the Prime Minister, I submitted a letter, in which I explained my situation and asked him to help me.Later, I went to the Preventive Security headquarters in Beitouniya to inquire about the reason for my dismissal. However, I received no explanations. In the morning of Sunday, 26 October, I went to the Intelligence headquarters in Ramallah. There, an officer took a statement on my personal information, including my family members and husband. The officer also asked me about my and my family's political affiliations."You can ask them. As for me, I am not a member of any faction," I replied. The officer requested that I sign a pledge stating that I would not participate in unlicensed sit-ins, not support any political party, and not to affiliate with any illegal political faction. I left the headquarters without any immediate results. However, the officer who took my statement said that they would follow up on the situation for “humanitarian reasons.”Over the period of my work, I was committed to my job. I did not receive any warning prior to my dismissal. My functional assessment was 'very good'. I did not show any default or omission towards my work. Take into account that my husband is the head of al-‘Beidiyya Municipality. He was elected almost three years ago. I kindly request to Al-Haq to contact the competent authorities in order to inquire about the real reason behind my dismissal and to intervene in order for me to be able to return to work. I am the only breadwinner of my family.