Affidavit No. 5564/2010
2010
I am a Palestinian citizen. I live in a rented house in al-‘Eisawiyya town, northeast of Jerusalem city, in return for a monthly rent of USD 500. My nine children and I have lived in this house for 16 years. Measuring  approximately 130 square metres, the house comprises of three rooms. In March 2010, my son Muhammad got married and since then his wife has lived with us in the same house. My 14-year-old daughter suffers from a physical disability and is utterly deaf.Throughout my life and with the help of my children, I was able to save money with which we decided to build a house for us all on a piece of land, which we own, in al- ‘Eisawiyya town. In 2006 I started construction of the house., During the period of construction not a single building inspector from the Jerusalem Municipality came to the construction site. I completed building the house four years after starting. My children and I were preparing to move to our new house in August 2010. At around 8:30 am on 13 July 2010 however, a resident of the village telephoned me and said that the Israeli police and army were in the area and had surrounded the home I had constructed. I was also told that Israeli bulldozers were deployed in the area ready to demolish my home.As my adult sons were at work, I went to the site (despite the fact that I was ill). I found the bulldozers demolishing my home, for the construction of which I had spent all my savings. I could not bear the scene and fell unconscious. When I came round, I found myself on a bed at the Emergency Room at al-Maqased Hospital in al-Tour Mount area.I did not apply for a licence to the Municipality because it classifies my land as ‘green land’, on which construction is prohibited. When the Israeli occupying forces and Municipality staff first arrived, they did not give me any papers. They demolished my home outright and without any prior notice. Therefore, I will remain in this flat together with my children. I do not have any choice. Demolition of my home has adversely affected me and destroyed me economically. I built my home and spent all the money I had saved. Moreover, my debts accumulated up to 25,000 US dollars. As all my adult sons were at their workplaces, a clash did not take place between me and the Israeli occupying forces.