Affidavit no. 7740/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Turkiya Muhammad Falih al-Hasanat, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID number 921886883, born on 24 December 1962, a housewife and a resident of al-Buraij refugee camp, the Middle Area governorate, would like to declare the following:I, Turkiya Muhammad Falih al-Hasanat, I am 50 years old, married and a mother of eight sons. I live with my husband and sons on the ground floor of a house made of concrete in the al-Maqbula area, east of the al-Buraij refugee camp, in the centre of the Gaza Strip. Our house is around 1300 metres away from the eastern border with Israel. At around 5:00 am on Monday, 24 September 2012, I woke to the sound of heavy gunfire, coming from the border. I could hear helicopters hovering in the sky. I stayed in bed for about half an hour during which time I could hear gunfire intermittently. We are used to hearing guns fired by the occupation soldiers. We are also used to incursions by the Israeli occupation soldiers near the border area. About an hour later, my husband woke up and got ready to go to work. He told me that the occupation forces were storming the land adjacent to the border, in the eastern area of the camp. I got out of bed and started working in the house and at around 7:30 am, I went to the roof to dry the laundry in the sun. While I was doing so, suddenly felt pain in my right arm. I looked at my arm and saw that I was bleeding, and realised I was injured. I felt dizzy and shaky. I started shouting to my sons saying “I’m injured, I’m injured”. I was asking them to help me. I tried to go downstairs but when I reached the entrance of the stairs, I fell to the ground out of sheer pain. I kept shouting out for my sons. Then my son, ‘Abdul-Rahman, 17, who was asleep arrived. I heard him shouting to his brothers, asking for their help. Moments later, my eldest son Maher, 24, came and both of them carried me down to the ground floor, to the reception room. My son Maher told me that he would go out to find a car to take me to the hospital as there was no way of calling an ambulance. I saw him leave the house and 20 minutes later, he returned with a civilian car, and took me to the al-Aqsa hospital in Deir al-Balah. At the hospital, I underwent medical examinations. The doctors told me that I had been shot in my right arm, that the bullet had gone through but that there was still shrapnel in my arm. I stayed in the hospital for four hours before I returned to my house after receiving the necessary treatment. Later on, I heard from our relatives in the area that the occupying forces entered about 300 meters away from the border into the area to the east of the camp and stayed until 8:30 am the same day before withdrawing back across the border.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign on 25 September 2012.