Affidavit No. 5879/2010
2010
I am the mother of Amna Nabil Fahmi Taha, who was born on 26 March 2006 and whose ID card number is 332814086. My daughter Amna holds the blue Israeli ID card (Jerusalem ID card) whereas I hold the West Bank ID card. We reside in Shu’fat refugee camp north of Jerusalem city.Since she was born, my daughter Amna has suffered from an illness called Gabir – a physical disability which renders the patient unable to move or talk and forces them to lie on their back. Symptoms also include growth disorders. As a result, my daughter seems as if she is only one and a half years despite the fact that she is four years old. Furthermore, Amna cannot swallow food. The method to feed her is by a tube that is connected to her stomach through her mouth. I have medical reports on her health condition. I take her frequently to Hadasa al-‘Eisawiyya Hospital (an Israeli hospital in Jerusalem city) for medical treatment. Sometimes, she needs to have medical tests at Hadasa ‘Ein Karem Hospital (another Israeli hospital in West Jerusalem).On average, my daughter visits the hospital four or five times a week. I usually take my daughter to hospital. Because I hold a West Bank ID card, I have obtained a paper from the Kupat Holim Clinic (Public Patient Fund in Israel, which also serves Palestinians who hold the blue Israeli ID cards Jerusalem ID cards) in Shu’fat refugee camp which states that I accompany my daughter, who needs urgent treatment, to hospital. The paper, in addition to the patient transfer report, makes it easier for me to cross the Israeli military checkpoint set up at the entrance to Shu’fat refugee camp (which separates the refugee camp and ‘Anata village from Jerusalem city). Sometimes, Israeli occupying troops positioned at the checkpoint permit me to go through the checkpoint. On other occasions, they prevent me from crossing, in which case my husband, who holds the blue Israeli ID card (Jerusalem ID card, which allows its holder to cross Israeli military checkpoints after a search has been performed) takes my daughter Amna to hospital instead of me. I feel sad for my daughter, who cries intensely when I leave her.On 4 November 2010, I took my daughter to al-‘Eisawiyya Hospital in order to change the food tube, through which she is fed. I carried my daughter in a baby carrier which I hang on my shoulder. At around 9:30 am, I reached the Israeli military checkpoint at the entrance to Shu’fat refugee camp (the only way that leads to the hospital), crossed the pedestrian lane, and passed through the iron door which separates pedestrians from the occupying troops positioned at the checkpoint. I could not go through the revolving door, which pedestrians usually use, because of carrying my daughter in the baby carrier on my shoulder. There were six soldiers sat opposite me on chairs. I immediately presented the patent transfer report as well as the paper which proved that I accompanied my daughter and that she was in urgent need to medical attention. I showed the papers to a soldier, who was tall, of large build, and had sunglasses on. As he held he papers, I noticed that he was about to tear them apart. He tucked each paper with the tips of his fingers in opposite directions and seemed as if he would rip them. I immediately pulled them from his hands and said they were important papers. I told the soldier I was taking my daughter to hospital in order her food tube to be changed.“You cannot cross,” he said.Another soldier translated what I had said to the soldier, who seemed not to know Arabic.“The girl will die if she does not drink milk.” I said to him.However, he grabbed all papers as well as my ID card and gave them to another soldier. He also grabbed the baby carrier and pushed it back, hitting my daughter’s head and leg against the iron door. I fell to the ground on my side, and noticed that the carrier had slipped from my shoulder and was hanging on my arm. My daughter cried and screamed intensely. Then, the same soldier grabbed the iron door and forcefully pushed it against us.“Get out of here.” He shouted at me in Arabic.He started to utter obscenities at me. I also heard him sing and utter shrilling sounds of mockery. I said I would call the Israeli Police, but he insisted he was not going to allow me through. Then, I saw the other soldier, who translated for me, talk to him. I think he tried to convince him to allow me to cross so that I would not go to the Police and file a complaint against him. Then, the Israeli soldiers allowed me to cross the checkpoint. Since arriving at the checkpoint, this incident had taken more than 15 minutes. I immediately called my husband, who came and took me and my daughter to the hospital.When we arrived at the hospital, my daughter started to throw up. A Jewish Israeli nurse came and asked about the girl and what happened to her. I explained what had happened to the nurse, but she shouted at me and said it was not true and that I “falsely accused” the soldier.Although my husband and I repeatedly asked doctors to treat her, my daughter remained in the Emergency Section at Hadasa al-‘Eisawiyya Hospital from 10:30 am until 8:00 pm. After having waited all this time, my husband grew impatient and started to shout at the doctors. My husband later explained to me that they wanted to keep our daughter fasting so that they could perform a CT scan of her head. However, my husband was confused, as he explained to me, as to why the doctors had put an intravenous (IV) line on her hand.“How can they keep her fasting while at the same time putting this IV line on her?” He asked. At around 9:30 pm, the doctors admitted my daughter into the x-ray room. I saw my husband try to tell them that our daughter cannot be given anaesthesia. My daughter was born with six fingers on her hand. When doctors tried to remove the surplus finger, they said it was not possible because she would not be able to stand anaesthesia. As my husband told me, however, they did not listen to him. They gave her anaesthesia and made the CT scan. Later,the doctors advised my husband and I that our daughter had not have suffered a bone fracture to the head. She only suffered from bruising in the eye, face, and leg. Then, we left the hospital.The scars left by the bruising are still visible on my daughter to this day. She now also suffers from panic because of what happened to her. She wakes up at night and screams intensely. She also moves her arms in a nervous manner. Furthermore, she now rejects her father and screams when she sees him, this might be because she links him to the soldier who attacked us at the checkpoint. The main problem is that, as a result of what happened to my daughter and I at the checkpoint, we missed the appointment for changing her food tube, which was scheduled for that day. Even now (the date on which this sworn statement was signed), the Kupat Holim Clinic and hospital continue to procrastinate arranging another date for changing the tube.Therefore, my daughter’s life is currently at risk; she could die any moment. I do not know what to do.