Affidavit No. 4889/2009
2009
My family consists of my husband Muhammad, 43 years old, as well as our children Mu’taz, 21 years old, Bassam, 18 years old, Hashem, 13 years old, Yakbur, 7 years old, and Ghada who is 12 years old. On 21 May 2009, my family and I were fast asleep in our house, located along a detour road south of al-Hashashin neighbourhood in Balata refugee camp. My son and I were sleeping in one room and the rest were sleeping in the other two rooms of the house. Suddenly, my son and I were woken up by loud knocking, which was coming from the door on the first floor, where my 70-year-old mother-in-law Fathiyya lives.“Open the door. It’s the army.” A voice shouted in Arabic. Five minutes later, I woke up my husband and told him what was going on. Ten minutes later, my brother-in-law Samir, about 31 years of age, called us from behind the northern door of our flat. He told us to open the door, upon request of the Israeli army. At that time, I switched on the lights in the house and went to the door. My husband was behind me. As soon as I opened the door, I saw more than seven Israeli soldiers. They were in their regular military uniform, armed with long weapons with flashlights on them, and wore helmets on their heads. One of the soldiers asked me if there was anyone inside the house. He must have been around 20 years old, or maybe a bit older. I saidthat my children were inside. He demanded that I wake them up and bring them to the entrance. In less than two minutes, I woke up my children and we all went to the entrance. The soldier also demanded that I bring the ID cards of my husband and my children Bassam and Mu’taz.After checking all the ID cards, the soldier returned the IDs of Bassam and my husband. However, he took my husband and Mu’taz outside the house to the street and told the rest of us to stay in the sitting room near the entrance. Two soldiers were standing next to us; five others climbed on the roof of the house, and came back down about twenty minutes later.In the meantime, my husband called me and asked me to fetch the medicine of our son Mu’taz, who is suffering from allergies. I responded that we had run out of medicine. “The soldiers want to take Mu’taz with them.” my husband replied. I went out of the house to check on Mu’taz. A number of soldiers surrounded him. I wanted to say goodbye to him, but the soldiers pointed their weapons at me preventing me from reaching my son. They grabbed Mu’taz’s arm and placed him onboard a patrol that was parked a few metres west of our house. Then, soldiers demanded that we get back into the house. The soldiers had not tampered with any of our stuff when they climbed on our roof and stayed up there for almost half an hour.