Affidavit No. 1671/2004
2004
I live in al-'Arroub Camp in Hebron  Governorate. At approximately midnight, Wednesday, 25February 2004, I  was sleeping when a number of the Israeli occupation army soldiers broke  intoour home. They were searching it, claiming that they wanted my  20-year-old brother 'Ammar,who was not at home. They searched our home  after they evacuated us, ordering us to standout in the cold air until  4:30 a.m. After that night, and until 'Ammar's afternoon arrest Friday  27February 2004, our home was broken into four times by the Israeli  soldiers. During the breakins,they attacked all of my family members,  including me.On  midnight, Friday 27 February 2004, while the soldiers were inside our  home, one of thesoldiers attacked me. Then two other soldiers helped  him, and they all hit me with their handsand I fell to the ground. They  tried to arrest me and charge me with impeding their work. I alsosaw  them beat my brother 19-year-old brother Ahmad, and break his right hand  with the butt ofa gun. At the same time, they attacked my 24-year-old  brother Muhammad, the blind father oftwo children. They beat him in  front of his wife and children. All these attacks happened in thepretext  of searching for my brother 'Ammar, who was at his work outside home.Moreover,  I saw one of the soldiers extinguish his cigarette on the brow of my  brotherMohammad, while beating him continuously. Mohammad started to  shout, and so did we, andthis increased the anger of the soldiers who  beat me again and again. At around 4:30 in theevening, 'Ammar arrived  home. The soldiers were outside the home with my 43-year-old motherFaten  Ahmad 'Atallah Al-Hindi, and my 15-year-old brothers Ahmad and Samed.  They detainedthem until they arrested 'Ammar.It is worth noting that the furniture,  tools, and foodstuffs in our home were damaged. Further, thesoldiers  took 'Ammar’s photos and papers. As soon as 'Ammar arrived home, a  number ofsoldiers arrived threw gas bombs at us and quickly arrested him  along with my mother andbrothers. After half an hour, they released my  mother and brothers, except for 'Ammar. Mymother and brothers told me  that they hit them many times before releasing them. On the sameday, my  brother Ahmad went to the Hebron governmental hospital where they put  Gibbs on hishand, because it had two fractures. My brother 'Ammar is  still under investigation, and we donot know anything about him.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 8 March 2004