Affidavit No. 4050/2008
2008
On 13 November 2007 at approximately 8:00 am, I participated with many students in a public march on the anniversary of the passing of President Yaser ‘Arafat. The march set out from the school and headed to the west of Sa'ir toward the bypass road known as Road 60. Before we arrived at that road, Israeli soldiers who were hiding among the grape vines suddenly appeared and dispersed the march. One of the soldiers fired his weapon, a bullet almost hitting me. When I stopped to see if I had been injured, two soldiers grabbed me. Immediately the soldiers attacked me with their hands, feet and the butts of their guns. I fell to the ground, receiving blows on all parts of my body. I started to scream in pain. Then the four soldiers who participated in beating me stopped and dragged me on the ground to a military jeep standing on Road 60. They dragged me for approximately 300 metres, all the while continuing to beat me.In the jeep, I was subjected to additional beating by more than one soldier. I felt severe pain in my back and then I felt dizzy. The jeep moved. When it stopped, the soldiers toldme in Arabic that we were in the Kiryat Arba’ settlement. After one hour, I was once again taken somewhere in a jeep. I was bleeding from my nose. At that time, one of the soldiers gave me some tissues to stop the bleeding which continued for about 10 minutes.When the jeep stopped, one of the investigators told me that I was in a military centre called ‘Atsyn, but I was not sure whether or not he was telling me the truth. This investigator also beat me and wanted me to confess about the people who had participated in the march. But I did not confess about anybody. This made the investigator angry. He was dressed in civilian clothes or some kind of uniform that is similar to the uniforms of the Israeli police. I estimate that the investigation lasted for 0around six hours. During that time, I was beaten from time to time. Then the investigator asked me to sign papers written in Hebrew but I did not agree. For that reason, I was beaten again. Two persons including the investigator took my hand by force and pressed my fingerprints on the file, thus taking my fingerprints against my will. Then they cuffed my hands together and carried me to a military vehicle.Again, I was in a new place. As I learned from one of the jailers, this place was called ‘Ofar. I had heard about ‘Ofar and knew that it was a detention place near Ramallah. The jailer asked me to decide where I wanted to stay, in the division of the Fatah members or in the part where Hamas members were held. I hesitated and then I decided to stay with the Fatah members. I was placed with Palestinian detainees and there I was not subjected to beating.On the second day, the jailers took me to a court and I was charged with throwing stones at the Israeli army. I denied the accusation but according to the testimonies of the soldiers who arrested me, I was seen throwing stones. This testimony was false. I was participating in a march and not throwing stones. Furthermore, there were no soldiers present. Those soldiers who had arrested me had appeared suddenly from among the grape vines and that’s why they were able to catch me. The court was adjourned for one week and I was sentenced to two months imprisonment and a bail of one thousand shekels.My family paid the bail and I was imprisoned for two months. I was released on 30 December 2007. I returned to school but this long absence has remarkably affected my achievements. At the time of my release, my classmates were taking the examinations of the first semester. I became the weakest among them as a result of this absence. But I will study hard to make it up and catch up with my classmates.