Affidavit No. 2810/2006
2006
I live with my eight-member family in Tal al-Rumeida village. My eldest child is my 19-year-old daughter Riham and the youngest is my five-year-old son Qussay. My husband is a worker. Ramat Shanay settlement is near our home; in fact, it is only 40 metres away from it.On Saturday, 4 February 2006, at 4:00 pm, I heard my son Diya’ (12 years) shouting. He was playing outside our home with his brother Ahmad (born on 10 December 1995). My husband 'Abd-al-Karim 'Abd-al-Rahman-Haddad (44 years) and I hurried over to see what was happening. I saw a number of settlers (about eight, 20 years old and over) chasing my son Diya’ and throwing stones at him. My son was running and shouting.I asked Diya’ about his brother Ahmad and he told me that the settlers had attacked them and he didn't know where Ahmad had gone. When my husband heard this, he threw stones at the settlers and made them go away. My husband and my sons went to search for Ahmad. I followed them. While we were searching, we found Ahmad lying on the ground two metres below the road that leads to our home. He was lying there motionless. I shouted and my husband jumped down to where Ahmad was lying. My son Talal (14 years) joined him.I called out to the soldiers who were at a military post established for protecting the settlers. It was only 20 metres away from us but the soldier merely looked at me and did not answer. My husband carried Ahmad, who was unconscious and bleeding from his head, and hurried to the hospital located approximately two kilometres from our home. Although the actual distance to the hospital is only two kilometres, we would have had to walk five kilometres to get there because the Shuhada’ street is closed. My husband walked around 100 metres and then took a taxi. I returned home to change and to get money and the insurance card. Then I followed my husband and my two sons to the hospital.I had only walked a few metres away from the house when I heard my daughter Shatha (16 years) screaming. I quickly returned home with my son Talal and found two settlers at the doorway of our home and many others heading toward it. My son and I began to yell and throw stones at the settlers while my daughter continued screaming from inside our home. The settlers ran away and my daughter opened the door and told me that the settlers had tried to enter our home but she had closed the door quickly. She said that she had accidentally hurt one of the settler's hands while she was shutting the door because she was very scared.It was a difficult situation. I took my daughter and my other children to our neighbour's (Rajab 'Beido) house and Talal and I continued on our way to the hospital. At the hospital, the doctors were still treating Ahmad. I knew that his right hand was broken and he had been injured in his right eye and his head. I stayed by my son's side until he regained consciousness. He told me that the settlers had hit him with two stones; the first hit his head and the second hit his eye. He then fell down from a height of two metres. He could not remember anything else.I stayed with my son in the hospital until 10:00 pm. After the doctors gave him stitches in his head and his eye and put a cast on his right hand, we went home. On Sunday, 5 February 2006, my husband went to the Israeli police headquarters and filed a complaint against the settlers. He provided the police with a physical description of the settlers. The settlers commit crimes in our quarter daily and we file one complaint after another, but nobody takes notice of our complaints or protects us from the settlers.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 23 February 2006Signature: Suha 'Abd-al-Rahman