Affidavit No. 3383/2007
2007
At approximately 7:00 am on 15 January 2007, I accompanied my cousin, Taysir, to al-Mutala' Hospital in Jerusalem, where he was being treated for cancer. We left the camp at the aforementioned hour and took a taxi to Huwara checkpoint, which is located to the south of Nablus. After 20 minutes, we reached the Israeli checkpoint. We disembarked and crossed the checkpoint on foot because the driver did not have a permit allowing him to cross the checkpoint with his car.After crossing the checkpoint, we got into another vehicle that was parked about 100 metres from the checkpoint. Within an hour, the vehicle, which was headed towards Qalandiya, was full with passengers. We arrived at Qalandiya after one hour. Then, we took another taxi to the al-Mutala' Hospital in Jerusalem.We arrived at the hospital at 10:00 am. After the doctors had examined Taysir, they said he would have to stay in the hospital for further tests. At approximately 10:00 am, on 18 January 2007, the doctors told us that that we could leave the hospital and continue Taysir's treatment in one of the hospitals in Nablus. After a few minutes, I met with a person from the al-Aghbar family from Nablus. This person transports patients between Nablus and Jerusalem in his private car. I asked him if it would be possible for us to go in his car to Nablus and he said yes. I told him that we would be ready to leave within an hour. He agreed, but returned half an hour later to tell me that his car had been filled with passengers. He then left.At 11:00 am, Taysir and I left the hospital and waited nearby for a taxi to take us to the Jerusalem bus station, from where we could take a bus to Ramallah. We waited for more than half an hour near the hospital because no taxi was willing to take us to Jerusalem, presumably because we were from the West Bank. Thus, we were obliged to walk. After walking for 200 metres, a passing mini-bus stopped and took us to the bus stop. It took us an hour to reach Ramallah. From Ramallah we travelled north to Nablus. I sat in the front seat of the car while Taysir sat in the back seat. After approximately one hour, we reached Huwara checkpoint.At Huwara checkpoint, there was an UNRWA car, which passed through the checkpoint in a matter of minutes. When our turn came, two Israeli soldiers, who were standing in the middle of the road about three metres from our car, asked the driver for the permit allowing him to pass through the checkpoint. As the driver did not have the requisite permit, the soldier ordered him to go back. I got out of the car and told the soldiers, in Hebrew, that there was a very sick patient in the car, that he could not walk across the checkpoint and that we had the appropriate permits. The soldier was not interested in what I said, and told us to walk. I asked him to come to the car and see the patient, but he refused.After arguing with the soldier for a few minutes, I asked my cousin if he could walk. He replied that he was tired and could not walk. Because of this, we had to go back and wait for a car to come with a driver who had a permit to cross the checkpoint. Unfortunately, no such driver passed by for more than half an hour. Given Taysir’s situation, the driver of the taxi in which Taysir was still sitting called an ambulance from Nablus. After 20 minutes, an ambulance from Nablus arrived at the checkpoint. I waved to the ambulance driver, and the ambulance came to the place where the taxi was parked. A number of medical personnel got out of the ambulance and went to the taxi to transfer my cousin. I opened the taxi door to help Taysir get out. I found him sitting as I had left him, on the back seat with his head bent down. I told him that the ambulance had arrived to take him home, however, he did not answer. One of the medical personnel examined him and told me that he was dead. I could not believe it. I thought that Taysir had simply been resting in the car.We put Taysir in the ambulance and took him to al-Watani Hospital in Nablus. The soldiers did not block our way this time. After the doctors examined him, they pronounced him dead.As for the two soldiers at the checkpoint who did not allow us to pass in the car, they were wearing military uniforms and were carrying weapons. They were of medium size, but I did not pay much attention to their features. I do not know whether they were soldiers or officers.