Affidavit No. 4358/2008
2008
I work as a lecturer at the al-Azhar University, located on al-Thalathini Street, west of Gaza city. At about 8:00 am on Sunday, 24 August 2008, I went to my workplace. A student informed me that students affiliated with the Islamic Bloc, along with Hamas armed individuals, raided a ground office belonging to the Evening Diploma Secretariat at the University. The office is used as a centre for the University Students’ Council. At about 7:00 am, Islamic Bloc affiliated students and Hamas armed individuals had seized control of this office.I went to the University Students' Council on the ground floor, where I saw around ten youths in civilian clothes, carrying pistols and sticks. They did not appear to be university students. They stood outside the Students’ Council room as well as in the opposite corridor. I have been working at the al-Azhar University since 1993 and I have never seen these people on campus before.When I entered the Students Council, I saw four students from the Islamic Bloc talking to Dr. Jaber al-Da'our and Jihad Abu-Mousa, the officer in charge of security at the University. I talked to the armed individuals outside the room. "This is not a civilised scene. This is a university and an educational centre," I said. An armed individual replied, "this is not a University. From today, there will not be Shabiba [youth groups affiliated with the Fateh movement] nor a students council." I went to my office, where I saw a poster signed by the Islamic Bloc students on the University's bulletin board. The poster said, “"No to the University Administrations’ decision on paying fees on 28 August 2008." Dr. Riyad al-'Eila, who is in charge of Student Affairs, tore the poster apart.When a number of female students gathered in the University yard, I heard armed individuals shout obscenities at them. A large number of university students gathered to prevent armed individuals from assaulting the female students. Then students quarrelled with armed individuals. Later, a clash took place between them and the armed individuals withdrew towards the room which they had seized control of. About ten minutes later, ten youths in civilian clothes with Kalashnikov rifles raided the University campus, after an Islamic Bloc-affiliated student called them. Another clash took place between students and armed individuals. "We will cleanse all pockets in the University," I heard an armed individual saying while he rushed towards students.Armed individuals assaulted students and led a number of students outside the university campus. At this point, the University Administration announced an evacuation of the campus through the loudspeakers. Examinations, which were scheduled for 1:00 pm for the summer course students, were also cancelled. The University Administration suspended classes in protest against the raid by Hamas armed individuals along with Islamic Bloc affiliated students. Police forces were dispatched and evacuated the University campus of students, Islamic Bloc affiliated students, and armed individuals.