Affidavit No. 1948/2004
2004
I live with my 37-year-old husband  Jamal Mousa 'Atiyya, and my five children in al-Wata al-Tantour area,  100 meters from 'Ayda Camp, in a house consisting of two rooms, a  kitchen and abathroom. My husband supports his father’s eight-member  family, who live nearby our home ina one-room house. In our  neighborhood, there are three other families (Jado, Umayya andDarwish).  We all suffer because of the construction of the Separation Wall around  Bethlehem. Aconcrete wall nine meters high has been constructed from  al-Quba north of Bethlehem through'Ayda Camp and it stretches to Beit  Jala. This Wall is 100 metres away from my home to theeast, and because  we hold Jerusalem Identity Cards, our situation is easier than that of  ourneighbors who carry the West Bank Identity Cards.Nevertheless,  we meet difficulties in reaching Bethlehem, as we have to walk one  kilometer toreach an opening in the Wall near 'Ayda Camp. This is a  rough area, and it’s especially difficultwhen we carry our foodstuffs or  other needs. Added to this, the difficulties we confront when weare in  need of service such as health or education. I go to Jerusalem, but I  also have to walkone kilometer or more to reach Beit Safafa as my  children do everyday when going to theirschool in Beit Safafa. I had to  transfer them from their school in 'Ayda Camp to Beit Safafabecause of  the construction of the Wall. This burdens them with a lot of problems.As for my  husband, who works as a labourer in Jerusalem, he has to work everyday  in therough roads, under the threat of the Israeli army that comes from  time to time to our home andinforms us to leave that area, despite that  we hold Jerusalem identity cards. I currently I do notvisit Bethlehem  although my family, who carry West Bank identity cards, live in Beit  Jala. I visitthem once a month or once every two months due to the  difficulties I meet on the way to theirhome after the building of the  Separation Wall. At the same time, my family cannot visit medespite the  short distance between my home in al-Wata and their home in Beit Jala,  which I cansee from my home.The  difficulties of our daily life and the threat of evacuation from our  home have worsened thepsychological situation of my children and I. We  move only in the surrounding area. Our childrendo not even go out to  play. They prefer to stay at home and when they play together, they do  sovery aggressively. They even do not like to visit my family, for fear  of the soldiers who arealways present near the Wall, and especially at  the opening of Aida Camp. I communicate withmy relatives and friends by  cellular phone because we do not have a telephone line. This isdespite  that we live in the Jerusalem area behind the Wall, and although we  fulfill all the dutiesof persons holding the Jerusalem Identity Cards.  But the Jerusalem Municipality and theMinistry of Interior do not  provide us with any services such as road, water,  telephoneinfrastructure service. The water to which we are connected is  from the PNA, and we oftenobtain our services from Bethlehem. But now  the situation is difficult whether we go toBethlehem or to Jerusalem.Moreover,  the opening to Aida Camp has been closed and now it takes me around two  hours togo from our home to Beit Safafa or Beit Jala, while in the past  it took me only five minutes. Incases of emergency, Israeli medical  relief refuse to come to us, although we have JerusalemI.D. cards, and  the Palestine Red Crescent ambulances cannot reach us. So it is very  difficult toobtain emergency medical services when we need them.  Personally, this situation made mebecome more nervous and frustrated  with my husband and children. Just thinking of going toJerusalem or any  other place to buy my needs, using these rough, unpaved roads makes  medepressed and angry. Formerly, the vegetable and gas delivery trucks  and taxis used to reachour home, but now they cannot approach this area.  All of this has increased my burdens as myhusband goes to work and I  have to walk with the children to their school in Beit Safafa,because  they are afraid of the Israeli soldiers continually present in this  area.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 29 August 2004