Affidavit No. 3955/2007
2007
My name is Zakariyya Ibrahim Saleh ‘Abd-al-‘Al, 37 years old. I am married with seven children, and I live in al-Tuffah quarter behind the al-Rifi Gas Station in Gaza city. At the beginning of January 2007, my 31 year old late wife, ‘Ayda ‘Abd-al-‘Al, started to suffer from breast cancer. She went to one of the Egyptian hospitals for treatment, where she stayed for approximately a month and underwent radiotherapy and chemotherapy. She then returned to Gaza on the condition that she would go back to Egypt in  mid-June for further treatment and a check up. But due to the complete closure of the Rafah border crossing and the other borders by the Israeli side from 10 June 2007, she could not go to Egypt.My wife’s health deteriorated and she was taken to al-Shifa’ Hospital in Gaza where she was given five chemotherapy doses. The last dose was at the end of June. My wife’shealth improved and the doctors said that she would need further treatment and another chemotherapy session in al-Shifa’ Hospital in Gaza after two months.The date for the next chemotherapy treatment was 26 August 2007. As usual, we headed to al-Shifa’ Hospital in Gaza. The doctor who was supervising the treatment of my wife, Dr. Khaled Thabet, told me that the chemotherapy treatment was not available in the hospital and he requested the Ministry of Health to provide the required medicines.The next day the Ministry of Health responded that the chemotherapy treatment was not available in their storehouses, as this type of treatment had entirely run out due to the complete siege imposed on the Gaza Strip. My wife stayed in al-Shifa’ Hospital from 26 August to 25 October 2007. During that period, she was given painkillers only.Finally, the doctors of al-Shifa’ Hospital decided to transfer her to one of the Israeli hospitals for treatment because her health had further deteriorated and the cancer had spread to her gallbladder and liver. Through the Palestinian Liaison Department I obtained a permit for my wife to enter Israel and be transferred to the Israeli Akhluf  Hospital. But the Palestinian Health Ministry referred her to al-Mutala’, also referred to as St. Victoria Hospital, in Jerusalem instead. My wife went to Jerusalem on 31 October 2007. After conducting the required tests, the doctors in al-Mutala’ Hospital told my wife that they could not treat her because the cancer had spread considerably. They decided to send her back to Gaza. After five days in al-Mutala’ Hospital, my wife returned to al-Shifa Hospital in Gaza, suffering and without treatment, until she died on Saturday, 10 November 2007.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 11 November 2007Signature: Zakariyya ‘Abd-al-‘Al