Affidavit No. 1979/2004
2004
Since the  early morning of 15 September 2004, I had been in my car repair and  painting shop located in the Industrial Area of Jenin. The situation  that day was very calm and quiet. I was practicing my work like all the  other shops and workshops in the Industrial Area. To the north of my  shop, is the car repair shop of Fawwaz Zakarna. At noon, I saw Fadi  Zakarna, the brother of Fawwaz Zakarna, come to his brother's shop with a  number of young men. It is worth noting that Fadi Zakarna is wanted by  the Israeli army. Fadi Zakarna and his comrades came in a stolen private  car. Work in our area continued as quiet and calm as before.At 12:30  the same day, I saw two cars, Nissan and Mercedes-Benz sport utility  vehicles; one was white and the other silver. These two cars had  Palestinian registration plates and inside were old and used things such  as beds, cupboards and similar things. These two cars parked next to  each other in front of my shop and Fawwaz Zakarna's shop. I was standing  outside my shop and so was Fawwaz, his brother and some other young  men. Fadi Zakarna was carrying his weapon. The two jeep cars were only  two metres away from us. There were around five persons in civilian  clothes inside each of the two jeeps. Suddenly, the drivers of these two  cars, who were carrying short weapons, got out of their jeeps and  without notice or warning, started firing at the young men who were  standing in front of Fawwaz Zakarna's shop. I then saw the other people  who were inside the two jeeps get out and start firing arbitrarily in  all directions. I also saw two masked persons with the Israeli Special  Squads who were in the two jeeps. These two persons were wearing blue  jeans and coloured shirts. I still remember one of them because his  image is still stuck in my memory; he was tall, brown and with a beard.  At that moment I entered my shop and hid behind a car I was repairing  and painting.The heavy  gunfire continued for not less than seven minutes. I looked from time  to time from under the car to see what was going on outside. I then saw  one of the Israeli Special Squad standing inside my shop and shooting at  the walls. At that moment I was sure that he would see and kill me. I  cannot describe my feelings and fears at that moment. Then I saw the  feet of three people dragging a person inside my shop. I recognised the  man being dragged because he was trading in stolen cars and he is known  to us; his name is Ibrahim al-Sirisi. Ibrahim (his family name is called  Sirisi after the name of his village Siris in Jenin Governorate) also  recognised me when he looked under the car I was hiding behind and he  motioned to me with his hand not to make any movement or noise. All of a  sudden and without any warning, Ibrahim al-Sirisi was shot with four  bullets by the Israeli Special Squad from a distance of less than two  metres. It is worth noting that Ibrahim did not have any weapons.  Ibrahim was shot in the head and he was bleeding heavily, forming a pool  on the ground.While I  was looking from under the car, I saw members of the Squad; three were  coming and going from my shop. Then I saw them leave and get in their  cars, and I also saw a number of military jeeps arrive to the scene  while the shooting had completely stopped. The army remained for five  minutes, and then these forces completely left. Then I heard the noise  and movement of people outside and I came out of my hiding place.I first  saw Ibrahim al-Sirisi and he was dead. I went out of my shop and saw  Fawwaz and Fadi Zakarna lying down on the ground in front of the shop;  both were bleeding and were dead, shot in the face and the chest. Fadi  was bleeding from all parts of his body and it seemed that he was  subjected to intensive shooting. As we entered the shop of Fawwaz  Zakarna, we saw Mu'ath al-Sirisi lying down on the ground inside the  shop and he was dead as a result of a shot in the chest. The Palestine  Red Crescent Society ambulances arrived and carried the four martyrs to  the Jenin Governmental Hospital. I also knew that Abu Al-Abed Saba’na,  28 years old, Fawwaz Zakarna’s business partner, was also wounded and  arrested. I also saw that the car that Fadi Zakarna had come in was  subjected to gunfire and its back box was opened, which means that it  had been searched.I would  like to say that I had not been aware of any armed confrontation taking  place between the Israeli Special Squad and any of the young men who had  been martyred. I am also sure that the Israeli squad was targeting Fadi  Zakarna, who was an activist with the Islamic Jihad Movement. The other  three were trading in stolen cars and similar things and were not  wanted by the Israeli occupying forces.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 16 September 2004Signature: Arafat Khaled Fayyad al-Sa'di