Affidavit No. 5482/2010
2010
I live in a two-storey house. On the first floor I raise broiler chickens and on the second floor I am living with my family. Seven of us, including myself, my wife, and my children Mousa (about 29 years); Manar (about 23 years old); and Hamza (about 21 years) as well as his wife Sabrin (about 17 years) and his daughter Rafif (about a month and a half) live in the second storey of my house. On 15 June 2010, my son Mousa was released from Israeli prison after he had served his sentence of seven years. We paid a fine of NIS 6,000. An Israeli military court convicted Mousa of being affiliated with the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades and of resisting the occupation.The house where we live overlooks part of the basement roof, which is approximately 32 square metres in area. Because of the sweltering heat in the summer, a number of my family members sleep on this roof. Last night, my wife, my sons Mousa and Hamza and I slept on that roof. An external staircase that stretches from the open house garden leads to the basement roof. At around 3:30 am on Tuesday, 22 June 2010, my family and some residents of the neighbourhood and myself woke up to a sound of a very loud explosion, which shook my house and left my family members in severe panic. We woke up in panic on the aforesaid roof and fire was opened on me and on the members of my family who were also sleeping on the basement roof. Sound grenades were also fired at us. My wife asked my children to raise their arms in fear for their lives.Later, my son Hamza was also dragged outside the house through the southern door. The soldiers took Hamza and Mousa out of the house after they had severely beaten them for about 20 minutes. Having examined their ID cards, the soldiers shouted that they wanted “B”. Although we did not understand their intention the soldiers repeated that they wanted “B” for about seven minutes.Soldiers called me to go to the street, where my sons had been detained, which I did. A soldier, who carried plastic handcuffs, demanded that I stretch my hands forward, but I strongly rejected.“I am sick. I suffer from high blood pressure and have heart problems. I am thirsty and cannot bear handcuffs.” I said.