Affidavit No. 5671/2010
2010
I own a house, which is under construction, in the eastern part of Bourin village, southeast of Nablus city. My house is situated opposite the Israeli settlement of Brakha, which was constructed on land belonging to the village of Bourin. At around 8:00 am on Monday 26 July 2010, I was working with five builders from Bourin village on my house. We were working to place a ceiling on the house, when I saw two Israeli settlers on top of the mountain on which the settlement is built. The view was good and I could see them clearly. The distance between my house and the area in which they were standing was not more than about 500 metres.About 15 minutes after I first saw the settlers, they brought vehicle wheel tyres, which were on fire, and rolled them down the mountain towards my house. After that, about 30 settlers approached the house from a westerly direction, through some olive trees, and threw stones at the house. We confronted the settlers by throwing stones back. Ten minutes later, a group of more than 30 settlers approached the house. We fought them for about 45 minutes – from 8:15 am until 9:00 am. The settlers then damaged some bricks and demolished the staircase of the house with a jackhammer, and one of the settlers opened fire indiscriminately. The settlers ended up inside the house, occupying it, and we on a dirt area underneath the house.Whilst I was on the dirt road outside the house, a settler hit me on the head with a jack, used for construction. I know the settler’s features well; he was of medium height, white complexion, with a blond beard and long sideburns and aged between 27 and 32 years. He was wearing white glasses. Another settler threw a stone at my leg. He was wearing a dark blue gown and black glasses. He had long sideburns, was about 180 centimetres tall, and was aged between 35 and 37 years.It was about 12:30pm when the settler hit me. As a result of the hit, I felt dizzy. I do not know what happened next because I fell unconscious. I came to at hospital. I was told that I had been taken by Palestine Red Crescent Society ambulance to Rafidiya Hospital, where I received medical treatment. I left hospital at around 2:30pm. This is the seventh time my house had been attacked by Israeli settlers. On this occasion, the Israeli settlers damaged and broke wood and iron that was being used for construction. They also broke four plastic water tanks, demolished the staircase to the house for the second time, and cut down olive trees next to the house.