Affidavit No. 2967/2006
2006
On Wednesday 24 May 2006, at around 2:45 pm, I left Al-Haq’s premises in Ramallah, driving my car, a black 1992 Hyundai Civic. I was alone in the car. When I was approximately 80 metres from the Al-Haq premises, on the main street in Ramallah, and before I reached Clock Square (Duwar al-Sa’a), three Israeli military jeeps approached me from the opposite direction. The jeeps changed course, aiming to either halt or collide with my car. I drove away from them but a fourth Israeli car called a “Hummer” speeded toward my car and struck the left side. I got out of my car to check the damage and found that the glass was broken on the left side and the back door behind me was also damaged, and its glass broken.When I stopped the car, I felt that I was in severe danger, especially because groups of young Palestinian men were throwing stones at the Israeli jeeps. With difficulty, I opened the damaged door and got out of the car and quickly entered a building to protect myself. I saw soldiers getting down from the military jeeps but I did not stop. I was not carrying anything except my cell phone. I thought that the soldiers were following me but they were not. Because shooting was taking place in the area, I sheltered myself for approximately an hour. There were many other youths who, like me, sheltered themselves in the building. None of these young men were carrying weapons. The name of the building was “al-Isra’ Building,” as I learned from the young me who were with me.I remained on the third floor, watching what was happening outside. Confrontations were taking place between the Israeli army and the young Palestinian men in the adjacent street in the middle of Ramallah the entire time. I saw one of the wounded, who fell on the ground beside Clock Square. I believe his injury was to his leg. He was carried away by other young men. I saw second, third and fourth boys injured because of the Israeli shooting. These young men were in their twenties and they were among the men who were throwing stones. None of them were firing or carrying weapons.After that, the soldiers withdrew and I got out of the building and went to my car. My car was moderately damaged, and I was suffering from some light bruises on my back and left hand as a result of the crash with the Israeli car. I took my car to the garage to repair it. The damage was estimated at around 2,500 shekels. This all happened to me without any reason and without any accusation. It is worth mentioning that I am not wanted by either side, Palestinian or Israeli.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 24 May 2006Signature: Mahmoud Ma’badName not withheldField researcher: Zahi Jaradat