Affidavit No. 6094/2011
2011
On Thursday 17 February 2011 at around 6:30 am, I received a phone call from on a relative informing me of the death of my 40-year-old brother Tal’at. He said Tal’at was shot by the Israeli Occupation Forces near the northern border of al-Seifa Area (Ard al- Ghoul), located northwest of Beit Lahiya in the northern part of the Gaza Strip. My brother Tal’at was unemployed and had three boys and a pregnant wife. He used to live  with me at our house located in al-Jala’ Street in central Gaza city. His wife lives in the city of Rahat, located inside the green line and would come to Gaza with the children every once in a while to visit her husband and stay with him for a week or two. Tal’at lived with his wife in Rahat for a long time, until he was deported to Gaza by the Israeli police some three years ago. This was merely because he was registered with a Gaza address in his ID card. Since then, Tal’at tried on numerous occasions to obtain a permit to cross the Gaza Strip borders, but was always met with rejection by the Israeli authority. For this reason, Tal’at hired an Israeli lawyer to follow up on his case.Seven months ago, Tal’at was arrested by the Internal Security Unit in Gaza and was detained for fifteen days, during which he was subject to physical torture. He was investigated on allegations of treachery and collaboration with the enemy because he was speaking Hebrew on a phone using an Orange (Israeli cellular network) phone card. He had declared in his statement that he had been speaking with his lawyer in Israel. They released him once they were convinced of that fact.After his release, Tal’at was in a psychologically disturbed state as a result of the torture he had been subjected to during his detainment. He wasn’t interacting with people as he used to. From time to time, he would describe to me his difficult experiences during detention and how he was beaten and tortured by being forced by the Internal Security to remain in painful positions such as al-shabeh position. Since then, he became depressed and frequently thought about leaving Gaza and never returning.The last time his wife and children visited him was two weeks before his death. They stayed with him for about a week. I saw my brother for the last time on the same day he was killed. That same day, my brother’s friend, Ashraf Eqteifan, came for a visit and they then left the house together. Tal’at said that he was going to spend the night at Ashraf’s place. I had met Ashraf before and knew that he had also lived in Israel for twelve years working at a restaurant in Yaffa (Jaffa). He came to Gaza six months ago to attend his brother’s wedding, after which he was refused re-entry into Israel.Immediately after hearing that Tal’at had been killed, I headed towards Kamal ‘Udwan Hospital in Beit Lahiya. At the morgue, I saw the corpse of my brother along with that of Ashraf Eqteifan and a third young man called Jihad Khalaf. The latter was from Jabaliya and was a relative of Ashraf’s. My brother was injured in the head and back by severalbullets and shrapnel from tank shelling. My brothers, uncles and I received Tal’at’s body and buried him in al-Sheikh Radwan cemetery in Gaza city.