Affidavit No. 2259/2005
2005
I am the  head of the joint village council for three Khirbets: Khirbet Twana,  Khirbet al-Touba and Khirbet al-Mufqara. These small villages belong to  Yatta town and are located to the east of it, approximately 10-12  kilometres away. The population of the three Khirbets is approximately  750 persons. In the vicinity of these three Khirbets, there are several  settlements with the nearest being the Ma’oun settlement and the farm  that belongs to it, in addition to an outpost known as Avi Jayel. The  settlers attack the citizens of these three Khirbets from time to time.  Following the repeated settler attacks against the villagers, especially  against the co-ed school located in Khirbet Twana, a team of foreign  volunteers began living continuously in Khirbet Twana.On  Tuesday 22 March 2005, one of the citizens, Mufdhi Ahmad Rib’i,  approximately 40 years old, told me that he found poison spread in the  area near the Ma’oun settlement. I hurried to that place and found  coloured grains. Immediately, I called many sides including the Israeli  police and the Israeli Protectors of Nature and asked them to come to  the place where I found the colored grains. In the evening,  representatives of the Israeli Protectors of Nature and various  humanitarian organizations, as well as a number of farmers came to the  place. Al-Ribi’, al-Amour and Abu Qbeita families (from Yatta town ),  who are the owners of the land, were also there.During  the search process, we and the Israeli Protectors of Nature found three  deer poisoned and dead, as well as a squirrel that died after it ate  from the meat of one of the deer. We also found a dead ewe owned by  Mufdhi Ahmad Rib’i. 16 sheep owned by Mahmoud Husein Hamamda (50 years)  had symptoms of poisoning. The citizens submitted a complaint against  the settlers to the Israeli police. The citizens told the police that  they had seen the settlers moving in the area on the evening of Monday  21 March. The village council then isolated the area and prevented  grazing in it, even though this area is around 50 dunums and is  considered to be the best area for grazing and agriculture.Because  we continuously followed up with the Israeli Protectors of Nature, they  organized a volunteer day, which included more than 100 Israeli and  foreign volunteers, in order to clear the fields of the grains. They  collected as many of the grains, spread in the fields by the settlers,  as they could. Grazing in these lands stopped out of fear that there  could still be grains hidden under the grass, causing new casualties  among the animals. We sent samples of these grains to Ta’ayoush, the  Israeli Co-existence Organization, for testing. The preliminary results  indicated that 30 grams of the substance is sufficient for killing a  sheep or a deer instantly and a quantity of less than 30 grams of this  substance takes a week to 2 weeks to kill. In the meantime, people must  not eat the meat or the milk of the animal. Moreover, the Israeli  Protectors of Nature took some of the dead sheep and deer for testing  and autopsies. So far we have not received their report, although they  promised us that they would give us a copy. There is a preliminary  agreement between us (the village council) and the volunteers to come  back to the land on Saturday 2 April 2005 to further clean these  poisonous grains from the fields.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 24 March 2005Signature: Saber Husein al-Hrini