Affidavit No. 2525/2005
2005
At  11:00  p.m. Wednesday, 24 August 2005, I was sitting near the shop of   'Abd-al-Rahman located near the al-Aman taxi stand in the main street of   Toulkarem camp. I was sitting on a low wall with Tareq Zayet, Marwan   Abu-'Asba, Muhammad Tareq and Anas Abu-Zeina. We all are friends from   Toulkarem Camp and we were talking together. Sitting beside us to the   north, opposite the Mahmoud Hudeib house and five metres away from us,   were Mahmoud Hudeib, Mushir Mansour, an activist and wanted by the   Israeli army, 'Adel al-Ghawi “Abu-Khalil”, a wanted activist, and Majdi   Abu 'Eitta, also a wanted activist. The situation was calm, without any   events or troubles.At   approximately 11:30, I saw across from us two persons wearing white T-   shirts and black jeans. Their faces were long and they had long hair   combed to the back. They were armed with M-16s and standing behind the   wall of an old deserted room, directly opposite to where we were sitting   and beside the Mahmoud Hudeib family house. These two men aimed their   weapons at us and said in Arabic, “Stop! Stop!” At that moment, the red   lights of their weapons were directed at us and at the group sitting   beside the Hudeib house. At first I thought that some young men were   kidding with us and with the wanted persons I mentioned earlier. But the   target lights of their weapons were aimed at us and the other group.  At  this point I realised that these two men were from the Israeli  special  squads.I  got up,  as did Tareq Zayet, Marwan, Muhammad Tareq, and Anas Abu-Zeina.  We  tried to run and escape, and so did the group sitting near the  Hudeib  house. Without any prior warning, they opened heavy fire at us.  As I ran  away, I was hit with a bullet in my left shoulder from the  back. Tareq  Zayet was hit in his right hand, while after running five  metres, Anas  Abu-Zeina was hit directly with bullets and fell to the  ground and did  not move. Tareq Zayet and I entered the 'Abd-al-Rahman  shop and from  there the Qeisi family house where we were protected for  approximately  an hour and a half until the Israeli army and the special  squads  withdrew.As  soon  as the shooting started, I saw Mushir Mansour run into the Hudeib  family  house while Mahmoud Hudeib, Majdi Husein, and 'Adel al-Ghawi  were each  directly hit from a short range. I was sitting beside  Muhammad Tareq,  who tried to run away with us from the first moment and  who managed to  run five metres inside a narrow lane but the members of  the special  squad shot at him again until they killed him.At  one  a.m. on Thursday, 25 August 2005, the Israeli army and the special   squads withdrew from the camp after an hour and a half of continuous   shooting. After we went out, blood was flowing heavily on the ground of   the scene. The Palestine Red Crescent Society ambulance took me to the   Thabet Thabet Governmental Hospital in Toulkarem where I received the   necessary treatment. People were shocked because there were no bodies on   the ground, but then realized that the Israeli army confiscated the   bodies of the martyrs.At  2:30  that same morning, we learned that five martyrs were killed: Majdi   Husein 'Atiyya, 'Adel al-Ghawi “Abu Khalil”, both activists wanted by   the Israeli army; Mahmoud Hudeib, who was sitting with Majdi and 'Adel;   and to Anas Abu-Zeina and Muhammad Tareq, who were sitting beside us  and  who were killed only because they were sitting where the incident  took  place.