Affidavit No. 3427/ 2007
2007
I live in Jenin camp, which is located near the city of Jenin. I live in an apartment located on the second floor of a three-storey building. I am married to Salih al-Sa'di and have five children.At 7:30 am on Wednesday, 28 February 2007, I heard the sound of intensive shooting. I did not know the reason for the shooting, which was taking place close to my house. I looked outside to see what was happening. When I looked to the north-east, I saw Ashraf al-Sa'di, a resident of the camp and a relative of mine. Ashraf was well known as he was an activist with the al-Quds brigades, which belongs to the Islamic Jihad movement. Accordingly, he was wanted by the Israeli army.I saw Ashraf running down a small alley. The alley in question leads to the main road of the camp and to the eastern entrance of the camp. The alley also leads to a road leading to the centre of Jenin city. Ashraf was running while shooting a gun he had with him. He was looking behind. When 'Asharf came near my house, approximately nine metres away from where I was standing, I saw an individual wearing civilian clothes chasing him. As far as I can remember, the individual was wearing blue jeans and a black jacket. This individual was holding a hand gun and was running after Ashraf. I saw him shoot at Ashraf, who fell forward onto the ground. He had been injured by the shot and was still alive. He was moving his body, hands and feet. All this happened very quickly. I was very shocked and, initially, I thought that it was a fight or a clash between Palestinians. The individual in question shot Ashraf again from a distance of approximately five metres. He then ran quickly towards Ashraf, who was still lying on the ground. At the same time, another individual, also dressed in civilian clothes, came running towards Ashraf. This individual came from the same direction the others had come from. I saw him run up to Ashraf. He pointed his gun at Ashraf's head and shot him from point blank range. He also shot other Ashraf in other parts of his body. While shooting Ashraf, the individuals were screaming in Arabic. I heard them shouting, "You worthless scum," and other similar curses. Both of the individuals, who were wearing civilian clothes, shot Ashraf in the head from point blank range.I could not believe my eyes. It was a clear murder operation. I went inside my house and heard voices screaming in Hebrew, which I do not understand. As a result, I realised that the individuals who murdered 'Asharf al-Sa'di were members of the Israeli special squads. They are known to enter Palestinian cities and camps, hiding their identity by wearing civilian clothes, to murder activists in the Palestinian resistance movements.The voices screaming in Hebrew were very loud, however, I was unable to understand what they were saying since I don’t speak the language. I was terrified and shocked by what I had seen. At approximately 7:50 am, I heard Palestinian citizens moving in the area outside. I realised that the Israeli special squad had withdrawn from the area. I went outside in order to find out what had happened. I found Ashraf still on the ground, lying on his front. He was dead and his body was in a very bad state. His brains were coming out of his head and I could see pieces of his brain stuck to the surrounding walls. I also saw his entrails falling out as a result of the intensive shooting he had been subjected to by the Israelis.When I moved into the aforementioned alley, which leads to the main road of the camp, I saw a dark green Isuzu car that had collided with the wall of my neighbour’s house. The car was in a horrible condition, and was riddled with bullet holes. I saw blood near the car and I saw a dead Palestinian lying near the driver’s seat. I was later informed that his name was A’la' Breiki and that he resided in a neighbourhood located to the west of Jenin city and the camp.I cannot describe how horrible the scene was. There was blood everywhere and the smell of shooting was very strong. The destruction and damage was clear to everyone. At this moment, dozens of citizens came to the area in order to transfer the two martyrs, 'Asharf al-Sa'di and A'la' Breiki, to a Palestinian ambulance which had arrived at the location. I could not bare the sight of blood anymore and so I returned home. I later discovered that a third youth had died in this military operation. His name was Muhammad Abu Na'sih. He was also a resident of Jenin camp and was an activist in the Islamic Jihad movement, which is a Palestinian resistance movement. He was also wanted by the Israeli army.The three dead youth had been inside the dark green car when they were shot at by members of the Israeli special squads. The above is what I have witnessed with my own eyes. I assert again that these individuals murdered 'Asharf al-Sa'di after they had shot him and he had fallen to the ground. They repeatedly shot at him from point blank range, killing him in cold blood without any need. They could have easily arrested him. The fact is that they wanted to kill him, not arrest him.