Affidavit No. 3976/2007
2007
On Sunday 25 November 2007 at approximately 1:00 pm, I was standing with Muhammad Badi’, aresident of the camp, at the entrance of a path leading to Marba’et Hannoun quarter in the Toulkarem camp, located in the vicinity of Toulkarem city. Standing beside us no more than seven metres away were five to seven young men. Some were from the camp while others were from elsewhere. I don’t know them personally, but as a resident of the camp I know that some of them are activists in the Palestinian resistance movement and therefore “wanted” by the Israeli occupying forces. One of these young men is called Muhammad Qouzah. He is originally from Toulkarem camp, but now lives with his family in the eastern quarter of Toulkarem. It is known to all the camp citizens that Muhammad is an activist in the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades of the Fateh movement, and for that reason is wanted by the Israeli army. I also recognised another young man called Mushir Mansouri, an activist from Toulkarem camp and also wanted by the occupying forces. I did not know the others, but knew they are from the camp because I constantly see them there.As mentioned above, Muhammad Badi’ and I were standing near a Palestinian vehicle at the entry of the path opposite the Service Centre, while those young men were standing beside a wall near the entry. Some were facing the wall while others turned their backs to it. They were talking to each other. Everything was normal and quiet. Right beside the path is “al-Baba cafe,” and opposite to it is a wide street running from east to west. Suddenly, and without prior warning, I was surprised to see beside me to the east a solidly-built whiteskinned person wearing a red shirt, jeans and sports shoes, and carrying a short black weapon. The distance between us was not more than one metre. He aimed his weapon toward the young men mentioned above, and opened fire directly on them, shooting a shower of bullets all at one time. While firing he was saying words which I could not understand. I estimate that he fired at the youths for 15-20 seconds. During this time, Muhammad Badi’ and I were lying face down on the ground.Initially, I thought this was a dispute between two people. But when the shooting stopped, I saw another man in civilian clothes carrying weapons like the short black one I mentioned earlier. He came towards the person in the red shirt and stood beside him. I then saw about three Israeli soldiers wearing full olive green military uniforms, which we are all familiar with. Those soldiers also came and stood near us, and their arrival coincided with that of several Israeli military jeeps. I instantly realised that those wearing the civilian clothing were members of an Israeli undercover unit which came to target the young persons mentioned above. Thus far, I do not know what has happened to all of them.The Israeli army deployed in and besieged the area. No more firing was heard. I saw the men in civilian clothes and the Israeli soldiers enter the path. When they returned, they were dragging a Palestinian young man by his shoulders. They threw him down to the ground, right at the entrance of al-Baba Cafe. At that moment, the Israeli soldiers asked Muhammad Badi’ and me to stand up and then led us to al-Baba Cafe. As we were entering the cafe, we passed by the young man who had been dragged by the Israeli soldiers. He was lying with his stomach to the ground. I immediately recognised him to be Muhammad Qouzah; he was bleeding from his back and was motionless. I saw that very briefly because the Israeli soldiers pushed me inside the cafe. At that moment, numerous Israeli military jeeps of different sizes arrived at the place. In the cafe Ifound 10-15 Palestinian citizens being detained. They were all standing up, facing a wall and had lifted their hands up. Muhammad Badi’ and I joined this group and stood there, just like them, as we had been ordered to do by the Israeli soldiers. Amongst us were old men who had been playing cards inside the cafe when the incident took place.The Israeli soldiers were deploying inside and outside the cafe, although the shooting had already completely stopped. After approximately half an hour, at around 1:30 pm, the Israeli soldiers tied our hands behind our backs with plastic cuffs and covered our eyes with pieces of cloth to prevent us from seeing anything. Together with the other young men, they led us to a large vehicle used for transporting soldiers. We were then taken in that carrier to the Israeli Military Liaison headquarters located west of Toulkarem.we were 11 young people. Initially, we were put in the yard of the Liaison headquarters and then taken to interrogation rooms. I was interrogated by an Israeli Intelligence officer dressed in civilian clothing. The officer asked me about the incident and how it had taken place. He also asked me about my relationships with the wanted young men and about my private life, inquiring about the names of my brothers and sisters, about my studies, and other issues. We were detained in the Liaison headquarters until 5:30 pm that day. At that hour, I was released with eight other young men while two others were arrested. I later discovered that these two men were Mu’ayyad Abu-Tammam and Ibrahim ‘Abd-al-Ghani Anis. Both are citizens of Toulkarem camp and were wanted by the Israeli occupation because of their activities in the Palestinian resistance. I alsodiscovered that they were standing with the group of young men but had escaped into the Cafe when the incident occurred. I returned to Toulkarem camp after the Israeli soldiers released me and found out that Muhammad Qouzah had been killed. I had observed his assassination at the location of the incident. The young men had not  confronted the Israeli soldiers with any weapons.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 3 December 2007Signature: Samer Kharyoush