Affidavit No. 1865/2004
2004
I am a resident of al-Dheisheh camp.  In 1997 I married 'Isa Zikri Abu-Faraj and now have twochildren,  5-year-old Ihab and 3-year-old Shayma’. I lived with my husband in an  apartment in abuilding owned by his family. My husband was a worker in  the West Bank. During the Israeliincursions in Bethlehem on 8 March  2002, my husband was with me at home. But when helooked through the  window, he was hit with two bullets shot by an Israeli sniper. He was  shotwithout any justification, just because he looked through the  window. My husband instantly died,and I remained in the apartment with  my two children. Problems started with my 57-year-oldfather-in-law Zikri  'Atallah Abu-Faraj, because of the allowances and assistance given to  themartyrs’ families. My father wanted to be in charge of everything and  as a result my husband’sfamily tried to evict and my children me from  the apartment. But I decided to stay at home.This  difficult situation continued, and my husband’s family severed their  relations with me to theextent that my mother came from al-Doha to bring  food for me. This situation continued, but itbecame aggravated when my  32-year-old brother-in-law Muhammad Zikri Abu-Faraj, proposedto marry me  although he is married and has three children. It was clear that he  wanted to marryme in order to control the martyrs’ family allowance. My  father-in-law received a $4,000 grantfrom the Iraqi President Saddam  Hussein, as well as the President 'Arafat grant and thePilgrimage grant  from Saudi Arabia, in addition to a part of my husband’s compensation  (5,600shekels). It is worth noting that I do not receive anything of the  monthly salary that the PNAallocated for the martyrs’ families, or the  other assistance received by my husband’s family.Despite that, my mother  and I support my family without receiving any assistance from  myhusband’s family.Of course, I refused the marriage  proposal and the result was my eviction from the apartmenton 1 April  2004. I moved in with my mother (eight persons live in an 100 square  meterapartment). This apartment is rented and not owned by my father.  Moreover, my mother andfather are divorced, and my father lives abroad.  So I burdened my mother all of my problemsand difficulties. She supports  us from her savings that are going to run out while my father, wholives  in the United States, supports us financially from time to time. The  problem is that I am theeldest of my siblings — the males are still  children, and the girls are students. Currently, there isno relation  between my husband’s family and me and they do not give my children any  support,and they rarely see the children. The few occasions they have  seen the children, it happensthrough some relatives who take my children  to visit their father’s family,As for me, I decided to restart my life  by enrolling in al-Quds Open University, and I receivefinancial support  from certain organizations to pay my tuition, while my mother helps  mewhenever she can. I am confronting a problem because my father-in-law  has obtained legalcustody of my children, which means that he is in  charge of all their financial matters. Anotherproblem is that I  contacted HaMoked to submit a case against the Israeli army for  theunprovoked killing of my husband; my father-in-law cancelled the  appointment and registered anew case at HaMoked in his name, in order to  control any compensation given to us,I am a young widow with two  children, and this greatly affects my psychological situation. Mytwo  children suffer as well, especially Ihab, who saw how his father was  killed and still suffersfrom nightmares, in addition to the impact of my  husband’s family hatred of me. As for mydaughter Shayma’, who was 13  months when her father was killed, she is also suffering fromthe loss of  her father. Consequently, I find difficulty in bringing up my children,  who do notunderstand why they do not have a father. The most difficult  consequence for me is that peoplelook at me with pity because I am  widowed, and married men or old-aged men proposemarriage to me. This has  often happened and I reject their proposals.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 24 June 2004