Affidavit No. 6166/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Majed Deifallah Tamim Tamimi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of identity card number 854268109, born on 1 August 1992, university student, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh, Ramallah district, would like to declare the following:I recall that the date was 19 November 2010, a Friday, and confrontations between occupation soldiers and youths from the village were going on in the village. The occupation soldiers were firing various kinds of teargas grenades, in addition to metal bullets covered in a thin layer of rubber. The soldiers were focusing on a two-storey house standing at the edge of the village to the south. At around 4:30 pm the occupation soldiers concentrating on the house fired a propelled gas grenade at the house of Fathi al-Tamimi. During that time I was there with a group of women and relatives of the neighbourhood who were trying to enter the house and save whoever was inside it. Majedah al-Tamimi was choking from the intensity of the gas. When the soldiers saw the people gathering at the house they fired an intense volley of live bullets and gas. Meanwhile, I was standing around 200 metres from the house which the soldiers were focusing on, and during that time I saw a long-range propelled gas grenade made of metal with a thin plastic covering and weighing around 300 grams crash to the ground and then bounce back up and injure my leg at the left knee. I fell straight to the ground and when I looked at my leg I saw bone and torn flesh. A number of people gathered around me and took me to Salfit Public Hospital. An examination revealed there were ten fractures in my leg which required surgery. I remained in hospital for ten days, and from then up until today I still undergo treatment and stay at home and return continuously to the doctor. As a result, I have been unable to attend university, as I study at al-Quds Abu Dis University, where I was in the first year. This has made me incapable of finishing the first year and the second as I lost an entire year of study.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 12 March 2011