Affidavit No. 3012/2006
2006
I am the brother of Tareq Ahmad al-Shami, 22 years old when he was assassinated by the Israeli special squad in an area called al-Zakarna Mountain, near al-Zakarna quarter in Qabatiya town south of Jenin, where my family also lives.The incident took place on Tuesday, 30 May 2006 at around 3:20 am. At that time, my brother Tareq al-Shami was in the company of 'Ala’ Abu-al-Rub, 20 years old, and Muhammad Abu-al-Rub, 22 years old. All three young men are activists in Saraya al-Quds, the military wing of Islamic Jihad, and the three of them were wanted by the Israeli occupying forces. At that time, the three young men were on al-Zakarna Mountain when they heard a movement in their vicinity. They were suspicious of the movement and started moving from that area.As the three young men were walking in a narrow alley among houses under construction, and as they left the alley, they were surprised by the presence of four people wearing civil uniforms and carrying weapons. The distance between the three young men and the other group was less than 30 metres. My brother Tareq shouted, “Who are you?” and fired one bullet toward them. The four people, who later on were revealed as belonging to an Israeli special forces squad, opened fire toward the three young Palestinian men. A bullet hit my brother Tareq in the right of his abdomen, 'Ala’ Abu-al-Rub was hit with bullets and shrapnel in the hands and face, while Muhammad Abu-al-Rub escaped.Tareq and 'Ala’ fell on the ground, and three of the Israeli special squad men came closer to where Tareq and 'Ala’ were lying on the ground, while the fourth followed Muhammad Abu-al-Rub without managing to arrest him. The three Israelis kicked my brother Tareq on his stomach and he yelled out from pain. Then one of them shot a bullet at Tareq’s face from a distance of not more than one metre and Tareq immediately died. The Israeli special squad members did the same with the injured 'Ala’ Abu-al-Rub, who put his hands on his face, which was bleeding as a result of the first injury. They also kicked him in his abdomen and other parts of his body, but he did not shout and pretended that he was dead. Despite that, the squad men fired seven bullets at 'Ala’s right leg and then left the scene of the incident straightaway.It seems that there were other activists deploying in the same area, who, directly after the Israeli army and the squad members left, arrived at the scene of the incident. Under extreme danger, the Palestinian men carried 'Ala’ Abu-al-Rub to Jenin Governmental Hospital. As for my brother Tareq, he was carried by an ambulance to the same hospital after approximately half an hour.My family and I learned about the incident and my brothers, including me, hurried to the hospital. I saw my brother Tareq in the hospital’s morgue. I looked at him and saw that he had been hit by a bullet in the face, near his nose, and by another in his abdomen. It seems that the shrapnel had penetrated his chest and abdomen.As for 'Ala’ Abu-al-Rub, he received first aid treatment and left the hospital in the company of other activists from Saraya al-Quds, because they were afraid that the Israeli army might raid the hospital and arrest 'Ala’.This is what took place at the scene of the incident. My brother Tareq al- Shami was highly wanted by the Israeli army because of being an activist in Saraya al-Quds. He had previously been arrested and had spent a year and a half in administrative detention from 15 October 2004 until 15 April 2006. As soon as he was released from detention, he became a fugitive chased by the Israeli army.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 5 June 2006Signature: Muhammad al-ShamiName not withheldField researcher: Tareq al-Haj Mahmoud