Affidavit No. 3947/2007
2007
On 10 October 2007, I was with my friend Sufiyan Qandil, who is wanted by the Israeli authorities, and other friends, ‘Ammar Taysir, Muhammad Fatayer and Muhammad Rawhi, who like me, are not wanted. We were all gathered at an open square of 70square metres, located inside the old city of Nablus and referred to as Bab al-Saha.It was around 1:00 am. We had been there for ten minutes and I was carrying Sufiyan Qandil’s weapon and standing next to two rocks at the west side, near a side road. Muhammad al-Takrouri was taking photos of me holding the weapon. MuhammadFatayer was standing next to him. We were laughing and imitating several Hamas characters. Sufiyan and ‘Ammar were standing in the middle of the square, approximately six metres southeast of us.After less than ten minutes of taking photos with me holding the weapon, we were surprised by a multi-coloured light that was directed at us in the middle of the square.That light was accompanied by heavy shooting, and ‘Ammar’s saying that he was hurt. I looked at him, and because of the light I could see blood pouring heavily from his chest. Sufiyan immediately tried to carry him, and while he was doing so tens of gunshots were fired at Bab al-Saha, the place where we were gathered. At that minute I felt the bullets pass by me and some hitting the ground. Within seconds I heard Sufiyan screaming and saying that he was hurt.Because of the shooting I was very confused and didn’t know what to do. I felt I was going to die, and so ran to the west speechless and in great panic, carrying Sufiyan’s weapon. After I ran for 100 metres, many young men arrived and asked me what was happening, but I could not say a word and I just pointed to the east. After I had run about 150 metres I stopped, and by then the sound of the bullets had ceased. Thereafter many young men went to the site of the incident. After less than two  minutes they came back carrying ‘Ammar and announcing his martyrdom. In the meantime, a Palestinian ambulance arrived and carried ‘Ammar - according to the crew - to the Rafidiya hospital in Nablus.As for Sufiyan, I learned from the rest of my friends that he had been hit by two gunshots on the bottom of his heel and was carried to an unknown place by some young men, but that his wound was not serious. As for the gunfire we were subjected to without prior warning and which led to the martyrdom of ‘Ammar, as well as the injuring of Sufiyan, and slight wounds to the right hand of Muhammad al-Takrouri, I did not see the shooters. I am certain, however, that the bullets were shot at us from the north side, as it was the only side opposite to where we were standing.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 14 October 2007.Signature: Muhammad Abu-ShamatField researcher: Yousef Qawariq