Affidavit No. 2044/2004
2004
On  Sunday, 7 November 2004, I was at my workplace in 'Abd-al-'Afou gas  station, located on Jenin-Nablus Street. Exactly at 5:45 p.m., I saw a  black new model jeep enter the gas station from the direction of Jenin.  This jeep stopped in front of the gas pump. I approached it and looked  inside, where I saw four young men whom I do not know. The young man who  was sitting beside the driver asked me to fill it up with 20 shekels  worth of fuel. I came closer to take the money and saw that this man had  a weapon. Then I immediately realised that these men were armed and  perhaps wanted by the Israeli army. That day was the 24th day of  Ramadan; not many people were out because most were in their homes  taking their iftar (breaking of the fast). I filled the car with fuel  and the jeep left.No sooner  was the jeep four metres away when I saw a grey Volkswagen, but I did  not notice the plate number. This second car was coming very quickly  from the south (the Jenin entrance) and it was driving opposite to the  traffic and stopped in front of the jeep carrying the four young men,  impeding it from driving ahead. All this happened while I was in the gas  station, watching what was happening. Without notice or warning, and  very quickly, I saw four weapons stick out of the Volkswagen car,  shooting at the jeep through the windows. I hid behind the gas pump  while firing continued towards the jeep for one minute. The distance  between the jeep and the Volkswagen car was less than one metre and the  distance between me and the scene was less than four metres.Then I  saw five persons in civilian dress get out of the Volkswagen and  continue to shoot at the jeep. I was watching with amazement and fear  for what was going on. I realised that the men who were firing were from  the Israeli Special Squad, especially after I heard them shouting in  Hebrew. Most of the members of the Israeli Special Squad were wearing  blue jeans and light shirts of different colours.Out of  great fear, I crawled on my stomach and went to a special room located  in the station, three metres behind where I was standing. The gun firing  stopped and then I thought that some people were walking in the station  and approaching me. Three of the Squad members entered the room where I  was hiding and they aimed their guns towards me. One of them was tall,  thin, with soft black hair, and in his mid-20s. They started shouting  loudly in my face, in Arabic and Hebrew, “Don’t move, don’t lift your  head, if you do we will fire at you.” Then these three men ordered me to  stand and lift my hands up and turn my face towards the wall. I did  what they ordered. Then the tall man with black hair broke the glass of  the window and the items in the office, then kicked me hard at my feet,  causing me to fall to the ground. After that, they turned the electric  current off in the station and took me to another room located behind  the room where they found me. The Israeli Squad members were behaving  like mad people, shouting and breaking the furniture. They were also  talking all the time on their wireless apparatuses in Hebrew, which I do  not understand.After 10  minutes, a group from the Israeli army reached in the area. I knew that  when I saw an Israeli soldier in the military uniform coming into the  room to where the squad members had moved me. The Israeli soldier  ordered me in Arabic to stand with my face towards the wall. The soldier  was standing with the other Squad members inside the room, talking in  Hebrew. This soldier asked me if anything happened to me with the  Israeli army and I answered no, and asked him to let me smoke a  cigarette, and he allowed me to do that.After  five minutes, one of the Israeli Special Squad members came back to me,  the same tall person with black hair, and led me towards a military jeep  known to us by the name “Aziza,” which means dear. He put me in the  back, amid a group of soldiers, and beside the aforementioned Special  Squad member. At that moment, I realised that they were going to arrest  me, and so I requested them to let me close the fuel room. No sooner had  I requested this when one of the soldiers seized my head and insulted  me with a curse word [the word is reserved with the researcher] and hit  my head on the floor of the military jeep. Then the soldier handcuffed  my hands with plastic cuffs to the back and blindfolded my eyes. Then  the jeep started to head north towards Jenin City.After  driving for 20 minutes, according to my estimation, the jeep stopped and  the soldiers ordered me to get down from the jeep and made me sit on an  asphalt road. After half an hour, the soldiers took me on foot to a  place four minutes away, during which the soldiers were laughing at me  and striking against me with the aim of scorning me. They made me sit on  earthy ground for a period of time, and then moved me to another  asphalt ground, and so the situation continued, taking me from one place  to another until three hours after my arrest I reached a tent  containing an iron bed. At midnight, according to my estimation, an  Israeli soldier called Jamal, I knew his name by hearing the soldiers  talk, entered the tent and started asking me questions such as “what did  the Israeli soldiers do?,” and “where is your identity card?,” “What  are the names of your sons and daughters?," and similar questions. Then  he said, “Now, 'Asem sleep on the bed” and I answered “Why? I have  nothing to do with anything that happened.” This soldier left without me  seeing him because I was still blindfolded and handcuffed, and I only  could see a little when I looked down. Having my hands cuffed to my back  this whole time caused severe pain in my shoulders.At around  12:15 a.m. on 8 November 2004, one of the soldiers took me from the  tent and we walked together for about seven minutes and then he put me  in a car that drove me around for 10 minutes. Then the soldier got me  out, uncuffed my hands, and unblindfolded my eyes. I saw two Israeli  soldiers and a lot of machinery and armoured cars, but I did not know  where I was. When I asked the soldiers that, one of them told me in  Hebrew, “Go away from here.” Although I repeated this questions many  times, the soldiers refused to answer my question and told me to leave  the place immediately. I started to walk on an asphalt street and after  10 minutes, I saw on the left a village and I knew that I was near  al-Jalama village and that I had been in the Israeli military camp. I  called one of my friends in Jenin with my mobile, which the Israeli  soldiers did not seize, and told him my whereabouts. He asked me to go  al-Jalama village, where I found somebody waiting for me. He took me to  his home, where I stayed until the early morning when I returned to  Jenin, directly to the gas station.There I  found out that four young Palestinian men had been martyred: Fadi  Ighbariyya, Muhammad Masharqa, Amin Abu-Kamel, and Mahmoud 'Ala’ al-Din.  These young men were from the Jenin Refugee Camp and were activists  with the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades and Islamic Jihad. They were the same  four young men who were in the black jeep. It is worth noting that no  confrontation happened between these young men and the Israeli Special  Squad members. Moreover, shooting at the young men took place without  any warning. I have suffered for two days from severe pains in my  shoulders and from a very bad psychological state, resulting from  witnessing the killings before my eyes.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 20 November 2004Signature: 'Asem 'Aref Muhammad Jarrar