Affidavit No. 2337/2005
2005
I am from  Barta’a village located behind the Separation Wall in Jenin  Governorate. The citizens of this village enter and exit it through an  iron gate (Gate No. 5) located at the eastern entrance of the village.  Recently, while I was coming back from Jenin to my village, the Israeli  soldiers who were present at the gate asked for my permit and the car’s  license. After they verified them, the soldiers asked me to go back,  telling me that I cannot go by car to Barta’a. I am a taxi driver. I was  surprised and when I asked a soldier about the reason for preventing  the car from passing through the gate, he told me that the car is not  registered in my name and that it is registered in another person’s name  from Zibda village in Jenin Governorate, adding that from now on I will  not be allowed to pass by car unless it is registered in my name. For  five consecutive days, I was not allowed to pass through the gate to  Barta’a. Every night I parked the car at its owner’s place in Zibda and  then went to my village through the gate and next day I went to Zibda,  took the car and used it to make my living. After five days, after the  period from 1/5/05 – 5/5/05, the decision was annulled and I and other  taxi drivers who work on cars not registered in their names were allowed  to go through the above-mentioned gate.But that  was not suitable for us. Currently, the soldiers at Barta’a gate  thoroughly inspect my car and others’ cars on a daily basis upon our  return to Barta’a. The soldiers start by ordering the passengers to get  down from the car and stand beside the road. Then the brutal inspection  process starts. Two soldiers completely dismantle the internal parts of  the car including the car floor, tableau, doors from inside and anything  that may be dismantled. Even the seats are untied. After that, the  cover of the car motor is opened and thoroughly inspected. Then a huge  dog is allowed to enter into the car to make the second round of  inspection. In case the passengers have bags, the soldiers open these  bags and mess up their contents, whatever they are. Afterwards, the  soldiers inspect the passengers’ ID cards and their special permits to  go through the gate and then we are permitted access through the gate.  The process takes two to three hours which creates a traffic jam at the  gate. Only public cars (taxis) are inspected. Moreover, we taxi drivers  are not permitted to go past other cars in case we are carrying to the  hospital a sick person or a woman who is going to give birth. If any one  of us goes past another car at the gate, he will have to pay a high  fine and both the car and the driver will be detained.Really,  we the citizens of Barta’a live under very hard circumstances due to the  conditions imposed on us by the Separation Wall. I would also like to  mention that during the last period three male soldiers and three blond  female soldiers (of Russian origin) are continuously present at the  gate. Their conduct is bad, ethically, morally and humanely. To increase  our sufferings, two other black female soldiers of Ethiopian origin  were brought to work on the gate. These two new soldiers treat the  Palestinians in a very bad manner and complicate and lengthen the  inspection procedures.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 23 April 2005