Affidavit No. 2067/2004
2004
On  Sunday, 7 November 2004, at 4:30 in the evening, I called my 18-year-old  nephew Mahmoud Salah-al-Din. Mahmoud was wanted by the Israeli army  because of his activities with the Al-Aqsa Martyrs’ Brigades in the  Jenin City and camp. I asked him to come to my home that is located near  his in al-Marah quarter in Jenin, and bring bread with him to his  mother. Actually, after five minutes, he came in a jeep with three other  armed young men. These young men were Muhamad Masharqa, Fadi Ighbariyya  and Amin Abu-al-Kamel. All of them were wanted by the Israeli army. I  asked them to sit but they didn't and left instead. Then while I was at  home watching the TV at 5:45 in the evening, I heard sound of heavy  firing in the area, but I could not identify which direction the sound  of shooting was coming from. I then felt that something had happened to  my nephew Mahmoud Salah-al-Din.I called  him to reassure myself and to know where the shooting was taking place.  Mahmoud’s mobile rang many times, but he did not answer. I called many  times, but still he did not answer. I felt more worried about him while  the firing continued, and consequently I went out to see what was going  on. On my way, I was told that the Israeli army and the Israeli Special  Forces were in 'Abd-al-'Afou Gas Station, located one kilometre away  from my home at the south entrance of Jenin on Jenin-Nablus Street. I  also found out that the jeep in which my nephew and his friend came to  my home was parked where shooting was taking place. I immediately went  to the scene in my car. As I reached nearby Jenin Municipality, at  approximately 600 metres from Abd-al-'Afou gas station, I saw many  Israeli jeeps, including big jeeps known to us as “Aziza,” standing in  that area. So I turned to al-Sika Street, which overlooks 'Abd-al-'Afou  Gas Station. I drove my car over that street above Nablus-Jenin Street  to the west, although it was dangerous because I was driving without  lights in order to avoid being seen by the Israeli army.From  there, and from the top of the hill at a distance of 30 metres from  'Abd-al-'Afou Gas Station, I saw a white Volkswagen vehicle in front of  the jeep with my nephew Mahmoud Salah-al-Din inside. The front side of  the jeep was pointing towards the street because Mahmoud had filled it  with petroleum from the station and was about to drive off. I saw also  many jeeps in that area, where the electricity was cut off. It was  around 6:00 in the evening when all the military cars started to leave  towards Jenin, including the white Volkswagen.When the  last jeep left, I immediately went to the gas station, and I was the  first to reach it as I was on the nearby hill. It was very shocking when  I reached the station. I saw the two doors of the jeep on the driver's  side, where Mahmoud was sitting, were opened. As I approached closer, I  saw Amin Abu-Kamel lying on his back on the ground near the back right  wheel of the jeep. He was dead as a result of being shot in the head and  many parts of his body. I turned him on his back and found that his  pants were down to his knees, and Muhammad Masharqa was lying beside him  with his face on the ground. He was also dead, as he sustained many  injuries in the head and other parts of his body. As for Fadi  Ighbariyya, he was lying with his back on the ground near the front door  of the car on the driver's side, and part of his brain was on the  ground. He also was dead.I  continued looking for my nephew Mahmoud, whom I found in front of the  jeep, lying on his back. I started examining his body, and found that he  was injured in the front side of the head with an exit wound in the  back. His brain was on the ground, and in addition hesuffered  many injuries in the neck, feet and chest. He was bleeding heavily, and  his pants were down to his feet. I started shouting and saying Allah wa  Akbar [God is great]. After a very short time, many Palestine Red  Crescent Society ambulances, citizens, and journalists reached the  place, and took many photos of me while I was yelling and crying as I  was carrying Mahmoud Salah-al-Din. The four martyrs were carried to  Jenin Government Hospital by the ambulances.It became  evident later that Mahmoud Salah-al-Din and his friends were attacked  by an Israeli Special Squad, which reached the place in the white  Volkswagen bus. This vehicle blocked the way of Mahmoud Salah-al-Din's  jeep. From a distance of less than one metre, intensive fire was opened  on these martyrs, as told to me by the eyewitness and gas station worker  'Asem Jarrar, who was detained for several hours and then released. On  the next day, we buried Mahmoud Salah-al-Din in the Martyrs’ cemetery in  the eastern neighbourhood in Jenin. It is worth noting that no curfew  was imposed on Jenin and there was no presence of the Israeli army  before the incident. The only thing is that a reconnaissance Israeli  plane was seen hovering over Jenin since the morning of that day.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 30 November 2004Signature: Nidal Mustafa Yousef Saqallah