Affidavit No. 1723/2004
2004
My family  owned hundreds of dunums of agricultural lands in Abu Dis, located to  thesoutheast of Jerusalem. Since the occupation of the Palestinian  territories in 1967, the Israelioccupation authorities confiscated vast  areas of the town lands, and we as a family lost vastareas of our  agricultural lands. Only 16 dunums of fertile agricultural lands located  west ofthe town are left for us. Twenty days ago, Israeli machinery,  bulldozers and excavators cameto this land and started excavating our  land in preparation for constructing what is called theSeparation Wall  between the Palestinian territories and the occupation state. Later on,  it wasrevealed that this Wall, according to the present plan, will  separate the land which we own inthat western area and confiscate part  of it for the benefit of the Wall. Consequently, fourdunums will be  behind the Wall, either confiscated or isolated so that we cannot use  it,whether for agriculture or by building on it.The lands affected by the Wall are  owned by 32 persons who depend on it for theirlivelihood, especially  under the difficult economic circumstances and their loss of their  jobs,by cultivating it with winter agriculture. As a result of the  Israeli measures, these lands losttheir financial value and only  remained their moral value as they are inherited from fathersand  grandfathers, and are considered a source of family power according to  the Palestiniansociety tradition. It is also considered of great value  as it helps families with their needs aspeople depend on it during their  marriage or building for their sons when they get married.It is  doubtless that the construction of the wall will transform the towns of  Abu-Dis, al-'Eizariyya and al-Sawahra al-Sharqiyya into enclaves similar  to prisons, controlled by theoccupation forces. These forces will be  responsible for entering and exiting to and fromthese lands through  gates, and maybe through only one gate like the one in al-Shayyah.