Affidavit No. 1988/2004
2004
I was  living in Jericho and a member of the Palestinian Preventive Security  Forces during the four years of the outbreak of Al-Aqsa intifada. During  these four years, the Israeli forces were breaking into the West Bank  cities from time to time, although most of the Palestinian cities were  under Israeli occupation. As Jericho was considered one of the calmest  Palestinian cities, many men wanted by the Israeli occupying forces  sheltered there despite the fact that a number of them had been  assassinated in the city.On 8  August 2004, at about 9:30 pm, a number of young men from Ramallah who  were living in Jericho had gathered. Several of these young men were  wanted by the Israeli forces, among them 'Amer 'Aydiyya, from Al-Am'ari  Refugee Camp, south of Ramallah; Hatem Abu-Halima from Ramallah; and a  colleague of mine and brother to 'Amer, Jaber 'Aydiyya. We gathered in  front of the Sara Net Café located on Palestine Street behind the  Jericho football stadium that was owned by Hatem Abu-Halima.At about  9:45 pm, while we were standing in front of the Net Café, a white  Volkswagen Caravelle, carrying bags on its roof, stopped nearby. We  thought that this car was coming from the bridge as it was carrying  bags. I saw the car but I did not heed it any attention. All of a  sudden, the car’s doors opened and a number of armed occupying forces  soldiers in civilian dress got out of that car. They aimed their  automatic guns directly at us all and without any warning, fired at us  with live ammunition. I saw several men fall down, killed or wounded. I  looked at Jaber, who was standing beside me and shouting that he was  injured. I also saw 'Ayed Abu 'Aydiyya had fallen to the ground and was  not moving, and bleeding heavily from his chest.Immediately,  the Israeli soldiers came to the scene and cuffed our hands behind us  with plastic cuffs and forced us to lie down on the ground. They then  led us inside the Net Café while the wounded men remained bleeding  outside. The Israeli soldiers tried to give first-aid to those who were  wounded, including Jaber, who was wounded in his legs, while 'Amer died  immediately. After around half an hour, the Israeli soldiers blindfolded  us and took us in their cars to an unknown place.The  Israeli soldiers refused my repeated request to observe the situation of  40-year-old Hatem Abu-Halima, as he was suffering from a brain stroke  and diabetes, and his health was very bad. Finally, we arrived to  Benjamin Detention Camp in Bitouniya, northwest Ramallah. In the  detention camp, the situation of Abu-Halima was getting worse. I was  detained for 13 days, and after investigation I was released. Jaber  'Aydiyya affirmed to me that his brother 'Amer died on the spot,  immediately after he was shot with several bullets in the chest and  abdomen. Jaber himself was shot in the legs and was transferred to  Hadassa Hospital in East Jerusalem, and then he was released where he  completed his treatment in al-Sheikh Zayed Hospital in Ramallah.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 25 September 2004Signature: Hamza Muhammad 'Abdallah al-Sheikh