Affidavit No. 2327/2005
2005
I am a  citizen from Kufr Ra'i village located in Jenin Governorate. I am also  one of the candidates in the Change and Reform List, close to the  Islamic parties, for the local elections that are going to take place on  Thursday 5 May 2005. On 27 April 2005, I learnt from some of my  relatives who live in Seida village located to the west of Kufr Ra'i  that my agricultural lands (40 dunums planted with 180 olive trees) have  been set afire the same day. Next day, I went to my lands to see what  had happened. To my surprise, I found that all the trees had been burnt  and damaged by a huge fire.Immediately,  I informed the Palestinian police in Kafr Rai’ about the incident. A  policeman with an official from the Ministry of agriculture went to  assign the land and record the damages. The Palestinian policeman  collected the facts from the neighbours who live at a distance of only  20 meters from my land, which is considered Seida land. Many of these  neighbours said that they had seen in the evening of the day of the  incident young man, his face uncovered, wearing black clothes burn the  land. At the beginning, the neighbours thought that the person was the  land owner and that he was burning the grass. Then they saw the same  person burning several parts of my agricultural lands. To their surprise  the fire reached the olive trees and burned one after another. Many  people from Seida village helped to extinguish the fire and informed me  about the incident.As for  me, I can not accuse anybody. I am a very strong Islamic candidate and  have many supporters. Following the incident, all the political forces  running for the elections in Kufr Ra'i issued a statement condemning  what had happened to my lands. It is surprising that this incident took  place during the election campaign when the competition was very hot  between the Change and Reform List (close to Hamas) and Kufr Ra'i  Martyrs List (close to the Fateh Movement), I believe that the person  who burned my land wanted to create clashes between the two parties and  increase the tension between them. I cannot accuse a person or a party  of committing this act due to the lack of adequate evidence.Many  violations took place during the election campaign in Kufr Ra'i. For  example, I have accurate and certain information that members of the  Palestinian Intelligence Forces of the PNA have participated in drafting  many of the elections statements issued by Kufr Ra'i Martyrs List and  these members have distributed these statements in the village streets.  Moreover, in the night of 3 May 2005 there were several shootings by  persons close to the PNA while they were driving their cars in the  village and calling for the election of the Kufr Ra'i Martyrs List.  Furthermore, the so-called Ghazi Jamil Dalla Milhem who was responsible  for the ballot center participated in the campaign for the interest of  the Independent Unified Kufr Ra'i Martyrs List, which is close to Fateh,  in addition to him being the spokesperson of this list. We appealed  against that to the Central Committee for Local Elections in Ramallah.  The response was that that person should apologize to the Central  Committee for Local Elections and for all the lists. But that person has  not done that and we do not want that from him. Moreover, Kufr Ra'iMartyrs  List has distributed invitation cards to the citizens of Kufr Ra'i to  participate in a festival to be held on the premises of Kufr Ra'i  Martyrs Block on the night of 4 May 2005, violating one of the most  important conditions of campaigning that requires stopping all the  campaigning activities a day prior to the ballot day. I ask God that  voting takes place tomorrow without any violations.