Affidavit No. 3942/2007
2007
My name is Sa’id ‘Abdallah Tafesh, 35 years of age. I work at the General Intelligence Agency, and am the father of four children. At around 10:30 pm on Tuesday, 13 November 2007, when I was at my home in al-Tanour quarter, east of the city of Rafah, the bell rang and my wife went to open the door. About ten masked persons rushed into my home; some were dressed in black suits and others were wearing civilian clothes. They were carrying arms, Kalashnikofs, which I am familiar with. My wife started screaming, and I saw one of them pushing her to the wall and insulting her with very bad words. They held me and put a black cover over my eyes and took me outside the house, and into a car. We then drove for about ten minutes.When the car stopped, I was taken to a place where I heard someone say, “take him to the room,” and then I heard an iron gate being closed. After about five minutes I heard the door open and suddenly about three persons assailed and beat me. I knew the number of them from their voices, as they insulted me with bad words. They beat my legs with sticks and pipes for about half an hour, and then others rotated in, beating me several times in the same way. I knew this from the different voices telling me to lift my legs, and they hit the bottom of my feet for an hour and a half. They also attacked my knee with sticks, and used their hands and legs all over my body. Then one of them put his hands on my feet and threatened to shoot, saying he would take me to al-Mashtal Interrogation Centre if I did not cooperate with them.Two persons asked whether I was in contact with anyone at the Security Service in Ramallah, and about reports concerning Hamas which the Security Service sent when I was working with them prior to the coup d’etat. They also asked if I was carrying arms while attending the third anniversary of the death of President ‘Arafat, and who my friends were in the Fateh movement. I answered that I did not carry any arms at the memorial, that my work had not included reporting on anyone, and that my participation at the memorial, like thousands of other people there, was not a crime. So they beat the bottom of my feet, while my legs were held up and tied to a chair. Then, they showered my feet with water, and hit them again for around an hour continuously. I then fainted because of the severe pain, and passed out for about two hours. After that I found myself in the Abu-Yousef al-Najjar hospital, in the east end of Rafah, where I was treated for bruises and trauma caused by the beating. I stayed at the hospital for a full day, after which my brother came and drove me home that night.