Affidavit No. 7240/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, ‘Adilah Ahmed Yousef ‘‘Asaliyya, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 961233004, born on 2 September 1967, a housewife, and a resident of the Jabalya town, Northern Gaza governorate, would like to declare the following:I live with my family on the ‘‘Asaliyya Street in the Jabalya town in Northern Gaza governorate. An eight-metre-wide dirt road and al-Sharafi citrus grove are opposite our home. At around 6:30 am on Sunday, 11 March 2012, my son Ayyoub (13 years) got up. I prepared breakfast before he left for his remedial lessons, which he attended at a charitable society (Ajyal Society for Innovation and Development) near to our home. My son Ayyoub was in the seventh grade (first preparatory stage). He used to attend remedial lessons in the morning, and then go to the afternoon school. Before my son Ayyoub left the house, I gave him a loaf of bread and a potato to eat on his way to the charitable society. It was 7:00 am sharp.About five minutes after my son Ayyoub had left, I heard the sound of a strong explosion near to our home. I immediately went out to see what had happened. As soon as I was out, I saw smoke rising from between the trees on al-Sharafi citrus grove opposite my home. An Israeli reconnaissance aircraft had fired a missile towards the grove. I saw a little child lying on his stomach on the ground. I started to scream, shouted for help, and prayed God to save that child. My other son, Seif al-Islam, as well as several neighbours and residents, arrived after they had heard the explosion and checked on the injured child. He was my nephew Wafi Shawqi ‘Asaliyya (6 years). He sustained light wounds. About 15 minutes after the explosion had occurred, ambulances arrived to the area. Medics confirmed that Wafi sustained shrapnel wounds on the left foot and left shoulder and that his injury was light. An ambulance transported him to hospital. A medic asked if there were other injured persons. Persons who were around said there were not any. Having made sure that there were no casualties, the other ambulance prepared to leave. Having driven for several metres, the ambulance stopped. Medics went out and said they would search the citrus grove to make sure that there were no other injured people. Indeed, a medic got into the grove. Almost two minutes after he searched between the trees, I heard the medic shouting:“There is another child… A martyr… Bring the stretcher.”My son Seif al-Islam and neighbours went to see who the martyred child was.“The martyr is Ayoub ‘Asaliyya.” I heard a neighbour saying.“This is my brother Ayyoub.” I also heard my son Seif al-Islam screaming and calling me.I rushed to the grove where residents of the neighbourhood gathered. I saw my son Ayyoub’s body torn to pieces. The lower part of his body was torn apart. I screamed and wept for the loss of my child. I did never expect that Ayyoub had still been in the area. I left him at my house door and he left for the charitable society to take his remedial lessons. The ambulance transported my son Ayyoub to the hospital. My son Seif al-Islam and my husband went with the ambulance. In the afternoon of the same day, my son Ayyoub was buried in the Beit Lahiya cemetery.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 12 March 2012