Affidavit No. 6109/2011
2011
I work on a seven dunum agricultural land for producing strawberries, which I have rented from the Hamdoun Family. The land is approximately 700 meters away from the northern border of the Gaza Strip at the northwest intersection of Beit Lahiya. It is also located to the west of “Abu-Samra” land in the area where the former settlement of Eli Sinai used to be.I work on the land everyday from 7:00 am to 4:00 pm. It is almost daily that I hear shooting from behind the borders targeting workers in this area. [Following the disengagement], the former Israeli settlement of Eli Sinai, which is approximately 300 meters away from the border, became a site for workers who collect gravel or rubble from destroyed buildings as well as other workers who collect iron and firewood. Since ambulances cannot enter this area without prior coordination with the Israeli army, I have witnessed on many occasions injured workers passing by my land in an attempt to reach a hospital. The Israeli army has been known to fire at anyone approaching the area.On Monday 28 February 2011 at around 9:30 am, I was working on my land when my cousin ‘Umar ‘Arafa ‘Abd-al-Latif Ma’rouf (20 years old), arrived on a cart pulled by a donkey. He is the youngest of my Uncle ‘Arafa’s sons and is unemployed with a wife and a one and a half year old baby. He is not accustomed to working in the site of the former Eli Sinai settlement as he mostly works in harvesting agricultural crops on lands in Beit Lahiya. He comes to this area every seven to ten days to collect a cart load or two of building rubble, which he then sells to merchants for some income. I asked him why he had come to the area that day and he responded that since he hasn’t been able to find work in agriculture, he came to gather a cart or two of building rubble to sell to merchants. I told him that for the past three days I had not seen any gravel or workers collecting rubble in the area. I explained to him that this was due to an escalation in the use of gunfire by the Israeli army as well as the declining prices of these materials. I warned him from going to that area as he might get shot by one of the soldiers stationed on the watch towers behind the border. ‘Umar then told me that his financial situation was in very poor condition and that he did not even have enough money to buy milk for his son Muhammad. He said he would go collect one cart of rubble and sell it to merchants for 10 NIS in order to buy some milk for his son. He then proceeded to head north towards the former settlement of Eli Sinai where he would gather gravel and rubble.After about half an hour, I heard the sounds of intermittent gunfire from the area along the border – from the north to the south. It went on until 11:00 am, after that time two Israeli bulldozers and crossed the border towards the dismantled settlement of Eli Sinai. They stopped at a distance of about 400 meters from the border. I was afraid that the bulldozers and tank would raid my land and start shooting at me, so I left and retreated to an area one kilometer away. There, I stood and observed the bulldozers and tank and waited for them to leave the area in order to return to my land. At around 12:30 pm, they crossed back into Israel. I was worried about my cousin ‘Umar since he had entered that same area and had not come back out. For that reason, I contacted an ambulance and informed them of my cousin’s location. I also told them that I had heard the gunfire and witnessed the incursion of two bulldozers and a tank. After about 15 minutes, an ambulance of the Palestine Red Crescent Society reached me. I informed the paramedics of where I thought my cousin was located and they responded that they needed to coordinate [with Israeli officials] so that they could enter the area. They then contacted the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to coordinate their entry with the Israeli army and search for my cousin. I waited with the paramedics until they heard back from the ICRC.At around 2:00 pm, the ICRC informed the chief of paramedics that the Israeli army had in fact picked up an injured man from the area at around 12:00 pm that day and that the man had died and was going to be handed over to the Palestinian Health Ministry by the Israeli District Coordination Office (DCO). They delivered his body through the Erez Crossing by coordinating with the Palestinian DCO.They also said that his body was at al-Shifa Hospital in Gaza city. Upon hearing this, I immediately went home and informed my Uncle ‘Arafa about what had happened. My brothers, uncles, cousins and I then headed to al-Shifa Hospital, where we found ‘Umar’s body in the morgue. He was injured by a bullet that had entered from his right thigh and exited from the bottom left side of his abdomen. The hospital provided us with an Israeli death certificate that had been issued by the Israeli DCO. My cousins and I then received ‘Umar’s body and buried him in Beit Lahiya Cemetery in northern Gaza Strip. When my cousins went back to the area to claim the donkey and cart, they found the donkey lying dead on the ground some 400 meters away from the border.