Affidavit No. 2799/2006
2006
On 19 February 2006, while inside my three-floor home located in Balata Camp, I heard a loud knocking on the main door. The knocking woke up my 23-member family, including the 12 children. It was 3:30 am. Having heard the loud knocking, my brother 'Isam quickly moved to open the door. Immediately, more than 20 Israeli soldiers had entered the courtyard of our home.Most of the soldiers were wearing masks. They asked for the ID cards and mobiles of the men who were present. Moments later, they gathered all of us in one room located on the second floor. Three soldiers stood guard at the doorway of the room to watch us. The room was too small to accommodate us (not more than 16 square metres for 23 people). The children were crying and the adults were scared and at a loss as to what was happening. From time to time, we heard shooting coming from our house. It was headed in an unknown direction.In the morning, we asked the soldiers to allow us to go to the kitchen to prepare food and milk for the children. They let us have two meals a day; one at 8:00 am and the other at 6:00 pm. Two women were allowed to go to the kitchen to prepare the food. In the evening, the soldiers intentionally turned off the light in the room. This frightened the children and adults.In the evening of the second day, after a long discussion (lasting more than 15 minutes) with the Israeli soldiers, we were allowed to use a small lamp so that we could at least see one another and move around; although it was not easy to move or sleep in such a crowded place. The formula (Materna) for my eight-month-old nephew, Samir, ran out. This formula was used as a supplement because Samir's mother's breast milk was not sufficient. We asked the soldiers to let us go out and buy milk but they strongly refused our request.We had been detained in the room for two consecutive days when the soldiers standing guard outside the room left at 1:30 am. We waited a half-an-hour after they left; as we did not hear any movement in the home, we left the room in which we were detained. We found our confiscated ID cards and mobiles. One Nokia mobile was missing. Then we inspected our home and found that the furniture was thrown on the floor and some of the windows were broken.We lived through a real tragedy in that room where we were piled on top of each other with little food. We were also not able to sleep or pray because of the lack of space. Moreover, the children were yelling and crying the entire time and our movement was restricted. We could only leave the room when we wanted to use the bathroom. In addition to me, three of my brothers were married.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 27 February 2006Signature: Jalal Ahmad Khalil