Affidavit No. 2802/2006
2006
On 19 February 2006, I was with my family, consisting of six persons, in our apartment located on the third floor of a building of seven floors in Balata Camp and in which 29 persons live. At 3:00 am, while we were all sleeping, loud knocking on the outer door woke me up. The knocking was accompanied by a voice saying in Arabic, “Open the door, army, army.” I opened the outer door of the building by pressing on the electric button from my apartment. Then I went to my apartment door to know why the soldiers wanted to enter the flat. As I opened the door, I saw more than 15 Israeli soldiers climbing the stairs. Most of them were masked except for one. Immediately, they entered my apartment, closed the door and went up to the upper floors of the building.In the morning, at approximately 7:00 am, I looked through my home window on the eastern side overlooking a secondary street to find out what was going on. I saw the son of our neighbours, Ibrahim, sitting on the roof of his home and after half an hour, I saw his friend Mohammad An-Natour, whom I know very well, joining him and sitting with him on the roof. I saw them sitting for a while and sometimes getting down to Ibrahim’s home. I also saw them drinking tea several times on the roof. I could see that because our home is exactly opposite their home and only 20 metres away from it to the eastern side.At approximately 12:30 pm, I heard between two to three bullets being fired in rapid succession. Immediately, I looked through the window and saw that Ibrahim and Mohammad had fallen on the ground and that Ibrahim’s legs were toward the north while his brother Othman was trying to pull him. At that moment, I knew that the shooting had targeted them, and I also realised that the shooting was taking place from the soldiers who were positioned on the fifth floor at my son Ashraf’s apartment. I say the fifth floor because I knew that they climbed up the stairs and knocked at the door of my son’s apartment.I would like to mention here that ten minutes before I heard the shooting, I saw Ibrahim and Mohammad coming up to the roof and getting down and drinking tea. Also, I did not see any weapons on them, and there were no confrontations in the area between the camps’ residents and the Israeli soldiers. In regard to the Israeli soldiers who shot at the three young men, after shooting at them, they stayed in our building for around two days before they withdrew. After eight hours of their withdrawal, the Israeli soldiers came back and occupied my son’s apartment for another day.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 1 March 2006Signature: Basima Issa