Affidavit No. 5089/2009
2009
In 1999, I constructed a house on a piece of land, which I had bought in 1982, in al-Ashqariyya neighbourhood in the town of Beit Hanina, north of the city of Jerusalem. I built the house to accommodate my family, which is comprised of six members. I also planned to build other storeys on the house for my children in the future. Construction of the house cost me approximately USD 60,000.My family and I resided in our house for ten years. In February 2008, I received a demolition order from the Jerusalem municipality, claiming that I had built my house without having obtained the required construction permit from the municipality of the occupying authorities. I also received a financial fine of ILS 28,000. I paid the fine in instalments. It should be noted that the fine does not cancel the house demolition order.In April 2008, I filed a petition before the municipal court against the administrative demolition order and the fine. After my lawyer had filed my submissions, the judge gave me a respite of one year to obtain a permit from the competent bodies at the municipality of the occupying authorities.I tried my best to convince officials at the municipality to grant me a permit. I said that my house was located within a Palestinian residential neighbourhood and was away from Israeli communities. However, they rejected my application and handed me a second demolition order. This occurred in December 2008. When I returned to the court, the judge confirmed the house demolition order, claiming that the court had given me a respite of one year to obtain a permit, which I did not get.However, he said he would bring in some workers to help me. Indeed, four Israeli workers arrived. They threw pieces of furniture out of the house in a harsh and careless manner, damaging most of it.Half an hour later, when I saw the bulldozer starting to demolish my house, I lost my temper, especially because most of the furniture was still inside the house. I sat on the floor, refusing to leave. The soldiers and policemen grabbed me by my shoulders and pulled me outside of the house. Confrontations took place between my children and the occupying troops and border guard officers as they tried to prevent the bulldozer from demolishing the house. During this time, I lost consciousness and I was taken to the emergency health centre close to my house. I sustained contusions as a result of having been pulled by the soldiers, and as a result of trying to separate my children from the policemen. My brother was also arrested, ostensibly because he had assaulted the occupying troops.After I returned from the health centre, I found that the municipality employees and police and border guards had left. They had destroyed my house, which had sheltered me and my wife and children. Today, I live in a leased house, the rent of which I cannot afford. The house measures only 70 square metres.