Affidavit No. 7485/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Mahmoud Sharif Mustafa ‘Abd-al-Razeq, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 922910583, born on 12 March 1961, a farmer, and a resident of the Deir Abu-D’eif village, Jenin governorate, would like to declare the following:I am a resident of the Deir Abu-D’eif village. Home to approximately 7,000 people, the village is located at a distance of about five kilometres east of the city of Jenin. I own a piece of agricultural land, measuring about 20 dunums, west of the village. Eight years ago, I constructed an artesian well on my land. I used water to irrigate the crops and I cultivated my land. I grow cucumbers, tomatoes, and other crops. 20 farmers, who support 20 families in the village, worked on the land.At around 7:30 am on Thursday, 7 June 2012, an Israeli military force, including 10 military jeeps and two yellow wheel dozers, arrived at the area surrounding the village. A white jeep, which I knew to belong to the Planning and Zoning Department of the Israeli Civil Administration, accompanied the military force. The bulldozers destroyed several wells around the village. The military force reached my land and well at around 10:00 am. Immediately, a bulldozer started to destroy my water well. A quarrel took place between me and some soldiers as I protested against the destruction of the well. Soldiers assaulted me and pushed me with their hands, throwing me to the ground. At gunpoint, they forced me out of my land, where the water well was being destroyed. Destruction took about 20 minutes. Before they had left the area, the Israeli soldiers imposed a tight military blockade around my land and water well.I quarrelled with the Israeli soldiers. A soldier told me in Arabic that the well was being destroyed because it had been constructed illegally. He said I had not gained possession of a licence from the Israeli occupying authorities to construct a water well. According to the Oslo Agreement concluded between the Palestinian and Israeli sides, the village of Deir Abu-D’eif is classified as Area B. In this area, the Palestinian Authority does not have the power to licence water wells. In fact, I did not receive any demolition notice before my well had been destroyed.In addition to irrigating crops, I used the well for drinking purposes. I also supplied water to several owners of adjacent agricultural land. The well used to supply irrigation water to a total of 40 dunums of nearby agricultural land. The well was 40 centimetres in diameter and 235 metres in depth. Construction cost totalled some 40,000 Jordanian dinars, including digging and water pump, which was also destroyed in the process. In addition, the Israeli bulldozers destroyed water pipelines, electrical wirings, and iron coating.Destruction of water wells in the area took place between 7:30 am until 10:30 am on the same day. In addition to my well, another five were demolished. These included ‘Abd-al-Mun’em Madraj Daraghma’s two wells on his land in Beit Qad village north of Deir Abu-D’eif village east of Jenin city; a well belonging to Ahmad Muhammad al-Qadi; a well belonging to ‘Isam ‘Izat Yasin; and a well belonging to Mahmoud Saleh Hithnawi, a resident of Jenin city. Hithnawi’s well was located on his agricultural land in the village of Deir Abu-D’eifThis is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 7 June 2012