Affidavit No. 2150/2005
2005
At 3:00  p.m. 26 January 2005, while I was at my home in the central area of  Qalqiliya city listening to the news on al-Jazeera, I heard heavy  firing. I moved from the sitting room to the kitchen window, which  overlooks on the street from the north. I saw a brown-grey private car  driving very slowly, surrounded by three armed persons from the front,  back and right sides. They were shouting, “Stop the car and bring the  weapons”. At that moment, I realised that they were from the Israeli  Special Squad, although they were wearing civilian clothing and shouting  in both Hebrew and Arabic. I immediately realised that the driver of  the car was injured and couldn’t control the car. The car ran for a  short distance (around 12 metres) and then crashed into a tree beside  the sidewalk.Despite  that, the Special Squad soldiers did not stop shooting inside the car.  Even when the car stopped, I saw the soldier on the right side open the  four doors of the car and shoot two bullets at the driver and the person  who was sitting beside him. Then these soldiers pulled out the driver,  the man in the passenger seat, and a third who was sitting in the back  seat from the car. Each soldier dragged a person with his face on the  ground for a distance of 12 metres and then put them inside a shop  nearby the place of the shooting. The Special Squad soldiers were then  stoned, and I heard them asking for support from other soldiers. After  few minutes, many patrol cars arrived to the scene and then those  Special Squad soldiers who were shooting at the persons in the car got  in an old white Volkswagen, which I saw behind them, and then they  withdrew from the place.I then  realised that two of the three persons who were in the car were killed  while they were inside the car, though I did not know the destiny of the  third. I also immediately recognised these two young men from their  shapes, and later I confirmed that they were Maher Harb, Muhammad Khamis  and Yihiya Nazzal. After an hour, I knew that only Maher Harb was  killed, while Muhammad Khamis sustained serious injuries and Yihiya  Nazzal sustained medium injuries. It is worth noting that these soldiers  fired at anybody who tried to approach the scene. I also saw an  ambulance come from the west, but due to the gunfire it stopped and  could not proceed. I would also like to mention the Special Squad  soldiers were carrying short weapons (advanced M-16). As for me, I was  only seven metres away from the scene and the operation lasted only  around five minutes or a little more.