Affidavit No: 7592/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned Khalid ‘Emad ‘Abdallah Ziadah, holding ID card 85236622, citizenship: Palestinian, born on 21 December 1989, working as worker, resident in Bettilo, Ramallah governorate, would like to declare the following:I remember that at 9:00 pm on Sunday, 29 July 2012, some young men, older men and myself left our villages of Bettilo and Deir ‘Ammar to work in Israel. There were 16 of us including the driver. When we arrived in Ramallah, we boarded a white Ford with an Israeli license and started our trip to al-Za’yyam checkpoint. The car was not wide enough to accommodate all of the passengers and we had to sit on each other’s laps. I was sitting in the middle seat on the lap of a man from the village, Akram Badi’. We did not have permits and we were planning to smuggle ourselves inside to work.We were about 200 metres from the checkpoint, with our Arab driver who has Israeli citizenship and a Ford Transit leading the way to detect any potential military points before we moved. The driver of the spy car contacted our driver and told him police were stationed at the checkpoint and we needed to go back. They were communicating using walkie-talkies. We were at al-Za’yyam checkpoint but did not pass through it. This checkpoint is located to the east of Jerusalem. Our driver was forced to go in reverse when the car suddenly stopped. Other cars were behind him and when he restarted the car, he saw soldiers coming toward us. The driver was in first gear trying to flee. While the car drove about 200 metres the soldiers were following behind shooting ‘dum-dum’ bullets at us. This is the ammunition they were using. They were shooting from behind at the rear and side of the car. The soldiers reached the car door before the driver fled and they held the door but he still managed to run away.Around 200 soldiers from the border guards, the regular army and other special guards who were also armed and wearing grey guard uniforms, were gathering there. The car stopped 200 metres from its starting point and Akram’s head fell on my shoulder. I did not know he was injured because of the situation we were in. I was also injured in the lower part of my right leg from live ammunition. I did not feel it, however, because I had stopped the car by stepping forward and pulling the hand brake.We ran out of the car, the shooting had stopped by then, and we dispersed into the hills although I still did not know that I was injured. I also did not know that someone had died (martyr) and another person was injured. I was not aware of any of this. I ran for about 300 metres and fell to the ground when I felt my injury. I was with Muhammad, the son of the (martyr) Akram, who asked me about his father. I told him he could be behind us. Muhammad is only 19 years old and he worked with his father. Then I looked at my right arm and discovered blood which made me realise that Akram could have been injured too.I went back to the checkpoint, walking in a normal posture without feeling the bullet wound. Upon arrival I found an Israeli ambulance with the army and other forces gathered around it. There were some crowds in the area and while I was at the location, another ambulance was called. The car we had taken was parked in the area and the police, soldiers and guards were around the injured man.Since I was not walking any more but was on the road next to the site of the accident, the Israeli police came to me and asked if I was injured and if I was in the car. I answered yes or rather I told them I was in the mountain and was injured. They took my ID card and brought me to the ambulance. I heard them saying there was a person with a serious injury. We returned to the place where the accident had taken place and saw that they had put an injured person in the Israeli ambulance. It was Akram, who at that point was still alive. I saw that he was breathing and that a bandage had been put around his head because it was bleeding. He died when the ambulance arrived at al-Za’yyam checkpoint. They let me down into another Israeli ambulance and did not allow me in since I do not have Israeli citizenship. I was transferred in a Palestinian ambulance to the Ramallah government hospital which I reached at about 2:00 am. I was diagnosed with an injury from a metal bullet in my lower right leg, and I will be operated on to remove the bullet.I am still in the hospital for treatment. I learned that Ashraf ‘Abdallah Sabti Qadh was also injured because of a dum-dum metal bullet in his shoulder and that his shoulder was totally broken because of the bullet. I would like to note that Akram who is known by this name in the village had an ID card which identified him as Hasan Badi’ Badr al-Tabar, 47.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 30 July 2012,