Affidavit No. 3887/2007
2007
I live with my four family members, including two children. At around 2:00 am on 2 September 2007, there was knock at the door of my house. When I opened it there were a number of armed men, their heads covered with masks and “Preventive Security” written on their shoulders. They demanded my ID card, and I told them that it was at the shop I own and work at, which is located about 200 metres away. As a result they told me to accompany them to the shop, and so we went together. I gave them the ID, and they searched the shop without my permission. They took some of the work I had samples of, which had been used in the electoral campaign of the Reform and Change Front. They also took two computers. I did not ask them why they were seizing these printed materials, nor did they say where they were taking them.They carried the materials to their car and took me to the headquarters of the Preventive Security forces, a place which I already knew. I was not handcuffed or blindfolded. I was immediately taken to a room where four persons asked questions about my work and the things I was designing, in particular those related to Hamas’ Reform and Change Front. I said all that I knew: that I do work for all who come to me; that I was paid for my work; that I did not know any particular names and that this was not important to me so long I received remuneration for any work I did.I spent an hour there, after which I was transferred to a narrow space with a small seat. I was tied to this seat, sitting, with my hands behind me, and a cloth bag was put on my head. I could not see anything. I sat on that chair for around 24 consecutive hours, and was allowed during this time to eat three meals and occasionally go to the toilet. The person who was watching me hit me when I called him “sergeant,” and I was hit with hands when I wanted to drink water. After this time I was taken again for interrogation, which lasted around 20 minutes and where I answered all questions. As happened earlier, I then went back to the same place and situation for almost 12 consecutive hours. Following this I was subjected to another kind of torture, where my hands were tightened behind my back, my head was covered, and I was hoisted up to a high place with my body bent back. I spent around 24 hours like this and was allowed to have three meals and to pray immediately after eating.After that I was brought before the attorney general, whose name I do not know, and they extended my detention for 24 hours. He questioned me about the items they abstracted from my shop, and verified that those items were indeed stolen. It is worth noting that I told the attorney general that I was subject to torture and beatings. I stayed in the stress position (Shabeh) until the next day, which was 4 September 2007, when I was taken to the magistrate’s court and detained along with three others for 15 days. During that period the doctor visited me several times and saw the situation I was in. After the extension I was taken for interrogation once, and then another time when I signed my affidavit. After that I was put in a single cell, until I was released on 18 September 2007, at 2:30 pm. When I was released I asked about the computers and materials they took from me. In response I was told I would receive the computers at the shop, but I do not know when.They accused me of dealing with the Reform and Change Front of Hamas, but I did not have any particular names and so described those I dealt with. I will lodge a complaint with the relevant Palestinian authority because of the torture and the Shabeh that I was subjected to.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 7 October 2007.Signature: Firas HijaziName not withheldField researcher: Zahi Jaradat