Affidavit No. 4990/2009
2009
At around 10:30 pm on 15 June 2009, I was present in my house in my village of „Asira al-Shamaliya. While I was descending the internal staircase, I saw more than five Palestinian Authority patrol vehicles arrive and stop in front of the house. Approximately 20 persons, who were wearing military uniforms and carrying long weapons, stepped out of the vehicles and took position around the house. I also saw many of them entering into the internal yard around the house by entering the main gate in the wall, which had been unlocked.I immediately went outside. When they saw me, a person asked for my name. I answered that my name was „Imad. Then, he asked for my ID card. After asking them what agency they belonged to, he answered that they were from the Palestinian General Intelligence. I requested that he allow me to dress. He did not object and accompanied me. I also requested that I go to the bathroom. He allowed me do so and waited at the door.Then, the General Intelligence officer demanded that I go out to the street. Having walked for several metres along the street, officers placed me on the rear seat of a patrol vehicle and lifted my shirt over my face and head. The patrol vehicle drove towards the village. As I was fully familiar with the village and its roads, I realised that the patrol (as well as the other patrols) had stopped near a house belonging to Fadi Husni Hamarna, about 27-years-old. Less than an hour later, the patrol vehicles withdrew from the area surrounding the house. I do not know what happened afterwards.I stayed in the room until 9:00 am the next day. Though I did not have a watch, I could recognise the time because breakfast was served, and it is distributed at approximately this time. I should note that I had been detained in the al-Jneid Prison by the General Intelligence agency before, so I have had similar experiences previously.After having breakfast, I was taken for interrogation into an office. I was questioned for a period of 10 to 15 minutes. Then, a security officer wearing a civil uniform took me out of the room and subjected me to shabeh. Blindfolded and handcuffed with a piece of cloth behind my back, I was forced to stand with my face against a wall. I was subjected to this position until around 1:00 pm. I was then taken to another room, where I had lunch. Approximately one hour later, I was again subjected to the same previous position of shabeh until 9:00 pm.I was then taken back to the same room, where I stayed until about 10:30 pm. Thereafter, I was interrogated for about half an hour. During the interrogation, my handcuffs and blindfold were removed. Then, I was subjected to another method of shabeh. For a period of one hour, I was forced to lift my hands, which were tied to a metal pipe in the corridor. During the first minute, from underneath my blindfold, I saw Fadi being subjected to the same method of shabeh.“God help us!” Fadi said as I screamed of the pain I felt in my hands.The Interrogation Director arrived minutes later. I had met him before. His name was Abu-„Uday and was about 40 years of age. Immediately, he asked Fadi his name, Fadi replied, and he asked him whether he had performed the evening prayers. Fadi replied he had not. The Interrogation Director ordered a security officer to take Fadi to a room so that could perform the prayers. The Interrogation Director asked me the same question and I was taken to a room. I stayed in that room for three days without any interrogation. During this time, I did not know what was happening with Fadi.At noon on Saturday, I was subjected to shabeh again. I was blindfolded and my hands were tied behind my back with a piece of cloth while I was forced to stand against a wall. I was forced to stand in this position for three days. During this time, however, I sometimes released from shabeh at mealtimes, which coincided with the times of prayers. However, this would depend on the mood of the security personnel.Five minutes later, my iron handcuffs were removed. I was blindfolded and my hands tied with a piece of cloth. At the noon call to prayers, I was brought back to interrogation. The interrogator asked if I had anything to say, but I said I did not. I was then taken to a room to eat. For the next two days, I was not subjected to interrogation or shabeh. At noon on the third day, I was blindfolded and my hands tied behind my back with a piece of cloth. I was also subjected to shabeh with my face against a wall for almost 20 minutes.I was also relocated to a number of rooms during this time. Finally, I settled in room no. one. Until 4 August 2009, I was not questioned or subjected to shabeh. As far as I know, Fadi was not subjected to interrogation or shabeh over this period.On 3 August 2009, six other detainees and I were allowed out for about one hour. Fadi and I walked together. He was in good health. During the walk, Abu-„Uday (the Interrogation Director) told us that we were about to be released. Upon the request of the security officers, Fadi would distribute meals on some days. During this time, Fadi remained in room no. 4.Until the morning of 4 August 2009, Fadi was in good physical and psychological condition. In the afternoon, a security officer came to my room and demanded that I go out and irrigate the garden outside, where some vegetables were grown. Another two detainees were also brought out of room no. four where Fadi was being held. These were Muhammad „Assida, 30 years old and a resident of the village of Til, and Ahmad „Omar, a resident of the city of Nablus. They asked if I had seen Fadi being subjected to shabeh, but I answered I did not. However, they confirmed that Fadi had been forced out of the room at around 12:00 pm and subjected to shabeh. Half an hour later, I was taken back to room no. one. During this time, I did not see Fadi.In the morning of 5 August 2009, I saw an interrogator beside the door of room no. three. He was holding Fadi and forcing him into that room. Over an hour after the interrogator had left, another interrogator brought me out of room no. one and into a cell. I knew the interrogator: his name was Najib. He was about 40 years of age and a resident of the village of Deir Sharaf. I stayed for one hour in the cell, which measured only three square metres and had no pieces of furniture. During this time, I did not have breakfast in protest against my relocation to this cell. Then, Najib took me out to the interrogation room. For ten minutes, he asked me several questions. During this time, I was not handcuffed or blindfolded. Later, Najib demanded that I crouch up and down, which I did for five minutes.“I had a bone fracture in my right leg. A platinum bar is inserted in my leg.” I told the interrogator.He ordered a security officer to subject me to shabeh in the corridor. A security officer tied my hands with a piece of cloth behind my back, blindfolded me, and forced to stand against a wall in the corridor. I moved my head against the wall and tried to remove the blindfold. I tried to see if anyone else was being subjected to shabeh in the corridor.An hour later, I was taken to another cell with a small mattress inside. During this time, I did not know anything about Fadi and Naser. However, I thought that they had been relocated to rooms, as I did not hear their voices. After I stayed for half an hour inside the cell, I was brought to room no. one, where I had been held before. I stayed in this room Friday and Saturday.At 12:00 pm on Sunday, 9 August 2009, I was relocated to room no. two, where I was subjected to shabeh. Also blindfolded, I was forced to stand with my hands tied behind my back. At 1:00 pm (around lunch time), my blindfold and handcuffs were removed for half an hour. Thereafter, the interrogator took me out to the corridor and subjected me to shabeh. About half an hour before the sunset call to prayers, I was brought back to room no. two. During this time, I was not handcuffed nor blindfolded.At 12:00 or 1:00 am, however, I was subjected to another round of interrogation, On my way into the interrogation room, I saw Fadi standing against a wall in the corridor. He was blindfolded and his hands were tied behind his back with a piece of cloth. My interrogation lasted ten minutes.At around 8:00 am, I heard security officer Ibrahim Salahat call Fadi, but no one answered. As I looked through the hole in the door, I saw the security officer hurry out and shout for the interrogator.“Come. He has hanged himself!” Salahat shouted.After a few moments, a physician from the Military Medical Services arrived and examined Fadi. He said that Fadi had died a while earlier, as his dead body was cold.