Affidavit No. 5696/2010
2010
At around 8:00 am on Wednesday 4 August 2010, I went to the Sports City stadium in the Qizan al-Najjar area, south of Khan Younes city, to cover a party organised by the Tuyour al-Jannah music group. I was standing near the gate leading to the Sports City stadium and saw that there was a lot of overcrowding at the gate leading to the grandstands and the playground. Police officers were preventing people from moving from the grandstands to the playground.I took my camera and went to a high spot to photograph the crowds. Whilst I was adjusting the camera settings, I heard someone shout. I turned around and saw a police officer calling me to approach him. “My name is Ahmad Fayyad and I am a correspondent at al-Jazeera Net,” I told the officer. He shouted again so I told him that I was coming down to see him. He was wearing a blue camouflage military uniform. He told me that a police officer, called Tal’at, wanted to talk to me and that he was standing behind the gate. I told the officer that my cousin Hammam was looking after my three children (aged between three and seven years). Like everyone else, I had brought my children with me and bought them tickets to attend the party. I had left them with my cousin Hammam so that I could do my work and cover the event.The police officer came with me to get my children, and then took me into the playground where I saw another officer. I ascertained from talking to [the second officer] that his name was Tal’at. He shouted at me and talked in a raised voice. “Give me the camera,” he said. I explained to him the nature of my work and said I would show all the photographs to him. I also said that I did not take any photographs of the party. As I was showing him the photographs, a police officer of dark complexion arrived. He seemed angry. “Give me the camera or I will break it and smash your face,” he said. He attempted to grab the camera from me. I told him I would show him the photographs. As I started to show him the photographs that were saved in the camera memory, I moved the camera closer to him and he grabbed it, punched me in the face several times and cursed at me. Suddenly another police officer hit me with a baton on my shoulder and insulted me in front of my three children, who started crying. A number of other police officers intervened and took the officer that hit me [on the shoulder] away. I used my mobile phone to try to make a call. I felt scatterbrained. A police officer, who I think was a lieutenant, asked me for my press card. He took the card and went away.I took my children and left the playground through the main gate. I went to Naser Hospital to have a medical examination because I felt pain in my ear. Marks from the beating were also evident on several parts of my body. After the hospital I went home and made some calls about the attack that I had been subjected to.Whilst at home I received a phone call from Dr. Husein Abu-Hashish, who told me to file a complaint with the police. The next morning, I received a phone call from someone in the Police Public Relations Department. He told me to go to the police and lodge a complaint. I received another phone call from someone claiming to be from the Police Investigations Department. He said they had found my press card and camera, and asked that I go and collect them. I told him I had not lost the card and the camera but rather that they had been confiscated from me, and that I knew how to get them back.