Affidavit No. 2798/2006
2006
I live with my six member family in the center of the village, Bani N'eim. On 21 February 2006, at approximately midnight, when I was on the second floor of my home, I heard knocking at the front door. When I looked through the window, I saw a group of Israeli soldiers in official uniform and carrying weapons. The soldiers had surrounded our home and were positioned at the entrance.I immediately opened the door and one of the soldiers, who spoke broken but intelligible Arabic, asked me to evacuate the house with my wife and children. I told him that I was not going to take them outside because it was very cold and the children were small (the oldest is 5 years old and the youngest is my nine month old daughter, Shahd). The soldier asked me to fully open the door, and when I did, the soldiers (there were eight) pushed themselves inside my home.They searched all the rooms and then put us all in our bedroom and told us to keep the door to the bedroom open. One soldier stood guard at the door. The other soldiers were moving around in the other rooms. They did not prevent us from using the bathroom when we asked permission, but when we asked them to close the door of the bedroom where we were detained, they refused. They told us that we could sleep, but how could we do that with the door open and our house full of soldiers? We were all afraid of the soldiers, especially the children, who clung to their mother and me the entire time while they were sleeping. They were particularly afraid of the multi-colored face paint that the soldiers wore.I introduced myself, telling the soldiers that I work with the Palestinian police and that I wanted to contact the police leadership, but the soldier at the door prevented me from doing so and took my mobile. At around 9:30 am, my mother Hakima Manasra (65 years) came to my home. The soldier opened the door for her, put her in the room with us, and prevented her from leaving. An hour later, my father, Muhammad Manasra (75 years) also came over and they did the same to him. I asked the soldier to let my wife enter the kitchen so she could prepare food for us and he agreed. She made food and brought it to the room, which was only 3.5 by 3.5 square metres. The soldiers ordered us not to leave the room.At 12:30 pm on Wednesday, 22 February, my sister-in-law Fatima Manasra (35 years) and my niece Rasha 'Atef Manasra (25 years) came to our home and the soldier ordered me to open the door for them. When I opened it, he detained them in the room with us. My sister-in-law Fatima had left her son (2 years) at home. When I asked the soldier to let her go to her son, he refused. I told him that her son may be subjected to danger, but he said that the soldiers would be in my home for six more hours and nobody would be permitted to leave.At approximately 1:30 pm, my nephew (Fatima's son) came over, accompanied by two relatives (11 years and 15 years). The soldiers ordered them to come in and prevented them from leaving. At 3:00 pm, my sister and another sister-in-law law arrived and the soldiers did the same to them. Fifteen minutes later, another relative(70 years) arrived and the soldiers ordered him to come in and also prevented him from leaving. Every visitor was detained and held in the same room with us. One of our neighbours, accompanied by her mother, also came to visit and the same thing happened to them.Thirty minutes later, one of our friends, Nasser Manasra (28 years), the owner of a restaurant, came with food for us because he suspected there was a problem, as the whole family had not left our home. After they inspected Nasser and the food he brought, the soldiers allowed him to enter and ordered him to stay in the room. The situation in the room became impossible and unbearable and the number of people in the room was beyond its capacity.At around 3:45 pm, one of the soldiers ordered everybody in the room, including my wife and children, to leave the house. The soldier ordered me to stay with Nasser Manasra. After that, the soldiers questioned me and asked if I had any weapons at home. Then the soldiers started searching our home again. I told them that that I did not have any weapons at home, but they were not convinced and started removing the tiles under the kitchen sink. The soldiers then opened fire on the youths who were demonstrating outside our home.The soldiers took a number of pictures and a wall hanging that had Fateh Movement emblems on them and left our home at 7:00 pm. Before they left, I recovered my ID card and mobile, which they had taken from me when they entered. After they left, I discovered that they had destroyed some windows from which they had fired at the youths who were gathered outside. My children are still afraid, even when they see Israeli soldiers on TV, they run and cling to their mother or me.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 25 February 2006Signature: Fayez Manasra