Affidavit No. 2605/2005
2005
At  approximately 1:40 am on 29 September 2005, while I was sleeping at home  with my family which consists of 9 members, I was awoken by a knocking  on the front door. When I opened the door of our bedroom, I saw a number  of Israeli soldiers inside our home. They were aiming their guns  towards me and said that they want to search our home. They first  inspected me and wanted to enter our bedroom before my wife could change  out of her night gown. I refused to let them enter and stood at the  door for several seconds until she put on her clothes. Then the soldiers  pushed inside the room and started searching it. They searched the  whole house, which has two floors. During the search, they pulled down  the shutters of the windows, tore the couches (seven couches), broke the  refrigerator, and dismantled its parts. Moreover, they broke items in  our home such as five clay pots and a vacuum cleaner.One of  the soldiers took the scarf off the head of my 17-year-old daughter  Wala' and threw it on the ground, which made her cry. After three hours  of searching, one of the soldiers brought a number of bullets, which he  said they had found in the house, and a banner on which was written,  “There is no god but God and Muhammad is the Messenger of God”. The  Israeli soldier asked me about the bullets and I told him that these  bullets were collected by my children to sell by kilos. They asked me to  get out the weapons and I told them that I do not have weapons. They  ordered me to accompany them. I followed them under the threat of arms  to an area about 100 metres away from my home.We came  to a big military vehicle which they use to transport the soldiers and  they ordered me to lie on my back on the ground under the car. Then I  heard a soldier saying in Hebrew, which I understand a little, to start  the car. When I heard the motor of the car, I tried to get away from  underneath the car. The soldiers started beating me and told me to stay  under the car. I fought with them and during the fight two soldiers fell  down on the ground. At that point, a number of soldiers, approximately  ten, started beating me until I lost consciousness.They took  me home and started to interrogate me again, and one of them threatened  to fire at me. Then they brought my son 'Ala (18 years) and asked him  to bring the weapons hidden in our home. He told them that he did not  know about the existence of any weapons inside our home. They also  threatened to shoot him if he did not tell them. The whole time they  were speaking in weak Arabic and sometimes in Hebrew, which we do not  understand. After around 4:30 am, the soldiers left and took both mine  and 'Ala's ID cards.After  they left, my wife, Amal Jamil Abu-Turk (34 years) and I went to Hebron  Government Hospital, which is around five kilometres away from our home.  Thecheck-up  showed bruises all over my body as a result of the beating I was  subjected to by the soldiers, and my wife was suffering from chest pains  due to fear. We returned home at approximately 10 am and my children  told me that the Israeli soldiers came back at around 7 am and returned  the ID cards they had previously taken.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 5 October 2005Signature: 'Abd-al-Ghani Abu-Turki