Affidavit No. 2674/2005
2005
At approximately 2:00 am on Wednesday,  30 November 2005, I was sleeping in my home located at the Wikala  (UNRWA) quarter in Jenin Camp, specifically near the UNRWA office. My  mother woke me up saying, “Get up, the army is at the neighbor's house”.  She meant the house of Abu-Ahmad al-Qasem located immediately south of  our home. I got up, put on my clothes and prepared myself, scared that  the Israeli army may enter our home. At 2:15 am, the Israeli army told  us through their megaphones to get out of our homes, “Everyone who is in  the house must come outside.” My father went out first, followed by my  mother and my aunt. There were nine of us in the house. After 15  minutes, all the above-mentioned returned home. Our home consists of two  floors. My family lives on the upper floor and my aunt Rihab  'Abd-al-Rahman lives on the lower floor.After my father, mother and aunt  returned, the Israeli army, who were in front of our home, threw a sound  bomb which exploded at our front door creating a horrible noise. All of  a sudden, I saw a big brown dog with a hearing device tied to its ear  and an iron chain on his neck. Without exaggeration, the dog was the  same size as a donkey. The dog came close to us, opening its eyes and  sticking its tongue out of its mouth. My brothers and sisters,  'Abd-al-Rahman (17 years), Asma’ (16 years), 'Umar (10 years), Ahmad (9  years) and Ayat (4 years), and I were very scared and sat on the floor  close to each other. The dog slowly came closer to us. It first came  near my father and smelled him, then my mother, followed by my aunt and  then me and my brothers and sisters. Then it climbed the stairs and  entered the second floor and went from one room to another. This  continued for around 3 minutes. While the dog was in the kitchen, I  moved from my place and sat beside my sister Ayat who was crying out of  fear.When the dog returned, it seemed to  have noticed that I changed my place. Immediately, it bit my left thigh  and pulled me. I felt severe pain in my thigh and started yelling at the  top of my voice, “Dad, dad!” The dog dragged me from the upper floor to  the ground floor, pulling me down the stairs, and then pulled me  outside our home onto the street. I was shouting from the pain and felt  the teeth of the dog deep in my thigh. On the street, I saw a large  number of Israeli soldiers preparing their guns to shoot at me. My  father ran after me and held me, although the dog still had its teeth in  my flesh. The soldiers came near me and tried to detach me from the dog  but the dog swallowed a piece of flesh from my left thigh.An Israeli soldier carried me and put  me down at the entrance of our home and some soldiers treated my wound. I  remember that they put glucose on the wound, gave me an injection and  wrapped my left thigh.Afterwards the Red Crescent Society  ambulance came, it seems upon the request of the Israeli army, and  carried me to the Jenin governmental hospital. I am still in the  hospital, undergoing treatment. I was very scared and badly  psychologically scarred. Even now, I shake whenever I remember the dog  and how it attacked and pulled me.It is worth noting that Ahmad  al-Khatib, who was killed by the Israel army on the first day of 'Eid  al-Fitr (3 November 2005) at the eastern entrance of Jenin camp, is my  classmate and one of my dearest friends. As the whole world heard,  Ahmad's organs have been donated to Israeli children. For that reason, I  appeal to all who can hear me and say: We gave life to Israeli children  but on the other side the Israeli army insists, to a frightening  degree, on killing our children's ability to live a normal childhood.  Indeed, the dog was going to kill me. Although it did not kill my soul,  it killed my childhood and turned my life into a life of horror.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 1 December 2005Signature: Muhammad Qassem