Affidavit No. 6231/2011
2011
On 13 March 2011 at around 4:30 am I left my house in the city for the village of Awarta, eightkm southeast of Nablus City. I work in Awarta as the director of the Medical Centre, which belongs to the Health Work Committee. When I reached the main western entrance of thevillage I saw an Israeli forces jeep. A triangular sign was placed on the street with the word“stop.” I stopped but one of the soldiers at the checkpoint waved for me to proceed. There were about four Israeli soldiers carrying weapons and in full uniform. After 30 meters there wasanother military checkpoint inside the village, and one of the soldiers signalled to me to to turn back. I went back and took a dirt road that connects Beita Village with Awarta and I entered Awarta and opened the Health Centre. After about two and a half hours two Military jeeps arrived. One was green belonging to the Border Guard Control and the other jeep was for transporting Israeli army soldiers.As I stepped out of Centre one of the soldiers asked me “what are you doing here and did you not hear that there is a curfew in the village?” I answered that I am a doctor. He told me to shut down the clinic and leave the village.I got in my car and as I drove out of the village an Israeli military jeep stopped me and asked in Hebrew the reason for my presence. When I told him that I was leaving the village he said “follow me and I will take you to the checkpoint so I make sure you go straight there.” I left the village for Nablus but when I reached the military checkpoint at the entrance to the village, I was held for 20 minutes and the Israeli soldier took my personal ID. After that a soldier told me in Arabic that he would allow me to leave the village on condition that I not come back again. He then returned my ID and I headed towards Nablus.I entered the village the next day on 14 March 2011 in an ambulance that belongs to the Health Work Committee. An Israeli Jeep followed us until we were inside the village. I then gathered various medical supplies from the Centre and distributed them among the village houses.On Tuesday 15 March 2011 I headed to the village in an ambulance with a medical team but we were held up at the checkpoint from 8:00 am until 1:00 pm. Many ambulances were stopped at this checkpoint at the entrance to the village. There were ambulances from the Palestinian Red Crescent Society, UNRWA, the Medical Relief Committees and the Ministry of Health. All were forbidden from entering the village. Subsequently, I called the Head of the Village Council and asked him to speak with the Israeli Military base to arrange for us to enter the village.Meanwhile a representative of the International Red Cross arrived, and a foreigner spoke to the soldiers. The foreigner told us that the soldiers would allow us to enter but that they needed some more time. Afterwards, an Israeli officer named Captain Jamal (I found out his name from an ambulance’ driver) told the staff of the Medical Relief Ambulance to enter the village, drop off a patient and come back. Then an argument broke out between us and the captain in which he made it clear that he did not want us to stay in the village. He was shouting foul terms of abuse in Arabic. He demanded that the ambulance cars go to the northern entrance of the village. We did, and wewaited at this entrance until 4:00 pm when we were finally able to enter.On Wednesday March 16 2011 I went to the village at around 8:00 am. I performed my duties as a doctor and provided necessary treatment to regular patients. None of the patients who were injured during the invasion came to the clinic. The Israeli forces left the village around 10:00 pm and the curfew was lifted and life went back to normal, as usual.