Affidavit No. 4915/2009
2009
I am a resident of Wadi al-Shajina village, located approximately five kilometres south of the town of Dura in the Governorate of Hebron. In the afternoon of Sunday, 26 April 2009, an Israeli military force, including four jeeps and one armoured personnel vehicle, also referred to as APC, which was carrying almost 16 persons, raided our village. I saw these vehicles from a window overlooking the street on the second floor of our house.A little before 4:00 pm, I saw my relative Raja’i Taleb Abu-’Arqoub, about 26 years of age, get out of a taxi near the jeep of an Israeli officer, which is distinct from other jeeps. After he stepped down, the jeep driver and officer got out and approached Raja’i. The officer attacked Raja’i and threw him to the ground. Then, two soldiers handcuffed and blindfolded Raja’i and placed him on the rear seat of the officer’s jeep. Meanwhile, I opened the window next to me.While opening it, the window made some noise causing a close by soldier to notice and point his weapon at me. “Come!” he yelled in Arabic. I came down from the second floor. After I opened the door on the first floor, I saw a soldier waiting for me at the door. There was another soldier standing at a distance of less than two metres behind the first one. The two soldiers wore helmets and were about 180 centimetres tall.One was blonde and the other had a brown complexion. As I got out, the soldier who stood closest to me placed his armed around my neck and stood behind me. The other soldier tied my hands behind my back with plastic handcuffs and blindfolded me with a piece of cloth. I could see through the blindfold because it was transparent.The two soldiers led me to a military jeep other than the officer’s jeep. It was parked at a distance of 40 metres away from the house door. After I sat in the jeep for almost two minutes, I was forced to step down. At that moment, I saw ‘Ayesh ‘Ajwa, about 30 years old, Midhat Shahin, about 24 years old, Raja’i Abu-’Arqoub, about 26 years old, Saber al-Bustanji, about 20 years old, and ‘Ali ‘Isa al-Bustanji who is about 20 years old. Soldiers forced all of them to stand in a queue. I was the first person standing in the queue. Midhat Shahin stood right behind me.Soldiers ordered each one to grab on to the clothes of the person right behind him as our hands were tied behind our backs. The soldiers forced us to walk for a distance of approximately 300 metres. Then, they forced us into the APC. Meanwhile, we were beaten. Soldiers ordered us to sit on the floor of the APC not on the chairs. A soldier, who spoke in mixed Hebrew and Arabic, assigned a number to each one of us and ordered us to remember our respective numbers. The APC drove quite fast for about five minutes before it stopped inside the al-Majnouna Military Camp, which is located near our town and referred to by the Israelis as ‘Adurayim Camp’. There, we were forced into a large room with chairs inside. Still blindfolded and handcuffed, each one of us was ordered to sit on a chair.The door and window of the room were kept open, which is why we were very cold. We were detained inside the room for a long period of time. As I was exhausted and sleepy, I fell asleep for a little while on the chair. I think I also snored. A soldier then slapped me on the face.At around 1:30 am on Monday, 27 April 2009, soldiers played a video game on a television set in the room where we were held. They turned up the volume and caused much noise as they shouted while playing. Any time one of us needed to use the toilet, the soldiers would make us wait for a long time before they would allow us to use it. After a long time of waiting, at around 3:30 am, a soldier finally took me to the toilet on the second floor. Overhearing the conversations of the soldiers I knew what time it was at most times. When I reached the toilet, the soldier removed the handcuffs. However, he did not remove my blindfold and refused to allow me to close the door.During our detention we were further physically assaulted. We were beaten with fists and with rifle butts. At around 4:30 am, soldiers called two detainees, who had been assigned Numbers 3 and 4 - Raja’i Abu-’Arqoub and Saber al-Bustanji - and led them out of the room. Almost half an hour later, soldiers called the detainees Numbers 1 and 2 - ‘Ayesh ‘Ajwa and ‘Ali al-Bustanji - and led them out of the room. Another half an hour later, they called Numbers 5 and 6. I was Number was 5 and Midhat Shahin was Number 6. Three soldiers dragged us out of the room and walked  with us for a distance of about six metres, all the while severely beating us with the butts of their rifles. They also slapped, punched, and kicked us. Then, Midhat and I were placed on the rear seat of a military jeep, which drove off. I heard a soldier tell his colleague to drive to al-Fawwar refugee camp.On the rear seat, a soldier sat right opposite me. Midhat was forced to sit on the floor of the jeep. After the jeep had moved for only 10 metres, the soldier who sat opposite me kicked me in the face. I felt intense pain and my nose bled. “Was it good?” the soldier asked after he hit me – referring to the kick. I confirmed, using his exact words.After the jeep stopped, the soldier who sat opposite me pushed Midhat out. I heard him falling to the ground and screaming of pain. The soldier pushed me out of the jeep as well and I, too, fell on the ground. Then the soldier got out of the jeep, trod on my back, and beat me for about ten minutes, until I fell unconscious. Just before I fainted, another soldier had arrived and was beating Midhat. The two soldiers further verbally assaulted us, cursing us as well as Islam. I had 3 fainted for a period of two minutes. As I partially came around, I heard a soldier ordering Midhat to wake me up. For this purpose the soldiers had removed Midhat’s handcuffs and blindfold.Midhat gently tapped me on the face. After I managed to stand up, the two soldiers beat me again. Then the soldiers allowed Midhat to leave and continued to beat me on my waist and above my thighs for about 20 minutes. In the meantime, a person said “Good Morning” to the soldiers in English, but a soldier ordered him to leave. During the last ten minutes, I was beaten while I was lying on the ground. Then, the soldiers demanded that I stand up, removed my handcuffs, and told me to lift the blindfold from my eyes. At that time, a soldier held a knife close to my neck while the other soldier was beating me with the butt of his rifle on my back.Later, the soldier who had threatened me with the knife ordered me to leave. I walked away from the jeep, which held Number 327. After I walked for a distance of about 150 metres, I found myself near a school in al-Fawwar refugee camp. There, I saw the same person who had wished the soldiers a good morning in English, while they were beating me. He told me that he was a teacher at that school and that he had arrived early that morning as a school trip was planned for that day.Having met my friend Midhat at the school gate, I used his mobile telephone and called my brother Majed, who arrived in his car and took us to the Hebron Governmental Hospital. We arrived at the hospital at around 6:15 am. Majed also picked up Raja’i Taleb Abu-’Arqoub, who had been released before us, taking him to the hospital with us.Later, ‘Ayesh ‘Ajwa arrived at the hospital as well. After we were diagnosed, we were told that we had sustained bruises and contusions on various parts of our bodies. I also learned that Raja’i and Saber had been transported in the same jeep and they had been beaten all the way to the entrance of the village. ‘Ayesh and ‘Ali were transported to Abu Sharar Petrol Station in the village of Kharsa and were beaten too. ‘Ayesh and Raja’i said that soldiers had stolen money from them before they were released. Raja’i told us that soldiers had stolen a sum of 140 NIS from his wallet while he was blindfolded. At the entrance to the village, a soldier had taken Raja’i’s wallet and returned it to him several minutes later. He said that after he checked his wallet he realised that the money had disappeared. When he was taken to the village of Kharsa, ‘Ayesh said that the soldiers also stole from him - a sum on 600 NIS - in the same manner.During our detention, we were not interrogated and no charges were filed against us. Until today, I do not know why I was detained. Similarly, none of the other detained adolescents could figure out why they had been captured.Signature: Muhammad Abu-’ArqoubI, the undersigned, ‘Aziza ‘Abd-al-Qader Muhammad Abu-’Arqoub, holder of ID number976062737, hereby certify that my son Muhammad has given the sworn statement above to al-Haq and signed before me.‘Aziza Abu-’Arqoub