Affidavit No. 4329/2008
2008
On 1 July 2008, I was in my house, which is located in the north-western area of the village of Bourin, along with my children ‘Izat, 20 years old and Mus'ab, 16 years old. At 1:15 pm, I saw two strange, bright objects fly in the air. They were launched from the top of the Northern Mountain from the settlement of Bracha towards the south. They fell on vacant land approximately 100 – 150 metres from my house and some other citizens' houses. I immediately looked in the direction that the objects had come from. I saw two settlers in that area. I say settlers because no resident in this area dares to go to the Mountain.About two minutes after the objects were launched, I saw a Hummer patrol car arrive at the location of the settlers. However, I do not know what happened next, as I could not see them anymore. I should note that the place from where the objects were launched is approximately 300 metres away from my house, and the houses of other citizens.After I witnessed the landing of the two objects, I called the Palestinian police in the city of Nablus and told them about the incident. In turn, the Palestinian police stated that they would call the Palestinian Liaison Office, as well as contact other authorities. They requested that I go to the area so that I could find out what had landed there. I immediately went there, with my children. We were there in less than five minutes.I saw a silver pipe, which was about 20 centimetres in length and about 10 centimetres in diameter, with two holes on both sides. The pipe contained a black, burned material. We lifted it and moved on to search for the other object. I saw another pipe approximately 50 metres away. With almost the same diameter, the pipe was about 15 centimetres long. In the meantime, I was in touch with the Palestinian police. They told me to keep what I had found inside my house, so we carried the projectiles to my house.About an hour later, three Israeli patrol cars surrounded my house. When they arrived, a number of soldiers got out of their cars and came directly to my house. I went out to them and a soldier introduced himself; he was in military uniform and carried a long weapon. He was about 40 years old and said that he was Officer Rami from the Israeli Liaison Office. He started to question me about what I had seen. Before I answered him I called the Palestinian police and Palestinian Liaison Office and told them that an Israeli army force was present. They requested that I cooperate with the Israeli Liaison officers.Therefore, I told the Israeli officer about what I had seen. I gave him the projectiles upon his request. He also instructed that I accompany them to the location where the projectiles landed. I went with them and explained again what had happened. I also pointed to the location the projectiles were launched from. They left a few minutes later, taking the projectiles with them.Before they left, I had a conversation with the officer. I said I was afraid that these missiles would land on our houses and cause injury to residents. He replied that he would not allow any settler to fire anything towards residents, in contrast to rockets being fired by Palestinians towards Sdeirot.Several hours later, I received a telephone call from a member of the Israeli Police. He asked me to go to the Liaison Office at Huwwara Military Camp to make a statement about the incident. When I refused, the Police officer said that they would come to my house. Three Israeli Police vehicles came to my house at around 8:00 pm.As several police officers got out of the vehicles, I went out to them. A policeman introduced himself but I do not remember his name now. He asked me about what had happened and I repeated the same information that I had given the Israeli Liaison Officers earlier. He recorded my statement on a piece of paper. About half an hour later, he requested that I sign to confirm what I had said, but I refused. I should note that two weeks earlier, the Yido'ot Ahranot newspaper reported that two settlers from the Yitzhar settlement fired a projectile towards the village of Bourin. They were arrested by the Israeli Police. None of the village residents saw the incident, but the Israeli press raised this issue. Finally, I would like to indicate that the settlement of Bracha was built in late 1989 on land over a series of mountains belonging to the village of Bourin. Extending from the east, the settlement is approximately 1.5 kilometres away from some citizens' houses.