Affidavit No. 1926/2004
2004
At 7:00  pm Sunday, 25 July 2004, I was at my home located in the western quarter  in Toulkarem. I went out 20 metres away from my home towards al-Mihdawi  cellular phone shop located near Abu-Nidal restaurant. I arrived at the  shop and gave my cellular phone to the owner, Ayman Mihdawi, to repair  it, and he told me that he needed half an hour to do that. So I returned  home to wait at home until he finished. The situation was calm on that  day and there was no presence of any Israeli military forces in the  area.I went  out again and as I was at 10 metres away from the shop towards the  south, I saw a white Volkswagen bus with yellow Israeli license plates,  and curtains on the windows, driving from the west to the east. The bus  stopped opposite of me, six metres away from me. All of a sudden, the  doors of the bus opened and heavy gunfire was shot in all directions. I  started to run away, but one of the Israeli forces opened fire on me and  injured my right leg. I did not fall down, and continued to run and  after running another two metres. I was then shot in my left leg from  the back. I fell down on the ground, and crept and hid behind one of the  cars and then behind a concrete wall. Shooting at me continued, but it  always hit the concrete. The firing continued for at least about three  minutes.At this  point, I realised that the gunmen were members of the Israeli Special  Squad Forces. I looked around and saw a large number of Israeli military  jeeps arriving to the area after the firing stopped. When I looked at  the targeted place, I saw a number of young men lying down on the ground  opposite of the Abu-Nidal restaurant, a restaurant serving popular food  such as foul, chickpeas, falafel and similar foods. I realised that the  martyrs had fallen in the area while the Israeli military support units  continued to come to the scene, staying for around an hour. During that  period, I was bleeding from both my legs. After approximately an hour,  the Israeli military jeeps started to withdraw to the west of Toulkarem  towards the District Coordination Office (DCO).As the  jeeps were leaving, one of them saw and approached me. Three soldiers  wearing their full military uniform and helmets on their heads got out  of the jeep, and came closer to me while they were aiming their guns  towards me. When they came up to me, one of them asked me in Arabic,  “What is your name.” When I tried to lift my head to look at him, he  prevented me from doing so under the threat of fire. I told him my name  and then three soldiers carried me and put me in the jeep, throwing me  on the floor of the jeep without regarding my injuries. Then the  soldiers brought into the jeep 70-year-old Khalil Zeidan, a resident of  the same quarter, who was also injured in his feet. They threw him over  me and then took us to the DCO west of Toulkarem.On the  way, the soldiers put their feet on my body and blindfolded me while  they were cursing us all the way along. When we reached the DCO, I was  carried from the jeep into an ambulance with a red Star of David on it,  which belonged to an Israeli hospital. No first aid was provided to me  and I was kept inside the ambulance for some time. Then the Israeli  military leader of the Toulkarem area, Captain Sharon, a short fat man  in his thirties, came into the ambulance and started asking me questions  about the persons who were at the scene of the shooting. I told him  that I do not know. He started cursing God and threatened to kill me if I  did not mention the names of the young men who were at the scene. I  denied knowing the names, although I saw and knew a number of wanted  young men there,including my brother Muhannad Samaha, wanted by the  Israeli army, Hani 'Weida and 'Abd-al-Rahman Shadid, and another number  of other al-Aqsa Brigades activists. But I did not tell that to captain  Sharon. Then he told me, “Listen, we killed your brother Muhannad.” I  said, “God gives him Mercy.” The Israeli captain repeatedly cursed God  and left the ambulance.Then a  male nurse wearing civilian clothes came and offered me first aid. The  ambulance carried me to Halil Haifa Hospital in al-Khdeira where I was  treated for five days. I was in a very bad psychological state because I  knew that my brother Muhannad was killed, and I was guarded by three  soldiers. During my stay at the hospital, I also learned that six young  Palestinian men were killed in Toulkarem, the matter worsening my  psychological situation. On the fifth day, I was put in an ambulance,  and I thought that I was going to be put in prison, but I was released  was transferred from the Israeli ambulance to a Palestinian one at the  DCO in Toulkarem. I was taken to the Toulkarem Governmental Hospital and  was informed that my brother Muhannad has not been killed.I knew  that six young men had been killed: Muhammad 'Adnan Shantir, who was not  an activist, nor wanted, and by chance was present during the shooting;  Ahmad Nabil Barouk, who was also a bystander not wanted nor an  activist; Said Nasser, who was not wanted was perhaps an activist,  because I had seen him several times in the company of wanted persons;  Mahdi Rayeq Tanbouz, a wanted activist with the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades  who was armed the day of the shooting; 'Abd-al-Rahman Shadid, also a  wanted activist with the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades who was armed that  day; Hani 'Weida, a wanted activist with the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades  who was armed that day as well. All these martyrs were from the  Toulkarem city and area. I am still being treated at this time.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 25 August 2004Signature: Muhammad 'Adnan Fathi Samaha