Affidavit No. 2222/2005
2005
I live in Nazlet ‘Isa, Toulkarem  governorate. Nazlet ‘Isa is a village whose economy depends on  agriculture. I am a farmer and so are all the members of my family. With  the outbreak of the al-Aqsa intifada on 28 September 2000, our life  worsened, day by day, as a result of the collective punishment practices  used by the Israeli occupation authorities with the hopes of ending the  intifada. Under the pretext of bringing security to Israel, the  occupation authorities besieged the Palestinian territories, directly  impacting Nazlet ‘Isa, being a border village with Baga al-Gharbiyya, a  village inside the Green Line.The worst  punishment imposed on the village was the building of what is known as  the ‘Separation and Annexation Wall’, which cut us off from the borders  of Israel. The construction of the Wall started on 20 August 2003 and  was completed on 20 February 2004. The Wall annexed around 600 dunums of  Nazlet ‘Isa’s agricultural and fertile lands, most of which is planted  with olive trees.As for me  and my family, all of our land in Nazlet ‘Isa, estimated at 45 dunums,  was confiscated and only three dunums were left for us on which my home  and my brothers' homes are built. Because we had lost our jobs in  Israel, as a result of the siege imposed on the Palestinian territories  by the Israeli authorities, we lost our only source of income when the  ‘Separation Wall’ cut us off from our land (45 dunums). Our lands are  planted with almond and olive trees and we used to plant seasonal  vegetables all year round.After the  completion of the Wall, gate No. 13 was constructed. After obtaining a  special permit, we were to be allowed to pass to our lands through the  gate in order to harvest the olives, almonds, and unirrigated  vegetables. My family and I obtained permits to pass through the gate.  The Israeli soldiers are at the gate 24 hours a day. We obtained permits  on 3 September 2004, seven months after the completion of the Wall. The  expiry date of these permits is 4 March 2005. We could not reach our  land during the seven months before the issuance of the permits. During  the validity of the permits, we were not allowed to pass through the  gate except during the olive picking season, which is from 15 October  2004 until 24 December 2004. After that period we were not allowed to  pass through the gate. Whenever my brothers, my father and I tried to go  to our lands, we had to wait for hours, despite the validity of our  permits.The  soldiers at the gate prevented us from reaching our lands to take care  of it, cultivate it, spray insecticides and trim the trees. During these  months we were not able to harvest the green almonds, which is an  important harvest for us. The green almond season provides significant  financial benefits on which we live for several months. During the valid  period (six months) of the permits, we were only allowed to pass freely  through the gate to our land for two months. This followed the seven  month period, during which the Wall was being constructed, when we were  unable to reach our lands altogether.When we  reached our land after obtaining the permits, we found that the sheep  had eaten the olive trees and the grass was approximately one and a half  metres high. This situation was dangerous for our land, since a fire  could break out. Though we have worked hard to rehabilitate our land, it  is to no avail since we are generally restricted from going to our land  by the Israeli soldiers. This means that the land will become arid and  not good for cultivation.