Affidavit No: 7558/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned Muhammad Bonya Mousa Ka’abna, ID No: 947749123, Citizenship: Palestinian, Date of Birth: 00/00/1943, Work as: farmer, resident in: Beit Hanina, Jerusalem governorate, would like to declare the following:I have been breeding animals for a long time and always moved between the Barriyat al-Khalil and the al-Khan al-Ahmar, up to the frontiers of the al-Ram for herding purposes. As I moved from one area to another, I was repeatedly forcibly displaced by the Israeli occupying authorities in the areas where I used to install my tents. The continuing harassment by the occupying authorities against my family and I led me to purchase a 1.5 dunum piece of land with a property deed from the civil administration. The land is located to the north of Beit Hanina which is north of Jerusalem.I decided to build a house for my married sons, Mansour, 29, and Mousa, 28, and for myself. The construction of the structure began five years ago. During the construction process, the Israeli Planning and Zoning Authority delivered a demolition notification and then demolished the structure on 24 November 2011, after we had been living there for five years. Following the demolition, we were left without a roof or shelter and so we had to live in an ad hoc barracks originally made for sheep and infested with rats. There are 22 of us including ten children, aged between two to eight years old, my unmarried sons and daughters, the wives of my sons Mousa and Mansour, my wife and I.It was a horrendous situation with rain falling onto our beds and the floor. We had to endure severe cold. My son Mansour moved with his family because of this difficult situation, to a house they rented in Bir Nabala one month after the demolition. Then my son Mousa moved with his family to Kufr ‘Aqab as he and his family could no longer live in homelessness. My elderly wife, my son, Muntasir, my daughter and her children (who lived with us as no houses were available before the demolition) and I stayed in this miserable situation. An international organisation, ACTED, visited us and said they would build us houses to replace the demolished ones. After several visits to the site, they decided to build us three caravans (mobile units), for my wife, daughter, son and I, a second one for Mousa and his family and a third one for Mansour and his family. We welcomed the idea because of our difficult living conditions.ACTED started to build the caravans within the boundaries of a certain piece of land, but the land is not a property of mine. The caravans’ construction began in February 2012 and continued for 35 days. Each caravan had two bedrooms, a living area, bathroom and a kitchen. We were given keys on 2 April 2012. Mansour and Mousa were preparing to move back to these units to eliminate the expensive rent they were paying. Two days after we were given the keys a large force of Israeli occupying soldiers arrived to the caravans with Micha; who was in charge of zoning and planning in the area. It was 2:00 pm and I was in the Ramallah hospital, when I learned that the soldiers were there. My son Mansour and I left the hospital and immediately returned to the caravans, only to find the area surrounded by 100 Israeli soldiers.The officer Micha and I arrived at the same time and Micha asked Mansour to come speak with him. Mansour went to see Micha near the caravans, but Micha did not allow me to access the location of the caravans. I was trying to follow him, but one of the soldiers pushed me back and asked my sons not to intervene for my safety. After the soldiers left the area, Mansour told me that Micha had handed him a demolition notification and ordered us to report to Beit Eil three days from the date of notification.We contacted ACTED immediately and told them what had happened to us. They appointed us a lawyer to follow up on the case. Within the three days prescribed by the notification, two lawyers from ACTED, my brother and I went to Beit Eil where they gave us 14 days to remove the caravans or to initiate the licensing procedures. Upon our return, I learned from my wife that a force from the army and regional planning unit came and photographed the location without saying anything. After the hearing with the Beit Eil court, I discussed licensing or removing the caravans with ACTED. ACTED confirmed that the caravans should stay because the purpose of building them was to consolidate our resilience and steadfastness in the area.To avoid the demolition, ACTED decided to relocate the caravans to land owned by my brother Hassan, approximately 40 metres from the original site. By moving the caravans we would avoid the demolition taking place and extend the period we had to proceed with the licensing.Around this time, Mansour and his family partially moved into the caravan, bringing part of their furniture and some clothes little by little. His wife would sleep in the caravan on the days that Mansour worked at night. On 7 June 2012 at 10:00 am, an army force and regional planning unit came to the site and handed us a warning to halt work with a notification of demolition. The notification said the demolition would take place on 15 July 2012, which is the delay granted to us for evacuating the area and removing the caravans. We consulted ACTED about our possible solutions, including the partial residence of Mansour and his family in the caravan.On 9 July 2012 at around 12.30 am, Mansour’s wife and her children were sleeping in their caravan, almost 40 metres from our location. An [Israeli regional planning unit] and a large force of the occupying army raided the site.  As we gathered at the site, we saw a winch, three trucks and a bulldozer. We were prevented from approaching the caravans. I could not tell what types of machines (brand) were being used. I told officer Micha that there were people sleeping in the caravan. The officer allowed me to evacuate Mansour’s wife and children. Soldiers then began to remove the furniture. They kept us in our tent and the children were screaming because of the high tension. The soldiers confiscated all three caravans and left at 1:45 am.In the morning I found a commodity seizure order in between the furniture. Thus, the soldiers returned us to our prior situation. Officer Micha told us one of the times he visited the area to photograph the caravans that such caravans were permitted only for settler residents and not for Arabs. He literally told my son Mansour in fluent Arabic that I was not a settler to own a caravan. Mansour told Micha that I, his father own the land on which the caravans are installed and that they had demolished our stone house. Micha said you do not have the right to build even if the land is yours. He presented himself as a house demolisher and this was the term he used. He told my wife: “I am Micha the house demolisher.”This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 7 June 2012