Affidavit No. 6509/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Abdel Hadi Mustafa Khalil Ighbariyeh, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 950638486, born on 27 October 1967, a Taxi driver, and a resident of Jenin Refugee Camp, Jenin governorate, would like to declare the following:Today, 05 August 2011, is the first Friday of Ramadan, and I have the right like any other Palestinian Muslim to pray in Al-Aqsa Mosque in occupied Jerusalem, as the reward for praying there during Ramadan, is greater than any other time. I woke up earlier than usual on the aforementioned date and left my house in Jenin Refugee Camp at around 3:00 am heading towards Qalandiya checkpoint, which separates East Jerusalem from the rest of the West Bank. I was hoping they would allow me to pass through the checkpoint into Jerusalem. I arrived to Qalandiya checkpoint at around 6:00 am, and when I approached the crossing point, I saw Israeli occupying soldiers stationed there checking the identity cards of Palestinian passersby, most of whom were also trying to go pray in Al-Aqsa Mosque.The Israeli occupying soldiers divided Qalandiya checkpoint into two sections; one section for inspecting and checking the identity cards of women and another section for men. I approached the soldiers who were standing behind the cement blocks holding up their weapons, accompanied by border guards and police officers, who I could recognise from recognized from their different uniforms.I approached an officer whose rank I recognised from the insignia on his shoulder. I was asking him to let me enter occupied Jerusalem through Qalandiya checkpoint when one of the policemen came and prevented me from talking with the officer; he pushed me with his hand and moved me away. I kept approaching different members of the occupying forces and each time they asked me to show my Identity card. Once they saw that I am 44 years old, they asked me to show a permission to cross, which I do not have.I requested a permit from the Israeli Civil Administration to enter Jerusalem to pray several times, but they kept saying that I am not allowed to enter Jerusalem as I have to be 45 years or above to be granted a permit, and 50 years or above to be allowed to enter without a permit. It is about 11:00 am now, I have only one hour until prayer, and I am still waiting under the sun while I am fasting at the Qalandiya checkpoint, waiting for somebody to allow me to go through.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 05 August 2011