Affidavit No. 5640/2010
2010
I work in the construction sector in Israel without a permit because of the difficulty in finding suitable work in the area in which I live and in the West Bank in general. I have previously submitted many applications for permits to enter and work in Israel. However, the Israeli occupying authorities have refused to issue permits for me.At around 7:00 am on Sunday 22 August 2010, I was in the market area in the Israeli city of Bir al-Sabe’, waiting in the bus station for a bus to take me to my workplace, which is about ten kilometres south of Bir al-Sabe’ city. I had spent the night under a bridge, which was relatively far away from the city centre. About one minute after I reached the bus station, two Israeli police officers, who were patrolling the area arrived. At a distance of about six metres from me, one of the police officer asked me to approach him, so I ran away. The two police officers chased me for about 50 metres, during which time my shoe slipped off my foot. The officers caught me, threw me to the ground, tied my hands behind my back with iron handcuffs, and beat me with their feet and fists all over my body for about ten minutes. They then led me on foot to a small police station near the market.When I arrived at the station, I was made to sit on a chair in an office and my feet were tied. The two officers who had brought me in from the street, hit me almost seven times with black batons on my shoulders, back and legs. Whilst I was being beaten, my cellular telephone that was in my pocket was broken. A police officer then demanded my ID card. I gave him a copy of my ID because I did not have the original. Another police officer searched me physically and took my personal belongings, including my work clothes and two cellular telephones. I was then interrogated about why I was in the area, the reason I had run away from the officers, and about my place of work. The interrogation lasted about one hour.I was taken to a car that is used for transporting detainees. Another detainee was in the car with me. We drove for about ten minutes until we reached Bir al-Sabe’ Police station. There, an interrogator asked me about my employer. I said I worked on a per diem basis with people I did not know. The interrogator also asked why I had run away from the police. I told him that I was afraid of being arrested for not having a permit. The interrogator accused me of stealing the cellular telephones that were on me, which I denied. I also told the interrogator that the two officers who had detained me, had beaten me. About an hour later, my fingerprints were taken and I was taken to the military checkpoint, which the Israelis call the ‘Mi’tar Crossing’, south of my hometown of al-Dhahiriya where I was released at around 3:30 pm.In the Police station, I was given back my shoe that had slipped from my foot while I was running away from the two Police officers. When I got home I felt pain in my head, shoulders and right leg as a result of the beating, and I was unable to sleep properly. The next morning I went to the Hebron Governmental Hospital. I had a medical examination and x-rays were taken which showed that I had sustained various bruises. I had to take medicine for a period of two weeks. I finished the course of medication yesterday but I still suffer from pain in my right shoulder and leg.