Affidavit No. 3345/2007
2007
On the morning of 22 January 2007, I was at home with my three children, Mahdi, Ma'moun and Mus'ab, who are between two-and-a-half and five years of age. My apartment is on the third floor of a four-storey building located in the Sour Baher area to the south-east of Jerusalem city. At approximately 8:15 am, I heard screaming coming from outside. When I looked out the window, I saw my mother screaming. She was shouting that the Israeli police intended to demolish our house. My mother resides in a house close to our building. She was alone, as my father was not home at the time.My three children and I left the house and went towards the yard. There, we saw more than 100 Israeli soldiers and police. They were carrying guns and batons, and were wearing safety helmets and different types of uniforms. Some of them were wearing green border police uniforms, while others were wearing the blue Israeli police uniform. The special squad units were wearing grey uniforms. I saw four police dogs with the soldiers.The soldiers pushed us forward, along with the other women who reside in our building and in the neighbouring house. There were six women in total. Some of them were holding their children. The soldiers forced us into a neighbouring house, which belongs to my uncle. They locked the main door to the house and prevented anyone from leaving.As the soldiers were pushing us inside my uncle's house, one of them, who was wearing a grey uniform, beat my left hand with his baton. We were terrified, having been pushed, beaten and detained. Through the window I saw 18 soldiers standing in front of the entrance of the house in which we were detained. These soldiers prevented us from leaving.Through the window I also saw two massive yellow bulldozers. One was a Volvo and the other a Caterpillar. The bulldozers’ brand names were written in English, which I can read. I saw these bulldozers demolishing our apartment building, with all our furniture and belongings, including the children’s school books and toys, still inside. The other women and I asked the soldiers to allow us to go to our houses in order to take the furniture and other belongings out, but they prohibited us from doing so.The incident has had a detrimental psychological impact on all the residents of the building, especially the children who ask about their books and toys. I had resided in the demolished house, which belonged to my father, Mahmoud al-A’mas, for a year and two months after my husband Hazem, who is 39-years-old, became unable to afford to rent a house.