Affidavit No. 4519/2008
2008
I am a Palestinian citizen and I have been living in the city of Jerusalem since 1996. I also hold a temporary Israeli ID card. My family consists of my wife Najah as well as my children Tareq, 24 years old, Fahed, 22 years old, Munir, 21 years old, and Du'a’, 14 years old. In 2008, I bought this land in the town of al-'Eisawiyya. I paid a price of around 180,000 Israeli shekels for it, which was my life savings for me and my children. I knew that it was “yellow land” according to the structural plan of al- 'Eisawiyya and in the year 2006, I submitted an application for a construction permit for this land. However, the municipality rejected my application, claiming that the land was “green land.”In this same year, I decided to build a house on this land. My family and I needed a larger place and I could no longer afford the monthly house rent in al-'Eisawiyya of 1,000 shekels, excluding water and electricity bills as well as the Arnona tax. Such a room was not able to accommodate me and my children, especially considering that my sons are getting older and several of them want to get married and make a family. Therefore, I decided to build a house on the land. Having completed construction of the house and lived in it for a period of one year, I received the first demolition decision from them in March 2008. I then went to a lawyer. After three sessions in the Municipal Court, the judge ruled in favour of the demolition decision.After that, I appealed the decision to the Central Court. However, the judge there confirmed the demolition decision. Finally, I went to the High Court, but did not attend the court sessions. The High Court supported the Central Court's decision to carry out the demolition as of 11 November 2008.Indeed, at about 9:00 am on Tuesday, 18 November 2008, when I was on the roof of the house, I saw several intelligence officers and Israeli occupying soldiers dispatched in the area. A Druze officer, whom I knew well from the Border Guard, arrived at the door of my house. "You have three minutes to evacuate the house in preparation for its demolition," he told me. Indeed, my children and I removed the  furniture from the house. They only allowed me ten minutes to evacuate the house.At gunpoint, the soldiers and Border Guards forced us to stay more than 30 metres away from the house. Before my eyes, hydraulic excavators began to demolish the house. During the demolition, soldiers assaulted my nephew Ahmad Mousa Abu-Daoud Abu- Sneina. They dragged him by the shoulder and put his head under the roof gutter.Then, a number of Border Guards handcuffed him, placed him onboard a military jeep, and took him to an unknown location.