Affidavit No.: 2055/2004
2004
On 1  November 2004, my six-member family and I were in the third floor of our  home located in al-Yasmina quarter. Between 8:45 and 9:00 pm, I heard  firing in the quarter where we live. Immediately, I looked from the  window to the southwest direction, where I saw three persons. One of  them disguised in a woman clothes, and the other two in civilian  clothing, while one of them had a beard. They moved towards the place  where my nephew and his friend Majdi Mir'i were standing, 10 metres away  from my home. Then one of them moved toward Fadi and caught him from  his neck, and opened heavy fire directly at him while he was lifting his  hands up.Majdi,  who was standing with him, tried to escape after he saw what had  happened to his friend Fadi. He ran for approximately seven metres, and  then stopped and lifted his hands. One of the Israeli Special Squad  members came towards him and emptied his gun directly into Majdi’s body.  The third person of the Special Squad was standing and looking over  what was going on. I quickly went from my home to the scene. On my way  down, I saw a number of soldiers standing to the south of my home. I  then realised why Majdi stopped and did not continue running. The  Special Squad soldiers were not satisfied with what they had done, but  also they intentionally fired at both Fadi and Majdi intensively,  despite that they fell to the ground.These  soldiers were behaving in an unjustified, nasty and cruel manner. One of  them put a box of sweets he was carrying in front of Fadi’s family home  in a provocative way, and then they withdrew. As for shooting at Fadi  and Majdi, it took place without any prior notice or warning. These  forces did not even verify their identity cards. This means that the  Special Squad Unit came only to kill them in cold blood rather than  arrest them. After the withdrawal of the Israeli army, many persons came  to the scene and transferred Fadi and Majdi to Rafidiya Hospital in  Nablus, but they were dead.As for  the Special Squad, when they withdrew, they were driving two white Ford  cars, and I also saw nearby them a military patrol. After a few minutes,  Jihad Abu-Salha arrived to the scene, and when he learned of the  assassination of his friends, he went down to the first step of the  stairs overlooking the main street and tried to aim his gun at the  soldiers. They no sooner saw him than fired many bullets at him, and he  fell to the ground. At that moment, many persons carried him and took  him to Rafidiya hospital, but he was dead.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 20 November 2004Signature: Jihad Nour Yousef al-Serwan