Affidavit No. 4608/2009
2009
At around 12:30 pm on the afternoon of 16 January 2009, I was in a room on the roof of my house. I heard a demonstration going on, which I knew had started at Wasaya al-Rasoul Mosque to the south. The room where I was at the time is located on the third floor of the house, which is on Um al-Daliya Street, which branches off from al-Fahs Street that leads to Yatta. During this time, I saw three Israeli military vehicles, which I think belonged to the Border Guard Police, entering our street from the main road. The entry to the street lies about 50 metres to the north of our house.The Border Guard vehicles headed south, then turned back and stopped about 25 metres away from my house to the north, and soldiers stepped out of the vehicles. Shortly, no more than two minutes after the Border Guard vehicles had stopped to the north of my house, about 40 to 50 young men arrived in the vicinity of my house and began throwing stones in the direction of the soldiers. The soldiers responded with tear gas and bullets. I later found out that some had been injured by these bullets, which were rubber-coated bullets. I also saw one soldier kneeling in an aiming position and shooting in the direction of stone throwers. Then I saw a young man standing behind a brick block opposite my house fall down, covered with blood. I immediately went down to the street in an attempt to provide any possible assistance. When I arrived to the street, however, the military vehicles had left and I saw young men carrying the victim to the north. A Palestinian ambulance arrived and stopped at the same place where the military vehicles had been positioned earlier. The ambulance took the victim and left.While in the street, I saw a large spot of blood, around one metre or more in diameter, at the same place where the victim had fallen. I found out later that the victim was Mus'ab Da'na and that he had been martyred; the bullet fired by the army hit and penetrated his head. The timeframe between when the army stopped and when the victim was injured was no more than five minutes.