Affidavit No. 4926/2009
2009
Housing 3,000 residents, the village of ‘Arrana is located four kilometres north of the city of Jenin. My two-storey house is situated in the al-Duwwar neighbourhood in ‘Arrana. My son Lou’ay, who is 27 years old, lives with his wife and three children on the first floor. My 86-yearold handicapped mother Fatima Sa’id al-Khaldi lives in a room that is adjacent to my son’s flat.My wife, four children and I live on the second floor. There is a fenced yard in front of my house and an external staircase connecting the first and second floors. At around 1:00 am on 23 May 2009, my family and I woke up to a loud voice demanding through loudspeakers “Muhammad al-Khaldi: Get out of the house!” The shouts were repeated twice. Immediately after that, we heard the sound of strong explosions in the area surrounding our house as well as in the yard.I immediately realised that Israeli occupying forces were surrounding the house and were looking for my 22-yer-old son Muhammad. On that day, I had not seen my son in the house. This was the first time the Israeli army raided my house searching for Muhammad. I did not even know whether or not he was “wanted” by the Israeli occupying army.Upon request of one of the Israeli soldiers, who spoke to us in Arabic, all of my family members including myself went out of the house and into the yard, where I saw my son Lou’ay with his wife and little children. I also saw a large number of Israeli military jeeps and soldiers. I could not figure how many they were. I was confused and scared as this was the first time anything like that had ever happened to us.The soldiers were wearing their green military uniforms and were armed with long black weapons. Some of the soldiers had painted their faces in black, making them look scary. The Israeli troops were dispatched at the door as well as in the yard. I was in possession of a rather large sum of money, including NIS 6,000 in notes of 100; NIS 1,000 in notes of 200 and USD 600 in notes of 100. In addition, I had a sum of NIS 2,200 belonging to my son Qusay, who works at a bakery in Huwwara, in Nablus Governorate. Earlier that day, before I left the house I had given all of this money to my 47-year-old wife Arwa al-Khaldi. Then I went outside with my son Lou’ay, who was carrying his two-year-old daughter Lara. The soldiers ordered us to uplift our shirts and turn around. Then, they took us to an Israeli military jeep, which was parked at a distance of 10 metres from the house. An Israeli officer was talking to me. “Where is your son Muhammad?” he asked me in Arabic. “I have not seen him.” I answered.Upon the officer’s order, a soldier tied my hands behind my back with plastic handcuffs, tightening them a great deal and causing me severe pain. I can still feel the pain today. The soldier also tied my son Lou’ay’s hands. As for my 24-year-old son Qusay, as soon as he had left the house, soldiers severely beat him on various parts of his body. Then, they handcuffed him, forcing him to sit beside Lou’ay and myself. My wife and daughters as well as my daughterin-law and her children were still in the yard. My elderly mother remained in her room inside the house.All of a sudden, the Israeli soldiers fired sound grenades in and around the yard despite our presence there, causing us intense fear and horror. The grenades produced the sound of very strong explosions. In addition, soldiers opened fire in the air and towards the second floor of my house. Thankfully, no one was injured. Seeking protection, my wife and the rest of my family members lied on the ground. Meanwhile, my wife dropped the money. As the shooting stopped, the soldiers ordered the women to get out towards the main gate of the house, and so they did.My wife got out without having noticed that she had dropped the money. Because of the shooting, she was in a state of terror. Everybody was outside now. Upon a soldier’s request, we all sat next to each other, at a distance of 20 – 25 metres south of the house. Then, one, by one, the soldiers took us to the eastern area, where a large number of military jeeps were parked at a distance of approximately 50 metres away from the house. Once again, officers and soldiers interrogated me and my children about the whereabouts of my son Muhammad. We were held near the jeeps. Then, the soldiers took all women and children to a nearby house belonging to Ahmad Saleh al-Khaldi, while my sons and I continued to be held near the jeeps. We were detained until 4:00 am. Then, I was surprised to see a group of Israeli soldiers approach the jeeps accompanied by my son Muhammad. His hands and feet were tied with iron cuffs and a black sack was placed on his head. Soldiers brought him forth and made him stand in front of me.“This is your son Muhammad here. Why did you lie to us?” an Israeli officer asked me. He removed the sack on Muhammad’s head so that I was able to identify him. Soldiers put the black sack back on Muhammad’s head and placed him onboard a military jeep. At around 4:30 am, dozens of Israeli soldiers raided my house. I saw them entering the house because I was sitting opposite to the house and nothing obstructed my sight. They stayed inside the house until 6:00 am without reopening fire. At around 7:00 am, I saw soldiers get out of the house and back into their jeeps.They arrested Muhammad, for whom they had allegedly come, as well as my sons Lou’ay and Qusay. After they left, I went to the house where the women and children of my family had been held. My wife told me that she had dropped the money in the house yard when soldiers opened fire. I hurried to the house yard, but did not find the money. The soldiers had stolen it after they raided the yard.Five days later, my son Lou’ay was released. However, the Israeli occupying army is still holding Muhammad and Qusay. As I learnt from some citizens, the Israeli soldiers had found my son Muhammad inside a cemetery west of the village. The Israeli soldiers raided my house in a very brutal manner. They deliberately damaged contents of the house. When we returned to the house, most of the furniture and contents had been destroyed as a result of the savage searches. Wooden doors were broken, seats were torn apart, the bedroom set was damaged, and food supplies scattered all over the place. I should also highlight that my elderly mother remained inside the house during the whole incident. The Israeli soldiers had stormed and searched even her room - without any consideration for her age and bad health condition.