Affidavit No. 4384/2008
2008
At about 5:30 am on Saturday, 30 August 2008, I left my village of Jaba' in the Jenin Governorate for the city of Jerusalem. I intended to climb over the Annexation Wall surrounding the city of Jerusalem so that I could access my workplace in the Palestinian territory occupied in 1948. I had to do this because the Israeli occupying authorities refused to issue a work permit for me.At about 7:30 am that day I reached an area, the name of which I don’t know, near the city of Jerusalem. I was not alone. About 30 other Palestinian workers from various areas in the West Bank also climbed the Wall. The Wall is approximately eight metres high, constructed from concrete slabs. Once we climbed the Wall and jumped into the area behind it, we were inside the city of Jerusalem. We even jumped over the wires that are built into the Wall's cement slabs. We were then behind the Wall and walked for a distance of around 20 metres.We waited for cars with yellow registration number plates, Israeli cars, to transport us to our workplaces. So far, everything was normal. We waited in the yard of a concrete factory. I believe that the area was called 'Atarot. At this moment, a jeep belonging to the Israeli Border Guard Police suddenly entered the factory yard. The word “Police” was printed in English and Hebrew on it. We all dispersed. There were around 30 people. I ran northwards with four workers in order to try and exit the walls of the concrete factory, towards the city of Jerusalem. Suddenly, we saw three Israeli soldiers. They were carrying weapons and were in the grey military uniform of the Border Guard Police, which we knew well. I saw these soldiers running after us."Stop. Stop," they shouted when I looked back.Pointing their weapons at us, they also shouted obscenities. While I was running, I fell and injured my chin, after which two soldiers captured me. The third soldier continued to chase the other young people. The two soldiers took me to an area outside the walls of the concrete factory and made me sit on the sidewalk of a paved street. The soldiers then brought the other three youths and sat them beside me. The rest of Palestinian workers were detained inside the concrete factory. The soldiers started to insult us. Two Israeli Border Guard soldiers watched us and cursed at us.One was black skinned, with his hair combed back, thin, about 170 centimetres tall and spoke Arabic. The other one was about 27 years of age, blond, tall, fat, bearded and had green eyes. Both carried long black weapons, which they pointed at us. About ten minutes later, the blond soldier went inside the factory and the black skinned soldier remained.We were seated in an uncomfortable position; we sat in a squatting position and were not allowed to move. One worker was exhausted and placed his knees on the ground. The black skinned soldier kicked the worker on his chest, which caused him to scream in pain. Then, the soldier started to kick us one by one. I was the last to be kicked; the black soldier kicked me hard on my back and I fell on the ground, onto my face. The wound on my chin exacerbated, causing severe bleeding.The soldier approached me and began to punch me, kick me and beat me with his weapon. He continued to beat me all over my body, especially on my chest, face and back. He beat me for sporadically five minutes. He would hit me for a while and thenstop. Although the bleeding was obvious, the soldier did not pay any attention to it and continued to beat me. I felt that my right shoulder was broken. As he beat me, the soldier also shouted obscenities at me, he was cursing at me. He was in control of the situation. After the soldier stopped beating me, a worker from the city of Hebron, whose name I did not know, gave me some tissues. The black skinned soldier came along and beat me, along with the youth who gave me the tissues.At about 8:00 am, 20 minutes after were captured, other soldiers arrived and led us into the concrete factory. When the other soldiers arrived, the black skinned soldier stopped beating us. We were seated along with the rest of the Palestinian workers. My chin continued to bleed. The Israeli soldiers searched our bags, which contained food and clothes. The search was meticulous. After this, the soldiers forced us to queue one behind the other. After they got into their jeep, the soldiers led us to a Police station, an Israeli Border Guard centre. We walked for about 700 metres to the centre. Before they went inside, the soldiers took our ID cards as well as all our possessions and they forced us to sit at the entrance of the centre. We were detained under the blazing sun for about ten hours. We were held from 8:30 am until 6:00 pm. During that period, my chin continued to bleed. I did not receive any medical treatment from the Israeli Border Guards. They did not offer us any food. Instead, they brought us hot water to drink in the sweltering heat. Soldiers frequently came into and out of the centre. They rejected the other workers' request to offer me first aid.At about 6:00 pm, Israeli soldiers forced workers to sign two papers, written in Hebrew and Arabic. The first paper indicated that every worker had accessed "Israel" without the necessary permits, and the other stated that we were not subjected to any beating or abuse and that we did not loose any of our possessions. The black skinned soldier who beat me brought the two papers and demanded that I sign them. I signed the first paper, but refused to sign the second one, although I was threatened to do so, at gunpoint, by other soldiers. "Why don’t you want to sign?" the blond soldier, whom I described earlier, asked me. "Because I was beaten and injured and because I lost my mobile telephone. If I receive medical treatment and get my belongings back, I will sign that paper," I answered. I was threatened to be beaten and insulted again. The soldiers also sat me away from other workers.At about 6:30 pm, Israeli soldiers demanded that we leave the area of 'Atarot for the Qalandiya checkpoint, set up between the cities of Ramallah and Jerusalem. There, we would receive our ID cards and personal belongings. We walked for a distance of500 to 600 metres to reach Qalandiya checkpoint. When I approached the checkpoint, a driver of a Ford taxi inquired about my bleeding chin. After I explained what had happened to me, he took me to Beit Hanina Health Care Centre, where doctors x-rayed my chin and offered me the necessary medical treatment. They also stitched my chin with five stitches. Then, I went back to the Qalandiya checkpoint and received my ID card. I later returned to my village of Jaba'.As you can see, I was subjected to severe beating, which caused me pain and left me with contusions, scratches and injuries, especially in the upper part of my body. My fault was that I wanted to work inside the Green Line to sustain my family, including my father, mother and brother. I am the only breadwinner within my family and can only secure my income by working inside the Green Line.