Affidavit No. 4322/2008
2008
I, my father Samir Mar’i, and brothers Ala', 15 years, and Jamil 13 years, were present on our land, located at the northern entrance to the village of Kufr Dan. We are residents of the village of Kufr Dan, located west of the city of Jenin. We work on our land for long hours. It was about 7:00 pm on Wednesday, 9 July 2008. Everything was normal and quiet. And then, I heard two vehicles collide. When I looked at the paved street – the northern entrance to the village – which was approximately 20 metres away from us, I saw a Subaru van with a rear cabin of light green colour. I did not see its registration number plates. The van collided with a white Volkswagen car of a 1986-model. We knew the latter car; it belonged to Burhan Farhan 'Abed, a resident of the village. The vehicles collided face to face."Stop. Stop." I heard shouts in Arabic. Five persons wearing white blouses, shirts of various colours and jeans pants as well as carrying black long as well as short weapons stepped down from the van. Of these, a person had a black mask on his face. I could see all this because there were not any natural barriers between me and the northern entrance of the village. Due to their weapons, appearance and behaviour, I realised that these persons were members of the Israeli Special Forces teams.As soon as they stepped out of their military vehicle, they opened intensive fire towards a young man who was running eastwards on agricultural land. The young man had stepped down from the Volkswagen car; he was sitting beside the driver and fled to the agricultural land. He was injured and fell on the ground. He was only 15 metres ahead of the armed persons, making him an easy target. Members of the Special Forces reached the young man after he was injured. I saw them drag him from his clothes to the paved street near the two vehicles and search him. I did not notice the young man move. He did not make any sound that indicated that he was alive. Fire was opened once in the area, and was not repeated. Two members of the Special Forces carried the young man and put him in the cabin. Then, they led the Volkswagen driver into their van and rushed towards Salem Military Camp west of the city of Jenin. The Jenin-Haifa road is located northeast and leads to that military camp.The whole incident took place within ten minutes; everything seemed to be fast. After the Special Forces left, we hurried to the area. There, I saw two spots of blood; one on the agricultural land where the young man had been wounded and which is 15 metres away from the paved street, and the other one on the paved street where the young man had been dragged. Dozens of village residents also rushed to the scene.About three minutes later, an Israeli military force of five military jeeps arrived and patrolled the area. Soldiers opened fire in the air and travelled towards Salem Military Camp. l learned from citizens that the young man who was injured by the Israeli Special Forces was Talal Sa'id 'Abed, who was known to all village residents to be targeted by the Israeli occupation and wanted due to his activity in the Palestinian resistance. Two hours after he was transported to Salem Military Camp, we learned that Talal was martyred and his dead body would be handed to his family on the next day, 10 July 2008.Finally, I would like to state that Talal 'Abed did not possess any weapon. Also, an armed confrontation did not take place. Talal sustained a fatal wound as fire was opened from a close distance. I did not see him make any movement or sound after he was injured; he was stone dead when he was dragged to the paved street.