Affidavit No. 2049/2004
2004
I work as  an employee at the al-Ihsan Charitable Society in Hebron, which takes  care of thedisabled. I work as babysitter for the children and as an  assistant to the supervisor in thechildren’s division. At 1:00 a.m. 30  November 2004, I was sleeping, as were all the 70 childrenaging between  three and 14 years, all of them living with different disabilities. I am  speakingabout the children’s division because there is another division  for adults, which hosts 40disabled persons. At that hour, I heard loud  knocking at the door of the Society. It is worthnoting that the Society  premises consist of five floors, and I was on the third floor. I got up,  andthe children started crying. I went towards the door being knocked  on to see what was going on,and while I was on the stairs between the  third and second floor, I met a soldier who aimed hisweapon at me and  was followed by two other soldiers.Through  hand gestures, the first soldier ordered me to return back. I returned  back to the thirdfloor. The soldiers were loudly knocking on the doors  and shouting in Hebrew. This created astate of horror among the children  and the other women employees. I did not know what to do,vis-à-vis the  continuous knocking on the doors and the yelling of children, until the  soldierscompleted forcefully opening all of the office doors, which took  around 15 minutes. It is worthnoting that the keys of these rooms were  with me, and I tried to give them to the soldiers if theywanted to open  the office rooms, but they refused and told me to return to my room.  Afterbreaking into all the offices, the state of tension among children  eased, but we all were afraidfrom the state of chaos created by the  soldiers while we did not know what they wanted.I tried to look from the  window, but I saw a soldier aiming his gun towards me and so I  closedthe window. The soldiers were in the building for two hours,  during which we 14 employees, andall the children, were in a state of  fear and horror. After the departure of the soldiers, the womenemployees  and I went to the division the soldiers were in, the second floor,  where all theadministrative offices and accounting offices are located.  Then came the Society watchman,and we found that the doors of all seven  offices were broken, all of them sustaining damage,and that all six  computers were taken, except for one which was in the seventh room. All  thechildren and employees, including me, did not sleep until the morning  when the director of theSociety came and I told him what had happened  that night.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 11 December 2004Signature: Rana Ibrahim Mousa 'Amr