Affidavit No. 5174/2009
2009
As I mentioned before, while we were asleep, we were suddenly awakened at the sound of a large explosion. As it was very strong, it appeared that the explosion took place near the external door of the western entrance to the house. I immediately turned on the lights outside my flat, which light the internal parts of the building; that is the internal staircase and corridor. Then, I went outside of the flat.“What happened? What happened?” I shouted as I climbed down the staircase.I thought that a gas barrel had exploded. After I went out, however, I was surprised to see my mother standing in front of her flat on the internal staircase.“Army!” She said as soon as she saw me.“I am coming down! I am coming down!” I repeated.I climbed down the staircase and reached the corridor, which measures about six metres in length and about three metres in width, in front of the western external entrance of the house. There, I was surprised when I saw more than 20 Israeli soldiers wearing the standard military uniform and carrying long weapons, some of them with mounted lights. Except for two or more masked soldiers, all of the other soldiers had their faces uncovered. As they were positioned along the aforementioned corridor, they pointed their weapons at me as soon as they saw me. A soldier, whose face was uncovered, asked me for my name in Arabic. I did not pay attention to whether a light was installed on his weapon or not.“Jihad.” I answered.He demanded that I lift up my shirt, which I did. Then, he ordered me to take off my trousers and to put them on again, as well as to turn around to the right and left, which I also did. Then, a number of soldiers approached me and grabbed my arm. Some soldiers yelled and inquired about my name, which I answered. Shouting, they also inquired about my ID card number, but I replied that I did not have it memorised. I kept asking them why they yelled, but they beat me with their feet, fists and rifles on every part of my body. I shouted at them, asking them why they were doing that. A soldier threatened that if I did not keep silent, he would shoot me. After I was beaten for a minute or so, a soldier secured my hands forcefully behind my back with plastic handcuffs and directed me to the western entrance; that is to the external door. There, I discovered that the explosion had hit the iron door, because it was removed from its place. I estimated that the soldier who had first talked to me was around 40 years of age. He inquired about the names of my brothers living in the house.“Ghassan, Nihad and I” I replied.As soon as Ghassan reached the landing, and without prior notice, four or five bullets were fired on him swiftly and directly by the soldiers who were positioned around me. At that moment, I was shocked and had not expected that this would have happened. Therefore, I did not distinguish the soldier or soldiers who had opened fire. Immediately after the shots were fired, Ghassan fell on his face on the landing and flight of stairs. He was soaked with blood and did not utter a word.“You killed him. Why did you do that?” I yelled, but no one answered.Directly afterwards, I was taken out to the street west of the house. I stayed on the street for two minutes and kept shouting. Another soldier came and threatened that if I did not keep silent, I would be shot and killed. Later, a number of soldiers led me to the corridor into the house. My family members, who were present on the staircase outside their flats, screamed because Ghassan had been killed. While I stood in the corridor, I saw my brother Ghassan lying on the ground with a number of soldiers several metres away from him. Shortly after I was forced into the house, a soldier demanded that I get all those present in the house out onto the street. After calling them, soldiers forced all of my family members and I outside. Several minutes after I reached the street, another soldier wearing the standard military uniform and carrying a long weapon approached me and identified himself as an Intelligence officer. I estimated that he was in his fifties. He asked me who had been shot.“My brother Ghassan.” I replied. “Why did you kill him? Why did you do that?” I went on.“Why did he flee?” he commented.“You lie.” I replied.In the meantime, my mother screamed and asked for an ambulance.“Now we will bring an ambulance!” The Intelligence officer replied sarcastically.The officer asked me how many floors were in the building, and I said there were three. Then, he went away.I said I could not sit because my legs hurt me. After standing for several minutes, a soldier told me to walk. Meanwhile, a soldier told me to walk at a slow pace and I felt that I was climbing down a staircase. After I walked for several metres, I was forced to sit down on a solid object. I sat for half an hour (I am estimating the period of time). During this time, I heard a number of male and female soldiers laughing. Later, I was forced to walk the same distance, which I mentioned above. On the staircase, a soldier told me to walk slowly. Then, I was placed onboard of the APC. After it drove for several minutes, a number of soldiers took me down and removed the blindfold and handcuffs. I realised I was near the Huwwara checkpoint and a soldier demanded that I go home.After I waited for several minutes for an Arab car to transport me, I reached the city of Nablus in less than half an hour. I looked at my watch, which indicated it was 9:00 am. When I reached my house, many people were offering condolences for the death of my brother Ghassan. I was not surprised; I knew that he had been martyred from the very first moment. My family told me that the dead body of my brother had been transported to the Rafidia Hospital in the city of Nablus. Therefore, I went to the hospital, which I reached in about five minutes. At the hospital, I saw my cousin Farid (about 45 years old) and asked him where the corpse of Ghassan was. He said that it was downstairs, referring to the mortuary. I hurried down and I saw many people there.