Affidavit No. 5054/2009
2009
My name is „Ammar „Abd-al-Rahman Rajab Abu-Warda. I am 29 years old, married and a father of a two-month old daughter. I live with my family on al-Falouja Street in Jabalya refugee camp in the governorate of Northern Gaza.With help of some persons and institutions, I received another transfer for medical treatment at Tal Hashomer Hospital on 4 June 2009. I was scheduled to start my treatment on 10 June 2009. However, I was not able to go to the hospital because the Israeli occupying authorities refused to allow me to travel to Israel. According to the Civil Affairs Coordination Office at the Palestinian Ministry of Health, the Israeli authorities refused to grant me a permit to access Israel and resume my treatment at Tal Hashomer Hospital. The Civil Affairs Coordination Office is the only Palestinian authority that is competent to apply for permits and to carry out the relevant coordination with the Israeli authorities. Having reported to the Office, I received a paper on which the word “Denied” was written in Hebrew. Employees at the Office informed me that Israeli Intelligence officers at Erez Crossing Point wanted to see me on 10 July 2009 to decide whether to grant me a permit to enter Israel to continue my medical treatment. Bewildered at such a request, I returned home.Later, I received a call on my personal cellular telephone from an Israeli Intelligence officer, who claimed that his name was Moshe. He requested that I give him information about the area where I lived as well as information about what was going on in the area. He asked me about what people talked about. Before I attended the scheduled interview with the Israeli Intelligence, “Moshe” called me four additional times on my telephone, on various days. He demanded that I cooperate with the Israeli Intelligence and provide information in return for helping me obtain a permit to access Israel and receive medical treatment. He said that the best physicians in Israel would follow up on my condition and provide all services necessary for my treatment at the expense of the Israeli Intelligence. The last time he called me, he demanded that I take the initiative and make telephone calls.“I will not call you, I will wait for your call to ask me for help.” He said. I refused, and I told him “If you provide me with information about Israel, I will give you information about Gaza strip” After that, “Moshe” did not telephone me anymore.Having coordinated with the Coordination Office at the Palestinian Ministry of Health, I travelled to Erez Crossing to report to the Israeli Intelligence on the morning of 10 July 2009. An Israeli Intelligence officer interrogated me. He inquired about the illness I suffer from, the doctors who supervised my health conditions, and the treatment methods I underwent. The Interrogator, however, accused me of counterfeiting all medical papers and reports in collaboration with physicians in Gaza, so that I could enter Israel for a job opportunity.“Report to the Coordination Office.” He said and told me to leave.A week later, I reported to the Coordination Office at the Ministry of Health in Gaza. The employees told me to renew the appointment at Tal Hashomer Hospital. Accordingly, I made a new appointment for 11 August 2009. I submitted an application to the Coordination Office at the Ministry of Health for a permit to access Israel and receive treatment. Two days later, I reported to the Coordination Office. Again, employees said that the Israeli occupying authorities refused to grant me a permit without stating any reasons. They handed me a paper, on which the word “Denied” was typed in Hebrew.My medical treatment has been suspended for a while because hospitals in the Gaza Strip are unable to treat me in light of the chronic shortages in capacities, medicines, medical equipment and specialists due to the siege imposed on the Gaza Strip.Despite all these circumstances, I managed to obtain a new appointment at Tal Hashomer Hospital on 6 October 2009. This time, I hope that the Israeli occupying authorities allow me to access Israel and continue my medical treatment.