Affidavit No. 2307/2005
2005
I am a  citizen from al-Khas village located 6 kilometres east of Bethlehem. The  population of my village is approximately 500 persons. The area of the  village lands is 7 thousand dunums, most of which is agricultural land  planted with olive and almond trees. The sufferings of the village began  when the Israeli occupying forces started constructing the Separation  Wall on the village lands. It separates the village from more than 2000  dunums of its lands (previously declared to be lands inside Jerusalem).  At the beginning of 2000, the construction of the Wall and a bypass road  connecting the central part of Jerusalem with the settlements in the  southern West Bank started on the lands of al-Khas village. Moreover,  the Wall and the bypass road intersect on the village lands. In 2003,  500 olive trees were uprooted and tens of dunums were bulldozed for the  construction of the Wall and the road. Moreover, the citizens of al-Khas  received military orders confiscating 150 dunums of al-Khas lands for  the construction of a commercial road linking Jerusalem with the  southern West Bank.Due to  the fact that al-Khas and al-Nu知an villages form one cluster (al-Nu知an  is only two hundred meters from al-Khas), the inhabitants of the two  villages resorted together to an Israeli lawyer named Shlomo Liker to  assist them with stopping the construction of the Wall and to move its  route away from the lands of the two villages. The Wall cuts off 2000  dunums of al-Khas lands, including the village cemetery, and puts 200  persons from al-Nu知an village with all its lands (5000 dunums) behind  the Wall. The 200 persons from al-Nu知an village hold West Bank ID  cards, which means that they are exposed to evacuation from their lands  at any time, especially since the lands of al-Nu知an village are  considered to lie within Jerusalem痴 borders. After paying 70 thousand  shekels for this lawyer, he was only able to stop the construction of  the one kilometre of the Separation Wall that had not been constructed  yet (between al-Khas and its lands towards al-Nu知an). The lawyer also  reached an agreement with the Israeli government to change the route of  the Wall in such a way that it goes behind the cemetery. Work on the  Wall was stopped until a solution was found for al-Nu知an痴 inhabitants  to either remain behind the Wall or be evacuated. The decision to stop  construction of the Wall was in 2004. The lawyer went to the Israeli  Supreme court and negotiated with the Israeli government in order to  issue a judicial writ.After the  Supreme Court decision in March 2005 which confirmed the route of the  Separation Wall as set out in the Israeli government plans, the  construction of the Wall resumed, separating al-Khas village from its  lands while al-Nu知an village remained behind the Wall (this is the one  kilometre that was not completed before). On 18 April 2005, the Israeli  bulldozers started bulldozing agricultural lands owned by Muhammad Salem  Khamis Hmeidan (70 years old, from al-Khas village) in addition to  cutting more than 25 olive trees (30 years old) before uprooting them.  Also, 20 olive trees were cut down on the lands of Ahmad Abu-Sitta  al-Dar'awi, to be uprooted later on. Another 5 dunum land owned by  Muhammad Salem Khamis Hmeidan was bulldozed. Consequently, the village  citizens lost all of its lands that now located behind the Wall,which is  constructed close to the village homes. For example, it is only 100  meters away from my home.The  impact of this Wall will be tragic on the residents of al-Nu知an village  who will be separated from the remaining parts of the West Bank.  Moreover, the social relations of these citizens will cease because  nobody will be able to enter the village except its residents because of  the Israeli soldiers who are present in the area continuously and in  great numbers.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 21 April 2005Signature: Ziyad Hmeidan