Affidavit No. 3971/2007
2007
I work as the head of the village council in al-Ma’sara, where I am a resident. The village is located 15 kilometres to the south of Bethlehem, and has 1000 inhabitants. Al-Ma’sara comprises 6000 dunums of land, 40% of which is agricultural land planted with olive and almond trees as well as grape vines; and 140 buildings, some with one apartment while others have several. At the eastern edge of al-Ma’sara are the villages of Manshiya and Khalet al-Haddad, to the north Abu- Njeim, and Thabra, to the west Jorat al-Sham’a and Marah M’alla, and to the south Marah M’alla. 50 dunums are owned by Mousa ‘Leiyyan Brijiyya at the intersection of the Efrat settlement and road 60. As well, there are 150 dunums in the Abu-Sbeih valley, parallel to the eastern wall of the Efrat settlement, and owned by Hasan ‘Ali Zawahra. These lands are agricultural lands that were officially registered and belonged to citizens from al-Ma’sara, who, when they died, passed the ownership on to their inheritors from al-Ma’sara.Twenty days ago, the Israelis cleared the land of the late Mousa ‘Leiyyan Brijiyya, comprising 50 dunums at the intersection of Efrat settlement and road 60, also referredto as “Jerusalem-Hebron road”. Several civilian vehicles owned by an Israeli company started clearing the land and they uprooted 60 grape vines. This was on the morning of15 November 2007, around 7:00 am, as reported by taxi drivers who drive on line 60 and phoned the inhabitants of al-Ma’sara with the news. I, along with some residents of al-Ma’sara and owners of the land, headed to the location. When we arrived at around 8:30 am, I saw a “GBC” backhoe digging up the soil and loading the uprooted grape vines onto a truck directly next to the line 60. I shouted at the truck driver, who was an Arab working for an Israeli company from Nazareth. He stopped and stepped out of the vehicle. He told me in Arabic that he works on a project from Hertzilia to Elat, and didn’t know that this land belongs to Arabs, thinking instead that it belonged to the Efrat settlement. I assured him that this land is Palestinian. I also pointed out that he did not have a work permit from the civil administration, and told him to leave. He immediately left the land in his truck and promised to never come back.Accompanied by around 20 citizens from the village and several foreigners united in solidarity, we stayed on the land. At around 9:30 am, a white jeep arrived at the location.At that time, a blue police jeep, two regular army jeeps, and a green or white – I don’t recall which one of the two – Toyota car of the Efrat Settlement guard, were alreadypresent when they arrived. They were three to ten metres away from us and from the backhoe driver, but none of them intervened. When the white jeep of the Civil Administration arrived, an officer stepped out. I knew he was an officer before he came because the soldiers asked us to talk to officer Nabil on their phone, but I refused. Sothey told him by phone to come, and he did. He was no older than 30 years, 170 centimetres tall, in regular military attire, and carrying a short M16 weapon. He was Druze, and spoke Arabic with a Druze accent. He introduced himself as the infrastructure officer at the Civil Administration, and told me that this land was  confiscated by a military order from the year 1982. I asked him to show me the order, but he refused and asked me for the deeds to title of the land. I responded that I would present them in court. He then said that this land was not mine, and so I told him to show me proof that it was his. In turn he said, “I will stop the work on the land today, because the company started the work on the land without the permission of its owners, but I will let them come back the next day to widen the streets of the Efrat settlement.” I told him that without a permit from the court we would not let them work, and that we would prevent them from doing so until the court makes a decision. He told me that I didn’t have the right to stop the work the next day, and that he would use force against us. Subsequently at 12:00 pm, he left the land with all the forces then present.They have not come to work on the land since that day, but I know that it was the mayor of Efrat municipality who ordered them to work on this land, without any decision having been issued by the court. Several residents confirmed that the mayor of Efrat had admitted to having done so, as did the security chief at the “Didia” settlement”. The fact that they have never came back to work since that day confirms my assumption.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 8 December 2007.Signature: Mahmoud SuleimanName not withheldField researcher: Ziyad Hmeidan