Affidavit No. 2951/ 2006
2006
I am a woman from Toulkarem. I work as a secretary at the International Committee for the Red Crescent. I got married in 1990 and I have three boys and one daughter. My sons are Nayef Ghassan Walid Mahmoud (14 years), Ahmad (13 years), and Khaled (one and a half years) and my daughter is 'Oula (10 years). After giving birth to Nayef, it was discovered that he suffers from a disease called Haemophilia A. If a haemophiliac is wounded or receives a blow, he may die from internal or external bleeding. Those who suffer from this disease usually take a medicine called “FACTOR,” which helps make the blood clot. If they do not take this medicine when they are wounded, they will bleed to death. My three sons Nayef, Ahmad and Khaled have Haemophilia and all of them are treated with FACTOR when they are wounded or subjected to any slight incident while playing with their friends at home or at school.I am very careful to make sure that my children do not suffer accidents that might cause them to bleed. If one of them is injured, I carry him straight to Toulkarem Governmental Hospital to receive treatment with this medicine. The medicine, an injection given to the patient to induce blood clotting, is very expensive. In the past, the Palestinian Ministry of Health provided the medicine, but for the last two months, after the latest developments in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the Ministry has run out of stock and the medicine has become unavailable.I will say little about my daily suffering as a result of the shortage of this medicine. My son Ahmad received a blow on his left ankle several days ago. I took him to the hospital as usual and asked the doctor to give him an injection to stop the internal bleeding in the location of the injury. To my surprise, the doctor told me that the medicine was not available in the hospital. Because my son did not receive the medicine, the cartilage in his ankle was damaged and he is now disabled.My three sons are in danger of death if this medicine is not provided to hospitals immediately and continuously. I cannot express my fear when I see my children playing, likely to be hit or wounded like any children. I appeal to Al-Haq, Law in the Service of Man, to immediately intervene so as to ensure that the above-mentioned medicine is provided in hospitals, through concerned and specialized European organizations. In this context, I ask Al-Haq to present the tragedy of my children to all concerned parties. Please help me as soon as possible. May I find somebody who has a conscience to save the lives of these children in their prime.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 7 May 2006Signature: Amani Mahmoud