Affidavit No. 2595/2005
2005
At  approximately 2:30 am on Tuesday, 27 September 2005, I was awoken by the  noise of Israeli military vehicles moving in the vicinity of my home  located in the Kmeil Quarter. When my family (my wife and 9 children)  heard shooting, we all got up. The situation continued until 3:00 am,  when we heard the military jeeps' megaphones say, "Abu-al-Kamel get out  of the house, the Israeli Defense Army is encircling your home." I  quickly went to open the door. There I saw a number of Israeli soldiers  spread out in front of my house, in addition to a number of military  jeeps.In  Arabic, the Israeli soldiers asked me to lift up my clothes from the  upper half of my body, and then to pull down my clothes on the lower  half of my body, which I did, but then they asked me to remove my  underwear, which I absolutely refused to do. They then told me to walk  towards them.When I  reached one of the jeeps, a medium sized brown skinned Israeli officer  got out of it. He asked me to tell him the names of my children,  starting with the eldest. He then made me repeat their names again. I  started with my eldest son, Kamel Abu-Zeid, who is 18 years old, and the  officer interrupted me and said, "Where is Kamel?" I told him he was in  the house. He then asked me to go and get Kamel out of the house, which  I did. As soon as Kamel left the house, one of the Israeli soldiers  cuffed his hands behind his back with a piece of plastic, blindfolded  his eyes, and put him in the jeep I was standing next to.The  above-mentioned soldier asked me to evacuate the rest of my family from  the house. I ordered my wife Kawthar Abu-Zeid (35 years old),  'Abd-al-Rahman (15 years old), Sawsan (13 years old), Sana' (12 years  old), Basel (10 years old), Na'el (8 years old), Hiba (5 years old),  Yasmin (4 years old), and Hala (1 year old) to evacuate our home, and  they did so. The soldiers then ordered my wife and children to go to a  yard located opposite our home whilst I remain beside the jeep.At the  same time, the soldiers began interrogating my son, Kamel, asking him  about weapons in the house. "Where are the arms which you have inside  your home?" Kamel answered, "There are no arms inside our house." The  soldiers then assaulted him and beat him in front of me. When Kamel  started to shout in pain, I ran towards him to ask the soldiers to stop  beating him. As a result, the soldiers threatened me and told me to  return to where I was originally standing. At that moment, around 20  soldiers took Kamel out of the jeep and beat him severely with their  feet, hands, and the butts of their guns, whilst continuously asking  him, "Where are the arms?" My wife, children and I began crying, but the  soldiers kept on beating him. My wife and I could no longer watch our  son being beaten, and we ran towards the soldiers and asked them to stop  beating him. They then put Kamel back in the jeep. Again theofficer  asked about the weapons in our home. I swore that there were no weapons  inside our home. The officer said, "Abu-Kamel you will regret this if we  find any weapons inside your home." Then he asked if there was anybody  else inside the house, and I answered no.At this  moment, specifically at 3:30 am, additional Israeli forces arrived in  the area. I saw approximately 15 soldiers breaking into our home; all of  them were carrying guns with lasers, and wearing night goggles on their  eyes. The soldiers stayed for around half an hour inside our home,  during which they carried out search operations. From outside, we could  hear the sounds of them breaking the porcelain and glass contents of our  home. The soldiers then left the house, carrying a big suitcase which  they had taken from our home, and put it in one of the jeeps.Meanwhile,  approximately 80 other soldiers accompanied by three big dogs broke  into our home. These soldiers remained in our home until 6:00 am before  they started to leave. As they were leaving, I saw a wire with a button  at the end in the hand of one of the soldiers. To me, this meant the  wire was running through the inside of our home. Then, I realised that  the Israeli army wanted to explode and demolish my home. Feeling both  angry and sad, I hurried towards the wire in order to cut it and stop  the demolition, but the soldiers threatened to shoot me. I looked down  at myself and saw tens of small laser red lights on my body. I knew that  the soldiers would kill me if I cut the wire, so I returned to my wife  and children. The soldiers took us around 80 metres away from our house,  and the jeeps started to move away too. At 7:00 am the demolition took  place.Our home,  which provided shelter for my children, turned into piles of stones  within seconds. My son Kamel was arrested and the Israeli army claimed  that the suitcase which they had taken from our home contained bombs,  weapons, and ammunition. Even if their claim was correct, why did the  army demolish our home? They could have seized it instead. It seems that  they were punishing us for something we did not commit. I currently  live with my family in a rented house and I do not know what is going to  happen to my son, Kamel. It is worth noting that my son Kamel was  neither an activist, nor wanted to be one, and this was the first time  that the Israeli army broke into our home.The  Israeli occupation destroyed my life and demolished the home I built,  through considerable exhaustion and suffering, for the shelter and  protection of my wife and children. It is a brutal and cruel occupation  that deprives man of his son, home, and future.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 1 October 2005Signature: Kamal Abu-Zeid