Affidavit No. 5505/2010
2010
I am a Palestinian who was born and raised in the city of East Jerusalem. As a permanent resident, I live in this city with an Israeli issued Jerusalem ID card issued by the Israeli Ministry of Interior. I nominated myself to become a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) in the second term of the Palestinian legislative elections, which were held on 25 January 2006. My nomination was through the “Reform and Change” List. The elections were approved by both the Israeli occupying authorities and Palestine Liberation Organisation. Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem participated in those elections by nominating and polling. It is well known that a polling station was situated in an Israeli post office along Salah al-Din Street in East Jerusalem. The “Reform and Change” List made an overwhelming victory in the elections. I was among those who won and became a member of the PLC with the Jerusalem electoral constituency.Two hours later, the brothers and I were relocated to the „Ofar Prison near the town of Beituniya in Ramallah. In the „Ofar Prison, I gave a statement on the detention conditions of our two hour arrest. Seventeen days after I had been detained, the Judicial Advisor to the occupying State refused the order of my administrative detention (arrest without charge or trial) as it had no legal arguments, either public or concealed. The brothers and I stood in front of an Israeli judge at the „Ofar military court twice. Each time, the judge issued a decision to release me but the Public Prosecution appealed the court order. I do not remember the name of the judge. According to the information I received, he was not convinced by the reasons for me and the other brothers to be detained. Therefore, he went on leave for a year.Over the course of two and a half years, I stood in front of other judges on approximately 162 occasions. Each time, I would repeat what I said during the interrogation sessions; I said that I was a legitimate PLC member in accordance with Palestinian and Israeli understandings and that I was not affiliated with the Hamas movement. Within the PLC, I represented the Reform and Change List which had nothing to do with the Hamas movement. In our last trial session at the „Ofar court, I remember the Prosecutor General requesting that an Israeli expert appear before the court. I remember that his surname was Shanhav. His face was covered when he appeared in court so as not to recognise him. In his testimony, he said that a group of students and himself had developed a study which concluded by confirming that a close relationship was in place between the Hamas movement and the “Reform and Change” List. Based on his testimony, an Israeli female judge sentenced me to prison for three and a half years.“You will stay here at least six years. Sheikh „Aziz Dwaik will stay longer”, the Prosecutor General once told me and the rest of the brothers.I was released on 2 November 2009 after I had served my sentence. Since then, I have not been subjected to much harassment by the occupying security agencies. On one occasion, I was detained at the Hizma checkpoint for two hours. On another, Israeli Intelligence and Jerusalem Police officers visited my house, but did not threaten me or cause me harm.“We will keep your ID cards in a safe and we will keep it for the Israeli Ministry of Interior. From this day on, you will not have the right to use any documents that may prove your residency in Jerusalem. Your presence in Jerusalem will be in accordance with a temporary permit for a period of 30 days. The permit will expire on 2 July 2010. After this date, you will be treated in line with the laws of the State of Israel as infiltrators into the land of the State,” the Intelligence officer told both, Minister and myself.