Affidavit No. 1978/2004
2004
On  Wednesday, 15 September 2004, at 12:30 pm, I was going out of a narrow  alleyway located in the Industrial Area where I live and work, heading  towards the shop where I work as a mechanic. I saw two cars, a Jeep and a  Mercedes-Benz, stopped in front of the shops of Fawwaz Zakarna and  Abu-al-'Abed Saba’na, located opposite of the alleyway from where I was  coming. One of the cars was white and the other silver, and both had  Palestinian registration plates and inside them were old and used stuff  such as old cupboards and beds and similar things.Suddenly,  I saw approximately eight persons wearing civilian clothing get out of  the two cars. Two of them were putting masks on their heads, and were  also carrying short weapons known as "M-16 short.” Immediately they  started to fire at Fawwaz Zakarna's shop, where several young men,  including Fawwaz Zakarna himself, were gathering. When I saw and heard  the gunfire, I hurriedly returned to the alleyway through which I came  and took shelter there because gunfire was coming from all directions. I  then realised that these people were from the Special Israeli teams.  Firing was taking place without any notice or warning.I started  to hear and see what was going on in at the scene as I was only around  10 metres away from it. I saw a tall brown-skinned person with a long  beard firing at Fawwaz Zakarna's shop. Firing continued for  approximately five minutes or a little more, then it stopped. I tall saw  this same tall brown-skinned person remove a back box with two weapons  from a stolen Daihatsu car parked in front of the Zakarna shop. He then  put the two weapons in one of the two aforementioned jeeps. I also saw  two young men lying on the ground in front of the Zakarna shop. I  realised that they were dead because they did not make any movement. One  of the masked men who was with the special Israeli team was standing at  their heads. I did not hear any further shooting. At that moment,  military jeeps and two machineries arrived at the scene while the two  jeeps that were carrying the Special Squads left. The Israeli army  remained at the place for about five minutes and then they left.I ran  quickly to Fawwaz Zakarna's shop where I saw Fawwaz, whom I know very  well, and his brother Fadi lying on the ground while they were bleeding  heavily. I knew that they were martyred, especially Fadi, who was  bleeding from his head, chest, face, and all parts of his body. I found  out later that Fawwaz had been wanted by the Israeli army due to his  activities with the Islamic Jihad. Inside the shop, I also saw a third  person lying on his back on the ground who was also bleeding from his  chest. He was also killed and his name was Mu’ath Sirisi, from the  village of Siris in the Jenin Governorate. Then I saw 'Arafat al-Sa’di,  the owner of a shop located exactly near Zakarna shop. Arafat pointed  out a fourth young man inside his shop. I went there and saw a young man  lying on his back and bleeding from the chest, head and many parts of  his body, and part of his brain was outside his head. I knew that his  name is Ibrahim al-Sirisi, also from Siris village. I did not know these  two Sirisi men, and later I found out that they were traders of stolen  cars and they were not wanted by the Israeli forces.After a  short time Palestinian ambulances came and carried the four martyrs to  Jenin Governmental Hospital. I also would like to point out that I saw  Shuja’ Nathmi, an activist in Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades and wanted by the  Israeli army, running from the place of the incident and escape to the  north while two persons from the Special Squads were runningafter him  and firing at him. I also know that Abu-al-'Abed Saba’na, the business  partner of Fawwaz Zakarna, had been injured and arrested by the Israeli  Special Squads.It is  worth noting that firing at these four persons had taken place from  close range, less than two metres, and without any warning. I would also  like to mention that none of these four men fired at the Israeli  Special Squads, which means that no confrontations took place between  the two sides during the incident.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 16 September 2004Signature: Fares Muhammad Salim Zidan