Affidavit No. 3945/2007
2007
On 7 November 2007, I was at home with my 63 year old husband, Muhammad, and my sons Jibril, 24, Hashem, 20, ‘Abd-al-Naser, 17, ‘Abdallah , 29, and Amal, 37. Our house comprises three floors and is located in the Balata Refugee Camp. All my family members were sleeping on the second and third floors, but I was still awake and sitting on the second floor.At approximately 12:30 am, I heard numerous vehicles and realised that they were Israeli patrols. Besides the noise of the vehicles, I also heard a voice cursing through a loudspeaker. Those bad words were not directing at anybody particular. I looked through the northwest window overlooking the street to see what was going on. As I looked, I saw a number of soldiers standing on the roof of our neighbour, Majed Ka’bi’s, building, which is directly adjacent to our building on the northwest side. I also saw several patrols stopping in the street on the south side of our house with their vehicle lights on.I looked for only a few moments and turned away from the window to find that my husband and sons were awake, having heard curses through the loudspeakers, and were wondering what was going on in the street. I told my family what I had seen.After two minutes, something suddenly happened. The Israeli soldiers blasted the south entrance of our building without any prior notice. Immediately, approximately 12 soldiers raided our house. These soldiers were dressed in military uniform, carried long weapons and wore helmets on their heads. One of the soldiers shouted at us, ordering us to sit on the ground. I realised that the person who was shouting and giving orders was an officer because he had the officers’ insignia on his shoulders. This officer was slim and tall, around 35 years old, with a small beard, and was accompanied by another officer with insignia on his shoulders who was short with light brown skin and was around 30 years old.The slim officer continued talking in Arabic and asked for the identity cards of all the male family members. After he took the IDs he asked my sons to raise their upper clothing. He then asked us about my son, Hani, who was wanted by the Israeli army,accused of resisting the occupation. I told him that Hani was not at home and that I had not seen him for more than a month. After that, the officer told us to go down to the first floor where we were all put in one room. The soldiers spread throughout our house and closed the door of the room where we were held. We stayed in that room for four hours, during which we heard the destruction of furniture and a dog barking inside our house. The short officer then entered the room and ordered us to go outside to the street a few metres from the entrance of our home. The slim officer came and told us that they wanted to blast some of the front wall of the first floor. At that moment I asked the officer to let me enter into the house to get some official papers such as our birth certificates and other documents.He gave me only five minutes to do that. I went to the second floor where I found a large number of soldiers who, when they saw me, aimed their weapons at me. The officer came directly afterwards and spoke to them in a language which I did not understand. The soldiers then let me go to the second floor where the documents were kept in a cupboard. But I found the cupboard thrown on the ground with all its contents inside, and I could not lift it to retrieve the documents. Moreover, in all the rooms I found furniture broken, including a TV, bed, chairs and other items.As a result of the mess and destruction, I could not find the papers and left the house. The slim soldier then told us to go farther away from the house. We went about 50 metres to the east, and after five minutes a strong explosion occurred in our home and we heard our windows and those of our neighbour’s home breaking. The dust spread all over our home and the surrounding houses.Following the explosion, the Israeli soldiers left after they returned our IDs. We entered the house and saw the volume of destruction. On the first floor, the north, west and east walls were destroyed and had cracks in the ceiling, and all the furniture, clothes, kitchen utensils, TV, electric appliances, etc., were severely damaged as a result of the explosion. I went to the second floor despite the danger caused by the blasting of the first floor. There I also found cracks in the walls and the couches were torn, while cupboards and beds were broken and thrown on the floor. Moreover, all the food supplies, including sugar, flour, rice, oil and other food stuffs, were thrown on the floor.On the third floor, which was not yet furnished, the walls were also cracked. To end, I would like to mention that engineers told us that the house is not fit to live in, and is in danger of falling down at any time. The Israeli army did all this to us on the pretext of searching for my 20 year old son, Hani.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 8 November 2007Signature: ‘Eisha Ka’biName not withheldField Researcher: Yousef Qawariq