Affidavit No. 2827/2006
2006
I am a resident of Toubas and I move between Toubas and Bardala because I am a vegetable trader. It is worth noting that most of Bardala’s farmers are from Toubas. I work as a mediator between vegetable traders from inside Israel and the Bardala farmers. The farmers bring their vegetables to my centre in Bardala in stages. At around ten in the morning, the traders with trucks of vegetable from inside the Green Line come to my centre to upload their vegetables, pay me money against the vegetables they buy, and then leave through Bardala barrier, which was established many years ago at the bypass road No. 90. This job was profitable for me and my monthly salary reached approximately 15,000 shekels, especially as the vegetables of the Jordan Valley (al-Aghwar) are valued by Israeli citizens because they are cheaper than those from Israel and are of the same quality.This situation lasted for several years until 16 October 2005, when an Israeli military order was issued, banning any Israeli citizen from transferring or transporting vegetables through Bardala barrier. Israelis could only receive al-Aghwar vegetables through al-Jalama crossing, which is 120 kilometres away from Bardala. To arrive at al-Jalama crossing point, our trucks must pass Tayasir barrier, which sometimes requires around four hours. It is important to note that al-Jalama crossing allows the entry of our produce only until noon.This military order has destroyed the agricultural wealth of the Jordan Valley. I can no longer meet with merchants from Israel, and all arrangements take place by phone. Moreover, I have to pay the expenses of transporting the vegetables to al-Jalama crossing. Farmers also have to bring their produce all the day to Bardala and leave it for two days, then I transport it to al-Jalama crossing through Tayasir barrier, and this process makes the produce deteriorate in quality and consequently, much of its price. Furthermore, because I cannot meet with the Israeli merchants, they impose on me the prices they find suitable for them and many times they return boxes of vegetables after several days on the pretext that they are not saleable.Since October 2005, I have been experiencing financial losses, as have Palestinian farmers generally. Moreover, and most importantly, making al-Aghwar farmers export their vegetables to Israel through al-Jalama crossing has created a competition between al-Aghwar farmers and Jenin farmers. As the latter are closer to al-Jalama crossing, their vegetables reach the crossing fresher and at less cost. It is worth noting that the distance between Bardala village and Israel after crossing the barrier is only three kilometres.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 4 March 2006Signature: Ahmad Sawafta