Affidavit No. 6564/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Widad Mousa Yousef ‘Ubeid, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 902161173, born on 25 August 1962, employee, and a resident of the ‘Ein Deir Bahha area, Hebron city, Hebron governorate, would like to declare the following:I am a 53-year-old retired teacher who is married to Maher Ribhi ‘Ubeid,. My husband has been administratively detained (held without charge or trial) by Israeli occupying forces on ten different occasions. He was also arrested twice by the Palestinian security agencies. He was held for a period of not more than one week on each occasion. The Palestinian and Israeli security agencies accused my husband of affiliating with Hamas, but never took him to court or convicted him with this charge. I have a daughter from Maher. Her name is Banan and she is about eight years old.About a year ago, my husband left the country to perform ‘Umrah (pilgrimage) in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. That was the first time he was allowed to travel abroad in about 20 years. After he had performed ‘Umrah, my husband came back to Palestine then decided to travel to Syria to study business administration at the University of Damascus. About 11 months ago, that was a month after my husband had left the country, -, my daughter and I tried to travel to Syria to spend ‘Eid al-Fitr holiday with my husband but we were turned away from the border by the occupying authorities without being given any reasons. They did not allow us to travel to see him!On 4 July 2011, my daughter and I tried, once again, to travel in order to spend several days with my husband. I was afraid that I would again be turned away from the border, so I arranged for my daughter Banan to travel abroad with a relative of her father if we are not allowed to pass. On that day, my daughter and I arrived at the Israeli crossing point at around 6:00 pm., I was asked to wait aside and then at t 9:30 pm, a security officer finally brought my passport back but demanded that I accompany him to the bus so as to be sent back. He told me that I was prohibited from travelling for security reasons. When I asked him about my daughter’s passport, he said that he did not know about it. Only after I protested, they searched for it and told me that she was also prohibited from travelling for security reasons. About 15 minutes later, my daughter’s passport was brought back. An Israeli security officer accompanied us to a bus in order to be taken back to the Palestinian territory.The fact that they prevented my daughter and myself from travelling constitutes a restriction of our freedom of movement. It is a punishment against us. This along with the fact that they would not allow my daughter to even travel without me, has exerted an adverse psychological impact on her. She was looking forward to seeing her father and spending time with him. When Banan was told that she was prevented from travelling, she burst into tears and screamed at the Israeli security officers and employees on the Bridge.I expect that my husband will stay outside the country for another three years until he has completed his degree.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 8 August 2011