Affidavit No. 1724/2004
2004
I have  been principal of Beit 'Our al-Tira Basic Co-Ed School since 2000, and  in attendanceare 320 male and female students from the villages of Beit  'Our and al-Tira, as well as 15teachers. The school was established in  the 1930s, and it is located on the west edge of thetown. A settlement  called Beit Horon was established nearby the town. Over time,  thesettlement expanded at the expense of Beitouniya lands west of  Ramallah. Its expansionwas towards Beit ‘Our town lands. This expansion  was parallel to the main street in thevillage, which was used for 15  years as a main street linking Jerusalem with Tel Aviv. Afterthat, a  highway was constructed parallel to Beit 'Our street, which the settlers  of Beit Horonand the residents of Beit 'Our used. It is the only street  that the students can reach thevillage school through the eastern gate.It is  worth mentioning that the highway that was constructed to link Jerusalem  with Tel Aviv,and which is parallel to Beit 'Our’s main street, has  separated Beit 'Our from Al-Tira. So Beit'Our lies on the east of the  road and al-Tira on the west, and every village has its ownentrance.  However, the two entrances are located at the two sides of the highway,  which atthat time compelled students from al-Tira to cross that street  in order to reach to their schooland enter through the west gate, which  is a few metres from the highway. Since the outbreakof the second  Intifada in September 2000, the Israeli occupation authorities closed  all theentrances of the Palestinian villages, including Beit 'Our and  al-Tira. Moreover, theyprevented the Beit 'Our residents from using  their vehicles on the village street parallel to thesettlement. They  were only allowed to cross it on foot.This means that the students have to  go to and come to school everyday on foot for adistance of about two  kilometres. As for the students from al-Tira village, they were  deniedaccess to the school through the west from the highand they had to  enter through a tunnelunder the highway. Similarly, the village  citizens have to go through that tunnel if they wantto move between the  two villages. In winter, students and teachers tremble from the cold  ontheir way to school, especially when it rains and their clothes become  wet. In summer,problems increase with the hot weather and sun,  especially since the students of the schoolare of the age group 6-14  years.It is  doubtless that the students’ achievement has deteriorated since 2001. In  the morning,they think about how they can reach the school, and at  noon, they think about which waythey will return home. The Israeli  authorities did not stop at that but have also intentionallyprevented us  from developing the school building. We are prohibited from adding any  newclassrooms. Moreover, we were prevented from developing the school  sanitary unitsespecially that their present situation is very bad.  Despite building the new floor, we were notallowed to complete it.I also would like to mention that the  school has a northern gate for the entry of vehicles, andit is the  nearest gate to the settlement gate. However, it is worthless because  the Israeliauthorities issued a resolution prohibiting citizens from  driving their cars on the main street ofthe village, and so we cannot  bring any school supplies or needs by car. Last week, amilitary leader  called Fares came to explain to us the route of the Separation Wall in  Beit'Our village. When he showed us the Separation Wall plan on the map,  we discovered that itwill be very close to the school’s wall from the  east and the south, and that it will be made ofconcrete and reach eight  meters high. This means that the east and south gates will beclosed.  Moreover, the lands around the school will be confiscated, which means  that thisschool will have no ability to develop and expand. Moreover,  Beit 'Our street will beconfiscated and it will for the settlement. It  will be substituted by a road that will soon beconstructed in the shape  of a rainbow, and will take hundreds of dunums from Beit 'Our landto be  included with the settlement lands.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 15 March 2004