Affidavit No. 6774/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Mohammed Mahmoud ‘Ayyad ‘Awad, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 85287969, born on 22 July 1990, a worker, and a resident of Muthallath Safa/ Beit Ummar, Hebron governorate, would like to declare the following:On Wednesday 12 October 2011 at around 13:20 pm, I left my house for the city of Hebron to attend a training course. At about 13:30 pm I reached about 500 meters east of the entrance to the town of ‘Asida. The site was crowded with around 400 youths, mainly boys. A number of them were throwing stones at Israeli military vehicles from a distance of about one hundred metres, while the Israeli military vehicles were positioned at approximately 400 metres inside the town. A few minutes after I had arrived, I saw an Israeli military jeep move quickly towards the crowd. At that point the young boys ran away from the main street into side streets and alleys. After the Israeli military jeep had rushed ahead for a distance of about 80 metres away from its original location, I stepped back to a distance of about 40 metres and stopped to watch what was going on. Suddenly I saw two masked people wearing Israeli military trousers and dark gray T-shirts. The soldiers got out from an alley located to the north of the town’s main street, and incapacitated Amir Ibrahim Khaled Sabarna, who seemed to be about 21 years old and who was running towards the alley that the Israeli soldiers were coming from, which was around 40 metres away from where I was standing.The two masked persons pushed Amir to the ground and beat him. He tried to get away from them in order to escape. That was when I saw that one of the two masked persons was holding a gun in his hand and aiming it at Amir who was by then lying flat on the ground. I heard the sound of a shot, and saw Amir trembling. Then I saw two soldiers get out of the Israeli jeep and run towards Amir. They made him walk to the east towards the military jeep. At the same time the two masked persons who as I then realised were also members of the Israeli occupying forces, were as well heading towards the military jeep the two other soldiers had emerged from. Even though he was falling on the ground the two soldiers forced wounded Amir to walk on foot for a distance of about 40 metres to the military jeep,, which had backed up to a distance of about 60 metres from where I was standing.  I later learned from the residents of the town that Beit Ummar Municipality had followed up with Amir’s case and that he had been taken to Hadassah Hospital in Jerusalem, where he had undergone a major surgery on his wounded left shoulder.When Amir was shot, he was not posing any danger or threat to the occupying forces, and the two soldiers would have been able to arrest him without firing any shot if they had wished to do so.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 12 October 2011