Affidavit No. 4906/2009
2009
Silet al-Thaher is a Palestinian town located 25 kilometres south of the city of Jenin and houses 6,000 residents. To its south-east, there is the settlement of Homesh. This settlement is situated on a hill and overlooks Silet al-Thaher and other villages, including the village of al-Funduqoumiyya in Jenin Governorate as well as the villages of Burqa and Bizariya in NablusGovernorate. Towards the end of 2005, the settlement of Homesh was evacuated under the socalled Unilateral Disengagement Plan. Based on this plan, Israeli settlements surrounding the Gaza Strip and those in the area around the city of Jenin, including the settlement of Homesh, were evacuated.On 12 May 2009, at around 7:00 am, I saw approximately 15 Israeli military jeeps approaching Silet al-Thaher. Some of these jeeps accessed the debris of the settlement of Homesh. Some jeeps took position on a hill, referred to as ‘Bizariya Hill’, opposite the settlement of Homesh. In the meantime, other jeeps set up a flying checkpoint at the entrance to the settlement along the Jenin-Nablus main road. In addition, the Israeli army set up another checkpoint on the Jaba’ junction north of the town.The Israeli jeeps were equipped with wireless telecommunication devices as well as with several other tools, which we did not recognise. I immediately realised that something was about to happen. I hurried to the area surrounding the settlement of Homesh. I saw four civilian buses transporting a number of Israeli settlers. I also saw three tents erected in the centre of the settlement, which could be seen from the paved Jenin-Nablus street opposite the settlement.Israeli troops positioned at the settlement entrance thoroughly searched civilians and vehicles passing through the surrounding area. It should be noted that the junction and street connect the area of Jenin to Toulkarem and Nablus.The military vehicles positioned on the Bizariya Hill were also equipped with wireless telecommunications devices and were providing backup and information to the rest of the Israeli military force accompanying the settlers. Military vehicles also crossed the main street to the centre of the town, travelling back and forth between the mentioned military checkpoints. This situation continued until 7:00 pm the same day.Then, the military force and settlers left the area heading south, towards the settlements of Shavi Shemron and others located in the vicinity of Nablus city, causing a state of confusion amongst residents of the town. Like on previous occasions, we were afraid that confrontations would take place between children and youths on the one hand and the Israeli army on theother. Fortunately, nothing happened. However, as a result of the checkpoints erected in the area and the thorough searches conducted there, the town was temporarily isolated from its surroundings. The Israeli army intended to protect a group of Israeli settlers, who were celebrating a certain occasion, which I could not figure out.I should finally note that a group of at least ten settlers are continuously present on the debris of the settlement of Homesh. They have civilian vehicles and reside in tents erected in the centre of the settlement. These settlers deliberately chase any citizen who comes close to the settlement. As they are armed, the presence of these settlers poses danger to residents in thearea. I witnessed such incidents on several occasions, usually without the precence of any military.We are constantly scared that the settlers may attack Palestinian residents or open fire on them and their homes. Such an incident took place during the month of April 2009. One day, at about 10:00 pm, a number of settlers raided the town for one hour, during which they attacked Palestinian properties and threw stones, damaging a number of vehicles. Then, they left for the evacuated settlement. Thankfully, despite the settlers having been armed, no confrontations between the settlers and citizens took place that day.