Affidavit No. 5792/2010
2010
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Louai Abdel-Razzak Mustafa al-Tamimi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 411009350, born on 2 April 1992, a high school student, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh village, Ramallah governorate, would like to declare the following:I recall that on Friday 8 October 2010, at around 4:30 pm, I was present near the military gate which has been set up at the main entrance to our village since 2001. Behind it stands a military watch tower located about 20 metres away. Approximately ten metres away from the gate, I was standing with Oday and Abdel-Karim Saleh Ayyoub as well as a number of other young men from the village. On the opposite side of the gate, there were three Israeli border-guard military jeeps with the word “Police” on them.Five soldiers stood near the jeeps and were firing sound bombs, teargas canisters and rubber-coated metal bullets towards the young men, the latter locally known as guls. The young men – or rather some of them – were throwing stones at the soldiers. As one of the soldiers aimed his rifle at us, me and the young men around me – including Abdel-Karim – ran back as they started firing rubber-coated metal bullets towards us. I ran about ten metres away, when I heard Abdel-Karim shouting “my head…my head”, so I looked back and found him laying on the ground. About 15 metres from him stood a soldier who was continuously shooting rubber-coated metal bullets and another, who I could not see, was firing teargas canisters in our direction. I went back to help Abdel-Karim, who was crying, and noticed that a teargas canister had landed two metres away from him. I lifted him as blood poured from the back of his left ear and carried him to the nearest home from the military gate, that of Dr. Walid Al Qam. By the time we reached the house, which was about a hundred metres from the gate, Abdel-Karim had fainted. The doctor performed first aid on him and then we rushed him to Salfit hospital by ambulance.I visited Abdel-Karim following his release from the hospital and learnt that a metal bullet thinly coated with rubber had caused a wound in the back of his left ear that required four stitches. I would like to point out that the manner in which the soldiers were shooting was random and indiscriminate. When I was running away, I could feel bullets and teargas canisters being fired in all directions; over the head and from the sides, parallel to the chest and legs.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 10 October 2010