Affidavit No. 4313/2008
2008
I am the wife of Mr. Jamal 'Uthman Muhammad Karama, 39 years old, and the mother of five children. My eldest child is ten years old and the youngest, Mu'min, is four months old. At about 1:30 am on Thursday 10 July 2008, I was woken up by the sound of bullets and explosions near our house. I also heard a voice in Arabic through a loudspeaker. "Get out of the house. Everybody get out of the house," the voice said. I, along with my husband and children, got out. I also saw that other relatives of mine, as well as neighbours, went out of their houses towards the loudspeaker. When we  reached a distance of about 100 metres from the soldiers, they separated myhusband from us. They took him to an area where the men were rounded up. I was also separated from my children. I requested that the soldiers allow me to stay with my children, but they said I could do so later.They escorted me to a military vehicle. There, they started to question me about my family, residents of neighbouring houses and asked who lived with us. There was a female soldier amongst them, who introduced herself as Captain Nour. She was in the official Israeli military uniform. While separated from my children, the female soldier, as well as other soldiers, interrogated me.I could hear the sound of a bulldozer start in the area. I did not know what it was doing. From time to time, more questions were addressed to me. Despite continuous requests, they did not allow me to go to or fetch my children, particularly my suckling baby; he had no other food. I was kept like this until about 5:00 am. Then, I was able to go to my children and suckle my baby, who was in a distressed condition because he did not have milk and so kept on crying. After more than four hours of separation, the soldiers had finally allowed me to suckle my child for 20 minutes. After this, they ordered me to go back for interrogation and leave my children. I was with the interrogators until 7:30 am, at which time they released me. I quickly returned to my children and the soldiers withdrew.Relatives of mine told me that they had arrested my husband Jamal. When I returned to my house, I saw massive damage. Large portions of the house as well as adjacent houses were demolished by the bulldozer. Our houses were demolished, along with the furniture inside. Our house can no longer be used. We lost all our furniture. The two adjacent houses belonging to our relatives were also demolished.My husband had not been wanted by the Israelis. This was the first time he was arrested. When they told us to get out of the house, they did not say he would be arrested. As far as I know, he was the only person arrested in the area. Take into account that they did not find any strangers in the area.