Affidavit No. 5334/2010
2010
“We are tapping your mobile telephone. You will tell us whom you called yesterday.” He said.The interrogator accused me of having suspicious relationships with my students and with some girls, whom he did not identify. He charged me with moral misconduct and threatened to detain me in the intelligence prison for two weeks if I did not speak out and present all the information I had. However, he did not specify any particular subject that he wanted me to talk about. Throughout, the interrogators did not introduce themselves to me. The interrogation session ended at about 11:00 am, after which I was relocated to a small cell.At around 12:00 pm, my hands were tied with iron handcuffs and I was transported by car to the Military Medical Services of the Palestinian Authority. For only one minute, I was presented to a doctor, who did not examine me but asked whether I suffered from certain diseases. Then, I was taken back to the intelligence headquarters, where I was guided to an interrogation room on the first floor. After been forced to sit on a plastic chair, a green blindfold was tied around my eyes. I remained in that position for two hours without being interrogated.Later, I was relocated to another room, where an interrogator asked general questions about my marital status and work. Again, he demanded that I present all the information I had, but I requested that he be clear and ask about a specific topic. I was forced to stand up and turn my face against the wall. With the green piece of cloth on my eyes, my hands were untied and stretched behind my back. I stood for two hours in this position. From time to time, an intelligence officer came in and exercised psychological pressure on me.Again, I was brought back to interrogation. At some stages, they accused me of affiliating with Hamas and at others with the Islamic Jihad Movement. They did not concentrate on a certain charge. For example, they asked how many children I had sexual intercourse with.“You either talk or you will suffer a lot here.” An interrogator said.Subjected to shabeh again, I was forced to stand on my feet, turn my face against the wall and lift my arms up. An hour later, I fell on the ground again because I felt dizzy. An interrogator grabbed me by my shirt, pushed me against the wall, and punched me in the chest. He accused me of pretending to be sick, but I explained I suffered from dizziness from time to time. He grabbed me by my clothes, shook me forcefully and subjected me to shabeh once more. This time, however, I was forced to kneel and turn my face against the wall. Several minutes later, I was allowed to sit on the ground. At times, I sat in a comfortable position and at others a painful one. I was forced to stay in this situation until 5:00 am on 10 March 2010. Then, other interrogators arrived and relocated me to another interrogation room, where I sat on a chair. Without specifying any particular charge, they demanded that I tell them all I knew.“How long have you been a member of Hamas?” An interrogator inquired.I explained that this was an old file. In 1997, I was detained and interrogated by the Palestinian intelligence. Before that, I was arrested by the Israeli occupying forces on the same charge. Arrested on eight occasions, I spent a total of four years in Israeli prisons. The last time I was detained by the Israeli occupying authorities was in 1998.During the interrogation session, an interrogator hit me with his fists on my face, back, arms and shoulders. He was overweight, short, bald and of a brown complexion. Then he demanded that I march on the spot in a military manner and he subjected me to shabeh again. Another interrogator demanded me to turn around him while he stood in the middle of the room. In addition to several charges, I was accused of having illegitimate sexual relationships and possessing weapons. The interrogator demanded that I admit all these allegations.“Why do you visit your married aunts in the town of „Arraba?” the interrogator asked.“What? Is it forbidden for someone to visit his aunts?!” I exclaimed.At around 6:00 am on 10 March 2010, I was relocated to a solitary confinement cell, which measured one by two metres and did not contain any mattress or any other facilities. Two hours later, I was allowed to use the toilet, and sent back to the cell.Then, an intelligence officer came in, grabbed my clothes, shook me forcefully and blindfolded me with a green piece of cloth. Also shaking my body, he took me to the interrogation room. Meanwhile, I fell on the ground several times. The same interrogators repeated the same charges and I gave the same answers. The interrogation interview lasted for about one hour, after which I was taken back to the cell. At noon on the same day, I was subjected to shabeh once again; I stood on my feet and turned my face against the wall. Then, I was directed to the interrogation room. Using the same technique, interrogators threatened that they would intensify pressures on me during the night. They also accused me of collaborating with the Israeli occupying authorities, but I absolutely denied that charge. Having inquired about my affiliation with Hamas, I said my relationship with the organisation ended in 1999. Later, I was subjected to several techniques of shabeh until around 11:00 pm. Early in the morning of 11 March 2010, I was taken back to the cell.Later, I was guided to another room, where I sat with a person who said he was in charge of all interrogators. Having talked about general matters, he requested that I sign a paper stating that I had been an active member of the Hamas movement and that my relationship with it ended. This information was derived from a 1997 file.After they had returned my personal belongings, they demanded that I do not visit Sheikh „Izz-al-Din „Amarna or deliver any assistance to him despite the fact that he is blind. Then, they allowed me to leave the intelligence agency headquarters. I left at around 11:00 pm on Thursday, 11 March 2010. During the interrogation sessions, they threatened to dismiss me from my job.