Affidavit No. 2788/2006
2006
I am the head of the Walaja Village Council located in Bethlehem Governorate. The village is located northwest of Beit Jala and southwest of Jerusalem. Walaja has a population of approximately 2,000 people. The village of al-Walaja has had land confiscated by the Israeli occupying forces several times since 1948. In 1948, the village consisted of 18,000 dunums of land and now it consists of 6,000 dunums. If the Separation Wall is built on the lands of this village, then only two thousand dunums of land will remain.This village has artesian wells rich with water. These wells supply the Jerusalem district with water but the Israeli occupying forces have seized control over the wells. So far, the Israeli authorities have not officially notified the Village Council about the intended track of the Separation Wall, but relevant maps issued by many organisations, including the Committee for Combating the Separation Wall and Settlements, indicate that the Wall will be built on part of our village land.With this background, village land is currently subjected to other forms of land confiscation by the Israeli occupying forces. Three weeks ago, the Israelis started to plant the kind of trees you would find in a forest on approximately 500 dunums of village land. This land is located northwest of the Walaja village and is owned by three families; the al-A'araj family, the Abd-Rabo family and the al-Hajala family. Neither the Village Council nor these families have received any military orders concerning the confiscation of this land. This land is mountainous and cultivated.The Walaja Village Council has informed both the Palestinian Ministry of Local Government and the concerned parties of what has been taking place. This current assault on the land is considered a prelude to further confiscation because our land borders on the city of Jerusalem and Israel's bad intention is to keep this area open so it can confiscate even more land. Three houses in the village have been demolished this year [2006] with the pretext of not having building permits. This occurred even though these houses are located within the village planning structure.The area classified as Area B [under Palestinian civil control] is only a small portion of the village land, not exceeding 100 dunums. The remaining lands are classified Area C [under full Israeli control]. Currently, the Israeli authorities are working on land known as "Ein Jweiza;" this work includes bulldozing the land to prepare it for the planting of the kind of trees one would find in the forest. We will follow through with our case and we will submit a complaint against the Israeli army for encroaching upon our lands.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 13 February 2006Signature: Saleh Hilmi