Affidavit No. 2021/2004
2004
In 1975, I  left Toubas for Saudi Arabia, where I worked as a teacher. In 1978 I  returned toToubas and married my cousin, who accompanied me to Saudi  Arabia. In 1979, we gave birthto Firas and in 1981 we gave birth to  Arij. We registered both children with my wife’s and myidentity cards by  returning for that purpose to the West Bank. The Israeli-imposed  occupationsystem during that period demanded that any person who leaves  the West Bank for three yearswithout coming back loses his/her  citizenship. For that reason, I came to the West Bank everythree years  during that period, to renew and to register my children as West Bank  citizens. I didthe same for my children Fadi, in 1982, Dima in 1989, my  twins 'Aref and Anis, in 1992, Ahmad,in 1993, Amina, in 1994 and Tareq,  in 1995. I registered all my children in me and my wife’sidentity cards  by returning from Saudi Arabia to the West Bank, where the Israelis at  the AllenbyBridge in Jericho added them to my card and my wife’s card.In 1999, a  new law was issued in Saudi Arabia that states that whenever any  non-Saudi departsthe country, he loses his right to return to Saudi  Arabia for work. This law has concernedworkers and officials who, like  me, have annual contracts. From here my tragedy started. In1999, my wife  gave birth to our youngest daughter, Nour, and due to the new Saudi  law, I wasnot able to return back and register her with my identity card  as I did with her siblings. On 22July 2004, I went to Jordan with my  wife and all my children, and early the second day we wentto the Allenby  Bridge, towards Toubas. When we reached the Jordanian border, the  Jordanianpolicemen refused to give my daughter Nour permission to pass  through the Israeli borderbecause she was five years and two months. I  asked the Jordanian policemen to let me reachto the Israeli border in an  attempt to convince the Israelis to register my daughter in my  identitycard, but they absolutely rejected my request. The Jordanian  police asked me to go to theIsraeli Embassy in Jordan.My wife and children continued their  trip to the West Bank while I accompanied my daughterNour to the Israeli  Embassy located in al-Rabiya in Amman. At the Embassy, I told  theJordanian Liaison officer the story of my daughter Nour, and he told  me to get her a Jordanianpassport and come back to him. I immediately  went to al-Rusayfa town in Jordan and got aJordanian passport for my  daughter Nour. I returned back to the Israeli Embassy, butsurprisingly,  that same Jordanian officer told me that he could not do anything for  cases likeNour’s. I asked to meet the Israeli ambassador, but my request  was rejected, and the officer toldme that the ambassador could not meet  anybody now, and that I have to come back on Sunday.That day was  Thursday, and I waited until Sunday when I met the Israeli ambassador to  Jordan.But before I meet him, I met an Israeli official and told her  Nour’s problem, and she told me thatNour needed to obtain a visa to  enter the 1948 occupied territories or Israel, and that shecannot be  given a visa to the 1967 occupied territories.When I  met with the ambassador, I told him Nour’s story and told him that the  Jordaniansprohibited me from reaching the Israeli border at the Allenby  Bridge because Nour is five yearsand two months, although children born  outside the West Bank to a parent holding thePalestinian identity card  have the right to hold the same identity card by registering them  withthe card of one of the parents. This is provided that they are added  to the identity card of one ofthe parents before they are five years  old. After discussing the whole issue with theambassador, he told me  that this issue is not within his jurisdiction, and his mission is to  issuevisit visas to Israel, adding that I may find a solution to my  problem in the Palestinian Embassyin Amman. I went to the Palestinian  Embassy and met the Palestinian ambassador who told methat he has no  solution to my problem, and if he could do anything, he would help all  thePalestinians to return to the West Bank.I  returned to the Israeli Embassy in an attempt to find a solution, but  without any results. I wasfrustrated and realized that this problem had  no solution. I was torn between my children andwife in Toubas and my  daughter Nour — what could I do with her? After much thinking, Idecided  to leave her with my old aunt in Irbed, Jordan, and I went to Toubas, to  live with my wifeand children. After around two months, Nour was taken  to al-Huson in Jordan to live with mycousin’s family. No words can  express my sadness and psychological situation because mydaughter lives  away from the family. Her mother lives a worse situation, as she does  not stopcrying over her youngest daughter. Does any person in the world  accept that a small child livesin a country away from her parents and  siblings? Please help me take this family out of thisstate of sadness,  misery and frustration!This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 4 January 2005Signature: Ghaleb 'Aref Anis Daraghma