Affidavit No. 5836/2010
2010
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Maha Abd al-Hamid Mustafa Ayyoub, of Palestinian nationality, holder of identity card number 41585487, born on 29 July 1965, housewife, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh, Ramallah district, would like to declare the following:I recall that on 22 October 2010, at around 8:00 am, all of the individuals in my family went to our land, which lies to the north-west of the village, to harvest olives. At around 3:00 pm, my husband, Abd al-Wahhab Muhammad Salih Ayyub, received a phone call from someone in the village informing him that occupation soldiers had fired two teargas grenades at our house. The grenades entered the house through the window and caused a fire inside the house. Immediately my husband and my sons headed home. They found that some youth from the village had entered the house, taken control of the fire, and extinguished it. According to what he told me the curtains were all black from the fire. He went into the room where the fire started, which is a room about five or six square metres in size and which opens directly into the kitchen with no wall separating the two rooms. We use this room for sitting and it has a glass side with a length of around five metres and a metre and a half wide. When my husband began to examine what had happened he found two circular gas grenades of aluminium on one of the cushions and he found that glass of the window had shattered. All of the walls were completely black, and even the other rooms were black. According to my husband, one of the gas grenades fell on one of the sponge mattresses present in the room and ignited it, which led to the fire. As for me, I arrived at the house at around 5:00 pm, as my husband had told me to stay at the land and to accompany the children because of the fire in the house and also because the soldiers were still inside the village and firing teargas grenades. When I arrived at the house I was unable to bear the smell of the gas and smoke. I noticed that the walls were black, not only the walls of the room which was affected by the fire, but also the other rooms and the hallways. When I saw that, I suffered from a chronic pain in my chest. My husband and our children moved to my brother-in-law’s house, Abdallah Muhammad Salih, who lives opposite us. We stayed at that house for a period of ten days, in order to clean the house of smoke and carry out the necessary repairs. My husband swapped the glass panels for concrete blocks and swapped two of the “Multilock” metal doors. We also changed some of the electrical wires and did some preliminary cleaning of the walls to get them ready for painting. We also changed some of the plaster on the walls. All of this cost around 35,000 shekels, without the cost of the tiles which were burned. I should like to point out here that if the grenades had entered the kitchen, which is the room directly opposite, there would have been an explosion in the house. Also the contents of the house affected by the fire smelled of gas and smoke and needed a complete cleaning. As for the mattresses,cushions, and carpets in the sitting room, they were totally burned.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 4 November 2010