Affidavit No. 5443/2010
2010
On 29 April 2010, seven young residents of our village of Huwwara and I were present in my tiles store located on the eastern side of the village’s main street. As I was sitting there, I turned my face towards the west. At a distance of almost one kilometre, I saw approximately 60 Israeli settlers rushing towards us from east to west in civilian clothes. They were coming from the top of the mountain which is adjacent to some settler houses in the settlement of Yitzhar which is 600 metres away from Huwwara resident homes and the municipality park west of Huwwara. I reported what I had seen to the young people in my company. We watched the settlers and monitored their movements. We saw them divide themselves into two groups. One quickly approached a house belonging to Mr. Muhammad Hussein and the other was going the direction of the Municipality Park, both were the last structures built in the western area of the village. They are about a 100 metres away from each other; the house is in the north and the park is to the south.As we were watching the settlers, I noticed it was 11:30 am on my watch. We went to the al-Rif Taxi Office, opposite my store, and asked two drivers to transport us to the said areas to where the settlers were heading in order to confront them. We reached the area in less than five minutes. We got off the taxi at a distance of about 100 metres southeast to and between the house and municipality park. We found settlers throwing stones at the house and Park. I was able to see them throwing stones while I was in close proximity to them. Like I mentioned earlier, the settlers wore civilian clothes, such as white and black shirts and blue jeans. Some settlers had small caps on their heads. A number of female settlers also took part in throwing stones. I estimate that the age group of the male and female settlers was between 20 - 25 years of age. I did not see any one of them carrying a weapon.Settlers were positioned on an elevated area near the house and Municipality Park. We started to shout and throw stones at them. Therefore, they withdrew immediately from the area towards the direction of the place they originally came from. We chased and threw stones at them. While they were running away, a number of settlers bent down on the ground and set fire to the dry grass. We then moved forward to extinguish the fire. We continued to chase the settlers for a distance of more than 200 metres while putting out fires they were setting. We chased them until they disappeared and went into the settlement they came from.As we were chasing the settlers, we noticed that the trunks of about 20 to 25 olive trees were damaged and some trees were completely burnt. We concluded that these trees had been destroyed more than 20 days earlier. This was evident from the stiffness of the tree trunks. The land on which these trees were planted belongs to the families of ‘Oda and al-Dumeidi. For several years, landowners had to coordinate with the Israeli District Coordination Office (DCO) in order to reach and tend their land as well as harvest crops because it is in close proximity to Yitzhar settlement. After we examined the trees and after settlers left the area, we got back to the aforesaid house to see what they have done to it. We saw that more than seven glass windows were broken by stones.The residents of the house were not inside when the settlers attacked their house. We realised that after we had approached the house. Residents arrived about less than half an hour after the incident took place. We then went to see what had happened at the municipal park. There was no one there, not even a guard. We saw that the settlers had destroyed a number of electric spotlights installed around the park. They also damaged a number of large loudspeakers and vandalized the children’s playground within the park.