Affidavit No. 5335/2010
2010
On 21 March 2010, I was present in the city of Nablus. At around 12:30 pm, I received several calls on my cellular telephone from residents of my village. They said that two martyrs from our village of „Awarta had been located at a distance of one kilometre east of the village. According to media reports, the bodies of the martyrs had not been identified. I immediately hurried back to the village in my 1997 Nissan jeep in order to follow up on the incident and to see what was going on.Twenty minutes later, I reached the village and immediately called Mr. Hisham Ibrahim „Awwad, a member of „Awarta Village Council, and reported the matter to him. He told me that he had received telephone calls from residents of the village regarding the same incident. He also said he did not have any information about the identities of the young men or the circumstances surrounding their death. During the short telephone conversation, we agreed to meet in the village and go to the said area in order to see what happened.Approximately five minutes later, we met and drove my car to the area where the young men had been killed. We reached the area in less than five minutes and stopped because more than ten Israeli patrols had stopped in the middle of the street. Positioned near the patrols, a number of infantry soldiers demanded that residents get back to the village. Hisham and I immediately stepped out of the car and approached the soldiers, who were several metres east of our location. I told the soldiers in Arabic that I was the Chairman of the Village Council and that another member was in my company. I said we had come to see what was going on.A soldier wearing the standard military uniform, with a star insignia on each shoulder, and who carried a weapon stepped forward and said in plain Arabic that he was the officer. He was tall, of fair complexion and I estimated that he was about 30 years of age. Upon his request, we presented our IDs and Village Council membership cards, which he hastily examined and returned. I asked about the rumour of the death of two people, but he said he did not have the authority to talk about it. However, he told us to tell the residents to step back and said he would call Fares, an officer at the Israeli District Coordination Office (DCO), about the matter.Having asked the residents to step several metres back, the officer told us to go to the Israeli checkpoint, which is known as („Awarta) Crossing, near Huwwara military camp north of our village, where the Israeli DCO is located. In less than ten minutes, we reached the DCO offices. Several other residents arrived later and stayed near us. Hisham and I stayed in the car and waited for the Israeli DCO officers. After about half an hour, a white DCO patrol came out of Huwwara military camp, which was south of our location. After it stopped, two soldiers, including the driver stepped down. They were in the standard military uniform and carried long weapons. The soldier, who had not been driving, said he was Officer Fares. I estimated that he was about 40 years of age and saw three insignias on each shoulder. The driver said his name was Zahran. He was also a DCO officer and although I estimated he was around 30 years of age, I did not check whether he had insignias on his shoulders.“Who is Hasan „Awwad, Chairman of the Council?” Officer Fares asked.I said it was me. He asked about the person who was in my company, so my colleague Hisham identified himself. Officer Fares demanded that we ask all the people who stood near us to step back and said that he wanted to speak with the Council members only. Having requested that the others step several metres back, Hisham and I returned to Officer Fares and asked him about what had happened. He said he would talk to us frankly.“Soldiers on board a military Jeep saw Muhammad Qawariq and Salah Qawariq in a field east of the village. The soldiers were suspicious of them, demanded that they present their ID cards and then searched them. The two young men complied and did not run away. They had with them an axe to plough the land as well as a bottle [Officer Fares did not describe the bottle or state what it had contained]. After they were forced to sit on the ground for about seven minutes, the soldiers were surprised when one of the young men got up and attempted to beat a soldier. As a result, the soldiers killed both young men.” The officer elaborated.Officer Fares said he would investigate the matter and report the details to us. Having asked us to prevent the residents from rioting, he said he would bring the dead bodies so that we could identify them. After he went to the checkpoint, which was several metres away from our location, I saw an ambulance of the Palestine Red Crescent Society come from the checkpoint and travel eastwards, where the two young men had been present. Two Israeli patrols were in front and behind the ambulance. Half an hour later, the ambulance returned in the company of the patrols and stopped near us.