Affidavit No. 2905/ 2006
2006
I am a citizen of 'Anin village located approximately 19 kilometres west of Jenin city. The population of 'Anin is around 5000 people. I own a piece of agricultural land located west of 'Anin at the Green Line separating Palestinian lands occupied in 1948 from lands occupied in 1967. The entire area of my land, which is located in a district called “Miri’b Cattle”, is 60 dunums planted with olive trees.This land was almost the only source of livelihood for my 16 person family. The annual income from this land was approximately 30,000 shekels derived from selling olive oil and olives. This amount of money was sufficient to support my family and fulfil its basic needs.Um al-Fahem city, located inside the occupied Palestinian lands of 1948, is only around two kilometres west of my village. At the beginning of 2002, the Israeli government decided to construct the so-called Separation Wall along the Green Line in order to separate lands occupied in 1948 from lands occupied in 1967. The Israeli machinery started bulldozing the lands of 'Anin and constructing the Separation Wall. At the end of that same year, the occupation forces completed the construction of the Wall in the 'Anin area.After construction of the Wall was completed, I found that my land was located two kilometres west of the Wall. The Wall has swallowed two kilometres from the Palestinian lands occupied in 1967 and was not constructed along the Green Line. At this point, my real suffering started. I became unable to reach my land just like many other 'Anin citizens whose land was now located west of the Wall. I applied to obtain a permit that would allow me to pass through an iron gate (Gate No. 3), which the occupation army installed on the Separation Wall nearby 'Anin, but the Israeli forces denied me a permit. They claimed that the denial was for security reasons without being more specific. I tried to obtain a permit several times so I could reach my land and take care of it, but to no avail.Since then, neither I nor my family members have once been able to reach our land. My family members were also denied permits for security reasons. We have not been able to pick the fruits at all, not even for one season. This drastically affected my family’s economic and financial situation. I am unable to provide my family with their minimum basic needs, especially since the Israeli authorities have prevented Palestinian workers from reaching their workplaces in Israel. In the past, some of my children used to work inside the Green Line, but the Separation Wall deprived them of that.I am 76 years old and I have spent most of my life taking care of this land and its olive trees. I watched the olive trees grow every day. My soul is connected with my land and my trees. I am suffering from several diseases caused by being deprived of my land. Everyday I look from my village at my land. My only wish before I die is to reach my land.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 27 April 2006Signature: Taysir Sa'idName not withheldField Researcher: Tareq al-Haj Mahmoud