Affidavit No. 4001/2008
2008
On Thursday 3 January 2008 at approximately 8:15 am, I was sitting with my family in our two-storey house located in al-Zanna village east of Khan Younes city. On that day, the Israeli occupying forces had raided the area at around 2:30 am. I saw eight tanks and two bulldozers, belonging to the occupying forces, positioned on my father’s land. This agricultural land encompasses 20 dunums and is located at 250 metres from my house, which in turn is located approximately two kilometres from the eastern border separating the Gaza Strip from the territories occupied in 1948. We, the residents of this area, are used to the raids carried out by the Israeli forces and to the sneaking in of the Israeli undercover units and soldiers.While I was looking through the kitchen window in the east side of our house, I saw my 32 year old brother Ahmad standing east of our house and looking toward the place where thetanks were positioned. All of a sudden, I heard a shell exploding where my brother Ahmad was standing and I saw smoke ascending from that very place. Then I saw my brother Sami, 29 years, rushing out of our house to check on our brother Ahmad. After minutes, I heard another shell falling on that same place and once again I saw smoke ascending from that spot. Then, I heard the explosion of a third shell landing on our house. This shell penetrated the window of Sami’s room. Fearing that another shell would hit our home, I carried my brother Ahmad’s two children, three year old Hamdan, and ten month old Sundus, and headed to the front door. But I could not get out because the Israeli soldiers were firing at the door. I saw the bullets hit the iron door of our home. Therefore, I headed to the back door where I finally succeeded in getting the two children out of the house.I went back home to help my 60 year old mother, my grandmother, my 24 year old sister Asma’, and the wife and children of my brother Sami get out of the house. My mother and sister were leaving the house to check on my brothers Ahmad and Sami despite the shelling. I heard my mother and my sister scream while the soldiers were intensively shooting at them. After a few moments, my sister and mother stopped screaming and fell to the ground at a distance of four metres from the door of our house.In fact, I was unable to leave the house, because I was afraid of being shot in the course of the Israeli soldiers’ shooting. These Israeli soldiers were positioned among the olive trees on the land of our neighbour Abu-Hajras, 50 metres north of our home. Seeing my cousin, Muhammad Fayyad, and another ten young men from the quarter’s residents going to help my mother and sister encouraged me. I accompanied them to where my sister and mother were lying on the ground. As soon as we arrived we found them bleeding heavily. Both of them had been hit in the chest by several bullets. I also found the bodies of my two brothers Ahmad and Sami torn into pieces on the ground at around five metres from my mother and sister.While the occupying soldiers were opening fire in our direction from among the olive trees, my 17 year old cousin Muhammad Khdeir Fayyad was hit in the chest by several bullets and fell on the ground, motionless, beside my mother. While the young men and I were trying to carry my mother, sister, brothers and my cousin Muhammad, the Israeli soldiers shot 23 year old Ahmad As’ad Fayyad in his right leg, 22 year old Bilal Jum’a Fayyad in his left hand, 22 year old Ibrahim Mahamoud al-Laham in his left leg, Zayed Muhammad Fayyad in his left shoulder and my 29 year old brother Muhammad in his foot.Then an ambulance approached which was supposed to transport the corpses and the injured but the Israeli occupying soldiers fired at the ambulance. Due to the heavy shooting, the driver of the ambulance was compelled to turn back without carrying the injured. As a result, the young men and I carried my mother, sister, brothers and cousin to the ambulance, which we found parked on a side street at around 30 metres from our home. Then some of the young men carried the injured people to another ambulance and we all headed to Naser Hospital in Khan Younes.