Affidavit No. 4677/2009
2009
My name is Majdi al-‘Abed Ahmad ‘Abd-Rabbo. I am married and the father of three sons and two daughters. My eldest child is Ala’, who is 15 years old and the youngest is Marah who is one year and three months old. I am a lieutenant with the General Intelligence Agency of the Palestinian National Authority. My family and I live in a two-storey house built over an area of 280 square metres in the neighbourhood of 'Izbet ‘Abd-Rabbo, east of the town of Jabaliya in Northern Gaza.At about 9:00 pm on Saturday, 3 January 2009, the Israeli occupying forces, including tanks, armoured personnel carriers and bulldozers, carried out an incursion into the area. With the support of combat aircraft, the Israeli forces fired intensely. During the then ongoing military operation called “Cast Lead,” my family and I lived under very harsh conditions. At about 9:30 am on Monday, 5 January 2009, my family and I were in our house. There was a knock at the door and I went out to see who it was. When I opened the door, I saw 20 to 25 Israeli soldiers. They carried M16 rifles and were in green military uniforms. My neighbour, Mahmoud Thaher, was in front of them with the soldiers pointing their guns at his back. A soldier pointed his rifle at me and ordered me to strip and turn around. After he searched me, soldiers stormed into my house. The soldier then ordered me to call all of my family members.Soldiers forced my children to strip and searched them. They forced my boys, wife and daughters to stay in the garden. Then, soldiers handcuffed Mahmoud Thaher and put him near my family. A soldier asked me, "Who is inside?" I replied, "no one." He said, "If I see anyone inside, I will shoot him.” A soldier then pointed his weapon at my back and ordered me to step into my house in front of him. The soldiers searched the house thoroughly, and in doing so damaged pieces of furniture and threw contents on the ground. After they had searched the first and second floors, they led me to the roof. A soldier asked me about the house belonging to Hatem ‘Abd-Rabbo and demanded that I knock down the wall on the roof of my house with a sledgehammer so the soldiers could enter Hatem’s house. They then raided Hatem’s house through this hole that I had made. In Hatem's house, they led me downstairs with their weapons pointed at my back.After searching the house, they took me back to my house through the hole on the roof. Later, they pointed their weapons at me and my handcuffed neighbour, Mahmoud Thaher, who is 22 years old, and forced us to walk in front of them through my house door. Meanwhile, resistance activists opened fire on the soldiers behind us. The occupying soldiers fired heavily back at the resistance activists. I was terrified as the gunfire continued. The soldiers then forced me and Mahmoud to walk in front of them in the midst of gunfire. We reached Salah al-Din Mosque, which is about 20 metres away from my house, where I saw approximately 20 Israeli soldiers inside the mosque. Meanwhile, Israeli soldiers continued shooting. As soon as wearrived in the mosque, a soldier shackled my hands and demanded that Mahmoud and I sit on the first floor of the mosque without moving. I asked an Arabic-speaking soldier if I could go and see my wife and five children, to which he said “Shut up or I will shoot you.” Soldiers positioned on the first and second floors of Salah al-Din Mosque fired heavily towards resistance activists. About half an hour later, soldiers forced me and Mahmoud to go westward through holes made in the walls of the mosque. We then walked through houses belonging to the families of al-Za’fan, Safi, al-Hawajra, Thaher, and Zeidan. They took me to the house of Abu-Mu’taz al-Katri, where the occupying soldiers separated me from Mahmoud Thaher. They took me to a room where ‘Abd-al-Wahhab al-Katri, 22 years old, Mamhoud Thaher’s father and brother, and a person from the family of Zeidan, were all being held. They were all handcuffed and guarded by occupying soldiers. I stayed with them. Then, I heard the sound of bullets being fired and explosions, which lasted for about 20 minutes. Then, a soldier led me out of the house and presented me to an officer with insignia on his shoulder.The soldier and officer spoke in Hebrew. The soldier told me, “Go to Hatem ‘Abd-Rabbo’s house. We killed armed individuals inside the house.” He ordered me to go there, strip the killed individuals, retrieve their weapons, and come back. When I refused, he beat me and forced me to go to Hatem’s at gunpoint. Fearing for my life, I went. It was impossible for me to enter the house from its entrance, as it had been destroyed. The soldier ordered me to climb to the roof of my house and enter through the hole that I had made. As I was entering Hatem’s house, I shouted and identified myself. I saw three armed individuals from the Palestinian resistance inside the house. I told them that the army forced me to come and take their weapons. “Go back,” an armed individual said.I returned to the street opposite my house. Pointing his weapon at me, the officer ordered me to take off my clothes and turn around three times. Having done so, I approached the occupying soldiers and related what happened with me. I repeated this process three times. Each time, I climbed to the resistance activists and told them the orders of the occupying soldiers. Each time, the soldiers ordered me to strip and turn around. Meanwhile, I had seen that the resistance activists inside the house were wounded. While I was inside, occupying troops continued to shoot towards the house. Aircraft also fired missiles towards Hatem’s house, in which the resistance activists sought protection. In the meantime, I was handcuffed and detained by the occupying troops. All this took place between 9:30 pm on Tuesday, 6 January 2009 and 1:30 am the next morning.Again, soldiers detained me at the al-Katri family’s house. They also detained other men, women, and children in a room on the second floor. I spent the night on the ground handcuffed as I was. We all suffered from the chilly weather. I slept until 6:30 am. Then, soldiers drove me outside the house. Through loudspeakers, they shouted to the resistance activists inside Hatem’s house to surrender. Meanwhile, soldiers told me to sit on the ground in the public street. From al-Katri’s house, soldiers brought out ‘Abd-al-Wahhab al-Katri and a person from the Zeidan family. Having given them a small camera, a soldier taught ‘Abd-al-Wahhab how to use it. Soldiers ordered ‘Abd-al-Wahhab and the other person to go into Hatem’s house and take photographs of all that they could see inside. When they rejected, soldiers severely beat them with their weapons. Then, they were forced to go and take photographs.About 15 minutes later, ‘Abd-al-Wahhab and Zeidan came back. As he displayed pictures on the camera, a soldier demanded that I confirm the identities of persons in the pictures. I saw three young people, who were the same resistance activists with whom the Israeli army had ordered me to negotiate. In the pictures, they appeared to be wounded and stretched out on the ground. Via loudspeakers, the occupying troops gave the three resistance activists a respite of 15 minutes in which they could surrender themselves. They also threatened that they would destroy the house over their heads. Around 20 minutes later, a large, green bulldozer arrived and started to destroy my house. First, it demolished the fence walls. Meanwhile, a soldier blindfolded me and took me to the al-Katri’s house again. Having removed the blindfold, soldiers took me out of the house. I saw that my house had been completely destroyed, as well as my neighbour Hatem’s. I also saw the dead bodies of two resistance activists stretched out on the ground opposite the door of Hatem’s house.They took me to the house of Muhammad Mustafa ‘Abd-Rabbo in ‘Izbet ‘Abd-Rabbo. There, I met with my family as well as with approximately 50 residents of the neighbourhood. Of these, some residents were handcuffed. About three hours later, soldiers ordered everybody to leave the house and go to the centre of the town of Jabalya. We walked there along al-‘Izba Public Street. On the way, I saw around six blood-soaked corpses, but I could not recognise any of them. Then, my family and I went to my relative Ahmad Sa’id Saleh in the town of Jabaliya and stayed at his house until Sunday, 18 January 2009, the day on which the Israeli army withdrew.My family and I continue to reside at Saleh’s house because the occupying army destroyed my house and I am still homeless.