Affidavit No. 6167/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Basel Abd’Allah Muhammad Saleh Ayyoub, of Palestinian nationality, born on 13 September 1998, school student, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh, Ramallah district, would like to declare the following:I recall that on Friday, 7 May 2011, at around 1:00 pm in the afternoon, I went out of the village with protesters towards lands threatened by settler annexation. These protests are organised in the village every Friday, and when we arrived at the entrance to the village Israeli occupation forces from the border guards and the army came and began firing gas grenades towards the protesters, so I fled back towards the village and returned home. I stayed at home until 4:00 pm, when I looked at the clock before going out. When I went out, confrontations were still taking place in the village, as soldiers were firing gas and sound grenades and youths were responding by throwing stones. I walked from my house to the watch tower which stands at the entrance to the village, which is an Israeli military watch tower, and there were a large number of soldiers present around it. I stayed around 30 metres away from the watch tower and there was a group of youths with me and some foreign protesters. After about an hour, I heard the youths shouting and telling me to run away, and I fled without knowing what happened. I fell over on the ground after my leg got stuck in some brambles. When I fell, a youth around 20 years old came over to me and told me to go with him. He was carrying a small pistol, and he was wearing a green and white shirt and jeans, and he had tied a band in the colours of the Palestinian kuffiyah to his forehead and most of his face was covered except for his eyes. I asked him who he was and he said in Arabic, which he spoke well, that he was a protester from Birzeit University. I walked with him and he led me and took hold of my hand until the military tower, and there he told me to climb up onto a military jeep which was standing by the watch tower and he climbed up with me. The jeep set out towards Halamish settlement and there he brought me down to the settlement yard and began hitting me with a stick that was in his hand, and asked me to identify the youths who were with me in the protest and tell him their names, but I refused and started to cry from fear and pain, and he kept hitting me in the same way for around ten minutes. Afterwards he brought out a cotton band and tied it around my head, and also plastic cuffs which he tied my hands behind my back with. He left me in the square on the ground until 7:00 pm on that day, when a person from the village called Abu Rami, who works with the Palestinian liaison, came and took my from the settlement to home.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 12 May 2011