Affidavit No. 2804/ 2006
2006
On 19 February 2006, I was with my brother Ibrahim together with our friend Mohammad An-Natour on the roof of our home located in Balata camp. At 12:30 pm in the afternoon, while we were having tea and talking together with our faces turned toward the south, our backs toward the north and Mohammad An-Natour carrying a metal tube of approximately 15 centimetres. I suddenly heard the sound of bullets fired toward us. I saw my brother Ibrahim stand up and then fall down on his left side, while Mohammad said, “Ibrahim, Ibrahim,” and fell down on his right side. At that moment, I thought that Mohammad was injured while my brother Ibrahim laid down on the floor of the roof voluntarily to protect himself from the shooting.I got up off the floor, as I was sitting the third to the west, and moved toward Ibrahim with my back bent to the east. I started to check Ibrahim. When I removed his jacket, I saw that a bullet hit him beside the left ear. After seconds, another bullet was shot and hit me in my right leg from the back under the hip. I started yelling and shouting for help.Hearing my yells, my family member came up and carried the three of us from the roof to the street opposite our home to the south. During that time, Ibrahim and Mohammad had been already killed with the first bullet that hit both of them, as they were sitting beside each other. The bullet hit Mohammad in his left shoulder and shrapnel hit his heart (as was later discovered). After Mohammad was hit, he only uttered ‘Ibrahim, Ibrahim’ and when he fell on the ground, he made a very slight movement. When we were carried to the street, after five minutes, the ambulances came and carried me to Rafidia Hospital in Nablus while another ambulance carried Ibrahim and Mohammad to the same hospital. When the doctor examined them, they were already motionless corpses.As for the source of shooting, the Israeli soldiers opened fire toward us from the building of Jamil Al Tirawi (consisting of more than five floors and only around 20 metres away from us). The Israeli army was positioned on the fourth floor, which is the only place from which they could shoot at us. What proves me right is that when I got up and went to my brother, I was shot from the back, i.e., from the east. Moreover, there were no other soldiers except in the building of Jamil Al Tirawi. Another indication is that my brother and his friend were injured in their sides which gives decisive proof that the shooting was from the soldiers in Al Tirawi building. As for me, I did not see any of the soldiers when the two bullets were fired.What astonishes me is that since the morning, we had sat on the roof and got down many times and we had known about the presence of the Israeli army in Al Tirawi building and nothing had happened to us. Even before the shooting, we sat for more than an hour while Mohammad was carrying the metal tube. I would like to emphasise that the metal tube was from the debris on the roof and Mohammad was unintentionally playing with it.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 27 February 2006Signature: ‘Uthman al-Sheikh ‘Isa