Affidavit No. 5890/2010
2010
I am 25 years old, married, and father of two daughters. I live near “Shuhada’ al-Shate’” Mosque in al-Shate’ al-Shamali refugee camp west of Gaza city. I have inherited my career as a fisherman from my father. I own a fishing boat, which measures seven metres in length and two metres in width. It is yellow and drawn by a 40 horse power engine. I and my brothers work on the boat.On 17 January 2009, during the war on the Gaza Strip (it was also the mullet fishing season), Israeli boats opened fire on fishing boats at sea off the Gaza city beach, injuring my brother Muhammad (22 years old), while he was fishing alongside my brother Hanafi (28 years old). My brother Muhammad died of the injuries he sustained on 25 January 2009.I catch mullet fish with nets on the sea shore. At around 5:30 am on Saturday, 27 November 2010, I travelled with some fellow fishermen, including Mahran al-‘Amoudi, Hatem al-Hassi and Naser al-‘Amoudi, on motorcycles to a beach on the town of Beit Lahiya, near al-Waha resort, north of the Gaza Strip. Our intention was to cast fishing nets and catch mullet fish on the beach. I took a fishing net and walked with fellow fishermen almost 15 metres into the sea water. When I started to fish, there were about 10 other fishermen who were fishing in the same manner. I could see Israeli boats at sea about three kilometres away from us. However, my colleagues and I continued to fish for several hours. At around 12:30 pm on the same day, I saw the Israeli boats sailing at great speed towards us. I also heard the sound of bullets being fired at us by the soldiers onboard the Israeli boats. I felt something hit my left leg and it became numb. Then, I fell on my face on the seawater. My fellow fishermen approached and carried me out of the sea. About 10 minutes later, I saw an ambulance arrive at the scene. Meanwhile, I did not feel any pain in my leg. My colleagues carried me to the ambulance, which transported me to Kamal ‘Udwan Hospital in Beit Lahiya Housing Project, north of the Gaza Strip. Doctors offered me first aid and I stayed at hospital for three days. The doctors told me that I had sustained a bullet gunshot (with an entry and exit) in the knee, but the bullet did not hit the knee bone. Subsequently, I left the hospital for my home.I currently, receive medical treatment at home. I have been unemployed since I was injured by the Israeli army. I am waiting to recover so that I could carry out my work and support my family and children.