Affidavit No. 5032/2009
2009
For several months, I have been suffering from testicular varicose veins, shortness of breath and an ulcer in the stomach. I have not been able to work due to my illness. About a month ago, I had an operation to treat the testicular varicose veins at the al-Mizan Hospital in the city of Hebron.Later on, I was taken to a room. A military physician removed my blindfold, cut the plastic handcuffs off my wrists, and requested that I fill out a medical form. On that form, I stated that I had had a surgical operation and that I suffered from other diseases. Having diagnosed me, the physician also examined the place where I had the surgery. After this, a soldier handcuffed and blindfolded me again.I remained standing in the room where the physician had seen me for about two hours or more. Meanwhile, I heard Hamed Jaradat screaming. An interrogator was also yelling at him to talk. I realised that Hamed was being beaten. I estimated that Hamed and his brother were not far from me. They were probably in a room nearby. I also heard an interrogator address Hamed, stating that his brother and I had confessed and that he (Hamed) had to do the same.About two hours later, three persons (whom I estimated were interrogators) entered the room where I was held. I could not see their faces because I was blindfolded.“Munir! You will have five minutes to tell us how many stones you threw and how many times you did, or I will screw you.” An interrogator told me. Five minutes later, an interrogator came in and asked what I would say. I replied that I had not thrown stones. As he talked to me, I felt that he was aggressive and I expected that he would beat me. I requested that he not beat me because I had had a surgical operation in the stomach. He lifted up my shirt and inspected the place where the surgery had been conducted. Suddenly, he punched me in the face and kicked me with his foot on the bottom of my stomach. I felt severe pain and fell on the ground.“If you want me to confess that I had thrown stones, I will do so. But I request that you stop beating me.” I said two hours after interrogators had started to beat me. They were not convinced, however, and continued to beat me for another half an hour and in the same way. At the end, I fell on the ground, exhausted and motionless. I suffered from pain in all parts of my body and could not get up. The interrogators ordered me to stand, but I could not. Then, two interrogators dragged me by my arms for a short distance and sat me on a chair.Later, a person removed my blindfold and cut the plastic handcuffs off my wrists. I found myself sitting before a police interrogator, who was using a tape recorder to record my statements. He inquired whether I had thrown stones, but I denied it. I told him I had been severely beaten during interrogation. Under torture, I was forced to tell the interrogators that I would record any confessions they wanted. The police officer told me to forget what I had said to interrogators and asked whether I had thrown stones or not. I denied that I had.Around midday on Friday, 24 July 2009, my health deteriorated further. I started to suffer from severe pain and shortness of breath and vomited on several occasions. I also suffered pain in the place of the operation I had had as well as in the testicles and stomach. Furthermore, I excreted blood, became motionless and my sight deteriorated greatly.In the afternoon of Wednesday, 29 July 2009, I was released after my family had paid the bail. An ambulance of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society transported me to the al-Ahli Hospital in the city of Hebron, where I underwent intensive medical treatment. I was supposed to be under medical attention at the hospital, but my family requested that I be treated at home and to report to hospital over the next days.Since the day I was released, I have been reporting to the hospital on a daily basis. A doctor told me that an operation might be necessary after my health stabilises. Now, I take four kinds of medicines and pain relievers. I still suffer from pain in my nose, head, testicles, stomach, and in the place where I had the first surgery. I also cannot sleep well or move freely.