Affidavit No. 2703/2005
2005
At  approximately 2:00 pm on Monday, 12 December 2005, I was returning from  Ramallah to my home located in Beit Hanina. As I reached the Qalandiya  checkpoint, I found at least 20-30 women at the entrance allocated for  women and many more at the entrance allocated for men. I stood in the  queue waiting my turn. The first half an hour passed and I still  remained in the same place. Another hour passed and I only went forward a  few steps. I then thought of going back to Ramallah and sleeping at my  sister’s home, but could not because I thought of how my husband would  be alone at home. So instead, I thought of going through Birzeit but I  knew it would take me a much longer time to reach home when I was only 2  kilometres away from my home already.I live in  al-Hijra Quarter, very near to Dahiyat al-Barid checkpoint. At 3:10 pm I  was still waiting in the queue. There was not a large number of women  in front of me, but the inspection took a long time. Everything inside a  bag must be emptied on the table in front of the Israeli soldiers, and  the women were carrying many bags in their hands. The Israeli forces  took such measures after a Palestinian citizen from Kufr Ni’ma village  in the Ramallah governorate stabbed to death an Israeli soldier on 8  December 2005. By 4:30 pm, I was still waiting in the queue and there  were still many people in front of me. I began to feel tired and sick. I  felt pain in my feet and back in addition to a severe headache.At 5:50  pm (after waiting four hours), the turn of the woman in front of me came  and I felt happy because my turn would be straight after. As that woman  took her bag and left the electronic gate, which did not ring, she  smiled and said “dogs,” meaning the Israeli soldiers. A female Israeli  soldier heard her and asked another soldier to return the Palestinian  woman back to the end of the queue. But I heard her saying that she  wanted to go home through Birzeit. I felt very angry because these  soldiers control us in any way they like. I reached the electronic gate  at 6:00 pm, emptied my bag on the table, and passed through the gate,  which did not ring. These are the conditions: to pass through the gate  without ringing, and to empty your bag. Finally, I got out of Qalandiya  checkpoint and after five minutes in the car I reached my home very  tired physically, and broken psychologically.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 13 December 2005Signature: Sawsan GheithName not withheldField researcher: Manaf 'Abbas