Affidavit No. 2430/2005
2005
On 3 June  2005 at 12:30 pm, I was with my brothers Haytham and Sharif inside our  patisserie shop located on the main street in Qabalan village. While we  were about to close our shop to go for Friday prayer, we heard a car  driving very quickly and strongly in front of our shop. I went out and  heard many persons saying that maybe that car was out of control. I  looked to the north-west following the car with my eyes. I saw the car,  which was a petrol tanker truck, stop at a distance of approximately 100  meter and a woman get down from it. She was shouting and beating her  head with both hands. At first, I thought that the car had been out of  control and the driver had caused an accident. I hurriedly went towards  where the incident took place.Before I  arrived, I heard intermittent shooting from an unknown direction. I was  hit in my right leg and fell down on the ground near the tanker truck. I  looked around and saw that the tanker truck collided with another small  car. The collision was so strong that I could not distinguish between  the front and the back of the car. I also saw an unrecognisable person  in the car with his head open and another person carrying a metallic  tube and standing over his head outside the car. I tried to stand up but  I could not because of the injury in my leg. I saw another person  outside the car and asked him to help me stand up and told him that I  was injured but he did not help and told me that it was not his  business. For minutes I could not understand what was going on around  me. Then a person approached me and put me beside a white car near me  but I fell down again on the ground.At that  moment my brothers arrived and put me in a car that carried me to  Qabalan Medical Centre in the village where I received first aid. In the  Medical Centre and while I was under treatment, I heard people saying  that what happened was not a traffic accident but an intentional murder  implemented by the sons of 'Abdallah al-Asmar, who was killed during the  first intifada, against Sheikh 'Ali Faraj and his brother Husam. The  sons of 'Abdallah al-Asmar accuse Sheikh 'Ali and his brother Husam of  killing 'Abdallah al-Asmar because they were leading the Fateh Movement  at that time. Then I understood what was going on and why people were  standing outside their shops and did not move from their places. As for  me, I was carried in an ambulance to the al-Ingili (Evangelical)  hospital in Nablus city where I stayed for five days because my injury  was in the bone.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 21 June 2005Signature: Ashraf Humeid