Affidavit No. 5159/2009
2009
My name is Ahmad Ibrahim Husein Naser. I am 56 years, married, father of sixteen children, unemployed and live with my family near the Deir al-Balah police station in the Central Gaza governorate. During the Al Aqsa Intifada, I sustained a bullet wound in my stomach after Israeli soldiers shot me in 2003. Doctors at the al-Shifa’ Hospital conducted a surgical operation on me, during which they removed my left kidney and spleen. Then, doctors decided to transfer me for medical treatment at an Egyptian hospital. I travelled to Egypt and underwent arthroscopic surgery in order to dissect the bladder, and I returned back to Gaza. Following the operation, I started to suffer from urinary incontinence (inability to control urine). After I returned to Gaza, my suffering from urinary incontinence intensified and doctors at the al-Shifa’ Hospital decided to transfer me for medical treatment abroad in order to have a surgical operation to install an artificial valve to control urine. Having reported to the competent authorities in Gaza, I managed to obtain a Form No. 1 from the Ministry of Health in Gaza. On 27 July 2009, I received a patient transfer to the Jordan Hospital in Amman, where I was supposed to undergo a surgical operation to install an artificial valve to control urine. I had approval from the Jordan Hospital in Amman to receive me and conduct the surgery. On 14 September 2009, I obtained a No Objection Certificate (NOC), which was valid until 19 January 2011, from the Jordanian Embassy in Ramallah, allowing me to enter Jordan and continue medical treatment. After I had received the NOC, I applied for a permit to enter Israel through the Erez Crossing Point, access the Allenby (King Husein) Bridge and travel to Jordan. I submitted the application to the Coordination Office at the Palestinian Ministry of Civil Affairs in Gaza – the only body that is authorised to contact the occupying authorities with regard to access permits to Israel. Due to the continued closure of the Rafah Border Crossing, this was the only way for me to leave the Gaza Strip for Jordan and continue my medical treatment. About three weeks after I applied for a permit through the Palestinian Ministry of Civil Affairs, I received a telephone call from Mr. Rif’at Muheisen, Director of the Coordination Office at the Palestinian Ministry of Civil Affairs. According to instructions of the Israeli Intelligence agency, Mr. Huheisen told me that I should report to the Israeli Intelligence at the Erez Crossing on 15 October 2009 so that they could decide on my application for a permit to enter Israel.At around 8:00 am on Thursday, 15 October 2009, I travelled to the Erez Crossing to report to the Israeli Intelligence agency in accordance with the date set for me. As soon as I reached the Coordination Office of the Palestinian Ministry of Civil Affairs on the Palestinian side of the Erez Crossing, an employee took my ID card, called the Israelis and requested that I go to the Israeli side of the Crossing and report to the Israeli Intelligence. To reach the Israeli side of the Erez Crossing, I walked for a distance of about two kilometres in pursuance of directives of the Israeli occupying authorities. After I arrived at the main gate of the Israeli checkpoint, a person who talked on a loudspeaker demanded that I put my personal belongings, including my ID card, belt, shoes, wristwatch, etc., in a box. Then, I was subjected to a search through a large electronic device, which spun around my body. It was fixed to the ceiling of a small room inside the gate. Then, I entered a waiting hall and sat down for about two hours along with two persons from Gaza, who told me that they were sick and came to report to the Israeli Intelligence agency. Like me, they wanted to obtain permits to enter Israel and continue their medical treatment. Later, two Israeli Intelligence officers wearing the civil uniform arrived and took me down a staircase underground, they ordered me to enter a room, take off my clothes and stay in only my underwear. Then, they scanned my body with a small electronic device, ordered me to put on my clothes and led me to a room, where a person wearing the civil uniform sat. He was of white complexion, bald and put on eyeglasses. Sitting at a desk with a laptop in front of him, he told me that he was an Israeli Intelligence officer and said his name, which I do not remember. After he inquired about my name and personal information, he asked me why I wanted to leave Gaza for Jordan and whether I knew persons who were members of the Hamas Movement or not. I told him I was sick and the reason I would travel to Jordan was that I was in dire need of a surgical operation to install an artificial valve to control urine. I also presented all medical reports, the patient transfer reports and the paper stating the approval of the Jordan Hospital. The Intelligence officer demanded that I collaborate with the Israeli Intelligence agency and provide information about persons in Gaza in return for helping me obtain a permit to enter Israel and travel to Jordan. As I refused to be subjected to blackmail, he threatened that if I did not cooperate he would not grant me the permit. He also demanded that I not respond immediately to the offer and said he would call me later to ask for my reply about his request to collaborate with the Israeli Intelligence. Still, I completely rejected the offer.“If this is the case, I do not want to travel or enter Israel and I do not want the treatment.” I affirmed.The Intelligence officer told me to report to the Coordination Office at the Ministry of Civil Affairs in Gaza to learn about the response to my application for a permit to access Israel. Later, the same two Intelligence officers came and led me to a neighbouring room, in which there was a television screen and a DVD device. Having demanded that I sit down, they locked the door from the outside. The television screen began to show a video and pictures of members of the Hamas Movement and Police officers of the Gaza government while they were beating participants in mass parades and wedding parties throughout governorates of the Gaza Strip. Pictures of them assaulting people during the military takeover in Gaza were also presented. After I was left in that place for about two hours, I started to shout because I wanted to go to the toilet and urinate. Later, an Intelligence officer came in, put a white paper with numbers and Hebrew writing, which I did not understand, on my chest and took several photographs of me with a small camera. Then, they led me to the waiting hall, where I sat down for about two hours. Then, an Intelligence officer arrived, gave me my ID card and personal belongings and demanded that I leave the area in the same way I had got in. I then returned to my home.Having reported several times to the Coordination Officer at the Ministry of Civil Affairs in Gaza, the responsible employee told me that a response from the occupying authorities about granting me a permit had not arrived and that the issue was being examined by the Israeli Intelligence agency. Over the period during which I was waiting for the occupying authorities’ response about granting me a permit, the duration of the validity of the patient transfer to the Jordan Hospital expired on three successive occasions, but I managed to renew it each time. The last time I renewed the report was on 6 November 2009. However, renewal of the hospital’s approval to receive me and conduct the surgical operation was useless because I could not obtain a permit to enter Israel and travel to Jordan.