Affidavit No. 6409/2011
2011
On 4 June 2011 at around 8:00 am, I was in my house, which is located near the western entrance of ‘Iraq Bourin village (Nablus governorate), when I witnessed an Israeli military jeep stop and unload four soldiers at the village entrance. They were armed and wearing military uniforms. I witnessed this from a window in my house, which overlooks the western entrance of the village and is situated approximately 70 meters away. I also witnessed the soldiers stopping cars with Palestinian plates from entering  and exiting the village and asking the passengers to provide their ID cards.I left my house a while later and headed towards agricultural lands that were about 200 meters away from the checkpoint the soldiers had set up. After I managed to cross the checkpoint, I saw a car that was denied entry into the village and learned from the passengers that the soldiers were only allowing entry to residents of ’Iraq Bourin. The checkpoint remained in place until 7:00 pm that day.At around 3:30 pm that same day, a peaceful demonstration marched from the village towards the lands that were threatened by Israeli confiscation. These lands were nearby the Israeli settlement of Barkhah, located approximately two kilometers east of the village. This demonstration is organized by village residents on a weekly basis - every Saturday - and is meant to express opposition to the Israeli policies of settlement expansion and the confiscation of lands. On that day, the protest started from the center of ’Iraq Bourin and continued towards al-Karm area which is located about 500 meters away from the starting point. About fifty village residents participated in the march and were waving Palestinian flags as well as holding banners condemning settlements that are built on Palestinian lands. I also participating in this protest on that that day.Upon arrival to al-Karm area, twenty Israeli soldiers appeared from behind olive trees and immediately started firing teargas canisters and smoke and sound bombs at demonstrators. At that moment, village youth responded by throwing rocks at the soldiers. The youth then grew in number, reaching to about 80, and there were ongoing clashes with Israeli soldiers for about two hours. During these clashes, tens of the youth were injured as a result of inhaling teargas fired by the soldiers. First-aid treatment was provided on site by a Red Crescent ambulance. None of the youth were taken to the hospital. I also learnt that the Israeli soldiers positioned at the village entrance prevented press crews from entering the village. I had received a call from a reporter from  Palestine Today [Filastin al-Yom], who informed me that Israeli soldiers forced them away from the village entrance.At around 5:30 pm, the Israeli forces withdrew from the village. The soldiers left in four military jeeps, one of which was white. The jeeps positioned themselves at a distance of one kilometer from the site of the clashes, in an area close to the aforementioned Israeli settlement of Barkhah.