Affidavit No. 4159/2008
2008
On 9 April 2008, I was with my elderly father and mother at home, located in Qalqiliya city. While we were preparing to go to bed, we suddenly heard knocking at the main door of our house. I looked at the clock on the wall of the room where we were sitting and saw that it was 12:15 am. The knocking was very loud. My father quickly went to open the door, while my mother and I were watching him.As my father opened the door, five Israeli soldiers wearing the usual military uniform and carrying weapons, the type of which I do not know due to my lack of experience in weaponry, and rushed into the house without speaking to my father. The soldiers entered the room were my mother and I were. One of the soldiers, who had fair skin and was of medium size, asked for our identity cards.After taking our identity cards, the soldiers deployed throughout our house and started searching it, while the three of us were observing what they were doing. We were prevented from making any movement and a soldier was standing guard over us, and aiming his weapon at me. After about half an hour, the soldiers came to the room we were in. They were carrying my laptop with my inserted memory stick on which many documents were saved, and they also took my passport.One of the soldiers asked, in broken Arabic, about the owner of the Samhan Cultural Centre. Out of fear for me, my father said that he was the owner although the Centre was actually mine and licensed in my name. Then the same soldier told my father to go with them on a small trip. I tried to go with my father but the soldiers prevented me from doing so. The soldiers put my father in a military jeep, which was positioned in front of our house, and quickly left in that jeep.I followed the jeep. I could see from a distance that it stopped in front of my Centre, the Samhan Cultural Center. Then a large truck came and stopped in front of the Centre, which is located opposite to al-Quds Open University. I saw the soldiers talking to my father and I later learned from my father that they had asked him about the Centre, making sure that it was Samhan Cultural Centre. After this, one of the soldiers opened the door of the Centre, using a sharp tool that he had with him. The soldier put the sharp tool under the door and opened it.The soldiers entered the Centre, confiscated all its contents and put them in the truck. My father was looking at them without being able to do anything, because one of the soldiers was aiming his weapon at him to prevent any movement. Then they took my father out of the Centre, welded the door and stuck three papers on the door. These papers included a closure order for two years. One of these three papers was in Arabic, the second in Hebrew and the third was an aerial photograph of the Centre and the area in which the Centre is located. After this the soldiers left the place while my father was watching them without being able to do anything except to cry over what was going on.I rented the building from Mr Youself al-Sous. It is worth noting that the Centre was licensed by the Palestinian Ministry for Education and Higher Education. It is registered under my name and carries registration No. WT8/3/1975. This Centre provides training courses and educational workshops for university and high school students. It is supervised and planned with teachers and professors, who give these workshops. The centre always provides services to University students.The items confiscated from the Centre include three computer sets, a large fridge, a gas oven, a photocopying machine, headsets, stationery, two big cabinets, 1 box of 10 CD’s, an office chair, a table, two HP printers, several screens, 25 lecture chairs, as well as student report cards. The estimated cost of these items is NIS 63,795. The soldiers gave us a period of 14 days to submit an objection to the closure. According to the military order, the reason for closure is the false allegation that the Centre is used for terrorist activities.