Affidavit No. 5713/2010
2010
Dhahr al-Maleh is a small village located about 25 kilometres northwest of Jenin city. The community includes 160 residents who are living in about 20 different houses. In total, Dhahr al-Maleh has 35 households, all from al-Khatib family. Houses are made of brick and cement.The Israeli occupying authorities started to construct the so-called Annexation Wall in mid-2002 to the south of Dhahr al-Maleh. Construction of the Wall was completed at the beginning of 2003 and has meant that the community is now entirely situated behind the Wall. The Israeli occupying authorities have installed an iron gate in the Wall, which bears the number 300. The gate is located about 300 metres from Dhahr al-Maleh. Access to and from the village is only possible through the gate. The Wall surrounding Dhahr al-Maleh is made up of an electronic barbed wire fence, a trench, and dirt and paved roads. There is also an Israeli army military base, which contains military buildings, military vehicles, and there are also soldiers there. It is located about 100 metres west of the village. The base is a constant source of annoyance for us because of the noise emanating from it, such as loud music. The base was established before the Wall was constructed, but has been expanded since the construction of the Wall.The Israeli settlement of Shaked is about one kilometre east of Dhahr al-Maleh, and the settlement of Hinanit is about one and a half kilometres north of the village. We do not suffer from harassment from the Israeli settlers living there. The life of residents of the village has been harsh since the Wall was built. The iron gate is opened daily between 7:00 am and 10:00 am and between 12:00 pm and 7:00 pm. As a result, access to and from the village is only possible within those hours. When the gate is closed, we live in a large prison, which we cannot leave. In times of emergency, the gate can be opened but only after a lengthy and complicated process. Each resident of Dhahr al-Maleh who is over  12 years of age has to have a special permit to enter and exit the village. No Palestinian citizen from other areas is allowed to enter Dhahr al-Maleh. This means that we live in isolation from the outside world. Food supplies are allowed into the village only after a thorough search at the gate, and only in small quantities. This is also the case with other supplies, such as gas andf fuel. People are subjected to an electronic search before being allowed to pass through the gate. A special device is used to search supplies and bags that people bring into Dhard al Maleh. Searches are conducted by Israeli occupying soldiers. Everything is dependant on the mood of these soldiers. At times, the searches are very thorough and take up to 15 minutes for each vehicle and person. At other times, searches are very quick. The Israeli soldiers verbally abuse us without any justification. This happened to me at around 5:00 pm on Friday 10 September 2010, when a soldier uttered obscenities at me for no reason as I was returning to  the village. This happens to me and to the residents of Dhahr al-Maleh almost every day.There are six to nine heavily armed soldiers positioned at the iron gate. They deliberately talk in Hebrew which most of the village residents do not understand, thereby preventing us from understanding what they want and causing there to be constant arguments at the gate.Moreover, the Israeli soldiers prevent us from bringing many kinds of supplies into the village, including all electrical appliances and furniture, forcing us to buy them from areas inside the Green Line at very high prices. All of these problems are a result of the construction of the Wall and the isolation of our village behind it. Dhahr al-Maleh does not have a school and students must therefore cross the gate to access schools in Toura al-Gharbiyya village. About 40 male and female students are subjected every day to searches at the gate. Soldiers have a list of names of the students, which they check every day. This daily process of passing the checkpoint is especially exhausting to students in the winter and in hot summers. The Israeli occupying soldiers often deliberately delay students, especially when they are returning home.Furthermore, Dhahr al-Maleh is not connected to the electricity grid. We have applied several times to become connected with the grid but the Israeli occupying authorities constantly refuse our applications without giving reasons. A generator gives us electricity for four hours a day only. The practices of the Israeli occupying authorities subject us to harsh living conditions, which we cannot endure. A number of the residents of the village have started to emigrate to Jenin city and to neighbouring villages in order to escape this harsh reality. So far, about ten families have left the village for Jenin city. From my conversations with village residents, I cantell that they are strongly inclined to leave the village for Jenin in order to lead a better life. Most of the families that have emigrated from the village are well educated and work in the Jenin area.These are the conditions of Dhahr al-Maleh. Construction of the Annexation Wall has imposed intolerable conditions on the residents of the village, which are not liveable. In addition, no public services are provided by the Palestinian authorities; we do not have a school, a health centre, an electricity network or any infrastructure. It is as if we live in another world, in which it  is extremely difficult to continue living.