Affidavit No. 3438/2007
2007
At around 12:00 pm on 12 March 2007, while I was standing in front of the canteen at Ithna Basic Girls School, I saw a child being chased by an Israeli soldier who was aiming his gun at the child. I saw the child enter the bathroom and heard the door to one of the cubicles closing. The soldier followed the child until he reached the bathroom and began knocking on the door of the cubicle that the child had entered. Then, I heard the child shouting from inside the cubicle. Having seen the soldier following the child into the bathroom, the female students began to shout. I went towards the bathroom and saw the soldier drag the child, who was crying, from the bathroom. I grabbed the child and tried to take him from the soldier. However, the soldier simply ignored me. I heard him saying to the child in Arabic, “Will you ever throw stones at the soldiers?"I told the soldier that the child was crazy. The soldier replied in astonishment, "Crazy?" He then kicked the child and hit him with the butt of his gun and with his hands. The child's shouting increased, as did the girls’ shouting. Then, another five soldiers arrived on the scene and surrounded the child. The child’s colour changed and he became unable to stand on his feet. The soldier who was holding on to him did not seem to care. Then, another soldier hit the child and started dragging him away, paying no attention to the child’s condition.Again, I grabbed the child in an attempt to reassure him. In response, a soldier hit my right arm with the butt of his gun and pushed me backwards. I was unable to withstand the soldier’s pushing and was about to fall down when the soldier pulled the child away from me and took him to a military vehicle, which was about 40 metres from the school. The soldiers put the child in the vehicle and left.I found a child (seven years old) in the vicinity of the school who was unable to stand on his feet due to fear. I carried the child and reassured him that the soldiers had left.Later, I learned that the child who had been arrested was Maymoun Muhammad Hasan al-Sawayfa (15-years-old), a ninth-grade student at Ithna Basic Boys School, which is located near our school. This was the first such incident to take place in our school.