Affidavit No. 4323/2008
2008
I was on my land along with my father Samir Mir'i, and my brothers Samer, 30 yearsold, Ahmed 19 years old and Jamil 11 years old, located at the northern entrance to the village of Kufr Dan. We are residents of the village of Kufr Dan. It was about 7:00 pm on Wednesday, 9 July 2008. Everything was normal and quiet. At that time, I saw a car of light green colour, but I did not see its registration plates. It also had an open rear cabin. I also saw an old white Volkswagen car. We knew the latter car. It belonged to Burhan Farhan 'Abed, a resident of Kufr Dan. This car was travelling from the village towards the main street, the Jenin-Haifa road, north of the village.This means that the Volkswagen car was travelling along the entrance to the village towards the main street in order to access the city of Jenin. When the Volkswagen was near the car mentioned above, I saw the other car suddenly collide head on with the Volkswagen. I heard "Stop. Stop." shouted in Arabic. The accident took place 20 metres from us, to the east. Five individuals wearing black and white blouses and jeans, as well as carrying black short weapons, got out of the green car. They pointed their weapons at the Volkswagen car. I saw the person who was sitting beside the driver of the Volkswagen open the door and run  eastwards towards vacant agricultural land. At this point, the individuals in civilian clothes opened fire at the young man and ran towards him. They opened intensive fire for a moment. During the gun fire, I saw the young man fall on the ground. He was not carrying a weapon. The Volkswagen driver was still in his car.When he fell, the young man was at a distance of 10 – 15 metres from the armed individuals. Due to their weapons, I realised that these individuals were members of the Israeli Special Forces teams. Of these, an individual also had a black mask on his face. Three members of the Special Forces reached the young man, inspected his body and dragged him from his clothes to the paved street near the two vehicles.While he was being searched, the young man did not make any movement or sound. I, along with my father and brothers, could clearly see what was going on because there were no natural barriers in the horizon. Later, I saw two members of the Special Forces carry the young man and put him in the rear cabin of their car. I also saw a member of that team take the driver of the Volkswagen car out, grab him by his neck, and lead him into the Special Forces car. Then, I saw the Special Forces officers leave the area towards Salem Military Camp west of the city of Jenin, which can be reached through the Jenin-Haifa road.We rushed to the area where the accident took place. There, we saw two patches of blood, one in the area where the young man was wounded and the other in the area where he was dragged. Several minutes later, at around 7:15 pm, five Israeli military jeeps arrived. The soldiers did not get out of their jeeps, but they shouted at us through loudspeakers to get away from the area. Soldiers fired several bullets in the air. After they had stayed for a maximum of three minutes in the area, the Israeli military forces travelled towards Salem Military Camp too. Later, a number of village residents came. We learned from them that the young man who was injured was Talal 'Abed, who was known to all the village residents to be wanted and therefore targeted by the Israeli occupation because he was an activist in the Palestinian resistance. Two hours later, we learned that Talal was martyred after he was transported to a hospital inside the Green Line for medical treatment. The next day, Talal's corpse was returned to the village and buried there. An armed confrontation did not take place in the area.