Affidavit No. 4908/2009
2009
My name is Ahmad ‘Abd-al-Fattah Ahmad Nasr and I am 55 years old. I live on the ninth floor on al-Nour Tower in Tal al-Hawa near the Ministry of Prisoners’ Affairs, west of Gaza city. I am a former member of the Palestinian Legislative Council. I am also member of the Fateh Revolutionary Council and of the Preparatory Committee for Fateh’s Sixth Conference.At around 10:00 pm, on Monday 18 May 2009, I returned to the Gaza Strip from the West Bank through the Beit Hanoun Crossing, also known as Erez. I had participated in preparatory meetings for Fateh’s Sixth Conference, which took place in Jordan and Ramallah.On my way back, I the Israeli army detained me for almost two hours at Qalandiya checkpoint. Then, I reached the Beit Hanoun Crossing and took a taxi into Gaza from there. When I arrived at the checkpoint set up by the Police of the deposed government on al-Jamarek junction, Police officers demanded that the taxi stop and requested my ID card. Having examined my ID, they ordered me to get out of the taxi. They thoroughly searched the taxi and my luggage. Then, they took me to into a container, which was very dirty and full of garbage and rotten food. Approximately half an hour later, several blue Police agency cars arrived.A bearded man in civil clothes got out of a vehicle and ordered my luggage and personal belongings to be put onboard some vehicles. Afterwards, he picked up an awfully malodorous piece of cloth from the garbage and blindfolded me. Then, they took me into a car, which drove for about 15 minutes before it came to a halt.They made me enter some kind of place where someone ordered me to stand on my feet and lift my arms up high with my face against a wall and ordered me not to talk. I stood there for about two hours in a position similar to Shabeh. Later, they led me into a room, where two people interrogated me about my background, inquiring about how it was possible for leading Fateh activists like myself to simply leave the Gaza Strip and go to Ramallah. They also wanted to know who had coordinated our passage, and who would wait for us on the other side of the crossing, and which issues we had discussed during the preparatory meetings of the Fateh Conference in Jordan and Ramallah. Furthermore, they asked me about our stance on national dialogue. During my interrogation, I was regularly insulted and cursed.Furthermore, several people beat me with their fists and kicked me on my head and face and on various other parts of my body. They also forced me to stand with my hands lifted upwards and with my legs spread wide open for an extended period of time. I was subjected to interrogation about the same topics for three consecutive days.Later, they took me somewhere and removed my blindfold. I found myself inside a narrow corridor, measuring approximately one and a half metres in length. I looked around and realised that I was being detained in the house of President Abu-Mazen on Abu-Mazen junction opposite al-Amin Muhammad Mosque in the area of Ansar Gaza, west of Gaza city. I was familiar withthat area and had been there several times. I was held for a total period of twelve days before they finally released me. As soon as I left the house, I was absolutely certain that I had been kept at President Abu-Mazen’s house. Before I left the place, they had confiscated my ID card, passport, luggage, and mobile telephone.