Affidavit No. 2846/2006
2006
I work at the Muqata'a building, attached to the Jericho prison. This prison contains a number of political prisoners and a large number of ordinary prisoners. In addition, a number of collaborators (people accused of dealing with the occupation authorities) are imprisoned there. I am a security officer and my office is located at the entrance of the Muqata'a building.The General Secretary of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) Ahmad Sa'adat, Fou'ad al-Shobaki, and four others are detained in the prison. The Israeli occupying authorities have accused them of killing the Israeli Minister of Tourism, Rahba'am Zei'evi. The eastern window of my office overlooks the Jericho-Jerusalem main street. The window also overlooks the general gate of the Muqata'a and the prison building.On Tuesday, 14 March 2006, at approximately 9:10 am, I heard a voice calling the guards to open the gate. The voice was transmitted over a loudspeaker and the orders were given in Arabic. When I looked, I saw the prison guard signalling for an Israeli jeep to wait at the gate, but the jeep broke through the gate into the Muqata'a square. It was followed by many ordinary military and border guard jeeps. This break-in was accompanied by alternately intensive and intermittent firing. I was able to distinguish one from the other by the sounds of the bullets and the intervals at which they were being fired. The firing was carried out by Israeli soldiers positioned on the roofs of certain buildings outside the Muqata'a.As I left the building and headed to the Muqata'a square to see what was going on, I saw many Israeli jeeps and armoured cars. Just then, I heard a voice in Arabic announce via a loud speaker, "All must go out of the building with hand up on head." I immediately returned to my office because the firing had intensified and the number of military jeeps increased and spread throughout the Muqata'a square.Only a few moments had passed when a bulldozer that was bigger than a D10 came. It was driving so quickly that it uprooted the oldest tree in the square, destroying my visiting friend's car. The firing became stronger and another bulldozer arrived. The two bulldozers started demolishing the first office at the entrance of the Muqata'a building, which is the district leadership office. When this happened, all the people (about 130), both military and civilian, gathered together in one section of the square.The prison doors were then opened; in particular, the door holding the PFLP General Secretary and his comrades was opened and they joined the group gathered in the building. There was machine gun fire (800 millimetres) and firing coming from planes and tanks. We saw death in every bullet or missile that was shot toward us while the occupying forces called on us to surrender. None of us shot a single bullet because we did not want to give the soldiers any excuse for killing us. There were a high number of casualties among us (around 12) as a result of the firing and shrapnel blasts.The occupying forces cut off the electricity. Afterward, the bulldozers destroyed the infrastructure, including the electricity and the main water tank. This worsened the situation. The water cistern was destroyed right after the occupying forces arrived. The building was shaking from time to time while the bulldozers demolished one room after another. Every blow by the bulldozers felt like an earthquake.With time, the number of casualties and injuries grew. The dead and the injured were not allowed out until 12:30 pm even though they were killed or hurt at the beginning of the attacks. This situation continued until 7:00 pm; by then, all the rooms were demolished except for the room that protected us. It was the only room that remained. At approximately 7:00 pm, the bulldozer demolished one wall of that room. The six wanted people were inside this room with us, including Sa'adat, al-Shobaki and their comrades. We were then able to see the bulldozer and the wheel excavator without any pesky walls to block our view.The driver of the wheel excavator spoke to us from a few metres distance and the Israeli jeep entered the room, forcing us out with our hands on our heads. We walked among the military jeeps and the Israeli soldiers with our hands on our heads and our torsos naked. The soldiers were trying to isolate us from the cameras and journalists until we reached the so-called "landing" square. There, we were forced under the threat of arms and curses, to take off our clothes. We remained in our underwear in front of the occupying forces; both male and female eyes were on us. They were using very bad words and pointing at us in a humiliating manner.They tied our hands behind our backs with plastic cuffs and we were carried in military vehicles to unknown places. I later learned that we were in Ferdrigo Military Camp near Jericho. We stayed there three hours, naked and handcuffed. They released our cuffs temporarily and moved them from behind our backs to the front. Female soldiers, acting rude and naughty, photographed us while we were naked. Then they brought our clothes and questioned us. We were released the next morning, Wednesday, 15 March 2006.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 19 March 2006Signature: Ibrahim 'Abdallah