Affidavit No. 4641/2009
2009
On 19 January 2009, at around 10:00 am, my colleague Muhammad Qandil, 17 years old, and I were in the south eastern side of our village, about one kilometre away from the last house in our village. We were sitting together in the fields having a picnic. After about one hour, my aforementioned colleague and I went in the direction of a known spring called ‘Ein Qaryout to drink water. This is a well-known spring for the people in our village and is located within its land. We walked around 400 metres to the south-east. Around 20 metres before reaching the spring, we saw that there were about seven persons near the spring.They were dressed in black and green civilian clothing. The moment they saw us, some of them shouted the word "bo" in Hebrew, which means, "come." Once we heard that word, we realised that they were settlers, and thus were terrified. We immediately ran in the direction from which we had come. As we were running for about 100 metres or less, we could hear heavy shooting close to us. It was heavy at times and light at others. I would look behind me while running in order to find out what was going on. As I was looking, I saw the previously mentioned persons running after us. Some of them were carrying long weapons, aiming and shooting at us.We continued to run for a distance of around 400 metres until they stopped, though they continued to shoot at us intermittently. My colleague and I continued our escape through the fields. After running for around 700 metres, and while the shooting still continued, my colleague and I lay face down, a few metres away from each other, seeking refuge from the bullets. About a minute after we lay down, I felt that I had been shot in the back of my right arm, above the elbow. My arm started bleeding. We got up so that we could run further away, as we were concerned that they would reach and kill us. The moment we stood up, two quick, consecutive shots were fired, but we were not hurt. Then the shooting stopped.I estimate that around 20 bullets were shot at us in total. We continued our escape despite my injury, until we reached the village about 20 minutes later. I immediately went to the village's medical clinic, where the doctor on duty examined me and asked me to go to a hospital in Ramallah in order to complete the diagnosis and get the necessary x-rays taken for my injury, since such medical services are not available at the clinic. As there are no ambulances in the village, a taxi was called to the clinic. The taxi, which was driven by Mr. Kayed, arrived and took me to al-Sheikh Zayed Hospital in Ramallah. The doctors examined me when I arrived and said that I was injured in my right arm by a bullet that had entered from the back and exited from the front. I was released two hours later, as there was no need for me to stay at the hospital with my injury, which was described as below medium. I did not have a thorough look at the settlers and could not tell their ages or what they looked like in detail. However, I think that they may be from Shilo Settlement, which lies to the south-east of our village, around two or three kilometres away.