Affidavit No. 5093/2009
2009
“Stop... Stop...” I heard the sound of a voice from a loudspeaker calling from the border area.At that moment, Israeli troops began to open fire on me from the two tanks and military jeep. After I turned back, I felt that something had hit my neck. I felt dizzy and fell on the ground. Having checked myself, I saw that I was bleeding heavily from my neck and located two holes from which blood was flowing. I also felt that my feet and body were heavy. At that moment, I saw police dogs advancing towards me at great speed from the area of the border, followed by a tank. A black dog reached me, tore my clothes apart and attacked my left foot. I fought with it for a short while before I took out my cellular telephone from my pocket and hit the dog with it forcefully. I tried to get up and escape from the dog, but I fell on the ground and lost my balance because of the bullet wound in my neck. At that time, the tank arrived. A soldier got out and kicked me forcefully on my mouth. Then, the soldier carried me to the tank, which drove towards the border. From there, they transported me by helicopter to a military post at the Erez Crossing Point. After the soldiers put me on a bed inside a clinic, two physicians arrived, assessed my bullet wound, offered me medical aid, and connected me to an artificial breathing device. I fell unconscious. When I came around, I found myself on the same bed with the artificial breathing machine on. An Israeli officer, whose rank I do not remember, came and inquired whether I was a terrorist or a member of Hamas.“I will shoot you.” He said as he pointed his weapon at my stomach.“I am a secondary school student.” I replied.Then, he inquired about my name, personal information and place of residence. Having verified my information, the Israelis coordinated with the Ministry of Health and Palestinian District Coordination Office to transport me to Gaza.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 12 October 2009Signature: Ashraf Abu-SuleimanName not withheldField researcher: Muhammad Abu-RahmaI, the undersigned, Bassam Muhammad Abu Suleiman hereby certify that my son Ashraf has made the above statement to Al-Haq and signed it before me.