Affidavit No. 1237/2003
2003
Al-Nu'man  village is located five kilometres east of Bethlehem, five kilometres  south of Jerusalem and one kilometre from Sour-Baher. The village is  around 2500 dunums in area. A large part of it is owned by citizens from  Beit-Sahour and Sour-Baher. Most of the village land is poor quality  agricultural land. There are 150 residents in the village living in 25  houses. The village receives all its services, including water and  electricity, from the Palestinian Authority. The village citizens also  hold West Bank Palestinian identity cards.In 1993,  the village’s citizens took their case against the Jerusalem  Municipality to the Israeli courts to settle the village’s problem in a  just manner. Two solutions were suggested: (1) to obtain planning  permission and all services from the Jerusalem Municipality along with  Jerusalem identity cards, or (2) keeping the village as a West Bank  village and not a village within the borders of the Jerusalem  Municipality. The village commissioned lawyer Wasim Dakwar, a  Palestinian from the 1948 occupied territories. This lawyer represented  our case in the Israeli courts until 1998, during which period the case  reached the Israeli High Court of Justice. In 1996, the High Court  decided to give a 60-day grace period for the Jerusalem Municipality and  the Israeli Ministry of the Interior to solve the village’s problem.  However, nothing was done at that time.In 1996, a  fine of 15,000 shekels was imposed on one of the village residents on  the pretext that he built a house without obtaining a licence, and the  decision to demolish his house would remain effective for one year if he  did not obtain a licence. This decision was issued by the Planning  Department of the Jerusalem Municipality and the Israeli Ministry of  Interior. However, the Israeli authorities constantly refused to grant  licences because it is a “green” site and no licences are granted for  building on it. The resident concerned, however, with the assistance of a  lawyer, obtained a decision freezing the demolition of his house, which  is still in effect at the present time.In 1996, a  decision was issued by the Jerusalem Municipality notifying the  Education Department not to accept students holding West Bank identity  cards. As a result, the village students were deprived of studying in  schools in Um-Touba in Jerusalem, where they used to study prior to 1967  due to its proximity to Jerusalem. Now, 50 village children at the  primary level have been distributed to Beit-Sahour schools and schools  in the eastern rural area.This has  been accompanied by other attempts to restrict the village citizens,  including closure of the only road that links the village with Bethlehem  by Israeli bulldozers many times over the last five years, and breaking  the water pipes that bring water to the village. The closure of the  village entrance lasts for 20 to 30 days each time, and is only reopened  when the citizens themselves open it. The village remains without water  until the citizens repair the water pipes. This is because the Israelis  allege that the village is part of Jerusalem and the village is not  allowed to receive services from the Palestinian Authority, and at the  same time the Jerusalem Municipality refuses to provide it with any  services.In April  2002, we were informed verbally by the Israeli army that the village is  located in an area through which the Separation Wall will run. This Wall  will surround Jerusalem, and separate the West Bank from Jerusalem. The  Israeli military bulldozers opened a preliminary road as a precursor to  the path of the Wall. Moreover, the military bulldozers destroyed the  one-kilometre long asphalt road leading to the village, and the  village’s water pipes, and gave notification that three houses would be  demolished. Through the efforts of a lawyer, Husni Abu-Hussein, the  demolition decisions were replaced by very high fines of around 50,000  to 60,000 shekels for every house not exceeding 80 square metres in  area.On 2  April 2003 at approximately 10:00 am, while I was at home in al-Nu'man  village, patrol soldiers came with two border guard jeeps to my home.  One of the soldiers was bald, wearing a hat, around 180 centimetres  tall, white, slim and spoke only Hebrew. He introduced himself to me as  Davier and gave me his telephone number, which I do not remember. He  said that he belonged to an agency concerned with following up  residents’ problems with Israeli ministries. Davier asked for the  residents’ names and identity cards, which he recorded. He then started  to talk about our village’s difficult problem in Hebrew, which I  understand very well, and added that he will work on helping us to solve  this problem. Davier asked me whether any of the villagers would want  to sell their land to the Jews or to any citizen from Sour-Baher. My  response and others’ responses were that we absolutely reject selling  our lands.In the  course of talking to me, Davier said that if the problems were only  faced by one or two families, it would be easy to evacuate them, but  that the whole village was too big to evacuate. He also said that the  village residents would face problems after the Wall separates them from  the West Bank in addition to the closure imposed in the direction of  Jerusalem. Davier also said that the Israelis would cut water and  electricity supplies to the village to encourage the villagers to  evacuate voluntarily from the village which would then have become like a  cage.He  pretended that he was sympathising with us and said that we would be  like prisoners with our families. He added that the village would be the  border with the Palestinian Authority in the future and therefore would  have to be empty, so our presence there was illegal. Davier showed us a  map with three roads that will pass through the village (two bypass  roads and the third being the 800 metre wide Separation Wall). The Wall,  he added, would swallow the land of the village and residents would be  given permits to reach their land, which could be rejected for security  reasons.On 10  April 2003, construction began of the Separation Wall that will separate  the village from the West Bank. Since then we have been waiting for the  unknown, which is frightening to us. I would like to mention that  Davier stayed for around two hours inmy house.  At the end of his visit, he asked to meet me at the Israeli Ministry of  Interior in Jerusalem on the condition that no lawyers would come with  me. He took my name and my ID number to obtain a permit for me and I did  not refuse because I wanted to know what he wanted. On 6 April 2003,  Davier called my cousin Yousef Dir'awi whose telephone number I gave to  Davier because he speaks Hebrew better than me. Davier told my cousin  that I was denied a permit for security reasons. Therefore he met my  cousin Yousef alone for an hour on 7 April 2003. The result was  negative. The best they could give offer Yousef was a possible permit,  but even that was not confirmed. Meanwhile, Yousef has not responded to  the Israelis’ demand to evacuate or sell his land despite the  intimidation he has been submitted to. As I have mentioned, on 10 April  2003, the construction of the Wall started and our future at this moment  is uncertain and frightening.It is  worth mentioning that the problems in our village have been followed up  by a number of legal organisations including the Israeli organisation  B'Tselem; Saint Eve; and an Israeli lawyer, Samuel Matsa. However, the  lawyer will not take action without money, and his fees are very high.  The case is currently pending, but the village cannot afford his fees.According  to what the residents of Beirauna, in the Beit-Jala district, have told  me, it seems our problem is similar to theirs. They obtained Jerusalem  IDs with a judgment from the Israeli courts despite the fact that the  Wall does not surround all of them or even a majority of them.