Affidavit No. 6860/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Ahmad Sameer Ahmad Naser, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 411697568, born on 20 June 1988, unemployed/ volunteer, and a resident of Bitounya, Ramallah governorate, would like to declare the following:For nine months now I have been participating in the weekly peaceful demonstrations in al-Nabi Saleh village, which have been taking place every Friday for nearly two years now.At the beginning, I used to participate in the demonstrations as a civilian but after I was injured during a demonstration at Qalandiya checkpoint, I was inspired to become a certified paramedic. I attended courses and trainings in first aid and then started to work with the Palestinian Red Crescent Society as a volunteer paramedic in al-Nabi Saleh..On Friday 09 December 2011, I was participating in one of the weekly demonstrations in al-Nabi Saleh within my capacity as a paramedic. The demonstration began at around 12:30 pm when approximately 70 Palestinian and international protestors, including Israelis, gathered to demonstrate peacefully.About eight Israeli army jeeps from the Israeli occupying forces were positioned at the southern entrance of the village when clashes erupted between them and young demonstrators who were bring prohibited by the soldiers from reaching their confiscated  lands. During the clashes, Israeli forces began throwing tear gas and shooting rubber bullets. Seven demonstrators were wounded and received immediate first aid. Three were wounded due to tear gas; four others were hit by rubber bullets. I noticed that two of those injured by rubber bullets had been seriously injured in the head.At around 3:00 pm, the Israeli occupying forces tried to enter [al-Nabi Saleh] village with a bulldozer and three military jeeps. At that time, clashes broke out. Palestinian youths were throwing stones at the military jeeps to try to prevent them from moving forward. I noticed that the soldiers were using a lot of tear-gas. From a distance of about 20 meters, I saw the tip of a rifle appear from the back door of one of the military jeeps and then fire a tear-gas canister that hit the ground. Seconds later, I saw another tear-gas canister fired directly at a man who was about two meters away from the jeep. The canister hit his head directly, he fell to the ground and lay still. The military jeep kept driving away while I ran with some others until we reached the young man and realised that it was Mustafa ‘Abd-al-Razzaq al-Tamimi (27 years old).He was shot in the face, specifically in his right eye. His eye had fallen off of its place.  Mustafa was unresponsive and when I put my hand on his head, it seemed to me that the right side of the head was smashed. I thought that he was about to die at any moment. With the help of other people I carried Mustafa’s body into a civilian car that took him to the entrance of the village, where the Israeli occupying soldiers ordered us to take Mustafa out of the car, and to evacuate the place.Only one of the citizens remained standing beside Mustafa, and after about five minutes, an Israeli ambulance arrived and took him to an unknown destination. After seeing Mustafa’s wound up-close, I knew that he was in a critical condition and that the injury may very well be fatal. I later found out that Mustafa was transferred to an Israeli hospital, and that he was announced dead on 10 December 2011 at about 10:00 pm.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 10 December 2011