Affidavit No.  6165/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Zeinab ‘Abd-al-Muiti Faraj al-Tamimi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of identity card number 852489129, born on 15 October 1990, housewife, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh, Ramallah district, would like to declare the following:I live in the village of al-Nabi Saleh, north of Ramallah, where our house consists of two storeys, with my husband’s family living on the first floor, while I live on the second floor with my husband and daughter who is around two years old. Our house is at the entrance to the town and directly on the main street. I should mention that the date was Friday 10 December 2010, and confrontations between occupation soldiers and youths from the village were going on after the weekly peace march. The occupation soldiers were firing intense volleys of gas grenades on the youths and towards the house while the youths were responding with stones. At around 4:30 pm, a number of occupation soldiers were gathered around 300 metres from the house, directly opposite our house. At the time I was standing with my daughter on our veranda, directly opposite the soldiers. The soldiers were firing intense volleys of gas grenades in all directions. A gas grenade came in, breaking the window. I heard the glass shatter. At that time, my niece was crying from a pain in her back. I headed towards the main entrance of our house and heard the sound of the window shattering. I found gas rising intensely inside near the door of the house. Meanwhile, my niece was stretched out on the ground and crying from the fumes of the gas and the pain in her back so I pulled her straight out onto the veranda, where I had been sitting. She told me that a gas grenade had hit her on the back. At the same time my daughter started to cry out from the gas fumes and was about to choke. I carried her towards the window and started to shout out to call my family to try to save the child who was screaming hysterically and had begun to choke. Smoke was filling all corners of the house. Some youths had gathered and brought with them a ladder, which they placed against the building directly at the veranda. I managed to pass the child down, screaming, into the arms of the people below but I was very worried that I might drop her and harm her. The people brought her to the house opposite. During all this, occupation soldiers were continually firing gas grenades towards the house, and its surrounding area became full of teargas. At the same time my niece was injured by a teargas grenade and by the fumes of the gas, just as everyone who tried to save her was affected by the gas fumes and suffered from choking. We left to go to the house of some of our relatives, and afterwards returned home after the army had left and I cleaned the house. The gas remained absorbed in the house for around four days after the incident. In addition to that my daughter remained affected by psychological trauma, and is always asking me why I dropped her from the window, and why I don’t love her. This continued for around two months, and she has taken to crying and screaming at night. On Fridays, when we hear the sound of the gunfire it puts her into a state of hysteria from fear and terror, in addition to involuntary urination.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 12 March 2011