Affidavit No. 2336/2005
2005
At the  beginning of April 2005 at 4:30 in the morning, I started my journey in a  public car (taxi) from my village of Barta’a located behind the  ‘Separation Wall’ in the Jenin governorate. I was heading towards the  iron gate constructed at the eastern entrance of the village [gate  no.5], on my way to the Jenin Governmental Hospital in Jenin city. I was  driving a woman, who was in labour, in my car to the hospital (I do not  want to mention the name of that woman), accompanied only by her  mother. When I reached gate no. 5 in my car, I lit all the lights of the  car and turned on the indicator, to inform the soldiers that I had an  emergency case in my car, because I knew that the soldiers do not open  that gate before 5 in the morning. I came near the gate, which was  closed at that time, and used the horn of the car several times so that  the Israeli soldiers would come and open it.After  five minutes, an Israeli soldier came out of the outpost and told me not  to use the horn and to wait for a short time. He told me that from a  far distance without coming near the car, and returned back to the  outpost. The woman was crying and shouting from the severe pain of  labour. Half an hour passed without any movement from the Israeli  soldiers to open the gate. I used the car horn again, and I repeated  that several times in an attempt to make the soldier open the gate, or  to talk to us, especially as it had turned five, which is the normal and  usual time for opening the gate. Minutes passed, the pain of labour  increased, and the woman’s condition worsened, without there being any  sign of a soldier coming out to open the gate.At 5:30,  there was still no response from these soldiers. As a result of the  increasing pain of the woman, her mother’s fear for her, and my feeling  that the Israeli soldiers were not going to open the gate, I was obliged  to switch on the car and go back towards the south to Barta’a village,  which lacks a hospital, clinic or an infirmary. So I returned the woman  to her home in order for her to give birth to her child there, with the  help of her mother and some village women. Thank God this event passed  safely, and the woman gave birth to her child. But imagine if the person  in my car was bleeding, or suffering from a dangerous disease that  needed immediate care! What would be the result then?This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 9 May 2005Signature: Tareq Hasan Mahmoud Qabaha