Affidavit No. 6369/2011
2011
My name is Fathi Hamdan Ibrahim Qadih and I have Palestinian nationality. I am 42 years old, married and a father to three children. I live in al-Qadih Neigborhood East of ‘Abasan al-Kabira and my house is about 1500 meters away from the border with Israel. The area in which I live is relatively close to the borders and is surrounded by agricultural lands. Our house has been shelled and invaded several times by the Israeli occupying forces.On Friday 8 April 2011 at around 12:30 pm, I headed to al-Nour Mosque to pray. While I was walking on a dirt road leading up to the mosque, I heard the sounds of Israeli drones flying overhead. Half way to the Mosque, I heard a huge blast in a location not far from where I was. I turned around to check where the blast had taken place and sawblack smoke coming out of my brother Ibrahim’s house. It was about 20 meters west of where I was standing. I also heard the sounds of women screaming from within the house and so I immediately headed towards the house. When I arrived, I opened the door to the front yard of the house (the hosh). At first, I noticed my 14-year-old niece lying next to the door. Her legs were injured and she was bleeding heavily. She was shouting ‘I got shot…I got shot.” I looked around the yard and saw my sister in law, Najah Salem Qadih (41 years old), and her daughter, Nidal (19 years old), lying on the ground next to each other, unable to move. Two meters away from them, my niece Nida’ (17 years old) was also on the ground with blood all over her body. For seconds I was in a state of shock from the horrific scene I had just witnessed. I then approached them and saw that Nidal’s head had been badly injured with her face distorted and blood spread all over her body. I also saw that my sister in law, Najah, was injured in the chest and was bleeding heavily as well. I realized that she was alive when I heard her reciting Qur’anic verses of martyrdom. I tried to give them first-aid as fast as possible and within a matter of seconds some of my relatives, who are residents of the area, arrived to the site. Using a taxi that had arrived to the site, I transported my two nieces Nidal and Fida’ to the European Gaza Hospital located East of the city.Upon arrival to the hospital, we were immediately taken to the emergency room. Doctors soon confirmed to us that Nidal had died from her injuries. They also informed us that according to medical examinations, Fida’ was injured by several shrapnel in the lower part of her body and described her injuries as moderate. While I was at the hospital, Icontacted a number of my relatives to check on the other members of my brother’s family. I was told that my sister-in-law, Najah, and niece, Nida’, had been taken to Naser Hospital West of Gaza City. They informed me that doctors had confirmed the death of Najah, 41, and that Nida’ was in critical condition and was receiving treatment at the intensive care unit.Afterwards, I went home and learned that my brother’s house had been targeted by an Israeli drone aircraft that fired a missile at his house. The missile landed on the house’s front yard where my sister-in-law and her three daughters were sitting. When I visited my brother’s house later on that day, I saw a 3-inch diameter hole in the yard, which was so deep that a 2-meter stick would not reach its bottom. In the hole, we found parts of the missile, electronic boards, wires and plastic parts. It is worth noting that my brother’s house is 80 square meters and has an asbestos-based roof. The yard is situated at the northern end of the house and is 150 square meters. Additionally, the house is located 1300 meters west of the border, 200 meters north of my house, and is surrounded by agricultural lands cultivated with olive trees.