Affidavit No. 4914/2009
2009
I am a sixth grade student at the al-Rahma Boys School, located along al-Salam Street in the city of Hebron. After my school day on Monday, 25 May 2009, I walked back to my house. Due to the end-of-year examinations, the school day finished early. On my way home, when I was at a distance of about 30 metres away from my house, I saw a group of around seven boys, who were a little older than me, running towards the market through the al-Sawakna neighbourhood.Suddenly, I saw behind them a group of at least six Israeli soldiers. They were running after the boys. A black soldier demanded that I stop, grabbed my left arm, and pushed me against a wall. I tried to talk to the soldier who was holding on to me, but he just told me to shut up. He led me for a distance of about 250 metres to a military post near the settlement outpost Beit Romano, which is built on the site of Usama Ben Munqeth School.On the way there, soldiers were surrounding me from all sides. I was scared and criying when they arrested me. When we arrived at the military post, I was forced into a room, the bottom of which was made of concrete and the upper part of which was made of glass.A soldier told me to sit down so I would not see what was happening. Then, my brother Samir, who is about 29 years old, arrived and spoke to me. But then a soldier ordered me to stop talking to Samir. It was very hot outside, and the door of the room in which I was detained was closed, which is why it was very hot in there.About half an hour later, a soldier arrived and led me to al-Shuhada’ Street towards the military camp in the old bus station. They forced me into a military watchtower located in the military camp where a soldier forced me to stand on one leg and blindfolded me with a piece of cloth. While I was inside the watchtower, a soldier demanded to see my hands, speaking to me in Hebrew. I understood that he was accusing me of throwing a stone, which hit a soldier in the head.Inside the watchtower, I was led to a higher area on a staircase while I was blindfolded. Later, I was forced back down. Then, a soldier led me for about 250 metres, grabbed my wrists, and released me. I looked at the military watchtower in which I had been detained and realised that I was on the road leading to al-Karantina, the health care centre, which had been closed by the Israeli army. There, I saw my brother Samir, who finally took me back home.My brother told me that the army had informed him that I was taken to the Police after I had been moved from the room, where I was detained. He went to the Israeli Police station near Al-Ibrahimi Mosque in an attempt to find me. There, he was told that I had been transported to the Israeli Police station near the settlement of Kiryat Arba’. He did not find me there either. Therefore, he eventually returned and waited for me near the army’s checkpoint leading to al-Karantina. I was arrested at around 10:30 am and released at around 1:00 pm.I, the undersigned, Samir ‘Abd-al-Halim Dweik, hereby declare that my brother ‘Izz-al-Din has made the sworn statement above to Al-Haq and signed it in front of me. Samir Dweik