Affidavit No. 4133/2008
2008
I am a citizen and resident of Qiffin village, located north of Toulkarem city. On 19 March 2008, at approximately 8:30 am, my mother told me to go to the grocery store to buy her some ingredients to prepare the meal. I left the house and walked towards the village centre because we live in the eastern quarter of Qiffin.While I was walking on one of the village roads, I was surprised to see two Israeli soldiers wearing military uniforms and carrying long weapons. These two soldiers rapidly ran towards me. Since they were already very close to me, I had no opportunity to run away. So they grabbed me. I instantly realised that an Israeli military force had invaded the village, a reality the village citizens were familiar with because Qiffin is one of the villages adjacent to the Separation Wall. The Wall is located at the western side of the village and has confiscated 700 dunums of its lands.When the two soldiers grabbed me, I felt an extreme fear that I cannot describe. One of the two soldiers asked me if I had thrown stones and I said no. Without any reason, the two soldiers started beating me. They beat me with their hands on my chest and abdomen. As a result, I fell to the ground where they started beating me on my legs. As the soldiers were beating me, I saw the village children throwing stones at them. Some of the stones hit me. When the stone throwing increased, one of the two soldiers hit me very strongly on the back of my head with the butt of his weapon which made me lose consciousness. I only regained my consciousness in Thabet Thabet Governmental Hospital in Toulkarem.As you see, I am still in the hospital receiving medical attention because my bleeding was very intensive. The doctor treated the wound on my head with three stitches. I hope to leave the hospital very soon. I learned later that after the stone throwing had increased and the soldier had hit me on my head, he fled to one of the jeeps that were spreading all over the village. Then the youngsters and children approached me and carried me to a clinic in the village, which recommended referring me to Toulkarem hospital. I would like to say that I have not committed any wrongful act and that the soldiers used me as a human shield when they were subjected to the stone throwing.