Affidavit No. 4372/2008
2008
Around 5:30 am on 2 September 2008, I was on board a small boat, a hasaka with an oar. I was accompanied by my brother Saddam, 14 years old. We were fishing in the sea, at a distance of approximately 500 metres from the Beit Lahiya beach in the northern Gaza Strip. Take into account that the distance allowed for fishing is six miles. My cousins Ahmad al-Sultan and 네mmar al-Sultan, both 14 years old, sailed on board another hasaka. My brother Saddam and I prepared the fishing equipment, including nets and the other necessary fishing tools. I threw them into the water at the required depth. Then, my brother and I sat waiting onboard the boat.Suddenly, I saw two green Israeli boats approaching us at high speed. My brother and I, and my cousins, were afraid and panicked. Five armed naval officers were onboard each boat. The two boats surrounded us and opened fire towards the water near us. They demanded that we do not move and that we follow their orders. A soldier ordered me, in Arabic, to sail west towards the Israeli battleship, which was a long distance away from the beach. The soldier also ordered my cousins, who were crying and screaming out of immense fear, to do the same. I told the soldier that my brother Saddam, as well as Ahmad and 네mmar, were children and that they should go back to the beach. They had to go to school. They also did not know how to swim.He then ordered them to go back to the beach. At gunpoint, he demanded that I row. Under the supervision of an Israeli boat, I started to row to the west. A soldier demanded that I row the hasaka towards the Boya-Rafsoda, a boat used by the occupying soldiers to seize Palestinian boats which are over the allowed fishing distance of six miles. Against the wind current and in the cold weather, I arrived there in an hour and 15 minutes. I was exhausted since I was fasting. While I was resting, after I reached the Rafsoda, I saw a boat sailing towards me at high speed. A soldier threw a rope into the water. At gunpoint, he forced me to dive into the water in order to bring the rope and tie it to the Rafsoda.When I dived, the soldiers started to laugh at me. Then, I tied the rope to the hasaka. Later, another Israeli boat came along, tugging the boat of 네dnan al-Sultan, a 45 year old member of my family. Soldiers demanded that 네dnan tie his hasaka along with mine. They demanded that 네dnan and I lift up the fishing nets and turn them around so that they could search them. Also at gunpoint, they ordered us to strip, which we did. In the cold weather, 네dnan and I kept our arms raised for about 15 minutes. At that point, a cruiser, the dabbour which is a large battleship that always stops at a great distance from the Gaza beach, appeared. Occupying soldiers use the cruiser for remote surveillance. The soldiers forced us to swim for about 100 metres and climb onboard the cruiser.Despite the swim being tough and despite my fear of the engines, and the water being polluted by them, I reached the cruiser and climbed onboard. A soldier blindfolded me and tied my hands behind my back with a plastic strip. Another soldier ordered me to sit on the rough deck. I felt severe pain in my back and hands. I stayed there for about 15 minutes until 네dnan arrived along with the soldiers. He sat beside me. They asked me about my name and some personal information including ID number, profession, place of residence etc. They also asked 네dnan the same questions.The cruiser then sailed at high speed towards the north and about 25 minutes later I heard a soldier say that it was Ashdod port. A soldier took me to another location, where soldiers asked me again about my personal information. Later, two doctors, a man and a woman, arrived and examined me, taking my pulse, blood pressure and temperature. A person in civilian clothes appeared and took photographs of me. I was then subjected to interrogation for more than three hours by two persons in civil uniform, and then by three others in the official uniform of the Israeli army. They asked me about training sites belonging to the Hamas movement in the area of Beit Lahiya, and whether Hamas members train on diving overseas or if Hamas has submarines and training boats.I stayed at the Ashdod port for about ten hours. Then, a military jeep transported me and 네dnan to the Erez border crossing. They demanded that we leave the crossing point and return home. While 네dnan and I were detained in a small room for about an hour, they completed all their procedures. At about 6:15 pm on the same day, I came back home.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 3 September 2008.Signature: Muhammad al-SultanName not withheldField researcher: Muhammad Abu-Rahma