Affidavit No. 2319/2005
2005
I am a  citizen from Al-Ra’s village, which is located approximately eight  kilometres to the south of Tulkarem city. The Israeli occupation built  what is called the ‘Separation Wall’ west of the village in 2002, which  swallowed hundreds of dunums from the village lands, due to the fact  that 3000 dunums of agricultural lands owned by the village citizens  (the population of the village is 500 people) are located behind the  Wall.In the  past, the occupation forces issued permits for us to go to our lands  located behind the Wall. We used to pass with these permits through gate  22. But since the beginning of February 2005, the Israeli occupation  forces have entirely refused to give any citizen any permits to pass  through the above-mentioned gate to his/her land. To be honest, 8 people  were given permits. These 8 people are men of 60 years and over, while  the rest of the village citizens including the youth, women, and men,  are completely and absolutely prohibited, for unknown reasons, from  entering through the gate to their lands. Such a decision (prohibition  to reach the lands behind the ‘Separation Wall’) will cause the  destruction of thousands of dunums of agricultural land, and tens of  thousands of olive trees, in addition to the destruction of the  un-irrigated agriculture and the agriculture of wheat and barley and  other types of agriculture. All the above-mentioned need continuous care  and work, such as uprooting the grass, ploughing the land, and trimming  the olive trees to prepare it for the next year. If we do not do this  work, the next season will be destroyed.I  believe, with all the citizens of Al-Ra’s village, that the occupation  authorities’ refusal to give us permits is because these authorities  intend to make all the lands of the village located behind the Wall arid  and uncared for, as a foundation for confiscating them; alleging that  they are arid lands, uncared for, and not good for agriculture, which  will mean the confiscation of the land from its owners.I am the  owner of agricultural land located behind the Wall. My land covers  approximately 7 dunums and is planted with olive trees (approximately 50  Russian olive trees of big size and good quality). I have not been able  to reach my land since 2002, the year in which the ‘Separation Wall’  was constructed, under the pretext that I am prohibited for security  reasons, because I am an ex-prisoner of the first Intifada. It is for  this reason that the Israeli occupation authorities allege they do not  give me a permit to pass through gate 22. Imagine that I can travel to  Jordan while I cannot enter my land. If this Israeli policy continues  and I am denied access to my land, my land will be destroyed, because  grass will spread in it.Although  the Israeli Supreme Court issued a decision two months ago (in March  2005) requiring the adjustment of the Wall track in Al-Kafriyat area and  Al-Ra’s village, in a manner that the Wall be removed towards the Green  Line, this decision has not been implemented yet by the Israeli army.  It is worth noting that changing the track of the Wall will return 2500  dunums of the village lands presently located behind the Wall.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 21 April 2005Signature: Ghazi Hussni Odeh