Affidavit No. 2479/2005
2005
I am the  wife of Feisal Ahmad Hamed Jaber (44 years) and a mother of five  children. I live in the Jaber quarter located between the Kiryat Arba’  settlement and al-Haram al-Ibrahimi, half of which the settlers control.  We own lands planted with olive and fruit trees. On Saturday 11 June  2005, while my husband, children and I were sitting on our balcony on  the second floor, which overlooks our lands, we saw trees, approximately  50 metres away from us, shaking and we also heard a sound like that of  somebody breaking a tree.As our  lands are close to the settlement, my brother-in-law Munther Jaber (40  years) went to the police station near al-Haram al-Ibrahimi. It was 11  p.m. and he submitted a complaint against the settlers accusing them of  destroying the trees. The policemen told him to go and that they would  follow him. We waited but neither the police nor the soldiers came. We  saw the settlers leave the field and go back to the Kiryat Arba’  settlement.In the  morning of the next day, we went to our field and found the olive and  peach trees broken and their fruit fallen on the earth. The site was not  visited by any policeman. On Sunday morning 18 June 2005, we discovered  that 12 olive trees had been cut and all the peaches were damaged. The  total area of the lands planted with olives and peaches is approximately  15 dunums and the majority of the trees were damaged. I would like to  add that this is the second time that settlers attack our lands.  Moreover, our fruit crops are stolen from time to time and we accuse the  settlers of stealing because no resident can approach this area, since  it is adjacent to Kiryat Arba’, and if anyone does, he or she will be  subjected to inspection, investigation and sometimes to arrest. We know  that the settlers aim at devastating the land and confiscating it under  the pretext that it is deserted. Building on this land is impossible due  to its vicinity to the Kiryat Arba’ settlement.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 28 July 2005Signature: Huda Jaber