Affidavit No. 6162/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Sharaf Fadel Tamim Tamimi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 852528389, born on 14 March 1993, a university student, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh village, Ramallah governorate, would like to declare the following:I recall that on 2 January 2011 at approximately 1:30 pm, I was in the centre of our village with a group of youth, when an Israeli military jeep entered the village. The jeep came in from the eastern entrance of the village, which used to be the main entrance but is currently blocked by a metal gate with a watch tower situated beside it. The jeep was moving slowly towards us, which provoked the youth who started throwing stones in its direction. When the jeep arrived at a short distance from us, its back door opened and four fully-equipped soldiers came out. At the time, I was standing about ten metres away from the jeep when I saw one of the soldiers aiming his gun at me; I turned my back in an attempt to run away. As soon as I turned around, I heard shooting and momentarily felt numbness on the right side of my body from my waist to my knee. Despite this, I carried on and managed to run about 200 metres away, during which I was running on one leg and feeling excruciating pain on my right side. I stumbled several times until I could not take the pain anymore and fell onto the ground. I looked at the right side of my body and noticed circular marks one-centimetre in diameter, with blood coming out of them. The marks were red and the skin was slit open. Then, a group of youth gathered around me and phoned my father, who arrived in his car a few minutes thereafter and took me to Salfit Governmental Hospital. There, twelve bullet marks - such as the ones I described earlier - were found on my right side, characteristic of those caused by steel bullets coated with a thin layer of rubber, typically used during the village’s weekly demonstration. I had felt these bullets striking my body when shooting was taking place, or rather when I heard shooting from the back. The doctor informed me that I was bruised by these specific bullets and proceeded to provide me the necessary treatment. He then asked me to take some rest at home. My condition is now stable.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 25 January 2011