Affidavit No. 2820/2006
2006
In the early morning hours of Wednesday, 15 February 2006, I was informed that an Israeli military force was occupying the house of Mousa Abu-al-Rub. The house is located 160 metres south of my home in the Abu-al-Rub quarter of Qabatiya, south of Jenin. As the news of the seizure spread through Qabatiya, many youths gathered and began throwing stones at the Israeli jeeps positioned in front of the house. The youths were throwing stones from the westward direction only, not from the east.At 8:30 am that same day, while in my kitchen, I saw a boy named Mjahed Smadi carrying a plastic gun and pretending to shoot at the soldiers from behind a wall. Mjahed is a resident of Qabatiya who suffers from a mental disability. He repeated the act of pretending to shoot the soldiers and hiding behind the wall many times. I shouted at Mjahed to discard the gun and get away from that place. He replied, "Don't worry, depend on God." Again, I requested that he stop, but he failed to obey, carrying on with his pretend shooting.At approximately 9:00 am, while I was washing dishes and checking on Mjahed through the kitchen window, soldiers positioned inside Mousa Abu-al-Rub's house fired two bullets at Mjahed. I saw Mjahed falling. His plastic gun went flying through the air and then he fell to the ground on his back. I started crying and shouting, "He died, he died!"I immediately called the Palestinian Red Crescent in Jenin and told them what happened. Then I headed toward the street, as many other women and youths were doing. We used the wall separating us from Mousa Abu-al-Rub's house to protect ourselves by staying out of sight of the soldiers. Some youths tried to reach Mjahed, beyond the wall, but the soldiers opened fire on them and they were forced to seek cover behind the wall.After waiting about 15 minutes, the youths tried to reach Mjahed again. This time they succeeded, carrying him to the town center where an ambulance took him to the Jenin governmental hospital. By the time the ambulance reached the hospital Mjahed was dead.At 10:00 am that same day, the Israeli soldiers retreated under heavy smoke which they had fired to cover them while they withdrew. After their withdrawal, I went to Mousa Abu-al Rub's house, where I learned that Israeli soldiers broke into the house at 3:00 am and imprisoned the family in one room. Soldiers, including snipers, occupied the remainder of the house. These snipers killed the mentally disabled boy, Mjahed Smadi, who was pretending to shoot the soldiers with his plastic gun. Finally, I would like to stress the fact that it was apparent to everyone, except the Israeli soldiers, that Mjahed was mentally retarded.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 21 February 2006.Signature: Firyal Abu-al-Rub