Affidavit No. 4659/2009
2009
My name is Munir ‘Afif Hasan al-Jarrah. I am 38 years old, married, and the father of two daughters and one son. I am unemployed and live near Wajih al-Naqqar Electric Appliances Company in al-Sabra neighbourhood east of Gaza City. At about 9:00 pm on Wednesday, 14 January 2009, I visited my 53-year-old sister, Samira ‘Afif Hasan Mousa [al-Jarrah]. I used to visit her regularly. At the house, I met with my brother-inlaw ‘Izz al-Din Wahid Mousa, 55 years old, as well as with my nephews and nieces Wahid 30 years old, Ahmad, 27 years old, Muhammad, 24 years old, Mahmoud, 21years old, Nous, 15 years old, Sabrin, 18 years old, Fathiyya, 17 years old, and Hanin, 16 years old. I also saw Wahid’s wife, Hiba Mousa al-Naqqar, 25 years old, her sons ‘Izz al-Din, two and a half years old, and Zein, six months old, as well as Sabrin’s fiancé, Ahmad Jadallah, 25 years old. The house comprises a ground floor over an area of 200 square metres, bordered on the east by a five-storey house belonging to Hisham Hamdan Hijazi, 50 years old and on the west by the two-storey house of Muhammad ‘Umar Salha, 65 years old. The house of my brother-in-law, ‘Izz al-Din Wahid Mousa, consisted of two rooms, a sitting room, and an external hall, measuring eight by four square metres and ceiled with zinc plates. Other rooms are ceiled with concrete.In the hall, Ahmad, Muhammad, and Wahid sat on the ground. As electricity was cut off, they lit a candle. Nour sat by the oven, baking some loaves of bread. Hanin and Fathiyya sat in the sitting room. Ahmad Jadallah and his fiancé Sabreen sat in the room opposite the sitting room. Wahid’s wife and her two children were in the adjacent room. I was in the sitting room, talking to Fathiyya and Hanin. Suddenly, I heard the sound of a very strong explosion. I saw fire erupt in all parts of the house. I was terrified and shocked. Doors of the rooms including those of the sitting room broke apart. Columns of fire and smoke rose from the house. I got up from my seat and left the sitting room. I could not see anything due to the rising smoke, dust, and erupting fire. About 18 minutes later, I opened my eyes and saw my sister, Um- Wahid. She was stretched on the ground near the house door. Beside her was her husband, Abu-Wahid. Both were dead, their corpses burnt. As I could not see anything and out of tremendous shock, I stepped over Abu-Wahid’s corpse. To the west of the house door, I saw Wahid, who was breathing.“Hiba! Get yourself and the children out of the house quickly,” I heard him say to his wife. He had sustained a wound in the head. His face and body were also torn to pieces and blood gushed from all parts of his body. Beside Wahid, I saw Muhammad, whose corpse was scorched, torn into two pieces, and whose left arm was amputated. I also saw Nour; her corpse was charred and torn into two pieces. The right side of her head was missing. Then, I saw Mahmoud; he was wounded and lying on the ground. He had been about to enter the sitting room, where I had been sitting. His arms were torn to pieces and his abdomen was open. I hit my face and head with my hands, crying and screaming at the grave calamity that struck my sister’s family. I did not know why the Israeli aircraft targeted my sister’s house and killed her, along with her husband and four children.My sister’s house is located in the midst of a densely populated area. My brother-inlaw and nephews were peaceful. They were not affiliated with any political party. None of them were wanted by the Israeli authorities. The situation in the area had been very calm. There were no armed individuals or resistance activists in our area.Approximately two kilometres away, the Israeli army had carried out an incursion into the area of Tal al-Hawa. About ten minutes later, residents from the neighbourhood entered my sister’s house. Among them I recognised persons from the families of Rayyan, Hijazi, Jadallah, al- Haddad, al-A’raj and Hashem. They evacuated the corpses of my relatives. After they arrived, ambulances and Civil Defence vehicles transported the dead bodies, along with Mahmoud, to al-Shifa’ Hospital in the centre of Gaza City. I took my nieces to my house, which was near my sister’s home. They collapsed and fainted. They did not stop crying at the grave catastrophe which had been inflicted upon them. I joined other youths in looking for the torn pieces of martyrs. We found remnants of flesh, legs, and feet on the roof of the al-Rayyan family house. We also found torn pieces of corpses scattered on the ground and on the walls inside my sister’s house. As a result of the Israeli air attack, my sister, Samira, her husband and four children were killed. My sister’s fifth son, Mahmoud, sustained critical wounds. He was transferred to Egypt for medical treatment.