Affidavit No. 5488/2010
2010
I am a 12th grade student at the Tareq Bin Ziyad Secondary School, which is immediately opposite my house. For about four years now, I have been selling Hariseh (Arabic sweets) on a vendor stall near my house and school in the afternoon.Both soldiers spoke to me in Arabic. Other two soldiers stepped down from the rear part of the jeep and forced me inside. They made me sit on the floor with my face turned towards the rear door and my back towards the driver and the soldier beside him. The other two soldiers turned back and sat on the seats in the rear section of the jeep. The jeep moved towards Wadi al-Qadi Street and then travelled south to the Industrial Zone. Then, it drove along a detour road northeast towards the Kurbaj Mountain and al-Ukhuwwah Girls School.As soon as the jeep drove off, the two soldiers on board the jeep lit a cigarette. After the car drove for a short distance, the soldier sitting on the right side of the rear seat placed his lit cigarette on my forehead for a moment and this caused me pain. Immediately after, the soldier sitting beside the driver pulled my right arm to the back and put his lit cigarette on the back of my hand twice. The other soldier who sat on the left side of the rear seat grabbed my left arm, which was close to him, and placed his lit cigarette on the back of my hand as well. The soldier on the right side of the rear seat searched his pockets and took out a blade. At that point, the soldier on the left side of the rear seat grabbed my head forcefully from behind and brought it close to the other soldier on the right seat. The latter made four cuts on my face with the blade. He also made one cut on my left arm and two other cuts on the back of my right hand. I felt my face burn and I also felt pain in my hands.As the jeep moved, the soldiers talked to one another in Hebrew. Because they tortured me, I insulted them in Hebrew. The jeep stopped in the Wadi al-Baqar area east of the street which leads to the Kurbaj Mountan and al-Ukhuwwah School. A number of cattle barns that belong to Palestinian farmers are located in that area. There, I was forced out of the jeep. The four soldiers, who got out of the car as well, forced me to sit on my knees, pushed my head backwards, and fixed me in this position. A soldier then dropped a pill of some sort of drug in my mouth. The soldiers continued to control me until they made sure I swallowed the pill and then pushed me on the ground.My family members told me that I had been transported to the Hebron Governmental Hospital and that we arrived there at around midnight. There, my stomach was washed and they took an x-ray of my brain. I was also given a tranquiliser injection. At 3:30 am today, Tuesday, 15 June 2010, I was brought back to my house.This was not the first time that I was assaulted by the Israeli army. The area where I sell Hariseh is located along a road that is frequently used by the Israeli military. As a result of physical assaults, I was admitted to hospital on several occasions. The first time I was attacked was in 2006. Frequent assaults have left me with chronic health issues such as increased electricity in the brain. I also suffer from spasms occasionally. Therefore, I take medication on a continuous basis.