Affidavit No. 6815/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Sami Ahmad Mahmoud Abu Snoubar, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 941184970, born on 16 February 1984, a volunteer at the International Movement for the Defense of Children, and a resident of Yatma village, Nablus governorate, would like to declare the following:I am a citizen of Yatma village, located about 17 kilometres to the south of Nablus city. I work as a volunteer at the International Movement for the Defence of Children in Nablus city, to which I travel from my village on a daily basis passing through two checkpoints of the Israeli occupying forces. The first is Za'tara checkpoint which is about three kilometres to the north of my village, and the second is Huwara checkpoint near the southern entrance of Nablus city.On 24 October 2011 at around 10:30 pm, I left my village using a public van carrying seven passengers heading to Nablus city. When I reached Za'tara checkpoint, there were no Israeli occupying soldiers on the road to Beita village. It was 10:45 pm when I reached Huwara checkpoint, where I noted a traffic jam at the checkpoint with an Israeli Police jeep and I saw an Israeli military jeep overtaking all vehicles. Three soldiers got out of their jeep and allowed only cars with an Israeli license plate to pass through.They allowed them to pass towards Huwara camp, which is located 300 metres to the right of the eastern side of the Huwara checkpoint. At that moment, I was watching the growing number of Palestinian cars that lined up behind the public vehicle that was carrying me. I would estimate that the number of Palestinian vehicles behind ours reached the amount of about 300 cars trying to pass through the Israeli checkpoint into Nablus city. The Palestinian vehicles had to stand still for about 15 minutes. After that, the line of vehicles started to move slowly, in a notable traffic jam where some cars overtook others to access to enter Nablus through the Huwara checkpoint. After I approached the checkpoint, I saw two young Palestinians that I do not know sitting on the ground near an Israeli tower at the checkpoint. It seemed to me that the Israeli occupying soldiers stopped the two young men with the intention of arresting them, as it is very common for the Israeli occupying soldiers to arrest citizens who are passing through the Huwara checkpoint.At about 11:10 pm we were able to pass through the checkpoint in our way to Nablus city, and at about 11:30 pm I reached my place of work after being delayed for one hour, which hindered me from reaching my work place on time.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 24 October 2011