Affidavit No. 2801/2006
2006
On 19 February 2006, I was with my family, consisting of seven members, at our home located in the eastern part of Balata Camp. That morning, I did not leave the home, nor did my family members, because the Israeli occupying soldiers were in the camp imposing a curfew. For that reason, my sons Ibrahim and Othman climbed the roof of our home from time to time, drank tea, and got down to inside the home again. At approximately eight in the morning, the son of our neighbour Mohammad An-Natour joined them. During their presence on the roof, we made tea for them, they drank it on the roof, and got down. At around 12:30 pm, I heard the sound of three bullets fired after each other, with only seconds between one shot and the other. I thought that the soldiers were opening fire in another part of the camp as usual. At that moment, my 18-year-old daughter Doa’a climbed up the roof to find out what was going on. No sooner had she reached the entrance to the roof than she began to yell and shout, “Father! Father! My brothers are hit and injured.” Immediately, I climbed the stairs to the roof.When I reached the roof, my son Othman started yelling and telling us not to come close to the north side because the firing at us came from the building of Jamil Al Tirawi. But I paid no attention to that warning and started to check my son Ibrahim who was lying down on the ground on his left side without any movement or breath. I found that he was hit below his left ear. I looked at our neighbour Mohammad, who was also lying on the ground. I did not check him because the situation was so difficult, but it seems that he was moving a little bit. Hearing our shouting and yelling, the neighbours came and helped me in getting down off the roof the three young men Ibrahim, Mohammad and Othman to the road near our home in the southern direction.I was sure that Ibrahim was killed and Mohammad as well, because after we put the three of them on the road, Mohammad passed away as he did not move or breathe. After two minutes, an Israeli patrol arrived at the place approximately 12 metres from where the three young men were lying. The soldiers tried to get out of their patrol cars but the people, especially women, who were gathering in the place prevented them from doing so to enable moving the three young men from the place. After around half an hour, the neighbourhood residents were able to call the ambulance, which arrived in the place with difficulty because the occupying soldiers were impeding its arrival, and took the three injured to Rafidia Hospital in Nablus. Upon their arrival and after examining them, the doctors found that my son Ibrahim and his friend Mohammad An-Natour were killed while my son Othman was hit in his right leg.I am really surprised and shocked because the opening of fire at my sons and their friend was unjustified, especially since no shooting took place in the vicinity of our home, and none of the three young men were armed and no confrontations took place before or after the incident.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 1 March 2006Signature: Ahmad Issa