Affidavit No. 6554/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Ma’moun Hasan ‘Awwad ‘Awwad, of Palestinian nationality, born on 25 November 1987, worker, and a resident of the Um-al-Sharayet area, Ramallah city, Ramallah governorate, would like to declare the following:I remember that at around 1:00 am wintertime on 1 August 2011, my friends and I were at the entrance to the Qalandiya refugee camp celebrating the advent of the holy month of Ramadan. At around 1:15 am, our friend Ali Khalifah arrived in his father’s car. He got out of the car to sit with us. About 15 minutes after sitting together, we were told that the occupying forces had raided the ‘Antar neighbourhood in the refugee camp and that they were trying to arrest children.Out of curiosity, ‘Ali Mahmoud and I got in the car and drove to see what was going on. On our way to the area, we did not hear gunfire. We stopped the car at a distance of almost 150 metres from Mu’tasem’s house, got out of the car and walked the house which had no one in front of the house. We continued to walk towards the ‘Umar Mosque which is located at the junction of the road leading to the ‘Antar neighbourhood. When we reached the junction we looked to the right. One soldier suddenly became visible to us and as soon as he saw us he immediately began firing live bullets. We tried to escape from him but he followed us and was shooting his gun at us sporadically without having given us any warning. We were easily visible to him especially with the light being emitted from the mosque, which was strong enough to light the road for the soldier. We ran away for about 50 meters. It was then that ‘Ali fell to the ground after being hit by one of the bullets. He collapsed about 20 meters away from the mosque, which is about the same distance that the Israeli soldier was away from him. As for me, I was hit in my shoulder by one bullet and another bullet hit the bottom of my lower back. Nonetheless, I ran for a few meters away from where ‘Ali had fallen and hid behind a wall near Mu’tasem’s house. The firing was still ongoing. As I stood there, hiding, I noticed that there was another person who was injured right in front of Mu’tasem’s house, about 10 meters away from me. His head had exploded and his brain was spilt on the ground.I did not know who he was. At that time, my friend Fares arrived in a car. When he spotted our friend, ‘Ali, lying on the ground, he immediately carried him to the car and drove off even though gunfire was still raging. He managed to drive for a distance of approximately 2 metres when all of a sudden a gas bomb was thrown from the direction of the mosque at the car with ‘Ali and Fares inside. The bomb entered through the front glass window and, the car rammed into the wall as Fares lost control of it due to the tear gas grenade that was thrown at his car. ‘Ali followed by Fares got out of the car and then Fares seemed to have lost consciousness while ‘Ali was lying on the ground bleeding for almost 20 minutes.The army opened fire from a distance of about 50 metres away from the neighbourhood even when medics tried to transport us to the hospital. After the army withdrew, neighbours who lived near Mu’tassem’s house arrived in a car and transported ‘Ali to the hospital where he arrived at around 3:00 am wintertime. I was transported in another car and arrived at the hospital at the same time. ‘Ali passed away after being admitted to the intensive care unit to undergo a surgical operation.It appears that the dead body which had been in front of Mu’tassem’s house was of the martyr Mu’tassem ‘’Udwan, a resident of the refugee camp.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 2 August 2011