Affidavit No. 7122/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Abdul Rahim Mohammed Ali Hamad, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 912266657, born on 19 February 1969, an auditor, and a resident of the Jabalya refugee camp, Northern Gaza governorate, would like to declare the following:I, the undersigned, Abdul Rahim Mohammed Ali Hamad, am 43 years of age and live on the Abu al Eish Street, Block 2, in the Jabalya refugee camp in the Northern Gaza governorate. I work as a freelance auditor. I am married and father of nine children. More than 20 years ago, I converted to the Shiite doctrine when I was at the university in the Annaba state in Algeria.At around 4:30 pm on Saturday, 14 January 2012, I visited my friend Abdul Rahim al Madhoun (Abu at Taher) near to the Ash Sheikh Zayed roundabout in Beit Lahiya town. I intended to meet with some friends and attend a lecture to be delivered by Sheikh Mahmoud Abdul Aziz Joudah. We planned to commemorate the 40th Day of Imam Hussein’s Martyrdom Anniversary. At my friend Al Madhoun’s house, I met with almost 25 persons from the majority of the Gaza Strip governorates. Of these, I was acquainted with Sheikh Mahmoud Abdul Aziz Joudah and his sons from Rafah, Mahmoud al Muqayyad, Sami al Muqayyad, Ashraf al Madhoun, Majed al Muqayyad, and Abu Salem al ‘Assar. After we had performed the Al Assr (afternoon) and Al Maghreb (dusk) prayers at one time, we listened to a lecture presented by Sheikh Mahmoud Joudah, who talked about the rise of Imam Hussein and his role in interpreting the Hadith (sayings of Prophet Mohammed). Later, a young man chanted a song that praised Sayeda Zeinab and another song on the commemoration of Imam Hussein’s martyrdom. With the latter song, we gently beat our hand palms on our chests. After we performed the Al Isha’ (evening) prayers, some young men left the house.At around 6:30 pm, while we were in the house, a large force of police officers who were in the official uniform and wearing white helmets raided the house. Masked persons, who were in black uniforms, were also present with the police force. The force comprised almost 80 members, who carried sticks and batons. They stormed into the house without having presented any legal notice. Without even talking to us, they started to severely beat me and my friends with the sticks and batons. Every three security officers gathered to beat one person. In the meantime, they shouted and uttered obscene expressions at us:“You atheists… You Shiites… You curse Abu Bakr and Ayesha… Dogs…. Pigs…”We were beaten for 15 minutes consecutively. Several persons were wounded and bled. Most young men sustained bone fractures on their arms and feet. As they beat us, security officers particularly hit our hands, feet and backs. Later, they transported us on military vehicles to the Northern Gaza police headquarters and forced us into a large hall. In the same manner, security officers beat us with sticks and batons inside the police station. During this time, I heard a security officer ask about Abdul Rahim Hamad. He came and beat me on all parts of my body with a stick.“You are an atheist Shiite… You curse Ayesha and Abu Bakr…” He said while he beat me.Then, more than three security officers beat Sheikh Mahmoud Joudah and me. “You must break his arms”, a security officer told his colleagues while he was pointing to me. They beat me with batons on my arms, back and feet. In addition to bone fractures on my arms, several ribs on my back were broken.Later, security officers left us on the ground in the police station’s yard, which was flooded with rainwater. I shivered of cold. They left us lying on the ground in the police station’s yard in the cold weather and on wet ground. We sustained bone fractures on our arms, feet and backs. After they had taken us to a room inside the police station, security officers called my brother Rafiq, who came and transported me to the Kamal Adwan Hospital in Beit Lahiya. My arms were put in plaster casts. I also sustained bone fractures on my back as well as scratches and contusions on my knees and on various parts of my body.While my colleagues and I were receiving medical treatment at the hospital, security officers served summonses on us to report to the Internal Security headquarters in Northern Gaza. My colleagues continue to be detained in the Internal Security headquarters, without interrogation and under very bad conditions. I reported to the Internal Security once. However, they no longer summoned me because of my critical health condition and the bone fractures I suffered from. They ordered me to stay at my home and to not meet with any of the persons whom I met us at the time we had been assaulted. I do not know why the security officers assaulted us in that savage manner when were in a house and practicing our religious rituals, which the religion and law safeguards for us.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 21 January2012