Affidavit No. 5853/2010
2010
I live in my house in the Wadi Hilwa area, which overlooks al- Bustan neighbourhood in Silwan town in the holy city of Jerusalem. I usually get up at the dawn call to prayers at around 3:40 am.On the morning of Wednesday 22 September 2010, I woke up and went to my bedroom balcony on the fifth floor, which overlooks the main street, Silwan Spring and al-Bustan neighbourhood. I sat on a chair and smoked a cigarette. Suddenly, I heard the loud sound of a car’s brakes. This sound is usually made by a white Land Rover jeep belonging to Israeli settlers’ guards, which always sounds its horn on the street. I looked onto the street towards the sound and saw the settler jeep heading towards al-‘Ein al-Foqa area, having come down the Wadi Hilwa Street.I also saw a young man walking from al-Bustan neighbourhood towards al-‘Ein Street, and another young man heading from al-‘Ein al-Foqa Street to al-‘Ein Street. The first young man was wearing a white shirt and the second a black shirt. The young man in the white shirt got to al-‘Ein Street, near the stairs leading to al-Bustan neighbourhood. At the same time, the jeep arrived in that area and reduced its speed to a minimum. I saw the young man turn towards the jeep and I heard a conversation in Hebrew, but I did not understand it. The young man continued to walk towards the junction leading to ‘Ein Hilwa area and the jeep drove on to al-‘Ein al-Foqa area. In the meantime, the other young man had reached the Silwan Spring. In less than a minute, I saw the jeep drive back towards the spring. There was a distance of about 15 metres between the two young men. The jeep stopped next to the young man in the black shirt and[settlers in the jeep] started to swear in Hebrew at the young man in the black shirt who swore back at them. The young man in the white shirt also swore at the settlers. Two or three other young men arrived, and the jeep drove back a distance of ten metres towards Wadi Hilwa area and then towards the street that my house overlooks – Wadi al-Rababa Street.I then saw the young man in the black shirt throw a piece of wood at the jeep. The young man in the white shirt did not do anything. The jeep, which was about 150 metres away from the young men, turned around and drove at a crazy speed towards the young men who dispersed. Some of the young men jumped into a nearby garden. The young man in the white shirt went up a hill, which overlooks the Wadi al-Rababa Street. Five armed settler guards wearing yellow caps, got out of the jeep, which by then had completely stopped, and started to open fire indiscriminately.They fired many bullets. I then saw dozens of settler guards arrive in the area. At that time, the young man in the white shirt, who I did not recognise, threw a stone at the settler guards down on the street and ran towards the stairs leading to the street that my house is on. My two children (aged 12 and 15 years respectively) who had been asleep on the outer balcony woke up and told me that a young man had fallen down on the staircase. I could not see him because my view was blocked from where I was sitting. I went down from the fifth floorto where my children were. Indeed, I saw the young man lying on his stomach on the staircase.His head was facing down the stairs and his legs were facing up the stairs. I did not recognise him at that point. Two settler guards came and then another 15 arrived and spread around in the area. I shouted at them to call an ambulance, and they said they would.The settler guards did not get close to the young man, or attempt to give him first aid. However, they tried to talk to him. I did not hear him respond. I think he was unconscious. Half an hour later, an ambulance arrived with Israeli Border Guard and police officers. During that time there were no clashes and the situation was calm. When the Border Guard and police officers (who I recognised from their uniforms) arrived, the settler guards disappeared.Medics carried the young man on a stretcher to the ambulance. I heard the sound of snoring, which I think was coming from the young man. When the medics put the young man in the ambulance, my children suspected that he was Samer, a cousin of mine. They knew this and told me so. I said I did not think that was the case because the young man’s face was fat whilst Samer’s is long.At around 8:30 am, the Israeli Police called the family and told them that the young man that had been killed was indeed Samer. I therefore found out that it was indeed my cousin that had been killed even though I was almost sure of what I had seen.I also remember that when the settlement outpost guards were running, I saw them take hold of a young man who was in al-Bustan neighbourhood several metres away from the place of the incident. They led the young man away and I think they beat him up. They let him go several minutes later.