Affidavit No. 5672/2010
2010
I am married and a father of four children - Muna (12 years old), ‘Uday (ten years old), Qusay (three years old), and Qasem (11 months old). I work in my grocery store in Silwan neighbourhood. The Israeli occupying forces have arrested me and placed me under house arrest several times in the past. During the last three months of 2010, the Israeli occupying forces summonsed me to interrogation at al–Maskobiyya (the ‘Russian compound’) Detention and Interrogation Centre on five occasions. Each time, I was placed under house arrest for a period of either five or seven days.On 28 November 2010, I was summonsed to al-Maskobiyya Detention and Interrogation Centre in West Jerusalem, and was given a letter, signed by Ma’in Cohen, the Israeli Legal Advisor for the Central Area stating that: “According to the Law of Defence (Time of Emergency) of 1945, after the security services presented to the Commander of the Army documents pertaining to your security-related activities in Jerusalem, and based on these documents, it is the intention of the Commander of the Central Area to use the powers given to him by the State of Emergency [Regulations] of 1945 to order your deportation from Jerusalem and its suburbs for a period of four months.” The letter stated that I had the right to challenge the decision within 14 days of receipt of the letter. An Israeli interrogator in civilian clothing handed me the letter. There was a police officer sitting next to him. On the letter I hand wrote that I had received it. This did not in any way mean that I consented to the decision.After receiving the letter], I immediately went to see the lawyer, Rami ‘Uthman, so that he would file a challenge against the decision. I also sent letters to human rights organisations, to consuls of foreign countries, and to Palestinian President Mahmoud ‘Abbas (Abu-Mazen), and in this way informed everyone about it and registered my objection and rejection of the unjust decision.The deadline for challenging the decision is 12 December 2010. My lawyer will submit the challenge to the Israeli Ministry of Defence in Tel Aviv. Should the deportation decision not be revoked, my lawyer will lodge a petition to the Israeli High Court. With regards to the reasons for ordering my deportation, I believe that [the decision] constitutes a message to all Palestinians who are active in the struggle against the Israeli policy of Judaising Jerusalem, and to every Palestinian who resides in Jerusalem and resists the Judaisation policy - the policy being one that aims to ensure a demographic balance between Arabs and Jews in the city that favours Jews. The issue therefore does not pertain to me, ‘Adnan Gheith, personally. I challenge the Israeli security agencies to present any evidence of my involvement in security related activities. I am a Jerusalemite citizen determined to remain in the City and have not been involved in any activities that breach security. The decision to deport me is driven by political, not security, reasons. It is a litmus test of the reaction of the Arab street in Jerusalem. If the State of Israel succeeds in deporting me from my native city, this will be a prelude to implementing a policy of deporting individuals and whole families from the city and its environs. The result of this will be the emptying of Jerusalem of its Arab residents.In relation to the impact that my deportation would have on my family, I am the sole provider for my wife and children. I also provide financial support to my married sisters. In addition, my 11- month-old son Qasem, used to suffer from a cataract in his left eye. The cataract was removed, and the lens of his eye was replaced with a plastic one. He therefore needs to be monitored regularly at the Hadassah ‘Ein Karem Hospital (an Israeli hospital in West Jerusalem). I take him to hospital every three months. His mother would not be able to take him because she has to take care of the house and his brothers.I am now in the process of preparing my children psychologically in case I am deported. My eldest daughter keeps asking me: “What authority would remove a father from his children? What kind of authority is that?” I have explained to my children that we are in a better position than others; we have not been subjected to bombing or been killed, in the way that happened in the latest Gaza war in which whole families were wiped out. I have explained that we, in Jerusalem, are a part of the Palestinian people living under occupation and are harassed by the occupation.My children have seen me being arrested at the house more than once and realise what I have had to go through when I have been arrested. I do not know, however, whether they will be able to accept my deportation easily, in spite of my having been arrested many times before.