Affidavit No. 2146/2005
2005
Before  the army started bulldozing the land for the construction of the  Separation Wall, ayear ago, there was a road connecting the area where  we live with Sour Baher, and therewere no problems of communication.  After bulldozing the land, the road to Sour Baher wascut off. We are now  are obliged to walk on foot on a rough road in summer and muddy roadin  winter if we want to go to Sour Baher, in addition to the restriction on  our movement thatthe Israeli army imposed on us in case we want to come  or go from Sour Baher.The Israeli army is present day and  night, and prevents any movement of the citizenstowards the north or  towards Sour Baher. I remember that a year ago, my family could  notattend the celebration of my son's engagement to a girl from Sour  Baher where it took place,because the Israeli army prevented us from  going there. Since the bulldozing for theSeparation Wall began, we  started to face difficulties and we have to go to Bethlehem or  BeitSahour to manage our life and do our shopping. I also have to walk  around a kilometre inorder to reach a place where cars going towards  Bethlehem or Beit Sahour pass by.Moreover, the army prevents cars from  approaching the area where we live. My children goto a school in Dar  Salah village, which is one and a half kilometre from our home. Our  sociallife has been adversely affected and we became isolated. For  example, I have a daughtermarried to a man from Sour Baher, and she  lives there and if they want to visit us, they haveto go to Bethlehem  and then to our home. This takes time and effort, while before the  Wallwas built this would not take more than few minutes. It is worth  noting that our neighbourshave deserted their homes and moved to Sour  Baher. Our life with the Wall has becomevery difficult, and now that we  are outside the Sour Baher area, we have been deprived allthe social  aspects of life.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 10 February 2005.Signature: Da'oud Mahmoud Salman Abu-Haniya