Affidavit No. 3023/2006
2006
We have been building a house for approximately ten years in our village, Tora al-Gharbiyya, in Jenin Governorate. Although we live in Jenin city, we originally come from Tora al-Gharbiyya village, where my husband Naji Taher Kifaya owns a piece of land.My husband works as a dress maker in Jenin. We saved some money from his work to build a house for the family in our village. As I mentioned in the beginning, we started building our house ten years ago. The area of the house is 180 square metres. As we reached the final stages of construction, at the end of 2004, the Israeli army handed us a notice that included an order for demolishing the house on the pretext of not having a license. We appealed to several lawyers who were able to postpone the demolition, which took place later, at 5:30 am on 12 June 2006.I wonder why the Israeli occupying forces demolished my home even though all Tora houses are built without licenses. Why has only my and my children’s house been demolished? The fact is that our house was built 200 metres east of the Separation Wall, which the Israeli occupying forces have built to separate the Palestinian territories occupied in 1948 from those occupied in 1967. What bothers me is that there are other houses in Tora located closer to the Separation Wall than my house, and they were not demolished. We have lost what we saved for over ten years. I used to deprive my children and myself of basic needs in order to save money and build that house. With the demolition of the house, the Israeli army destroyed all our dreams of living in our own house. The Israeli bulldozers killed all the sacrifices and hopes in less than half an hour as they levelled the house.I would also like to point out that I am the mother of the prisoner Ahmad Naji Kifaya, 27 years old, who was arrested in Jenin on 15 August 2003, tried at the end of 2004 and sentenced to 30 years imprisonment on the charge of being an activist with Hamas.My son is imprisoned in Jalbou’ prison and I am prevented from visiting him for security reasons. My husband, Naji Kifaya, died a year ago after suffering from several diseases as a result of the imprisonment of his son and after we received the order to demolish our house.This occupation is oppressive and malignant. It deprived me of my son and of seeing him and visiting him in the Israeli prisons. Then it demolished the house that was going to shelter my family. The Israeli occupation has left me nothing except misery.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 14 June 2006Signature: Radiyya 'Abdallah