Affidavit No. 5392/2010
2010
My name is Ahmad Nahed Sa’d al-Tatar. I am 19 years old, unemployed, and live in my family’s house near the police station in the Al-Sheikh Radwan neighbourhood northeast of Gaza city.At around 11:30 am on Wednesday, 28 April 2010, I went to the area of al-Jisr [the ‘Bridge’] in the al-Sheikh Radwan neighbourhood. I was with my friends, Ahmad Salem Deeb, his cousin Ahmad Nafeth Deeb, and two brothers Ahmad and Mahmoud Shubeir. We have lived in the same neighbourhood and have been friends for a long time. We went to the area of al-Jisr to take a bus, which was waiting to transport a large number of residents of the al-Sheikh Radwan area to the Israeli border with the Gaza Strip in the area of al-Muntar, east of al-Shuja’iya neighbourhood and east of Gaza city. At around 12:00 pm, the bus set off and we reached our destination at around 12:20 pm.We planned to participate in a peaceful demonstration against the seam zone, which is a vast area controlled by the Israeli army along the border with the Gaza Strip. We had been called upon to do so by the Popular Campaign against the Seam Zone in Gaza city. A large number of participants had gathered in the area where the bus dropped us off to also take part in the demonstration.After arriving, a large number of participants and I stepped out of the bus carrying Palestinian flags and saw a large group ahead of us in the area east of al-Shuja’iya neighbourhood. There were approximately 500 participants representing all national factions, including well-known national figures, journalists and press photographers who were leading the demonstration. Participants gathered about 100 metres from the Israeli border and waved Palestinian flags shouting anti-seam zone slogans. Other participants also arrived in large buses at a later time.My friends and I were in the front of the demonstration, when I saw a military jeep stop about 20 metres from the separating fence. A number of Israeli soldiers stood near the jeep, hiding behind a cement wall, pointing their weapons at us and taking combat positions (as snipers). I also saw an Israeli soldier with a video camera taking footage of participants near al-Qalba (the military watchtower), located about 20 metres behind the separating fence opposite the protestors. Another soldier stood inside the military watchtower and pointed his weapon at the participants.The atmosphere at this stage was calm. My friends and I remained at the front of the demonstration holding Palestinian flags and, along with other participants, shouted slogans against the seam zone, for about 20 minutes. Then, we heard the sound of a live bullet, which had been fired by a soldier on the participants to the demonstration. Along with others, my friends and I sought protection on the ground in fear that one of us might get hurt, we were on open land with no barriers to separate us from the Israeli army and therefore very vulnerable.Later, I saw a number of children throw stones at the soldiers behind the separating fence and the protesters dispersed. My friends and I decided to retreat, fearing that the soldiers would open fire on us again and injure somebody. Having crawled on the ground, my friends and I decided to get up and hurry back. Again, I heard the sound of live bullets fired by a soldier who had taken position behind the separating fence. We lay on the ground again. I looked around me and saw my friend Ahmad Salem Deeb raise his index finger, I saw blood on his finger and heard his cousin Ahmad Nafeth Deeb shout that Ahmad was injured. Meanwhile, he crawled towards Ahmad, who was lying on his back. I too crawled towards him and saw blood flowing heavily out of Ahmad’s right thigh, which was torn apart and the bone visibly fragmented. As his cousin Ahmad carried him, I was encouraged to get up and help. Then, my friends Ahmad and Mahmoud Shubeir arrived and carried Ahmad with us to an ambulance, which was present in the area. On our way to the ambulance, a number of participants in the demonstration helped us to carry Ahmad. My friends and I boarded the ambulance, which took us to the al-Shifa’ Hospital and as soon as we arrived, doctors in the Reception Section examined Ahmad and decided to quickly transfer him to the operations room.My friends and I waited at the door of the operations room to keep up-to-date on Ahmad’s condition. Ahmad’s father and brothers arrived later. A doctor came out of the operations room and requested that we fetch blood units for Ahmad, telling us that he had sustained critical wounds and that the bullet had cut the main artery in his thigh. He asked us to deliver the blood units to the intensive care unit, where Ahmad would be relocated after the surgical operation. My friends and I along with a number of other participants who had followed us to the hospital donated blood. We collected nine units in total and delivered it to the intensive care room. Having waited at the room’s door for about 15 minutes, a doctor came out and told us that Ahmad had died as a result of the injuries he sustained, as the bullet had cut off the main artery in his thigh. We then called Ahmad’s father and reported that Ahmad had died.Later, Ahmad’s relatives arrived and received the dead body. We performed funeral prayers at al-Taqwa Hospital in al-Sheikh Radwan neighbourhood and buried him in the Beit Lahiya cemetery.