Affidavit No. 4999/2009
2009
At about 9:00 am on 2 August 2009, I reported to the Hamas Internal Security headquarters in the Jabalya refugee camp. On 27 July 2009, I had been detained in the Internal Security headquarters for several hours and was served a summons to report to the Internal Security on the date mentioned above.On 27 July, Internal Security officers had interrogated me about my relationship with Fateh and Ramallah, as well as about the Fateh Sixth Conference, which was to convene in Bethlehem. On the 2 August, when I arrived, officers took me to a barracks (a container made of iron), which was located in a large yard in the sun. It was completely enclosed from all sides. I sat inside the barracks in the sweltering heat of the summer sun. Approximately ten persons, who were members and activists in the Fateh Movement in the Northern Gaza Region, were also detained inside the barracks. On 27 July, I had been detained in the same barracks for about three hours. This time, I was detained inside the container for almost one hour. Later, I was blindfolded by Internal Security officers and taken to the headquarters.“Guys! This is a Fateh leader in Beit Lahiya. Before that, he was a correspondent and used to curse Hamas. Take care of him.” I heard a person say.Then, they led me to an adjacent place, where I was subjected to Shabeh once again. More than one person also beat me with their fists and feet. I was interrogated about my work as a member of the Leadership Office in the Fateh movement and about the Fateh Sixth Conference. I was also questioned about persons who left Gaza for the West Bank in order to attend the Conference and was asked how they managed to leave the Gaza Strip. In addition, interrogators asked me about my relationship with Ramallah and the Palestine television station as well as about the people I dealt with. During the interrogation, I was subjected to a Shabeh position and beaten. Two hours later, I threw up blood and collapsed. At the end of the interrogation, a person hit my head against the wall several times, after which I fell unconscious for a while.Later, an ambulance transported me to Kamal „Udwan Hospital, where I was treated for contusions and bruises. After they conducted medical examinations, physicians decided that I report to the hospital again.I did not receive a medical report on my health conditions because doctors refused to give me one. Then, I returned home. However, I still suffer from sharp pains in my arms, legs, shoulders and head.