Affidavit No. 6670/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Sami Sadeq Mahmoud Sbeih, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 919063842, born on 21 July 1955, Head of the Al-네qaba Village Council, and a resident of the Al-네qaba village, Jenin governorate, would like to declare the following:At around 7:00 am on Thursday, 15 September 2011, an Israeli military force raided the village of Al-네qaba, which is located at a distance of about 7 kilometres east of Toubas city. Al-네qaba village consists of approximately 300 residents and is considered a part of the Northern Jordan Valley.The Israeli force that entered the village included three Israeli bulldozers, two of which were green military bulldozers that moved on crawlers and one bulldozer that moved on rubber wheel tyres. The Israeli force was, furthermore, accompanied by about 20 army jeeps, including three white jeeps from the Israeli Civil Administration. These white vehicles have been familiar to us because they have always taken part in Israeli army raids on the village of Al-네qaba.During the raid, the soldiers implemented a military siege whereby the northern, western and eastern entrances to the village were closed off and any access to or from Al-네qaba village was prohibited. The Israeli bulldozers then began destroying al-Salam Street near the eastern entrance of the village as they were being guarded by the Israeli soldiers. They levelled at least one kilometre of the street which connects Al-네qaba with the rest of the Jordan Valley area. The bulldozers also erected dirt barricades across al-Salam street and then levelled yet another street which leads to Al-Muhajirin housing project, north of Al-네qaba village at the northern entrance of the village; about one and a half kilometres of the street was levelled. The bulldozers erected dirt barricades across this street as well.Then the Israeli bulldozers moved to the northern quarter of Al-네qaba village. Under the protection of the Israeli occupying soldiers, the bulldozers demolished the house of Khaled Ahmad Abdul-Rahman Sbeih (35 years old). Khaled used to live in that house along with his family of 8, including his wife and children, up until the demolition. The house was completely demolished once Israeli forces removed the residents and furniture from within the house, The soldiers forced Khaled and his wife and children away from the house and then the bulldozers completely demolished the house. Two barracks, still under construction, were also demolished by the bulldozers. One of the barracks belonged to Basem Muhamman Abdul-Rahim Sbeih and was being built out of metal and zinc sheets and had a surface area of 240 square metres. The barrack was to be used for raising livestock. Shortly after, the bulldozers moved to another area west of the aformentioned demolished house and started to destroy the second barrack which belongs to Abdul-Naser Ahmad Abdul-Rahman Sbeih. This barrack was also under construction. It had a surface area of about 120 square metres and was built of zinc and metal sheets.It should be noted that Khaled뇹 demolished house was built of bricks and had a concrete roof. The Israeli occupying authorities demolished the house ostensibly under the pretence that it lacked the proper licence. Four or five months before these structures were demolished, the Israeli occupying authorities distributed orders of demolition to the respective owners. However, the owners did not challenge these notices before the Israeli judiciary because they consider it to be unfair. In fact we have already had previous experiences with it and we have never obtained any decision to annul the demolition orders.The Israeli military forces remained in Al-네qaba village until about 11:00 am and then left the village. It should be noted that a large number of houses and streets in Al-네qaba village are under the threat of demolition because they had allegedly been built without the required construction licences. The Israeli occupying authorities refuse to give us construction licences under the pretext that the village of Al-네qaba is located in a military training area that is a closed military zone. In fact, this is the general situation of Palestinian villages in the Jordan Valley. It should be noted that the aforementioned two streets and barracks had already been levelled a first time on 7 April 2011. Although we restored the streets and barracks, the Israeli occupying authorities have demolished them again.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 17 September 2011