Affidavit No. 1844/2004
2004
At around  10:30 am of Monday 7th June 2004, and during my time at work in  Izziddin Samara farming nursery, which is located approximately in the  middle of Far'oun town, I saw a resident of the village of Far'oun named  Omar al Jaber Farkh who is mentally retarded, suffers a physical  disability in his arm and is deaf and dumb, enter the nursery running.  Entering through the nursery’s only entrance on the western side, he  kept constantly looking behind his back with expressions of extreme fear  and terror evident on his face. Although he was screaming  incomprehensible words, it seemed he was asking for help. Soon after  Omar Farkh entered the nursery and approached me, I saw an Israeli  military jeep stop at the entrance of the nursery and two Israeli  military soldiers came out of it, wearing full military gear and armed.  At that point, Omar Farkh started running again in the eastern direction  behind the greenhouses. I realised that Omar was afraid, because these  two soldiers had asked me to come closer to them which I did. When I  reached nearby the jeep, the Israeli soldiers pointed their guns at me  and asked me, in Arabic, not to speak and to stand besides the jeep  motionless. I told them that the person they were pursuing was mentally  retarded, at which point one of the soldiers screamed at me in Hebrew to  "Shut up". In this instance, Omar Farkh peeked at us from behind the  greenhouses, 50 meters towards the east away from the Israeli soldiers  and me, as a result of which the Israeli soldiers aimed their guns at  him and demanded in Arabic that he stop.At that  point, Omar started running again towards the east, and I saw one of the  Israeli soldiers shooting bullets in the air, while the other aimed his  gunfire towards Omar. In the beginning only several bullets were shot,  then the shooting became heavier. During that period, I could not see  Omar Farkh because of the greenhouses that stood in the line of my  vision from where I was standing. As for the Israeli soldiers, they  could see him because they had taken up positions that would enable them  to do so. After less than two minutes, the shooting stopped and the  Israeli soldiers asked me to leave the nursery, which I did because I  was afraid of getting killed at the hands of these soldiers if I  refused. One of these soldiers was tall, with dark skin, around 25 and  with Hebrew as his mother tongue (he barely spoke Arabic). As for the  second soldier, I could not tell whether he was an Israeli of Arab or  Jewish origin, although it is worth mentioning that he was the first  soldier who shot towards Omar Farkh. I left the nursery and I told the  people gathered there that Omar Farkh was probably killed or injured.At that  point, several Israeli jeeps arrived on the scene, accompanied by an  ambulance for the Israeli Army and one from the Palestine Red Crescent  Society. At around 11:10, Omar Farkh was transferred to Thabet Thabet  Governmental Hospital in Tulkarem, where it was later announced that he  had become a martyr as a result of fatal injuries to the chest and  abdomen. I would like to point out that this Israeli force is  practically present in the town of Far'oun on a daily basis, and that  although the Israeli soldiers know of Omar Farkh's condition, they  nevertheless insisted on killing this mentally retarded and physically  handicapped human being, who does not pose a threat to the life of the  smallest creatures on this planet. This incident has deeply affected the people of the town and confirms the cruelty and ugly nature of the Israeli occupation.Date: 20 June, 2004