Affidavit No. 6414/2011
2011
I own seven dunums of agricultural land in the northern end of my village, Toura al-Gharbiya, which is located on the outskirts of Jenin city. My land was separated from me behind the Israeli Expansion and Annexation Wall, which was constructed on the northern part of Toura al-Gharbiya and was completed in mid-2002. The Wall annexes approximately 500 dunums of Toura al-Gharbiya’s land and is built of electric barbed wires, dirt and paved roads, as well as a deep trench. The Israeli authorities have also placed an iron gate in the Wall near Toura al-Gharbiya, which holds the number “300.”All people who own lands separated behind the Wall now need permits to enter through the aforementioned gate and access their lands. Thus, the Israeli occupying forces control every entry and exist to and from our lands. It is worth noting that many land owners are denied permits. I regularly apply for a three-month permit in order to access my land and cultivate it.This season, I cultivated my land with tobacco leaves. I did this on my own since I was the only one allowed entry to the land. Now, harvest season is approaching and I cannot complete the harvest by myself, so I have applied for two more permits for my sons Muhammad (24 years old), and Majd (16 year old), in order for them to help me. I submitted these applications in the beginning of April 2011 but have not received approvals until now. If my sons are not issued permits, this would affect our harvest season and our crops would wither. I simply would not be able to harvest the land on my own; I am fifty-three years old and suffer from several illnesses.In last year’s harvest season, my son Muhammad was given a permit to enter from the gate, but this year the Israeli authorities have not yet granted him such a permit. I only ask that my sons be provided with permits so they could help me harvest this season’s crops. If my sons are not given such permits, I will lose this year’s agricultural crop.Since this land is my only source of income, this would threaten the livelihood of six family members, including myself.