Affidavit No. 3434/2007
2007
I live with my family, which consists of seven members, including four children, in Khirbet Safa. Khirbet Safa belongs to Beit Ummar town and has a population of roughly 1,000 persons. At approximately 3:30 pm on 3 March 2007, I was at home with my children. My husband, who is a taxi driver, was at work. Suddenly, I saw five persons on the hilltop opposite our house. I did not know their identity, however, I saw that they were coming from the direction of Beit 'Ein settlement, which is a part of the 'Etzion settlement bloc and is approximately one and a half kilometres from our house.Subsequently, I heard firing and realised that they must be settlers. Their number increased and they started to move towards our house until they were less than 100 metres away. I was very worried, particularly for my children’s safety. As our home is the closest to the settlement, I was afraid that they would come here first. Because I did not have anything to defend myself and my children with, I decided to seek protection in my relatives’ home. However, I was frightened about going outside, because I might be shot at. Nevertheless, I went outside with my children. As we were descending the steps outside our house, I heard the settlers shouting in Hebrew, which I do not understand, and shooting. I was very frightened. I returned home with my children and closed the doors. I waited for the settlers to arrive. My children and I were crying and we did not know what to do.I looked out a window and saw a settler approximately 60 metres from our home. Then, I decided to go out of the house, whatever the consequences might be. In order not to confront them alone, I went out with my children. The settlers started shouting at us and firing their weapons. Although I was very afraid, after descending the steps I continued walking towards my neighbours’ house, which is 30 metres from our home. My children followed me and despite the continual firing we reached our neighbours' home. My children were still crying. I checked them one-by-one to ensure that none of them were injured. Apart from being muddied and cut by thorns they were all okay. The firing became intermittent. Then, my husband came to our neighbours’ house in his car and took us to our relatives' house, which is located in Beit Ummar town, two kilometres from Khirbet Safa. My children and I were very frightened. I later heard from my neighbours that the settlers had run away after soldiers arrived in the area.The same night, my husband, my children and I returned home and took some of the children’s textbooks. Again, we heard firing. We returned to Beit Ummar, where we stayed for three nights. After the children were calm and no longer afraid, we returned to our home. I do not know what the settlers wanted or whether they will attack us again. Also, I do not know if I could confront the settlers if they attacked our house again. It is worth noting that a settler from the Beit 'Ein settlement was killed a week ago, and that persons from Khirbet Safa were arrested on suspicion of killing him.