Affidavit No. 6522/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Mustafa Sha’ban Ahmed Mustafa, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 852509330, born on 08 February 1990, a university student, and a resident of Jenin Refugee Camp, Jenin governorate, would like to declare the following:I live in Jenin Refugee Camp located near Jenin city, and I am a third-year student in political science at Al-Najah National University in Nablus city.On Wednesday 13 July 2011 at about 2:00 pm, I received a phone call from my cousin Basem Muhammad Khatib (20 years old), informing me that he was going to visit Nablus city with Kamal Abu-‘Awwad and his brother Muhammed Abu ‘Awwad from Jenin refugee camp. Both Kamal and Muhammad are friends of mine. My cousin told me that they all wanted to go to the Turkish bath in Nablus and asked me to accompany them, since I was already in the city.They picked me up in a white “Skoda” driven by Kamal Abu-‘Awwad and we all went to the Turkish bath in Nablus. At about 6:00 pm on the same day, we all left the city heading back towards Jenin refugee camp; driving along the Jenin – Nablus road. At about 6:30 pm we approached the evacuated settlement of Homesh, located between the Palestinian villages of Burqa (Nablus governorate) and Sielet Al Daher (Jenin governorate). The entrance of this settlement is located on the Jenin – Nablus road, and it had been evacuated by the Israeli occupying forces in 2004 in the context of the so-called plan of Israeli unilateral withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and from part of those settlements located in the northern occupied territory of 1967. Despite that, many Israeli religious settlers are still living in Homesh settlement on a permanent basis. As soon as we approached the entrance of the settlement, we were surprised by a white-colored jeep and by another white civilian car, surrounded by about 10 settlers. At that moment, we were approximately 60 metres away from them, and we could recognise them immediately from their distinctive appearance: small circular caps on their heads, and their long hair tales hanging near their ears, which indicates that they were religious settlers; all of whom were male.My cousin Basem Khatib and I were sitting in the back seat of our car and continued driving at normal speed, but when we came closer to where the settlers were standing, we were surprised by the fact that they were holding stones in their hands and started throwing them at us from a distance that did not exceed 2-3 metres. Stones hit the car heavily and directly. We were lucky that we had the side windows open, so the stones hit the body of the car and not the glass. One of the stones directly hit the head of Basem, while the rest of them hit the car’s body and the front and back windows. The car driver increased speed in order to leave the site fearing for our lives, taking into consideration the fact that I witnessed at least one black and short machine gun carried by one of the settlers but no shooting had taken place.After the stone hit Basem, he started bleeding heavily from his head and lost consciousness. I put his head on my chest and all my clothes became soaked in blood. We continued driving quickly, while Mohammed Abu-‘Awwad called the Palestinian Red Crescent in Jenin city, asking them to send us an ambulance. When we reached the vicinity of Bier Al-Basha village, the ambulance stopped and transferred Basem into the vehicle, and then brought him bleeding and unconscious to the Jenin Governmental Hospital, where he received the required treatment. He remained in the hospital to be monitored for a day. Now, after several days, he is in good health.Neither I nor the other two young men were injured during the incident, but we felt that our lives were put at great risk. Our car was damaged following the attack and its windows were broken. The Israeli settlers were in a state of aggressiveness and anger during the time of the attack. They were shouting in Hebrew, which I do not understand, while throwing stones at us. Finally, I would like to point out that there were no Israeli soldiers around the settlers when the incident took place.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 30 July 2011