Affidavit No. 2815/2006
2006
My work breeding animals is my family’s main source of income. I have four children and two brothers. My brothers and their families work with me. Including my mother and father, the family consists of 18 people. We live in an area called al-Minya near al-Tqou village. We own a total of 500 sheep (we had 300 sheep which then gave birth to 200 sheep).We live one kilometre away from Asfar settlement. The settlers have seized land located approximately 200 metres from our homes [villagers’ homes]. We moved to a new home a year ago because we were under pressure day and night from the settlers. They pressured us because our old home was only 300 metres from the settlement. Some families are still living near Asfar settlement.On Thursday, 9 February 2006, I took my sheep to graze on the nearby mountain. I left the baby sheep in an area surrounded by mesh. There is a gate in this area which is kept closed in order to prevent the sheep from escaping. At noon, one of my relatives followed me to the mountain and told me to go back because my baby sheep were not well. They did not know why the sheep were ill. I left the other sheep on the mountain with my nephew Salim 'Awni (20 years) and quickly returned.When I arrived, I found that 23 sheep were dead. These sheep were near the mesh area, which is located nearby the land (200 metres from our house) seized by the settlers two months ago. Sixty of my sheep had reached that area and became sick. I called the veterinarian (Sa'id) who prescribed medicine for them. I gave the medicine to the remaining sheep, but the baby sheep continued to die one after the other. Forty-two sheep died within 12 hours.The next day, I put 28 dead baby sheep in a Ford car and headed to Bethlehem veterinary clinic. The veterinarian performed autopsies on two sheep and all the doctors agreed that the cause of death was poisoning. As a result, I headed for the Israeli military liaison and filed a complaint but they wouldn't accept it. Then I went to the Palestinian police office in Bethlehem and to the Israeli police office but I did not file any complaints because in the past I had submitted many complaints but nothing happened.On one occasion, my neighbours and I had filed complaints when the Israeli soldiers closed the main road in and out of the village and we were forced to walk around six kilometres to reach our homes and our cattle. When the Israeli soldiers closed the road, we were forced to carry the animal feed on donkeys. I went to the Israeli court several times to no avail. This is why I did not file a complaint, because doing so meant losing time in addition to suffering the initial loss. It is better to suffer one loss than two.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 20 February 2006Signature: Jamil Muhammad