Affidavit No. 6425/2011
2011
I am the coordinator of the National Committee Against the Wall and Settlement Activity in Bethlehem governorate and Chairman of the Popular Committee Against the Wall and Settlement Activity in my village of al-Ma’sara.In 2006, the Israeli occupying forces began erecting a new fence around ‘Efrat settlement west of my village; the fence was being built on al-Ma’sara’s land. Since then, the Popular Committee has been organising weekly peaceful demonstrations against the the Wall and the ongoing settlement activity in the town. Usually, the occupying forces confront peaceful demonstrations in my town with sound and gas grenades as well as different kinds of bullets. They also detain protestors and attempt to fabricate charges, accusing them of being present in closed military zones or of assaulting soldiers. I have been arrested on several occasions during these demonstrations. The last time I was detained was on 13 May 2011.On that day, the demonstration marched from the al-Ma’sara’s centre westwards, where the Wall and confiscated land are located. Israeli and foreign peace activists took part in the demonstration. When the participants reached the junction to Um Salamouna area, which is about one kilometre away from the town’s centre, they found a large number of Israeli troops deployed in the area. Israeli troops took position across the road and prevented protestors from marching further. There were more than 30 soldiers in the area. Speaking in Hebrew, a language I understand well Israeli soldiers told the participants that they were prohibited from moving along. However, the soldiers did not present any legal document to support their claim.Moments later, soldiers started to fire sound grenades on protestors who ran in different directions. Soldiers then fired gas grenades. On that day, soldiers fired approximately 20 sound and gas grenades. I remained in the area and did not move backwards and protestors gathered around me. The demonstration had set out at around 1:00 pm and reached the area where the army was stationed at around 1:30 pm. At around 2:00 pm, an Israeli soldier approached the protestors and along with several other soldiers dragged an Israeli peace activist to the west where their army vehicles were parked. About two minutes later, three soldiers, including one who was of a large build, reached the area where I was standing. The large soldier snatched me and the two others pushed me towards the west where the jeeps were parked at a distance of around 20 metres from the protestors. The soldiers pulled me violently and tore my shirt apart. When I was close to the jeep jeep, the soldier violently hit my head against the jeep. Another soldier blindfolded me and tied my hands behind my back with plastic handcuffs. They then put me in the rear section of the jeep. I heard the soldiers put the Israeli detainee into the same jeep. I also heard the Israeli activist ask the soldiers why they had tied my hands behind my back. The Israeli peace activist and I were detained inside the stationary jeep for about half an hour. Meanwhile, I heard protestors shout at the soldiers, who continued to fire ammunition on them.The jeep then moved from the area as I sat on its floor. Meanwhile, the soldiers who accompanied me in the jeep uttered obscenities at me. Having travelled for less than 10 minutes, the jeep stopped and the Israeli peace activist and I were forced to step down. I heard soldiers talk about admitting me to the detention centre. However, a soldier said that it was prohibited to admit me to the detention centre without an arrest warrant from the Police as well as a report from the doctor. I realised I was present in Kfar ‘Etzion Detention Centre because it was close to al-Ma’sara and was the only Israeli detention centre in the governorate. I was taken to a room where the blindfold on my eyes was removed. It appeared to me that I was in a clinic with a military nurse or doctor. It was she who removed the blindfold from my eyes. The doctor fetched a medical form, which was to be filled with information about detainees’ diseases. I told the doctor in Hebrew that I did not suffer from any diseases and that I was in good health. I requested that the doctor untie the handcuffs because they were tightened and caused me immense pain. The Israeli peace activist was also taken to the clinic.However, he was not handcuffed nor blindfolded. After I was moved from the clinic, the Israeli peace activist and I were taken in another jeep that transported us to the Israeli Police station near Kiryat Arba’ settlement in Hebron governorate, which we reached at around 5:30 pm. After I was forced out of the jeep, my handcuffs and blindfold were removed. There, a police interrogator, who had questioned me on previous occasions, talked to me and took me to an interrogation room. The interrogator accused me of being present in a closed military zone. I demanded that I talk to my lawyer and he allowed me to do so. I subsequently told the interrogator that I was not present in a closed military zone and that no one reported that the area was a closed military zone. I also stated that there was video footage, confirming what I said. The interrogation lasted for about half an hour. The interrogator stipulated that in order to leave I had to sign a pledge stating that I would not enter Um Salamouna for a period of two weeks. I signed the pledge.Based on the interrogator’s request, I waited outside the interrogation room for about 10 minutes. I was released at around 7:00 pm. Because my clothes were torn apart and I did not have money, I called a friend of mine inHebron, who took me to his house, offered me food, and gave me a shirt. My relative Muhammad Zawahra arrived to Hebron and took me in his car back to my home.