Affidavit No. 2962/2006
2006
I worked in the Israeli police force from 1975 until 1988. I resigned in 1988 at the beginning of the first intifada. From 1988 to 1994, I lived on the salary (150 Jordanian dinars) I received from the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) in Amman. In 1994, with the development of the Palestinian Authority, I joined the staff of the Palestinian police. I was given the rank of sergeant. In 1997, I undertook the administration of al-Dhahriyya prison. I remained in this position until August 1997, when I was arrested by the Palestinian police. The charge was having connections to the Israeli authorities.I spent 45 days in interrogation, where I was subjected to torture and psychological pressure. I was released because the charge was not proven. I did not take my case to court. I returned to my work in the police system. I would like to mention that the interrogation period (45 days) was not filed in my record and I was asked to treat this period as a vacation.On 17 July 2001, I was arrested by the Palestinian Preventive Security. I was accused of collaborating with the Israelis. I spent 67 days in interrogation. During this period, I was also subjected to torture, physical and psychological pressure and continuous harassment. During the investigation, I denied all the charges against me because I had not cooperated with the Israeli intelligence.On 25 March 2002, I was released, but I was prevented from resuming my job in the police system even though I had not received an official letter saying that I was fired. Nevertheless, I have not received any salary or end of service compensation since then. I have a family of 13 people and I am unemployed. I consider myself a victim of incorrect and mistaken charges and ideas. I demand to return to my job or to get compensation for the previous period during which I worked with the Palestinian police. It is worth noting that I have letters from the various Palestinian national parties confirming that I am not collaborating with any non-Palestinian apparatus, and that I was carrying out my job in accordance with principles.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 4 May 2006Signature: Ahmad I'qab