Affidavit No. 5699/2010
2010
At around 11:00 pm on Sunday 22 August 2010, I was driving home with my wife and children. We had been at a Ramadan Iftar evening with my extended family in al-Bustan Resort on the coast of Gaza city. When I reached the end of Third Street (al-Mukhabarat Street) opposite the Abu-Ida villa in al-Sheikh Radwan neighbourhood, near to the beach, a car stopped along the width of the road in front of me, blocking the street, and forcing me to stop. The car was a dark brown Mercedes 250. Its number plate was 10-1643. Four individuals dressed in black suits got out of the car. Two of them wore masks; one carried a Kalashnikov rifle and the other a pistol.The other two men were not masked and had beards, dark complexions and were of medium height. The two masked men approached me. I was sitting in the driver’s seat. My wife was sitting next to me and my children were in the rear seat. The other two men stood in front of and behind the car. One of the masked men ordered me at gunpoint to get out of the car. I was afraid. I refused to get out in fear that I might be hurt, as I had heard that many young men in Gaza have been shot in the legs by unidentified masked men in this way. One of the masked men shouted in my face, ordered me to get out of the car and pointed his pistol at my head. The two masked men then tried to force me out of the car. The altercation that broke out between us escalated into a fight. The masked men opened the car door and tried to pull me out. I clung on to the steering wheel and my wife and children pulled me back inside the car. When the men did not manage to force me out of the car, one of them drew his pistol and fired three bullets into my left leg, in front of my wife and children. My wife and children started to scream, and the masked men left the area in their car.A number of citizens gathered in the area after they heard the sound of the bullets and my wife screaming. My friend Usama Abu-Dayya, who had also attended the Iftar party we had been at, also arrived and took me in his car to al-Shifa’ Hospital. A preliminary medical examination showed that I had three entry and exit bullet wounds around my left knee. I received the necessary medical treatment. I left hospital and went home, on my own account, because I did not feel safe there. I signed a pledge to discharge myself, in spite of the doctors’ insistence that I stay in order to be kept under supervision and receive further treatment.My wife reported what had happened to al-Shate’ police station, west of Gaza. As a result, whilst I was in hospital, members of the security agencies - police detectives and Internal Security - took a statement about the incident. As of yet I have heard nothing about the identities of the persons involved, and in spite of having given the police the car’s registration number and descriptions of those involved, I have heard nothing about any police investigations.