Affidavit No. 3437/2007
2007
I support a family consisting of 18 members. My family lives in Khirbet Um Lasfa, which lies roughly seven kilometres from Yatta. I own a 45 dunum patch of land (No. 1485 in basin No. 2) in an area called Sha'b Muhammad 'Ali. My land lies in the vicinity of my home and is two kilometres from Ma'oun settlement, which was established in the early eighties. I use my land for agricultural purposes. I grow wheat and parsley on my land, and sell whatever portion of the harvest my family does not use.In 1998, a settler (known as Dove) was killed in the vicinity of my land. Since then, the settlers of Ma'oun have repeatedly damaged my land. For example, once, after I had planted wheat on my land and the crops were growing, the settlers came and ploughed the land with a tractor. On other occassions, the settlers harvested my crops. One of these incidents took place on 23 May 2005. Many citizens witnessed this incident, and I make a complaint to the Israeli police on 4 June 2005. However, so far, the police have taken no action arising from my complaint.Every time I buy seeds and sow them, the settlers either destroy the crops or harvest the crops for themselves. In reality, from 1998 to now, I have received no benefit from my land. On the contrary, I pay for the seeds and I go to the effort of planting them only to have the settlers destroy or steal the crops. This year, I planted my land with parsley seeds. It cost me approximately 3,000 shekels (for the seeds and work). On 10 March 2007, a foreign volunteer called me. This person said that Izra, an Israeli volunteer I know, had seen the settlers ploughing the land that I had planted, in order to destroy the crops that were growing.I went straight to my land and found that it had all been tilled. Nothing was left of my crops. On 15 March 2007, I went to an Israeli police station and submitted a complaint against the settlers of Ma'oun settlement. The police asked me how I knew that it had been the settlers who had destroyed the crops. I told the police that a number of citizens and foreign volunteers had seen the settlers doing so.The settlers have also attacked me many times while I have been working on my land. During the past number of years, the settlers have planted olives trees on my land, which I have uprooted. Once, the settlers placed hosing on my land with the aim of planting it, but I cut the hoses without letting the settlers see me. This is my land; I have never sold it and want to keep it as long as I live.Due to the fact that I am afraid of the settlers assaulting me, I arrange to be accompanied by foreign volunteers, or make an appointment with the civil administration officer to accompany me, whenever I go to work on my land. I will continue to work on my land and to take care of it in order to ensure that the settlers do not take it.