Affidavit No. 2684/2005
2005
I am an  employee at the Ibrahimiyya school in the Old City of Hebron. I began  working in the Ibrahimiyya school at the beginning of this academic  year. On 31 August 2005, an inspection room was erected beside the  school in order to inspect the students who come to school. On 19  November 2005, the Israeli soldiers asked the students and teachers to  pass through this room to be inspected by an electronic inspection  machine. At first, all the students and teachers rejected the decision  and as a result the school closed from 19 November until 24 November,  until it was forced upon all of the students and teachers to pass  through the room and be subjected to inspection.On  Wednesday 23 November 2005, while the students were protesting against  the inspection process, many Israeli military officials came. I began to  talk with one of them partially in Hebrew, which I am 70% fluent in,  and partially in Arabic because the official also spoke Arabic. By  talking with this official, I learned that a military order was issued  requiring everyone to pass through this room with the exception of  pregnant women and persons who have heart diseases or hold special  medical documents. If this system of inspection takes place, it will  impede the students and the teachers, especially in the morning hours,  and the school will suffer from the late arrival of students to school.I passed  through that room and saw the electronic inspection machine, which is  similar to the machine used at the entrance of the Ibrahimi Mosque and  in several other places. The difference here is that this machine is set  up in a room which has an entrance and an exit, and the doors are  closed whilst all the students are inside this room. This is stressful  for female students and female teachers and I do not know if this type  of inspection may have side effects, other than the psychological ones,  on those who pass through it.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 26 November 2005Signature: “Muhammad Maher” al-Karaki