Affidavit No. 3446/2007
2007
I live in Deir al-Ghsoun, which is located to the north of Toulkarem city in the northern West Bank. I own two pieces of land situated to the west of Deir al-Ghsoun. The surface area of both pieces of land, which are planted with olive trees, is 12 acres. The first piece of land was allocated the number 12 and is located in block number 8661, while the second piece of land, which is located in the same block, was allocated the number 9.These two pieces of land used to provide me with a yearly income of roughly 1000 Jordanian dinars. This income used to assist me in providing for my family, especially my children who study at universities in Palestine and abroad. My wife and I, as well as some of our children, used to take care of the land and harvest it. During our visits to the land, we enjoyed some of our best times together. We used to carry out a lot of work maintaining the land, such as removing the grass from around the olive trees.All of this came to a tragic end at the hands of the Israeli occupier, which launched the plan for the construction of the Annexation Wall. The route of the Wall, which was constructed during the second half of 2002, passes to the west of Deir al-Ghsoun. The Wall in the Deir al-Ghsoun area, as well as in neighbouring areas, consists of asphalt and dusty sand roads, electric barbed wire and a ditch. My land is situated on the western side of the Wall. As a result, I am cut off from my land.To enter my land I have to pass through gates in the Wall. The gates in question hold the numbers 609 and 624. In order to pass through the gates one must have a special permit. The total surface area of Deir al-Ghsoun is 14,000 acres. As a result of the construction of the Wall, 2,500 acres of this land have been confiscated. In other words, this land is now isolated on the western side of the Wall. We own part of the isolated land.In the past, we applied for permits to pass through the gates in the Wall at the Palestinian district liaison office in the city of Toulkarem. However, since the beginning of 2007, the procedure for obtaining permits has changed as a result of an Israeli order. Every Palestinian who owns land to the west of the Wall and who wishes to access their land must go in person to the Israeli district liaison headquarters, located to the west of Toulkarem city. The process of obtaining a permit is particularly burdensome.I went in person to apply for a permit. I indicated on my application that I needed a permit to pass through gate number 609, because this is the gate closest to my land. However, to my surprise, the permit I obtained only allows me to pass through gate number 624, which is located a great distance from my land. I am unable to reach my land by passing through this gate, because there is no road connecting gate number 624 with my land. As a result, I have not gone to my land since the end of 2006.I was unable to collect the olive harvest this year or to remove the grass from around the trees. My land and my olive trees are going to ruin because I am unable to reach and look after them. This is a direct result of the unfair measures imposed by the occupying power. While my land used to be among the best land in the region, it is now becoming unproductive. This is due to the construction of the Wall.As a result of the construction of the Wall, I have been deprived of my only source of income and from the pleasure of visiting my land. However, my problems do not stop there. In addition to everything previously mentioned, the Wall has also damaged the social relations between my immediate family and our relatives and beloved ones residing in the Arab-Israeli villages near Deir al-Ghsoun. These villages include Ibthan, Bir al-Sakka, Yama and al-Marja. They are located to the west of Deir al-Ghsoun, and their residents are directly related to us and the other residents of Deir al-Ghsoun village. They are our cousins, aunts and uncles.Before the construction of the Wall, we had very strong social ties and shared our happy and sad moments together. Since the Wall was built, we have been prevented from seeing one another. Nowadays, we only speak by phone. Thus, the Wall has destroyed our strong social ties and deprived us of the land and a source of income which we inherited from our ancestors. It has deprived us of our past, present and our future, as well as any hope for our children’s future.