Affidavit No. 1692/2004
2004
At around  2:30 in the afternoon of Wednesday, 10 March 2004, and while I was  sleeping in my house, which is located in Al Maslakh quarters on the  eastern side of Jenin near the tin factory, I woke up to the sounds of  heavy shooting next to my house. I thought that there was a row outside,  but the heavy shooting made me change my mind.I rose  from my bed and the heavy shooting was still continuing, when suddenly I  sensed some movement in front of my house. I looked towards the western  window of the house to find an Israeli soldier, wearing full military  gear, including a helmet. The right side of the soldier was visible and  clear to me. This soldier started shooting towards a target that was  directly in front of him, because I had seen the gun he was carrying  when it was aiming to the ground.At this  point, I protected myself behind a curtain that divides between the  kitchen and the room, which has the western window where the soldier was  standing directly in front of it. I would sneak a quick look at the  soldier, out of the fear that he would notice me and aim his gun towards  me. This soldier had shot over 50 bullets quickly and continuously.After a  few moments, the soldier left the place returning in the direction of  the tin factory, which lies to the northern side of my house. At this  moment, at the time when the Israeli soldier was leaving the place, I  heard a very loud shout and it was literally, “the dogs are dead”. At  that point, the gunfire was still ongoing but it was sporadic and I  realized that the shooters were members of the Israeli Army and that  they had succeeded in killing one or more of the young men. I remained  in the house, incapable of leaving it, until around 3:00 in the  afternoon when the gunfire subsided and I started hearing the sounds of  young men and women outside. Here I opened the door of my house, which  has a veranda in front of it, and when I looked in the direction of  where the Israeli soldier had been shooting, specifically towards the  south, I found a young man laying flat back on the ground, soaked in  blood. At the sight, I started screaming as loud as I could and I came  closer to that young man only to find out that he had been killed. His  body was bleeding profusely, due to the many gunshots he had. At the  point, some young men came to the place and they carried the man and  transferred him to an ambulance.When I  looked towards the north of my house towards the main road, I found a  small, navy Volkswagen car that had crashed into an electrical pole 20  metres away from house, which is the distance between my house and the  main road. Now things became clear to me, because I realised that  members of the Israeli special troops had shot towards the car and at  that point, one of the young men tried to flee and went to the veranda  of my house to take shelter. Nevertheless, the Israeli soldiers chased  him and killed him. The name of the young man, as I learned afterwards,  is Ayman Mahmoud Saba’neh and he is a resident of Nablus Street in  Jenin. I also knew from other fellow citizens that three other young men  had been killed, they are, Muhammad Kheir Allah, Ihab Abu Ja’far and  Amer Qasrawi, all from Jenin. After a few hours from this accident, I  found out that a fifth young man had been killed, named Basel’ Amro and  it was said that he had been arrested while still alive, but hewas eliminated later on, in a military checkpoint called al-Jalmah, on the northern side of Jenin.Signed on 24 March 2004Name not withheld from publication