Affidavit No. 6546/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Musa Ibrahim Musa Abu Dhiel, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 801458977, born on 5 April 1986, unemployed, and a resident of the Second Bedouin Village, North Gaza governorate, would like to declare the following:Myself and my family own about 30 sheep and cattle. We usually collect food for the livestock from the crop leftovers which are available in the agricultural lands located in the North Gaza governorate.On Saturday, 30 July 2011 at around 9:30 am, I travelled riding an animal drawn cart to Hammouda’s land located to the northwest of the town of Beit Lahiya, northern Gaza, which lies 400 metres from the Israeli controlled northern border.I decided to go to Hammouda’s land after I saw about 20 farmers collecting onions from the land, so I went there to collect the leftover crop of onions in order to use it to feed my livestock. As soon as I reached Hammouda’s land, I saw workers busy harvesting onions, and immediately I started to collect the leftovers of the crops, putting them into the cart. I continued working with the rest of the farmers for about an hour, and then I heard sporadic shooting coming from behind the separating fence. I witnessed an army jeep stationed behind the separating fence, and I heard the sound of gunfire coming from the jeep and from the control towers located in the surrounding area along the fence.After hearing the shooting, I decided to leave the area, along with the rest of the farmers. We feared for our lives, because we were used to seeing Israeli occupying soldiers open fire directly on Palestinian workers, farmers, fishermen and anyone who approaches within 500 metres of the border.While I was preparing the cart to leave the area with what I have collected from the onion leftovers, I heard a round of sporadic shots coming towards me from behind. Then I felt that something hit the top of my head. I felt dizzy and fell to the ground. Some farmers then carried me into a civilian car and brought me to Beit Lahiya clinic, where the doctors provided me with the necessary first aid, and told me that I had received a mild injury caused by a bullet.Doctors referred me to Al-Shifa’ Hospital in Gaza City to undergo all the necessary tests and x-rays. I stayed in the hospital receiving medication treatment for about two hours and then I went back to my home.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 31 July 2011