Affidavit No. 4685/2009
2009
On Tuesday, 3 February 2009 I was at home when I saw diggers, military vehicles, cars belonging to the Israeli Planning Authority, civilian cars and Israeli police cars. At around 10:00 am, they arrived at the 12 dunums piece of land belonging to my brother and I. This land lies around 300 metres to the east of Bypass Road No. 60 and is cultivated with olive trees. The state of Israel claims that the land was seized in 1982 and that it has been state land ever since. This group of Israeli vehicles toured an area of around 100 dunums surrounding our land. My house lies on the eastern side of our land. One of the bulldozers demolished the 200 metre stone fence that belonged to Haj Amin Yousef Jaradat, Haj Kamel Yousef Jaradat, and Yousef Ismail Yousef Jaradat. The other bulldozer helped in demolishing it and uprooting olive trees from our land. Individuals dressed in civilian clothes spread out and uprooted trees with their hands, while the bulldozer uprooted those trees that they were unable to uproot by hand. They also uprooted trees that belonged to the people whose stone fence was demolished.After seeing the Israeli vehicles, whose number was no less than 15, I went down to my and my brothers' land. The family members of Amin, Kamel and Yousef Jaradat also went down to their land. I spoke with the persons who were uprooting the olive trees and asked them to stop. Two persons, dressed in civilian clothes talked to me in Arabic, saying “this is state land, and we request that you to leave it.” In the meantime, our relatives, members of Amin, Kamel, and Yousef Jaradat’s family, quarrelled with the Israelis. I heard them fighting, so I went to where they were. I saw Nidal Kamel Jaradat, around 35 years old, Hajja Khadra Talab Jaradat, around 85 years old, Hisham Kamel Jaradat, around 32 years old, Rafifan Amin Jaradat, around 43 years old, and others, including women and children, whose number totalled around 60 persons. They clashed fists with the soldiers. The army responded by using tear gas, sound bombs, and rubber-coated bullets, which it shot at the protestors.Hajja Khadra was taken to the hospital for tear gas inhalation. Nidal and Hisham Kamel Jaradat and Rafifan Amin Jaradat were severely beaten by the soldiers and border Guard to the extent that they needed to be taken to the hospital for the severe bruises they suffered. Rafifan also suffered from a head injury in addition to bruises.The clashes with the army and the bulldozing activity ended at around 1:00 pm and the Israelis left the area. The Israeli judiciary is currently looking into the case of our land, and there has been no final decision in this regard. We approached the Israeli judiciary to protest against declaring our land as state land in 2004. The next day, Wednesday 4 February 2009, an Israeli military car, with soldiers in it, arrived at our land. The soldiers inspected the area to ensure that the community did not repair what the occupying forces had ruined on the previous day. The soldiers remained on theland from 3:00 pm until 4:00 pm. When my brothers and I checked the land, we found that the Israelis had uprooted around 45 four-year-old olive trees from our land.They uprooted about 35 similar trees from our relatives' land, in addition to demolishing their stone chain fences.