Affidavit No. 5355/2010
2010
My name is Naji Suleiman al-‘Abed Abu-Reida and I am 34 years old. I am married, a father of four children and a resident of Abu-Reida neighbourhood in the town of Khuza’a, east of the city of Khan Younes. I work at the police agency connected to the Authority in Ramallah.At around 8:00 am on Thursday, 25 March 2010, I rode a donkey cart to the area around Sofa Crossing on the eastern border fence with Israel. The crossing is situated east of the town of al-Fukhari and southwest of the city of Khan Younes. I wanted to transport my brothers, Fakhri (33 years old) and Salem (25 years old), as well as my relative Bara’ Muhammad Abu-Reida (21 years old) from the area. They were collecting stones and rubble from the buildings that the Israeli occupying forces had destroyed, which they planned to sell. It should be noted that inhabitants of the Gaza Strip use these materials in construction works and the manufacturing of bricks and concrete because the occupying forces deny access to construction materials in the Gaza Strip.My brothers were present at a distance of about 500 metres from the eastern border fence, west of the Sofa Crossing. When I reached that area, I saw dozens of workers collecting rubble from the buildings. At that time, I heard the occupying forces, on megaphone, demand that workers evacuate the area at once. I also saw a soldier stand at the gate of the crossing and point his weapon at us. I called to my brothers and my relative, Bara,’ and told them to climb onto the cart. As I was about to get the donkey to leave the area, I heard the sound of many bullets. I fell onto the ground and felt a bullet hit the top of my right thigh. Attempting to withdraw from the area, I crawled for a distance of almost 10 metres before I collapsed. The shooting continued sporadically for several minutes.When it had stopped, my brothers moved me from the area, carrying me a distance of about 20 metres. They called an ambulance, which arrived about ten minutes later and transported me to the Gaza European Hospital, approximately 2,000 metres east of Khan Younes. The medical examination established that I had sustained a bullet wound to the top part of my right thigh. I was treated for several hours before leaving the hospital.