Affidavit No. 7800/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, ‘Umar Salih ‘Abed, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 900002833, born on 11 November 1969, a farmer, and a resident of Kufr Dan village, Jenin governorate, would like to declare the following:I have a piece of agricultural land, measuring about 150 dunums, on Marj Ben ‘Amer plain, which is immediately opposite the village of Kufr Dan. The village is almost five kilometres west of Jenin city. I cultivate my land with crops and irrigated vegetables. In early 2000, I constructed an artesian well to supply water for the land.At around 6:00 am on Wednesday, 24 October 2012, I was at my home in Kufr Dan village and I received a telephone call from a farmer who had been on my land. He told me that Israeli military forces had arrived on my land and that a bulldozer, which accompanied them, had demolished my artesian well. I immediately rushed to my land. To my surprise, I saw Israeli military forces, including almost 20 military jeeps and a yellow wheel loader. A white jeep, which belonged to the Israeli Water Authority, accompanied the force. From time to time that jeep used to come to the area and checked on the licensed artesian wells. I knew the Israeli officer working for the Israeli Water Authority whose name is ‘Aykel’. I saw him in the company of the Israeli forces on that day. He put on civilian clothes and supervised their destruction of my artesian well. When I arrived, the wheel loader had already finished destruction of the well. Meanwhile, a number of soldiers were positioning themselves in the area to protect to the wheel loader.“Why have you done this?” I asked a soldier.Another soldier hit me with a black baton on my right shoulder and hand, causing me severe pain. He uttered blasphemous expressions and shouted that I cannot get any closer.The wheel loader and the Israeli forces left the area and went to other agricultural land. The bulldozer also destroyed four wells belonging to Muhammad Fahmi Mir’i, his brother Fat’hi Fahmi Mir’i, Ahmad ‘Muhammad Shafi’ Jabarin, and Ibrahim Ahmad ‘Abed. It also destroyed a rainwater collection pool as well as a water pump on Mahmoud Mustafa ‘Arqawi’s land. All five wells are located on agricultural land belonging to Kufr Dan village. They were destroyed under the pretext that they had been constructed without the required licences. The Israeli occupying authorities also claimed that we stole water. The destroyed wells are located in Area C, which is under full Israeli control according to the Oslo Agreement signed between the Palestinian and Israeli sides. I had not received any notice before my artesian well was destroyed. Destruction of my well will consequently cause damage to the crops I have cultivated over an area of 50 dunums, including lettuce, cauliflower, aubergines, fennel and other crops. Over another 100 dunums, I tend tomatoes and cucumbers grown in greenhouses. After the Israeli occupying authorities destroyed my artesian well, all these crops are now threatened because there are no alternative water sources available for irrigation.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 24 October 2012