Affidavit No 6164/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Khitam Faraj Hatem al-Tamimi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 97550141, born on 15 December 1965, housewife, and a resident of Ramallah, would like to declare the following:I live in the village of al-Nabi Saleh, which lies to the north of Ramallah, and my two-storey house is located at the entrance to the village. My house is no further than 20 metres from the junction which leads to the village. I recall that on Friday, 23 November 2010, during the weekly peaceful protest against settler activities that is organised in the village, confrontations were taking place in the village between occupation soldiers who s ubdued the march with the use of various gas grenades and rubber bullets, and between the youths who were responding to the aggression of the soldiers with stones. The soldiers had brought with them a large white car from which they were spraying green water, which had a very disgusting smell which seemed to an extent like the smell of animal excrement, and they were spraying the water towards the protestors. Meanwhile, the car moved towards the house and stopped almost three metres from the door of the building. The driver directed the hose, which was fixed on top of the car, towards the house. The substance began to come out of the hose and was sprayed intensely towards the house. It was sprayed all over the balcony, the doors, and air vents, and also towards the roof of the house where it reached the water tank located there, and mixed with the water in the tank. The driver continued to spray the house in this manner for around a quarter of an hour, and I became very angry because of the driver’s purposeful spraying our house with this extremely bad-smelling substance. Meanwhile I became nauseous and felt that I had to get away from the smell, so I went out into the yard of the house and threw stones at the car until it left. I was very angry and I screamed madly, and when the car left I began cleaning the house, which took two continuous days, using every known cleaning material. I used entire containers, but the smell remained in the house for around a month, and even now because of its saturation into the wooden doors we still smell the substance when the weather is sunny. We also changed the water tank because the substance had gotten into it, and the crops in the garden of the house were also destroyed. We are very ashamed when visitors come to us and recoil at the stench. In addition I suffer weekly as occupation soldiers aim at the house and fire teargas grenades and rubber bullets towards the house, which have broken around 12 of my house’s windows since the start of the activities against the settlers in January 2010.  Part of the curtains in the house were burned because of a grenade that landed in the house, not to mention the state of suffocation and severe terror we are exposed to, especially my married son who lives with us and has a daughter not yet three years old. We frequently have to leave the house for two or three days while we get the house cleaned. Also because we are unable to repair what the gas has destroyed each time we have placed wooden boards on doors and carpets over the air vents. Our house now resembles a barracks as no sun can enter.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 12 March 2011