Affidavit No. 5753/2010
2010
At around 1:00 pm on Friday 8 October 2010, I completed Friday prayers at the sit-in tent in al-Bustan area of Silwan neighbourhood (south of the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound). I saw boys wearing masks and after noticing photographers and television reporters in the area, I put a mask on my face because I did not want my face to appear on television. There were about seven masked boys carrying stones. I stood with these boys on Wadi al-Rababa junction in Silwan neighbourhood. Drivers in vehicles passing by told the boys that Israeli occupying soldiers had set up a roadblock at the bottom of Wadi al-Rababa hill.The boys and I saw a car coming downhill along Wadi Hilwa Street several metres away - that is not from the direction the drivers had told us that the occupying troops were positioned. The car stopped and the boys shouted “settler, settler.” The car reserved backwards but seemed to be blocked in by another car that was behind it. The car then went into another lane in the street, and headed towards where I was standing, although I think the lane the car had been driving in initially was empty. The car ran me over. I was just standing there, confused. I had a stone in my hand and I wanted to throw it but I could not because the incident was fast-moving and lasted only seconds. I think there were some journalists standing behind me. I do not remember anything after the car hit me.I found myself in an ordinary car going to al-Maqased Hospital (an Arab hospital in al-Tour neighbourhood in Jerusalem). I sustained injuries in my left shoulder, left knee, the left side of my head, and my right hand. I was given a local anaesthetic and 17 stitches in my shoulder, as well as stitches on other parts of my body. I stayed at hospital until 8:00 pm that day. When I left hospital, I was exhausted and fell asleep immediately. I felt afraid. My mother told me I screamed all night and wet myself. I was afraid that Israeli occupying soldiers would come and arrest me because I had been on television and that therefore I would be beaten up. However, the police did not come to get me, nor did anyone call me on the telephone.Several days later, I heard from my neighbours that the police had arrested a child whose name was ‘Umran Mansour. Of course, this name is the same as mine. I was afraid and said to myself that the Israeli occupying soldiers would come in two or three days to arrest me. At 5:30 am on Sunday 17 October 2010, I was at home asleep. My father woke me up and said to me: “The Israeli army is at the door. Don’t be afraid. “When I looked up, I saw three or four persons in civilian clothing standing near me. They were carrying large rifles. I raised my head a little more and saw Border Guard officers in green uniform. I put on my shoes and shirt and went with the soldiers. A soldier walked in front of me and another behind me. The soldiers put me in a white jeep. They made me sit in the middle of the rear seat. Two soldiers in civilian clothing sat on each side of me. We drove several metres towards the Moroccan Gate yard. A soldier who was wearing civilian clothing forced me out of the jeep and put me in a green Border Guard police car. He held my arm and sat me in the middle of the rear seat.He and another Border Guard officer sat on each side of me. In the car I heard the occupying forces curse Palestinians and residents of Silwan neighbourhood. I was taken to a building, which I found out from my mother, was al-Maskobiyya Prison (the Russian Compound) in West Jerusalem. The man in civilian clothing, who was carrying a large rifle, got out of the car with me. He told me to follow him and we went to a room in the building.“Come on, sit on the chair,” he said to me. He sat at his desk and started to question me aboutwhether I had thrown stones at the soldiers. I said I had not. He said, “you know that this is forbidden in (Israeli) law?” and I answered “yes.” Then he asked me to show him the injuries I had sustained during the incident. I showed him my shoulder, head and hand. During the interview he spoke to me in broken Arabic. For about ten minutes he typed on the computer. After he finished typing he demanded that I sign papers written in Hebrew. He said that I had not been beaten and that no harm has been caused to me. I refused [to sign] and told him I would only do that after the interrogation ended.After a short while three persons in civilian clothing, who had pistols on them came in. They started to mock me and make taunting facial expressions and strange sounds. One of them cursed my mother and used obscene language. Another told me to turn my chair around to face the other way. I did not know what direction to turn it in. He turned it for me so that my face was against the wall. I put my hand on the table next to me but he grabbed my hand and told me not to put it there. He also told me to stand with my back against the wall. Then he left the room.A man in civilian clothing took me to another room in which there was another man sat at a desk and an elderly man in handcuffs. I stood at some distance from the elderly man for about five minutes. Then a man in civilian clothing came into the room. I heard a policeman that was in the room call this man Fou’ad.Fou’ad took me to another room and made me sit on a chair and questioned me. “What happened to your eye?” he asked, pointing to the bruises on my face, which were caused by the settler who ran over me. Don’t you know?” I replied. “No. I don’t,” he answered sarcastically. He then left and said he would bring my mother in to sit with me. He came back with my mother and made her face the wall. I faced the desk where he was sitting. Before my mother came in, I had heard him order her to switch off her telephone. He also told us that we would not be allowed to look at or talk to each other. Then he showed me a video clip. “You perform your prayers?” heasked, “Yes,” I answered. “Lying is prohibited in Islam. Why do you lie?” he said. He asked which person I was in the video clip and who the other boys were.He also showed me other pictures of confrontations in which boys were throwing stones, and asked me who these boys were. I said I did not know them. He asked me why I threw stones. I said I did not. He then re-wound the tape and fixed it on a shot in which I appeared, lifting my arm about to throw a stone. “You were about to throw a stone” he said. “I was defending myself against the settler’s car” I replied. “So you were intending to throw stones?” he said. “Yes” I answered.After that, he forced me to sign papers written in Hebrew and made my mother sign them too. He did not read what was written on the papers to us. Then he took me to a room where he took my fingerprints. He forced me to put my fingerprint on a paper when were back in the interrogation room.About an hour later I left al-Maskobiyya Prison (the Russian Compound) accompanied by a policeman in civilian clothes. As I was leaving, I met someone who told me he was a lawyer called Muhammad Ramzi Mahmoud. We went to court. I waited there for about half an hour until the hearing began. At the end of the hearing, which was in Hebrew, the interrogator told me that I was sentenced to house arrest for a period of two weeks. If I breached the sentence or if I was summonsed to interrogation but did not appear I would pay a fine of ILS 10,000.I was released from court at around 2:00 pm. I found out later that my father had paid a sum of ILS 2,000. At the moment I am imprisoned in my house and am only allowed to leave to go to school or to the doctor. When I leave the house, my mother has to accompany me.