Affidavit No. 3377/2007
2007
On Thursday, 1 February 2007, I arrived at the construction site on the Jamal al-Tamimi building where I work. The building is located in the Samiramis area, to the south of al-Bireh and to the west of the Ramallah-Jerusalem main road. The old airport road, known as the al-Matar road, is located to the west of the building. The airport and the Annexation Wall, which was established by the Israeli occupying forces in order to isolate Jerusalem from other areas in the West Bank, are also located in the area. At 7:10 am, I was on the roof of a two-storey building, along with the other workers, getting ready to start work.At approximately 7:30 am, I heard the sound of approximately four bullets being fired. I looked around but did not see any border police jeeps inside the borders of the airport's land. Generally speaking, border police jeeps are always present in this area in order to protect the Annexation Wall. However, I saw two youths running towards the Jerusalem main road to the northeast. I saw a bullet hit the ground near the youth who was last, and I saw him stumble as he was running. I also saw a third youth running away from the Liftawi building, which is located to the northwest of the building where I work. The Liftawi building overlooks al-Matar road and consists of seven floors that are still under constructionI returned to work astonished because of the shooting I had heard. Ten minutes later, my brother 'Isam told me to look at the Liftawi building. As I looked at the seventh floor, I saw a soldier who was wearing the light green uniform of the Israeli occupying forces standing on the western balcony. He was armed. I thought that this was unusual, because we are not used to the presence of the soldiers in such buildings. During my two months working in the area, I have only ever seen soldiers inside the old airportFifteen minutes later, while I was discussing the soldier’s presence in the building, I saw a dark green jeep that had "Police" written in English on it inside the airport. The jeep stopped near the fence, and two individuals wearing the dark green uniform of the border police got out of it. They stood near the fence at the place from which I had seen the youths running. The jeep left, but returned to the same area fifteen minutes later. At that time, three military jeeps belonging to the regular Israeli army, one of which was a hummer, came to the area. Three soldiers got out of the jeeps and walked towards the fence.Then after twenty minutes, another two military jeeps, accompanied by a light green military ambulance with a Star of David on it, arrived. Several more soldiers got out, one of whom was holding a stretcher. They went towards the fence. I saw a soldier lifting up a black jacket with his hands and pointing it in the direction of the Liftawi building. He was speaking in a loud voice in Hebrew, which I do not speak. I also heard another loud voice replying to him.Ten minutes later, the soldiers returned from to the road. Two of them were carrying the stretcher, to which a youngster was strapped. I estimated from 120 metres away that he was not moving. The soldiers placed the stretcher on the ground for approximately five minutes, during which time I saw no medical aid being provided to the youngster. Then, the stretcher was placed in the ambulance, which left the area guarded by two military jeeps, one in front of it and the other behind it, towards the main Jerusalem road.Two other military jeeps remained at the al-Matar road facing east. Twenty minutes after the ambulance left, I saw a military vehicle arrive at the al-Matar road from the south. It was accompanied by a military jeep, which was in front of it and which stopped at the entrance to the Liftawi building. The vehicle stopped near the gate of the building. Then, I saw a soldier come out of the gate, followed by approximately six soldiers who were wearing regular army uniforms.The soldiers who exited the building engaged in a short conversation with the soldiers who were present on the road, after which they entered the military vehicle. All the soldiers were armed and wore huge dark green bags on their backs. Then, they all left to the south. I was later told by my nephew Jum'a 'Abd-al-Khaleq, who had come back from a neighbouring grocery store, that the youngster who was killed in the morning was Taha al-Qaljawi, who resided in a building located on the main road.