Affidavit No. 6317/2011
2011
I am the father of Ra’fat Yousef Shalalda who was born on 14 May 1986 and holds ID No. 910364512. Ra’fat is a student at the Palestine Polytechnic University and has been detained by the Palestinian Intelligence services in Hebron city since 2 April 2011. On that date, members of the Palestinian Police and Intelligence came to our house at around 8:00 pm. Without presenting a search warrant, they searched the house for about half an hour and took with them personal photographs of Ra’fat as well as CDs. They also confiscated Ra’fat’s computer. When they left, a Palestinian Intelligence officer demanded that Ra’fat accompany without presenting a warrant for his arrest. For a period of about one month, no family member was allowed to visit Ra’fat despite the fact that we went to the Intelligence headquarters in Hebron city several times to try and visit him. Ra’fat appeared before Halhoul Conciliation Court on several occasions, but I do not remember the exact dates.On 8 May 2011, Ra’fat was brought before Halhoul Conciliation Court and the judge agreed to release him on a financial bail of JD 500. My brother Mousa (39 years old), went to al-Quds Bank and paid the bail. He handed the voucher to the court clerk and received a receipt from him. During the time my brother Mousa went to the bank and paid the bail, Ra’fat was transported to the Palestinian Intelligence prison and then returned to the court where an appeal of the decision to release Ra’fat was successful. The judge decided to hold Ra’fat in detention for five more days. This took place even though Mousa handed over the bank voucher and received the receipt from the court. Muhammad Hasan ‘Alama, Ra’fat’s advocate, informed Mousa of the extension.On 13 May 2011, the day my son was supposed to be released, Ra’fat came before Halhoul Conciliation Court once again. The judge decided to release Ra’fat on bail, which had been paid, until a trial date is set. On the same day, the lawyer finalised the bail procedures and handed the voucher to the Intelligence headquarters in Hebron city. It is now 10:41 pm on Monday, 16 May 2011. So far, my son has not yet been released, nor has the court decision been implemented. The lawyer called the Intelligence headquarters on several occasions to follow up on the decision of Ra’fat’s release. He said he received responses stating that the release needed the director’s signature and that the director was not available. It should be noted that Ra’fat’s lawyer went to the Public Prosecution office in Halhoul on Sunday, 15 May, and reported that the decision on Ra’fat’s release had not yet been implemented. He received another letter from the Public Prosecution, confirming the decision of release.