Affidavit No. 3863/2007
2007
At around 10:45 pm on Sunday, 7 October 2007, I was leaving my house located on block “C” on al-Hilqawi street, near the Rab’a al-’Adawiyya Girls High School, when suddenly I saw a dark green Toyota car parked in front of my place. Six masked people wearing black suits and carrying Kalashnikofs, which I am familiar with, stepped out of the car and came towards me. One of them hit my head and back with the bottom of his arm and put his hand on my mouth, and along with another masked man, lead me to the car. A masked man put a black cover over my eyes and they then assaulted me with sticks and pipes. The car moved for five minutes then stopped and I was taken out of it, and for about 15 minutes beaten with sticks and pipes and rifle stocks all over my body.They asked who my friends were in the quarter, what Fateh members in the quarter say about the Hamas movement, and who in the quarter were Fateh members? I was surprised by the questions, and told them that I worked with the Popular Front in the area and did not belong to the Fateh movement.They tied my hands and feet with ropes and hung me by my hands, and assaulted me for about two hours, beating different parts of my body. I felt severe pain and broke down. I heard someone saying: “this man is clean and we have nothing against him, so let him go.” He meant me. Then another man said: “I want to take you to a place and execute you.” So I told him that I was a victim of injustice and hadn’t done anything, so why execute me? They put me inside the car and it drove for about ten minutes. When it stopped they threw me in a hole and shot around it, and then left. After five minutes I heard the screaming of a woman, who came and released my hands and feet and uncovered my face. I saw a woman of around 50 years old, who helped me get up and walk to the street. I was at the Sawafi area (al-Rimal) of Mawasi Tal-al-Sultan, to the west of Rafah.After about five minutes a man of approximately 45 years old came and took me to his house, provided me with first aid and dressed me in other clothes. I realised that he was from the Ghariz family of Tal-al-Sultan. He drove me home at around 6 am.