Affidavit No. 5176/2009
2009
On 26 December 2009, my family members and I were present in our old one-storey house, which is made of 5 rooms and located in the neighbourhood of Bab al-Saha along the al-Nasr Street in the city of Nablus. My family consists of my husband Raed „Abd-al-Jabbar Muhammad al-Sarkaji (about 42 years of age) and my children Walid (12 years old) and Zeina (8 years old). My mother-in-law Nathmiyya (about 77 years old) and sister-in-law Rabiha (about 55 years old) also live with us in the house. While my husband and I were asleep in our bedroom, we were awakened at the sound of strong explosions. As they were severe, it appeared that the explosions took place inside the house, but I did not know their exact location. We also heard the sound of another explosion, which occurred in a garden east of our house.Meanwhile, we heard the sound of footsteps on the southern part of the house roof, which is made of zinc plates and overlooks our bedroom. Several seconds later, we were surprised when strong spotlights were directed towards our bedroom. We were shocked and wondered what was going on. I looked at my watch, which showed it was 3:00 am. Quickly, we put on additional clothes. We realised that Israeli occupying troops were carrying out the aforementioned activities, although we did not know the reason for it. Two or more minutes later, the troops suddenly opened fire on our bedroom without prior warning. At this time, my husband stepped forward to open the door of the bedroom, which led outside. I was behind my husband, and we shouted in Arabic, asking why they had opened fire and letting them know that we were getting out of the room to open the door. The soldiers did not reply to us and continued to fire. Under the spotlights, my husband and I went out of the bedroom after he had opened the southern door of the room. Iwalked behind my husband and we reached the small yard, which only measures two square meters, south of the house door. Due to the lights, we were exposed and directly seen by the soldiers. During this time, a soldier who was positioned on the roof at a distance of approximately six or seven metres south of our location opened fire and hit my husband in the forehead. As soon as he sustained the bullet wound, blood spurted heavily from his head. Parts of his brain scattered on my body. He fell backward in my lap without saying a word. I also felt a bullet or more hit my right leg and we both fell on our backs on the ground. While soldiers continued to open fire, I shouted for an ambulance.“You killed him! You killed him!” I yelled.