Affidavit No. 5168/2009
2009
I live in a four-storey house, where five families reside. My family and I live on the third floor. My family consists of four members, including my two children who are under four years of age. My eldest brother „Isam, about 40 years of age, lives with his family on the first floor. He has five children, the eldest of whom is almost 13 years old. My stepmother lives in a separate flat on the first floor with her son (my half-brother) Ahmed, who is about 21 years. My mother, two sisters and brother Iyad, who is unmarried and about 27 years, live on the second floor. My brother Hamada, about 24 years, lives alone on the fourth floor.At around 12:15 am on Sunday, 13 December 2009, I got up at the sound of loud banging on the doors of the ground floor of the house. When I looked through the window of the house balcony, I saw a large number of Israeli occupying troops and six armoured personnel carriers (APCs) of various types dispersed around the house. Through a window on the second floor, I heard my brother Iyad ask who was there.“We are the army. Everybody in the house must get out.” a soldier replied.All of the residents of the building went outside. My wife and I each carried a child. I carried my son Ibrahim, who is about three and a half years old, and my wife carried our son Yousef, two years old. As I was leaving the house, I saw the soldiers point their weapons at everybody who came through the door. At a distance of five metres from the house door, a soldier pointed his weapon at me and indicated that I put my son down on the ground and lift up my shirt, which I did. Meanwhile, my two children became frightened and started crying. After everybody had gone outside, soldiers allowed the women and children to enter the house and demanded that they stay on the balcony of the ground (first) floor. Soldiers demanded that my four brothers and I stand at different locations around the house yard and on the street, at a distance of about ten metres away from one another. While I was waiting in the house yard, I heard someone talking to my brother „Isam in broken Arabic, inquiring about whether anyone had remained in the house. „Isam said that no one else was there. From the place where I stood, I then heard and saw the same person ask „Isam about our names and to point us out, which „Isam did. When my brother „Isam introduced Iyad, the said person approached Iyad and demanded that he present his ID card and inquired about his date of birth. The aforementioned person then called a soldier and ordered him to handcuff Iyad and take him to the jeep. He spoke in Hebrew, which I could somewhat understand. I believe that he was an officer because he wore body armour that was a different colour from the other soldiers and issued directives to them. Later, soldiers demanded that my brothers and I sit on the ground. As the officer and a number of soldiers were about to enter the house, „Isam asked them where they were going. The officer said they wanted to search the house. „Isam insisted that he accompany them during the search, but the officer refused and told soldiers to approach him and threatened to beat him. The officer also shouted obscenities at „Isam. After he entered the house, the officer returned and asked „Isam on which floor Iyad lived.More than an hour and a half later, soldiers called my brothers and I, forced us into the guestroom on the first floor, and locked the door while we were inside. When I looked through the window which overlooks the house door, I heard and saw the army vehicles withdraw from the area in front of the house to the main street. At that moment, I looked at my watch and saw it was 1:55 am. After the soldiers, who took my brother Iyad with them, had left, my family members and I checked the house. We found that soldiers had tampered with pieces of furniture, thrown contents of cupboards on the ground; moved the cupboards, taken mattresses off the beds, and removed contents from our kitchens. We also found that soldiers had taken the personal documents of my family members to the second floor. We also found documents of cars, which I was then repairing, thrown on the ground on the second floor.I intend to go to the Israeli Police station today or tomorrow and file a complaint against the thieves.