Affidavit No. 6042/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Saleh Ayyoub Saleh Dar Ayyoub, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 959220963, born on 25 January 1961, employee of al-Birah municipality, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh, Ramallah district, would like to declare the following:I recall that around 2:00 am on 23 January 2011, Israeli occupation forces stormed our house, which stands in the village of al-Nabi Saleh. I was woken up by the sound of violent knocking on the outside door, and I thought that the knocking was by feet or rifle butts, such was the force of the sound. I opened the door after investigating from the road, where a voice outside was calling, “Open up, army!” When I opened the door I saw a group of around 15 soldiers at the outside door, and one of them demanded that I bring everyone in my house to the entrance. I said to him that there is only myself, my wife, and our sons in the house, and one of them demanded that I bring my male sons to the door. I entered the house and asked ‘Umar and Kareem to go out to the entrance. When we arrived we were asked to present our ID cards and when they were examined I was asked about my son Islam, who is 14 years old, and I said that Islam was sleeping at his uncle’s in the adjoining house, since his uncle is ill and Islam has taken responsibility for looking after him. The officer spoke Arabic well, but when I told him Islam was next door he spoke with the soldiers in Hebrew and I understood that he demanded that they go to my brother’s house where Islam was, with a hand signal. My house and my brother’s house are adjoining and share one courtyard, and the soldiers moved quickly through the courtyard up to the entrance of the house and knocked on the door. My wife and I followed them. They asked Islam to open the door, which he did, and the officer asked him in Arabic for his name, to which he answered, Islam. They then asked him for his full name and date of birth, and Islam answered that he was born on 21 November 1996. After that the officer asked him to hand over his ID card, and when he compared what Islam had said with what was on the card and also the papers that he had with him, he asked the soldiers to arrest Islam. However, he was wearing his summer underclothes and no shoes, so I asked him for some time to allow Islam to prepare and get dressed in a suitable manner, especially as the weather was cold. However, the officer refused at first, but my wife and I insisted that Islam must wear suitable clothes, and a squabble broke out between us and the soldiers, the result of which was that the soldiers began attacking us with their hands and feet, and they also used their rifle butts. We were knocked to the ground violently, but because of our insistence on not allowing them to arrest Islam while he wore unsuitable clothes they allowed him to change his clothes. However, he had to do that in the courtyard of the house, where his father brought him his clothes from inside. After that his hands were bound behind him and he was led to the jeep which was parked around 150 metres away. Islam was led humiliatingly to the jeep as the soldiers dragged him along the ground outside. In the same way they took his brother ‘Umar, having tied his hands behind him, however in the end they left him bound in the neighbourhood while Islam was arrested. The officer responsible for the soldiers and also for the arrest of Islam did not give us any information on his arrest, and before they left and departed the neighbourhood I asked the officer where he would be held, and he told us that Islam would speak to us after a week and after a week we would know where he was. The next day I headed to the headquarters of the Red Cross in Ramallah, and informed them of the arrest operation, and they in turn informed me to wait 48 hours before they could intervene. When I returned home I found I had received a call from an institute in Jerusalem, as they told me, although I don’t remember the name of the institute. They contacted me at around 5:00 pm on Monday 24 January 2011, and told me that Islam was in detention in the “Shai” centre in Jerusalem for questioning. Around half an hour after that call, a lawyer named “Lemur” called me and said to me that he had met Islam in the investigation centre known as “Shai”, although he was not able to attend the investigative hearing which took place from 9:00 am until 4:00 pm. As he informed me, the investigation hearing had forbidden him from interviewing Islam, and he told me that a judicial hearing for Islam would be held on Thursday 27 January 2011, in Ofer prison. That Thursday I headed to Ofer prison at the request of the lawyer who had informed me that the hearing would be secret, and I sat in the courtroom at around 2:00 pm. Islam was present in the courtroom in the dock, his legs bound in metal handcuffs, as well as myself, the judge, the lawyer, and the public prosecutor. When the judge entered Islam’s hands were released from the cuffs, but his legs remained bound. After the discussion and interview which were carried out in Hebrew with an Arabic translation, Islam was charged with taking part in marches in the village and throwing stones at army forces and border guards, during which the judge asked whether that had been carried out inside or outside the village and the prosecutor responded that it had been carried out inside. The lawyer emphasised that this came in the context of self-defence, and after that the judge demanded that Islam stay away from the house, and the judge asked me about the distance between al-Nabi Saleh and Ramallah, and I answered that the distance is 23 kilometres, after which he was silent for around two minutes and said that he would keep Islam away from al-Nabi Saleh. He asked me to rent a house for him or provide him with a dwelling in Ramallah with a land line phone and two guarantors who possessed blue [Israeli] identity cards. Islam was to stay inside the house 24 hours a day. When I mentioned to him that Islam is a student he said that this does not concern him. In case the police, the prosecutor or the intelligence call the number they have for Islam twice and do not find him then they are entitled to fine the guarantors an amount of 10,000 shekels each and issue an arrest warrant for Islam. The judge gave me three days to get the house ready, give them the phone number and provide them with the guarantors, and the hearing ended at around 4:45 pm. On Sunday 30 January 2011, I went to Ofer detention centre to attend the scheduled court session. I decided to reject the judges proposal and the lawyer conveyed my rejection to the judge. The judge asked me to provide an alternative. I said that the alternative is to take him to a proper court and to sentence him in accordance with proper proceedings. The judge requested that the lawyer ask me if I am willing to commute Islam to Benjamin Military Centre from 8:00 am to 5:00 pm for an unlimited period of time. I refused. The hearing ended after the military prosecutor requested an extension of Islam’s detention for two days and the preparation of an indictment. The request was directed at the judge, who agreed. A session was scheduled to be held on 1 February 2011. By the time of the session, the military prosecutor had not finished preparing the indictment and the judge repeated his previous proposals. I again refused. The judge issued a sentence, imprisoning Islam for about 100 days. This is customary among lawyers and judges and is known as “an open check.” It was also decided that a deliberation session would be held on 14 February 2011 to enable prosecutors to prepare an indictment. The session was adjourned at about 6:00 pm on that day with me and the lawyer present.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 2 February 2011