Affidavit No. 4680/2009
2009
I live in the town of Beit Kahel. I am married and have 14 daughters and sons. I also have a sister who is married and living in al-Far’a, to the east of Ksifa, a Bedouin village in the Negev. On Friday, 30 January 2009, I went to visit her together with another one of my sisters, Nadiya, who is 25 years old. Nadiya and I left al-Far’a on Monday, 2 February 2009 and made our way back to Beit Kahel. We took a Mercedes 711, driven by the driver Muhammad Rashid from Yatta, who was accompanied by his son, who is around 15 years old. We left al-Far’a around 7:00 am and reached a bumpy road close to the east of Khirbet Janba. As we were heading up north, Israeli soldiers stopped the car.The soldiers, who had been hiding on the sides of the road, suddenly jumped out and asked us to stop. In fact, one soldier jumped in front of the car from the right hand side and stopped us. He was blond, around 170 centimetres tall, about 20 years old, and not wearing a helmet. This soldier asked us for our ID cards when our car pulled over and stopped on the left side of the road. At almost the same moment, a car that looked like the car we were driving, arrived from the opposite side. The army stopped it as well. Another cabin car with a number of passengers arrived and was also stopped by the army. Then, about ten minutes after our car had been stopped, a small Peugeot 205, beige in colour, arrived from the opposite side. When the Peugeot was around 25 to 30 metres away, I saw two soldiers hide on the side of the road. As the Peugeot car passed by them at a distance of about two to three metres, the two soldiers came out of their hiding places and shouted at the car, ordering the driver to stop, and aimed their guns at it. The two soldiers stood on my left, or rather to the right of the driver of the Peugeot.After the two soldiers asked the Peugeot driver to stop, the car moved about five more metres. Two soldiers came out from the left of the car and fired two or three bullets in the air. The Peugeot stopped. Nevertheless, the two soldiers whom the Peugeot car had passed and the two soldiers to the left as well as the soldier who had stopped our car, all opened fire at the Peugeot from all directions. The shooting persisted for a total of around half an hour. All of the passengers of the cars I had mentioned were inside their cars during the first one or two minutes. After that, the soldiers took us out of the cars and sat us down on the opposite side of the road, or in other words, facing the car in which I had been. Around five minutes later, with the shooting ongoing, the soldiers also asked us to move to a place behind the car in which I had been. The soldiers who were shooting changed their position more than once. I was able to see what was going on from under the car, as we were seated behind it, it was relatively high and wewere located on higher ground than the Peugeot. When the shooting stopped, large forces comprised of various Israeli security forces arrived at the location. A helicopter also brought a senior officer who inspected the scene.Israeli investigators arrived and quickly summoned the persons who were present for individual interrogation. I was not interrogated, possibly because I am old and looked exhausted and had told them I was sick. An investigator dressed in civilian attire also arrived and greeted us in proper Arabic. I heard him speak to the soldier who shot from our side. The soldier told the investigator in Hebrew, which I understand well, "While I was inspecting the cars and the IDs of the passengers, this car arrived and its  driver shot at me." The investigator asked him "did he shoot at you from a gun or arifle?" The soldier answered, "from a rifle." The investigator asked him, "did he shoot five or six or rather 20 or 30 bullets at you?" The soldier said 20 to 30 bullets. This investigator and other investigators took pictures of the soldier and of a nearby broken stone, which the soldier claimed had been broken as a result of the shooting, since he was standing nearby. The soldiers and the officers shook hands with the same soldier and called him "Big Boss." I did not see or hear any shooting from the Peugeot car. To support my statement, if fire was shot in the direction of the soldier, Palestinian cars or one of their passengers who were standing in the direct vicinity of the soldiers would have been hit. At around 11:30 am, a military vehicle arrived to the location, and a robot came out, headed towards the Peugeot car after the soldiers had opened it. The robot pulled the dead body outside the car, after which the soldiers searched the car thoroughly. Those people present were held and interrogated at the location until around 2:30 pm. After that time, we were transported in the same cars in which we and our ID cards had been held, to Battir military checkpoint. The cars moved in a convoy with a military jeep in the lead and another in the back. We remained at Battir checkpoint until 5 pm and then were released from there.