Affidavit No. 2800/2006
2006
On Wednesday, 15 February 2006, at approximately 3:00 am, I was sleeping in my home located in Abu-al-Rub Quarter in the village of Qabatiya. Qabatiya is around seven kilometres south of Jenin and has a population of 20,000 people. I was at home with my wife Imtisal Abu-al-Rub (30 years) and my children; Raghda (12 years), Rawan (10 years), Rolin (8 years), Fadi (6 years), Balkis (3 years) and Lama (3 months). We were all sleeping. At 3:00 am, forceful knocking on the door woke up me and my wife. I slowly approached the door and realised that Israeli occupying soldiers were knocking. They were whispering to each other in Hebrew.At first I did not open the door. They knocked again, but I did not open it. Then the Israeli soldiers broke one window of the living room, next to the door, with the butts of their guns. Then they broke the second window. My children woke up, frightened by the noise of the crashing glass. I realised that the Israeli soldiers were insisting on entering and breaking into our home. As a result, I opened the door for them.I was standing with my wife as we watched four Israeli armed soldiers with their faces painted black enter the house. The soldiers led my wife and me into our bedroom where they detained us. One of the soldiers told me in poor Arabic, "No one is allowed to leave this room and making any sound is prohibited." An Israeli soldier was standing guard at the door to prevent us from leaving the bedroom. That soldier was aiming his weapon at us the entire time. The soldier's shape was threatening and put my children and wife in a state of horror. He told us that moving and making any sound was prohibited.After putting us in the bedroom, the other soldiers started to search the home room by room. I heard the sound of glass breaking during the brutal search carried out by the soldiers. I did not hear any noise that would indicate the presence of a military jeep in the surrounding area. Therefore, I guessed that these soldiers came on foot to my home. The door to the bedroom where we were withheld was open, enabling us to see what the soldiers were doing inside the home. I saw two Israeli soldiers bring a mattress from one of the other bedrooms and sleep on it while the other soldiers spread out all over our home and positioned their weapons at the windows.At around 5:00 am, I saw the soldiers installing small cameras. These cameras were connected to a small TV screen and were recording every movement made around our home. A soldier approached me and asked me in Hebrew, which I understand well, if I had any weapons inside my home. I told him that they had searched my home and if there were any weapons there, they should have found them. The soldier smiled scornfully. My wife and a few of my children wanted to use the bathroom. The soldiers allowed them to do so, but under guard.At approximately 6:30 am on that same day, I heard knocking on the door to my home. My mother Sharifa 'Awad Abu-al-Rub (58 years) was at the door shouting my name and asking me to open the door for her. The Israeli soldiers were put on alert by the sound of the knocking and prepared their guns. I asked them to allow me toopen the door for my mother, but they refused. One of the soldiers opened the door for her and took her to the same room where we were being detained. No one in the village knew that Israeli soldiers were inside my home.This situation continued until 8:00 am. At this hour, the soldiers were put on alert again and positioned a sniper at the kitchen window on the side of the home. I saw the soldiers carrying big and heavy weapons (I believe they were 250 millimetres). One of the soldiers (in Hebrew) told the other soldiers occupying my home that there was a person carrying weapons approaching my home. No sooner had the soldier said that than I heard the sound of bullets fired from inside my home; specifically form the kitchen window. The firing was done bullet by bullet, which means that it was sniper fire. At the beginning, the Israeli snipers fired two bullets. Then they fired three bullets. The firing stopped and the soldiers began laughing and jumping for joy. I heard one of the soldiers say, "I hit and killed him."I immediately realised that one of the Palestinian youths had been killed outside my home. The Palestinian citizens did not open fire on my home. If they had, I would have known because I would have heard the bullets, but nothing of this kind happened. After the Palestinian youth was killed, the neighbours discovered that Israeli soldiers had occupied my home. Around a dozen youths from Qabatiya gathered near my home and started throwing stones at it. The soldiers responded by firing live bullets at them. The Israeli soldiers fired around 100 bullets within a period of two hours.My wife and children were in a state of horror and panic. Whenever the soldiers fired, my children clung either to me or their mother. Sometimes they clung to one another, seeking protection. I continuously tried to calm them down, but some of them began to yell or cry out of extreme fear. This situation continued until 10:00 am. At this hour, the Israeli soldier guarding the door of the room where we were detained said they were going to withdraw in ten minutes. After 10 minutes, I heard the sound of a number of Israeli jeeps stopping in front of our home.The Israeli soldiers inside our home gathered in the living room in front of the room where we were held. The soldiers opened the front door and threw smoke bombs outside. They started to leave and enter the jeeps. Then the jeeps withdrew from the entire area. After the Israeli soldiers left my home, my wife, mother and I started to check up on our home. We found that the furniture, to a large extent, was destroyed. The Israeli soldiers had broken the china and dirtied the mattresses with their shoes, which were filled with soil and mud.After that, I left my home and was informed that the Israeli occupying army had killed the mentally retarded boy Mjahed al-Smadi (15 years), a resident of Qabatiya, while he used a plastic gun and pretend to fire at the Israeli soldiers positioned inside my home. I also found around 100 bullet casings from rounds fired at the Palestinian boys who gathered outside my home.Since then, my wife and children have been living in a state of panic and anxiety, especially in the evening when it becomes dark. I cannot leave my home at night now because my wife and children always think that the Israeli soldiers will return to our home. That event had a negative impact on my life and the life of my children. These soldiers do not respect any home they enter. They intentionally destroy the furniture and any available objects. In addition, they scare the women and children, throwing them into a state of panic.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 1 March 2006Signature: Mousa 'Abd-al-Rahman Abu-al-Rub