Affidavit No. 2829/2006
2006
I am a resident of Fasayel village, one of the northern Jordan Valley villages known as the al-Aghwar villages, located approximately 25 kilometres from Jericho and approximately 45 kilometres away from Toubas. The economy of Fasayel is dependant on labourers, animal breeders, and animal husbandry. The city of Jericho is the lifelineand the main gate for the village. For six months, the residents of Fasayel have been deprived from going to the north towards Toubas by the al-Hamra barrier.Any citizen from Fasayel and the surrounding villages is prevented from passing through this barrier unless he holds an I.D. with an al-Jiftlek address. Al-Dyouk barrier is another barrier that separates us from Jericho and has become difficult to pass through. For example, on Friday, 2 March 2006, while my family and I were coming back from Jericho to Fasayel at approximately 6:30 in the evening, we stayed for three hours at al-Dyouk barrier because the soldiers were intentionally inspecting the cars very slowly. Some of the citizens who were stuck at the barrier told me that they had been waiting for more than four hours. For that reason, I went to the other al-Dyouk barrier, which is considered less difficult, where I found around 70 cars.But after half an hour of waiting, I was able to cross the barrier and I reached my village at 10:30 at night. Residents of the northern Jordan Valley villages repeatedly have such experiences, making coming and going from Jericho very difficult and complicated, and I depend on Jericho merchants for the stocking of my grocery. As for al-Hamra barrier, I do not consider using it, because I know that I am not allowed to pass through it as the address in my I.D. is in Fasayel [and not al-Jiftlek], and we have received orders not to pass through it. Since the occupying authorities closed al-Aghwar area, we [residents of Fasayel] have a very difficult life, especially citizens who own sheep and cattle as they are prevented from accessing pastures and they are always subjected to the Israeli army and settlers’ assaults, including being fired upon – one week ago, shepherd Mahmoud ‘Ayesh was attacked by Israeli soldiers, or rather settlers,  who shot at him. Moreover, the Israeli soldiers and settlers have demolished structures built for animals outside the village structural planning, which is considered Area C, over which Israel has full power.It is worth noting that al-Dyuk barrier is a real problem for residents. Not only does it restrict their movement, but it also harms the animal breeders during important seasonsof producing cheese. Standing for long hours with their cheese products at the barrier will eventually damage the Bedouin cheese products, which form one of the primarylivelihoods of the village residents. In addition, this barrier impedes emergency medical cases, especially as there is not an ambulance in the village and so village residentshave to transport those experiencing emergency cases in their cars.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 4 March 2005Signature: Suleiman Sawarka