Affidavit No. 4989/2009
2009
My name is Rabah Ibrahim Salim al-Madhoun. I am 48-years-old and live near the market in Beit Lahiya Housing Project in the governorate of Northern Gaza.At around 10:40 pm on Tuesday, 14 July 2009, I was present at the wedding party of my nephew, Yousef ‘Abd-al-Hakim al-Madhoun. The wedding party took place across a side road, in front of my house. Music had been playing on a stereo and a large number of people, including my relatives, neighbours and friends, were attending the party. The bridegroom’s father had posted a picture of his nephew, Samih al-Madhoun, at the place where the wedding party was held. Samih had been a Fateh activist. He was killed by armed individuals from the Hamas movement after Hamas seized control of the Gaza Strip during the military coup of 14 June 2007.During the party, I received a telephone call from my cousin, Dr. Nafeth al-Madhoun, Rapporteur of the Legal Committee at the Palestinian Legislative Council. He requested that the family not post Samih al-Madhoun’s picture and not play songs or hoist banners supporting the Fateh movement. However, the family said that it was their right to post the picture of their son in front of their homes and at their social occasions. I should note that Fateh banners were not hoisted, nor were Fateh songs played.Suddenly, three cars transporting Hamas police officers armed with weapons and clubs arrived. The police officers assailed the audience and opened fire indiscriminately in the air, and also at the house of ‘Abd-al-Hakim al-Madhoun, the bridegroom’s father. In an attempt to solve the problem, I approached the police force commander to ask about the reason for their presence, trying to solve the problem calmly. However, a police officer hit me on the head with his weapon and I fell on the ground. Later, more armed police officers arrived and assaulted the audience. They severely beat attendees with clubs and rifle butts. They also tore apart pictures, damaged chairs, and chased away the participants in the wedding party, dispelling the crowd.During this time, I collapsed on the ground, bleeding from my head. A relative of mine transported me to Kamal ‘Udwan Hospital, which was located near my house. There, I received medical treatment.As a result of the indiscriminate firing, four persons, including two women, were injured. Ni’ma Salim al-Madhoun, 60-years-old, sustained shrapnel wounds in the left foot and Tahrir Ibrahim al-Madhoun (my sister), 22-years-old, was also injured with shrapnel in the right foot. Also, Mahmoud ‘Abd-al-Hakim al-Madhoun, 21-years-old, sustained shrapnel injuries in the head. In addition, police officers severely beat Jum’a al-Madhoun, 42-years-old, with clubs and rifle butts, leaving him in critical condition. He sustained bone fractures in the arms, legs and pelvis and was transported to al-Quds Hospital in Gaza for medical treatment. Police officers also severely beat a large number of attendees, leaving them with contusions and bruises, without having any right to do that.