Affidavit No. 3931/2007
2007
I support a family of ten, including my wife and nine children. On 6 January 1992, I wasinjured in my left leg while at work with an Israeli company. The injury was so serious that the leg was estimated to be 46% disabled at the time. I was treated at the expense of an Israeli insurance company, and since then I’ve received a monthly salary as compensation from the company for whom I worked.On Wednesday, 24 October 2007, while I was sleeping at home with my family, I heard loud knocking at the door of our house. I got up and looked through the window of the second floor to find a number of Israeli vehicles beside my home. Immediately I opened the door fearing that the Israeli soldiers would break it open, because the knocking was very strong.As I opened the door, one of the soldiers told me to take off my clothes and I did. Then he told me to get my family members out of the house because the soldiers wanted to search it. I asked my wife and children to leave. My 26 year old son, Khalil, was not at home. After my family left, the Israeli soldiers, five or more – I don’t remember – entered the house.One of the soldiers started to ask me and my family questions. He claimed that the soldiers were conducting a census and they wanted my son Khalil to participate.However, I learned from one of them, who introduced himself as Captain Yofal, that my son Khalil was wanted by the soldiers. The Captain wrote a note ordering me, my son Khalil, and my 27 year old son Iyad, to meet him the next day. He also gave me his phone number to call if Khalil wanted to surrender to the Israeli forces. Then he threatened me and my family, saying that he would kill Khalil. Moreover, he threatened to prevent me from entering Israel for treatment if Khalil did not surrender.It is worth noting that I have a permit and a magnetic card to enter Israel for treatment whenever I want. I emphasized that Khalil had not come home and that I did not know where he was. After searching the entire area, the soldiers left. After they left, we entered our home to find that all the furniture was in a mess as a resultof the house search. As we were looking for our belongings, we found that we had lost our money that we had saved in a small bag in the girls’ bed room. We lost USD 5000, J.D. 3000 and 3500 NIS.On the morning of the same day, 24 October 2007, I went to meet the Israeli Intelligence officer, in Hebron, at his request. I arrived at 9:00 am and could not find the officer. I learned that the meeting had been transferred to the ‘Atsyoun area in Bethlehem. I went there and met with Captain Yofal at around 1:00 pm. I accused his soldiers of intentionally stealing money from our home when they searched it, while Captain Yofal stayed outside talking to me. Initially, he rejected the accusation but at the end of the interview, which continued until 2:00 pm, he said that he would help me as much as he could and would return the money if I cooperated with him and became his eyes in the area. I refused his deal and said that I wanted to live in peace. He then threatened me with several types of punishment if I didn’t cooperate and hand my son Khalil over to him. Amongst those punishments would be to prevent me from entering Israel, and the destruction of our stone-cutting shop in Ithna.I returned home and told the civil liaison in the Palestinian Authority about the robbery. The Israeli soldiers raided our house four times after that, and each raid took place at night. During the last raid, on 28 October 2007, at 3:30 am, they arrested Khalil. They treated him fiercely when they arrested him. That night, Khalil was waiting for the soldiers after he learned of the repeated raids of our home. It’s worth mentioning that Khalil was released on 3 May 2007, after he had spent five and a half years in Israeli prisons, charged with being affiliated to the Islamic Jihad Movement. As for me, I submitted a complaint to the Israeli police regarding the money stolen from my home by the Israeli soldiers. I also informed the Red Crescent of the incident. After my son’s arrest, I was able to enter Israel twice, but on 30 October 2007, the Israeli soldiers prevented me from going to Jerusalem. On 8 November 2007, at the same checkpoint, I was also prevented from reaching Jerusalem in order to receive medical treatment. I consider this to be the implementation of the intelligence officer’s threats.Now, after these incidents, I do not know how to recover my money and how to enter Israel. Ula Khalil, a lawyer for the Prisoners’ Club, told me on 4 November 2007, that my son Khalil was held in administrative detention for a period of six months. I further learned that he is still in ‘Atsyoun prison, which means that he has not been accused of any specific crime. I know that he will be moved to another prison, but not to which one.