Affidavit No. 2000/2004
2004
I am a  citizen of this homeland. I have a story with this homeland and with the  Israelioccupation that I am going to try to illustrate. I am a citizen  of Zeita village, ToulkaremGovernorate, which I left when I was only a  child. I grew up in exile away from my homelandand my concerns grew up  with me. I left for the Gulf and worked in Kuwait, and there Imarried  and had my children. But after the invasion of Kuwait by the former  Iraqi regime, Iwas made to leave Kuwait to Jordan with my children and  wife, who soon died there. Thisevent made me think of returning to the  homeland where there is my family and where Ihave land. But because I do  not hold the Palestinian citizenship I.D. card, the Israeliauthorities  prevented me from entering the West Bank.After the  peace accords between the Palestinians and the Israelis, visitor’s  permits weregiven to Palestinians that enable them to enter the West  Bank. One of my relatives from 'Attilvillage, Toulkarem Governorate,  worked on issuing a visitor’s permit for me, through which Ientered the  West Bank on 12 January 1996, after more than 30 years. My first concern  wasto reach my agricultural land (45 dunums planted with olive trees)  located southwest of Zeitavillage. I then decided to remain in my  village where we have an old family house, which Irepaired, and later I  married Manal Mustafa Daqqa from 'Attil village.This  marriage’s aim was for me to obtain a Palestinian citizenship I.D. card.  On 12 August1998, Manal submitted a family reunion application for me.  Later on the visitor’s permitexpired and I violated the residency  conditions because I wanted to stay in my home and onmy land among my  relatives, whatever the price may be. Until that time, I did not receive  anyresponse concerning the family reunion. With the outbreak of al-Aqsa  Intifada on 28September 2000, the Israeli occupation authorities  stopped considering the family reunionapplications. In this way, the  situation got worse and my agricultural land was the only thingthat  relieved me. I spent the day from morning until evening working on my  land and takingcare of my olive trees, because I was afraid to go out of  my village for fear that I wouldencounter an Israeli checkpoint where I  would be arrested because I do not hold aPalestinian I.D. card.It is  difficult to express how difficult that situation is because I feel that  I am living in asomewhat large prison and that others are better than  me. My only comfort was my land towhich I complained and talked about my  concerns and feelings. But even that did not lastlong. The Israeli  occupation deprived me of my land as it deprived me before from living  inmy homeland in a natural and legal way. This happened when the Israeli  army embarked onthe construction of the Separation Wall along the Green  Line that separates the West Bankfrom the Palestinian lands occupied in  1948.This Wall  has swallowed my land as the wild animals swallow their prey. My land  wasconfiscated at the end of 2002 when the Separation Wall had been  constructed in Zeitavillage. Imagine! The Wall has completely separated  me from my land, which is now behindthe Wall and I am unable to reach  it. So for around three years, I have not entered my landwhere I used to  spend my days taking care of it. My land, which I reached everyday on  foot,now I can only see from a distance and wave at it with my hands so  it would remember me.As you know, my situation is worse than others  because I cannot obtain a permit from theIsraeli occupation forces that  enables me to enter my land and pick my crops like othersbecause I do  not have an I.D. card.This  situation has been adversely affected my psychological situation. These  days, I do notleave my home and do not meet with anybody. Everything for  me has gone and finishedbecause of the Israeli occupation. I have not  even seen my four sons who live in Jordansince 1996, and I have not left  Zeita village for five years because I do not have aPalestinian I.D.  card. I live in continuous fear from being arrested and deported by the  Israelioccupying forces. This is a nightmare and a ghost that chases me  continuously. Now, I amunemployed, and I lost my land on which I relied  for my livelihood before the Separation Wallseparated me from it. I have  been crying for a long time, asking for help to put an end for  thistorturous situation, which I have been going through for a long  time; but I have got noresponse. Please, I request you to help me and  pass my appeal to the entire world, maybesomeone will respond.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 4 October 2004.Signature: Rida Muhammad Mousa Abu-Daqqa