Affidavit No. 4004/2008
2008
I am a resident of al-Khader village in the Bethlehem Governorate and I work as an Awqaf employee. I am the curator of the al-Hamidiyya Mosque and Shrine located in an area called Faghour; five kilometres south of al-Khader Gate. The Mosque is situated 500 metres from Road 60. Faghour is an agricultural area belonging to the al-Khader inhabitants. Al-Khader lands reach from Beit Jala to Beit Ummar, to Beit Fajjar and Bethlehem and comprise about 22 thousand dunums, most which is agricultural land.Three settlements are built on these lands: Furat, Ali’azar and Daniel. A part of ‘Asyoun is also built on it, in addition to another settlement, the name of which I do not know, which is built on ‘Ein al-Qassis west of al-Khader and north of the Daniel settlement. The Mosque which is located in the middle of al-Khader lands, is surrounded by all of these settlements. Each one is no more than 500 aerial metres away from the Mosque. Furat is located east, Daniel west, and Ali’azar south west of the Mosque.The Mosque is also a shrine and is named al-Hamidiyya after the daughter of the ‘Uthman Sultan Fakhr-al-Din. This Mosque is very old, 800 years. According to the date written on its gate, the Mosque was constructed in 1180. Inside the Mosque, which isbuilt on 25 square metres and surrounded by a dunum of land, there is a tomb. The Mosque and the land belong to the Ministry of Awqaf and this ownership is officially documented.There is an Islamic cemetery 100 metres from the Mosque. It is worth noting that the Mosque is not deserted, farmers working on nearby lands regularly visit it for their noon and evening prayers. The Mosque contains Qur’an copies and carpets. It has noelectricity because there are no electricity cables in the area and people use the water of ‘Ein Faghour, 150 metres from the Mosque, when they wash for prayer.Since 1998, I have been working as a curator and a muezzin of al-Awqaf in al-Khader village, specifically in the New al-Khader Mosque. Two years ago, al-Awqaf Department in Bethlehem assigned me as a curator and muezzin for the al-Hamidiyya Mosque. Therefore, I go to al-Hamidiyya Mosque on a daily basis and usually spend the period from noon until evening in that Mosque.This Mosque has been subjected to the assaults of settlers from the three settlements including the stealing of its contents, the writing of anti-Arab slogans on its walls such as “Death to Arabs” as well as the tearing of Qur’an copies. These assaults have become frequent since 2005. The last of these assaults amounted to the burning of the Mosque on 1 January 2008. On that day, around 11 am, close to the noon prayer, I went to the Mosque as I do everyday. I was shocked when I saw that the Mosque had been completely burned and the fire was almost extinguished. The walls were black and a copy of the Qur’an was torn, not burned, and thrown on the floor. Burned items included carpets, rugs, books and candles. I climbed on the roof and discovered that someone had dug a whole in an attempt to destroy it. Moreover, the settlers had used the 22 bee hives that I cultivate on the land surrounding the Mosque to burn the Mosque. These bee hives were full of wax and therefore highly inflammable. The worth of the beehives alone is estimated at JD 3000.When I came back on 1 January 2008 at around 12 pm, I saw that the Mosque and bee hives were burnt. The farmers told me that when they finished their work and left the area in the evening, everything had been normal. I therefore assume that the settlers burnt the Mosque at night. In any case, it would be difficult for anybody to approach the bee hives during daylight.I accuse the settlers of burning the Mosque because no one else would have any interest in burning it. The presence of Mosque threatens the expansion of the settlements in that area. The Mosque is surrounded by ruined and deserted houses but it is still in a good condition because I take care of it. At 9:00 am on 2 January 2008, as I was in the Mosque, an Israeli military jeep arrived. Two soldiers and an officer got out of this jeep. The officer was young, in his twenties, about 170 centimetres tall and with white skin. He was not carrying any weapons like the other two soldiers. The officer told me in Hebrew, which I understand very well, that he had been notified of a fire. I told him that the fire had been intentionally set by the settlers of Ali’azar, who carried out most of the assaults in that area. The officer wrote down my testimony and told me that a police force would come to investigate the case.He remained in the location until 10:30 am when the police and an official from the civil administration arrived. They asked me about the incident and wrote down my affidavit in which I accused the settlers. They asked me why I accused the settlers and not Arabs of the assault. I responded that the settlers had repeatedly committed such assaults in the past. At 1:00 pm, after the Awqaf official and the Palestinian Liaison official permitted me to go, the police took me to ‘Atsyon, where I submitted a complaint against the settlers of Ali’azar accusing them of burning the Mosque and the beehives and demolishing the roof of the mosque. At 2:30 pm I returned to the Mosque with the Israeli police. They took photos of the burned Mosque and the surrounding place and left.On 3 January 2008, an ‘Atsyon investigation officer, named ‘Amitay, called me on the phone and asked for documents proving the Awqaf ownership of the Mosque and its surrounding land. He also asked me about the nature of my employment in that Mosque. I told him to coordinate with the responsible parties in this matter.So far, we have not received an answer from the Israeli side and we are waiting for the Palestinian Ministry of Awqaf to rehabilitate the Mosque. It is worth noting that one of the civil administration officials offered to repair the Mosque but the Awqaf Director in Bethlehem refused. Instead, he asked him not to impede the rehabilitation process of the Mosque and to stop the assaults of the settlers and their presence on the land, which is not theirs. I still go to the Mosque as usual, everyday.