Affidavit No. 7136/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Randa Jihad Muhammad Mousa, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 904724143, born on 7 September 1979, a housewife, and a resident of the ‘‘Arraba town, Jenin governorate, would like to declare the following:At around 2:00 am on Saturday, 17 December 2011, an Israeli military force raided my home in the ‘Arraba town in the governorate of Jenin. Having thoroughly searched my home, Israeli soldiers arrested my husband Khader ‘Adnan Muhammad Mousa, 33 years old and a leading activist of the Islamic Jihad Movement in Jenin, and took him to a military jeep, which was parked near the house. The Israeli military force stayed in my home until 3:30 am on that day and then withdrew.Twelve days after he had been detained, my husband was brought to the military court at the Salem military camp. My father-in-law and I attended the trial session. My husband reported to the judge that he had been beaten, insulted and subjected to harsh interrogation at the al-Jalama Prison. Soldiers deliberately uttered blasphemous expressions about God and the Prophet Muhammad. My husband also told the judge, who was in the military uniform, that he refrained from eating and drinking since he had been arrested. He stated that he was subjected to Shabeh every day. With his hands and feet in shackles, he was forced to sit on a chair and had his body bent over for a period of seven hours. He would be allowed rest for one hour only, and then be subjected to Shabeh again. Meantime, he was threatened and subjected to psychological torture to force him to make confessions. My husband also said that soldiers uttered obscene expressions about his wife and daughters. He said that Israeli interrogators ripped hair from his beard, causing him severe pain.The Israeli judge did not comment on my husband’s statements; he only nodded his head and extended his detention for eight days. The judge stated that the interrogators “had the right to extract confessions from him (Khader ‘Adnan) in any means because he absolutely refrained from talking”. The trial session at the Salem Court lasted for 45 minutes. Riyadh al-‘Ardhah, a lawyer from the Palestinian Prisoners’ Club, demanded that my husband be released, but the military prosecutor claimed they had a secret file and that ‘Adnan could not be released. The judge agreed to the military prosecutor’s request and extended my husband detention. He was then taken back to the al-Jalama Prison. Located north of Jenin city. Al-Jalama Prison is an Israeli detention and interrogation centre, in which interrogators exercise all forms of torture.On 18 January 2012, another court session was held for my husband. However, my husband did not appear before the court because he had declared an open-ended hunger strike. Riyadh al-Ardhah, a lawyer from the Palestinian Prisoners Club, told us that my husband had been sentenced to a term of four months in administrative detention (arrest without charge or trial). Yesterday, 22 January 2012, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) office in Jenin reported to us that my husband had continued his hunger strike. He was in a critical health condition and suffered from severe weight loss. With his hands and feet in chains, he was detained in a solitary confinement cell at the Ramla Prison Hospital.Except for water, Khader ‘Adnan has refused to have anything, posing a real threat to his life. My husband declared the open-ended hunger strike because of the cruel treatment and torture he was subjected to in Israeli prisons. He has insisted on continuing with the hunger strike after the administrative detention order was entered against him. I am afraid for his life. I demand that injustice be ended. This is the 37th day of the hunger strike my husband has declared. He insists that he will go on until his demands are fulfilled. In particular, he wants to be freed and to return to his home. He has two daughters and he is our family provider. We demand that all government bodies, human rights organisations, and international institutions intervene now and save my husband’s life. I hold the Israeli occupying authorities fully responsible for his life. When he was detained, my husband was in a good health and did not suffer from any illnesses.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 23 January 2012