Affidavit No. 4927/2009
2009
At around 11:00 pm on Saturday, 30 May 2009, my wife and I were on a family visit and thus not home. My home is located in the eastern quarter of al-Yamoun, my birth town, west of Jenin. At the said time, I received a call on my mobile telephone. The caller indentified himself as Muhammad Jarahat from the Palestinian General Intelligence Agency and as the officer in charge of all villages west of Jenin, also known as the Western Area. “We are at the door of your house. Come immediately!” he ordered.I was confused. I did not know who that person was, nor was there any evidence that he was actually a member of the Palestinian Intelligence. My house stands alone in the eastern quarter of the town. No other houses are constructed in its vicinity. As it was late and dark outside, I decided to wait a little and make some phone calls to make sure that it was indeed Palestinian Intelligence agents who were surrounding my house, and not a group of thieves or other people pretending to be Palestinian Intelligence.I am a journalist and community activist and have extensive relations in the area, which allowed me to phone and question different people about the matter. Approximately 20 – 25 minutes later, I received information stating that Intelligence officers were indeed surrounding my house and wanted to search it. I immediately went to my house, arriving there at around 11:35 pm. As soon as I reached the house, I saw five persons wearing civil clothes and carrying pistols on their waists. One of them was holding a pistol in his hand, but was not pointing it directly at me.When I arrived, they were all dispatched around the house, but once they saw me, they all hurried towards me. “When the General Intelligence calls you, you come immediately! We are the ones giving the orders here. Don’t you think that you will benefit from any of the people you just called.” They shouted. They repeated these and similar phrases several times.Without any notice, a person approached me, slapping me on my face and hitting me on my neck. Then, he grabbed my shoulders and shook me violently several times, causing me severe pain and humiliation. He was a short, fat young man, of brown complexion and red hair, and was about 30 – 35 years old. I could see him and the others because of the kitchen light. I did not do anything or commit any crime for him to beat me like that.Until then, I did not know why they had come to my house. They demanded that I open the house door. As soon as I opened the door, they stormed into my house. Upon their request, I had entered the house before they did. They did not show me any document or search warrant, which would allow them to enter and search the house. Later someone told me that they were looking for individuals I had supposedly accommodated in my house. That claim was baseless.My wife and I were not even home when they called. With the exception of my work relationships, I did not have any relations with any political parties. There was no evidence indicating that such an accusation was valid. The Intelligence officers did not clarify what exactly they wanted from me. They did not mention anything such as ‘wanted individuals’ or ‘individuals affiliated with a certain party’. All they said was ‘persons inside my house’.As soon as they entered my home, officers dispersed inside the house and started searching it. Without any regards for my feelings, they even entered my bedroom. Thankfully, they did not deliberately damage contents of the house. They only looked inside the rooms and inside some cupboards. They also searched the roof of the house and the surroundings. Almost 20 minutes after they started the search, they finally left.As they were leaving, they did not talk to me, nor did they apologise for or justify their behaviour. Until today, the incident bewilders me. As I mentioned earlier, I work as a journalist and community activist. My relations are good with everyone. Therefore, I would like to know why my home was raided and searched. In particular, I would like to inquire about the person who beat me without any apparent justification. The pretext under which they had searched my home was null. It seems to me as if they have simply received some false information. Still, this does not justify the raid. They should make sure the information they receive is substantiated, before they violate the sanctity of citizens’ homes and before they beat them late at night.Fortunately, my wife was not inside the house when the incident took place.