Affidavit No. 2473/2005
2005
On 14  June 2005 while I was with my brother Muhammad and sister Layali on our  land, which is located north of the village and at a distance of  approximately 400 metres from the bypass road, gathering the wheat crops  and filling the hay in sacks, we saw dozens of settlers in cars, on  bicycles and horses accompanied by army vehicles on that bypass road  during six in the early morning and until 11 before noon. We knew that  settlers were on a march. We were looking at the settlers cautiously  waiting for the march to go farther from us in order to go to our home  safely, especially that we only can go home through the place where  settlers were standing, which was a huge water conduit located down the  street that leads to our home.For some  reason, the settlers stayed for a long time near the conduit. We  remained waiting until food and water ran out. We called our family and  told them what was happening and about our fears from the settlers. At  approximately 4 pm, the settlers withdrew. As we were looking at the  settlers, we saw our brother Ma'moun at a distance of more than 600  metres coming towards us. As he approached the conduit to go to the  bypass road, we saw one of the settlers cars (white colour), which was  participating in the march coming from the east. All of a sudden, the  car stopped beside our brother Ma'moun who was only 400 metres to the  south from us and four settlers stepped out from it. We were scared and  felt that something bad might happen to Ma'moun. For that reason, my  brother Muhammad started shouting to Ma'moun but Ma'moun did not  respond. Muhammad hurried towards Ma'moun and before he reached him, the  settlers withdrew. When Muhammad reached the place, he found Ma'moun  lying fainted on the ground. Muhammad started shouting asking for help.  Many citizens from the village came and carried him by car to Rafidiya  Hospital in Nablus. He stayed 12 days in the hospital, nine of them in  the intensive care unit as a result of the beating he was subjected to  by the settlers. This incident left its impact on my brother who can  hardly speak now, while he used to speak fluently before he was hit by  the settlers, because the beating caused brain damage to him.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 14 July 2005Signature: Khuloud Amin