Affidavit No. 4847/2009
2009
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Hamed Suleiman Jabr Khdeir, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 980759617, born on 6 December 1944, a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council, namely the Change and Reform Bloc, and a resident of Nablus city, Nablus Governorate, would like to declare the following:I am a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council, namely of the Change and Reform Bloc. My office, which was situated in ‘Aloul and Abu-Salha Building in the city of Nablus, was closed and all of its contents were confiscated by the Palestinian General Intelligence agency on 28 July 2008. On 1 March 2009, I rented another office on al-Bayan Building in the area of Rafidiya in the city of Nablus in order to pursue my work as a PLC member. Since I opened my new office, I would see a vehicle belonging to the Palestinian Preventive Security Agency stop near my office every morning. Preventive Security officers would also examined ID cards of every single person who visited my office.At around 12:00 pm on 19 April 2009, I left my office in my car – a 2008 grey Opel. My son Nasr, 32 years old, was driving the car. We travelled to the al-Anbiya’ Mosque east of the city of Nablus to perform the noon prayer. After finishing the prayer, I went alone to the market to do some shopping. It took me several minutes to reach the market. While I was walking, I met and had a conversation with a person called Abu-’Ali. He is retired now but used to work in the Force 17 of the Palestinian Authority. Five minutes later, my attention was drawn to a white car that stopped near us. Three persons in civil clothes stepped out of the car. One of them approached us and without any prior notice started to shout obscenities at me. “Why are you cursing?” Abu- ’Ali asked that person. “I am not talking to you, but to Sheikh Hamed al-Bitawi,” he responded  referring to me.The young man continued to shout obscenities, utter blasphemies, and curse Hamas. He threatened me and said that he did not want to see me in any public places. He also pushed me with his hand. Within a few minutes, dozens of persons gathered around us. Amongst them was my son Nasr, who immediately stood between me and the young man. “Why are you doing this? Why did you push him?” My son exclaimed. The young man drew out a pistol from his waist and pointed it at my chest. My son immediately grabbed the young man’s arm, holding it to the ground. Then, the young man fired a bullet at the ground. Consequently, shrapnel hit my right calf. Then the young man left the area.My son transported me to Rafidiya Hospital in the city of Nablus. Until today, I continue to receive medical treatment. It should be noted that my son Nasr told me that the young man was from the village of Kufr Qalil. His name was Nu’man ‘Amer and he is a member of the Preventive Security agency.Finally, I would like to state that over six months ago, fire was opened towards my car, while it was parked in the village of Roujib. I was not in the car at that time. I filed a complaint, but the case was registered and filed against an unidentified person or entity.