Affidavit No. 2825/2006
2006
I am a resident of the village of Beit Iksa located northwest of Jerusalem. My five-member family, including three children, lives in a small house in the village. I own some land on the northeast side of the village on plots 13 and 14. These parcels are located within the range of the village planning structure. Under the Oslo Accords, this area is classified as "Area B" [under Palestinian civil control]; therefore, I decided to build a house there. I applied to the Palestinian Authority for a building permit. After obtaining this permit on 14 June 2005, I began the construction of a new home.On 20 September 2005, not three months after I started construction, two Israeli officials from the Planning and Building Department in Beit El came to the site with a notification ordering me to halt construction. At this point, I had already built two floors of 136 square meters each. Due to the notification, however, we stopped construction on the existing building and didn't carry out plans to make any additions to it.I headed for the Ramallah branch of the Jerusalem Center for Economic and Social Rights in order to follow up on the case with Beit El. After several communications between the centre’s attorney and the Israeli Legal Advisor Office in Beit El, I was told that I received the orders because the area where I was building the house was actually located in "Area C" [under Israeli civil and security control]. The Israelis are not obligated to recognize a building permit issued by the Palestinian Authority for that area. In order to continue construction, I would have to obtain a special permit from the Israeli Land department in West Jerusalem. I attempted to obtain this document, but all my efforts were in vain.On the morning of 7 March 2006, numerous Israeli soldiers armed with a bulldozer besieged the village entrance where my new house was being built. When the soldiers and bulldozer entered the village, I was at my old home and attempted to reach the construction site. Although the soldiers tried to prevent my entrance, I managed to make it. My sister Aya also tried to reach the site but was prevented from doing so by the soldiers. They assaulted her, causing her to fall to the ground. As a result of the assault on my sister, a confrontation took place between our family and the soldiers. I suffered bruises and pain throughout my body. My family was denied the natural right of security and stability, something I was looking forward to providing. We also sustained financial losses amounting to 50 thousand USD.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 9 March 2006Signature: Amjad Kamel