Affidavit No. 5126/2009
2009
At around 6:40 pm on Tuesday, 20 October 2009, I was on my way to my house in the Tal-al-Rumeida neighbourhood, where Israeli settlers constructed an outpost in 1984. My brother Husam and our friends Diya’ ‘Abd-al-Karim al Haddad and Labib Abu-Heikal, all about 16 years of age, were in my company. When I reached the Israeli military checkpoint set up at the entrance to al-Shuhada’ Street, located at a distance of about 600 metres from my house, I discovered that the occupying soldiers had closed the gate to the checkpoint. The entrance consists of a metal room with a metal detector inside. We called out to the soldiers and requested that they open the door for us, but they did not. After repeating our request, they opened the door about five minutes later. When we entered the checkpoint, two soldiers positioned there started to shout at us, alleging that one of us had described a soldier as a pig. After denying this, the two soldiers demanded that we stand behind the checkpoint, turn our faces against a wall and hold our arms up. Then, the two soldiers started to punch, slap and kick us on all parts of our bodies, whilst demanding that we confess to who had described one of them as a pig. I should note that none of us had uttered that word. About two minutes later, six infantry soldiers passed by.Suddenly, a soldier ran towards Labib Abu-Heikal, whose face was turned against the wall, and kicked him forcefully on his back. I heard Labib moan of pain because of the severe strike. After the infantry troops resumed their way, the two soldiers continued to assault us for approximately 15 minutes. We were beaten continuously during the first five minutes and sporadically for the rest of that time. Thereafter, the soldiers released us and we went to our houses. Because of beating, I suffered from pain in various parts of my body overnight. My brother and friends also suffered from pain as they sustained various contusions.To reach our house, My family members and I are forced to cross the aforementioned checkpoint. Most members of my family and residents of the neighbourhood cross the checkpoint more than once every day. They are often subjected to soldiers’ harassment.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 21 October 2009Signature: Hazem SharabatiName not withheldField researcher: Hisham SharabatiI, the undersigned, Wa’el Muhammad Sharabati, declare that my son Hazem has given the above sworn statement to the AL-HAQ and signed thereon before me.Wa’el Sharabati