Affidavit No. 6516/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Anwar Khaled Mirshed Sabarnah, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 975083635, born on 14 March 1973, worker, and a resident of the Al ‘Ein Road, Beit Ummar town, Hebron governorate, would like to declare the following:At around 2:30 pm on Monday, 11 July 2011, I arrived in my car at the junction that branches off to the west from the Hebron-Jerusalem main street (Road No. 60) and leads to my town of Beit Ummar. I was coming from Bethlehem in the north. My car is a white Mercedes Benz 220.Before I turned to the western street leading to the town, my neighbour Manal ‘Adawiyyah (40 years old), who was standing on the eastern side of the road to hitchhike, asked if I could drive her home on my way. When I halted the car, I saw an Israeli military jeep arrive and stop near the Israeli military watchtower at the eastern entrance of the town, located approximately 30 metres away from where I was at the time. I saw three military officers get out of the jeep and walk towards my car. Manal reached for the car door by stretching her hand, but was prevented from doing so by an officer of the Israeli occupying forces. He was tall, of large build and had a white complexion. He had two stripes on his shoulder indicating his military rank. Manal asked the officer in Arabic why he was preventing her from getting in the car. She then went on to explain that she was my neighbour and that she wanted me to take her to her house.The officer demanded to see both our ID cards and he then noticed from my ID that I am registered as a resident of Bethlehem. He told me in Arabic that I was a liar who was not a resident of Beit Ummar and that I was using my car as a taxi. Manal reiterated that she was my neighbour and that she only wanted me to transport her to her house. However, the officer began speaking to her disrespectfully, uttering obscene words. He then returned Manal’s ID card, but retained mine.The officer demanded that I drive my car towards the military watchtower. I drove my car there and parked it on the side of the road opposite the military watchtower. The officer and two soldiers accompanying him walked towards me. They asked me to get out of the car and I did while the engine was still running. An officer and a soldier of African descent grabbed me. They each grabbed one of my arms and led me to a yard that was surrounded by a cement wall. The yard was about 2 metres in size, including the military tower. Once I was inside the yard, the officer asked me to turn around to face the wall, to lift my hands up, and to spread my legs. One of the soldiers pushed me with the butt of his gun towards the wall. He kept pressing his gun in my back as two other soldiers beat my upper back with their guns. As they beat me, the soldiers were cursing me and seemed to be enjoying themselves by mocking me. After about 40 minutes of intermittent beating, I received a strong blow to my right side which made me hit the wall, drop to the ground and lose consciousness. I regained consciousness while I was still in the yard and was ordered by the soldiers to stand up. I stood on my feet and walked with difficulty. With the help of the soldiers I was led outside the yard and ordered to leave the area. I could not walk due to the pain I felt all over my body, especially the right side of my waist, so I sat on the ground next to the military tower.The officer and a soldier of African origin grabbed me by the arms and took me to a yard, which was surrounded by an almost 2-metre-high cement wall with a built-in military watchtower. Inside the yard, the officer demanded that I turn around, stand against the wall, raise my arms, and spread my legs apart. One of the soldiers hurt my back by continuously exerting pressure on it with the butt end of his rifle. At that time, two other soldiers beat me with the butt ends of their rifles on the upper rear parts of my body. While doing so, the officer and the two soldiers shouted obscenities at me. It was obvious they drew pleasure from beating and mocking me.About 40 minutes later, I received a very strong blow on the right side of my waist. As a result thereof, I was thrown against the wall, fell to the ground and lost consciousness for several minutes. When I regained consciousness I was still in the yard and the soldiers were demanding that I stand up. I rose to my feet but could walk only with difficultly. The soldiers helped me walk out of the yard and then demanded that I go away. I could not walk because I suffered from pain in various parts of my body, especially the right side of my waist. I sat on the ground beside the military watchtower. Palestinian passers-by saw me. Three persons, including my relative Muhammad Sabarneh (27 years old), approached me and offered help. Almost at the same time, another military jeep arrived in the area while the soldiers who beat me left in the jeep in which they had arrived earlier. An officer got out of the military jeep that had just arrived. He had two stripes on his shoulder, indicating his rank. He asked me in Hebrew what had happened to me. My relative Muhammad helped me and translated the conversation between the officer and me. I explained to the officer what had happened to me. The officer described his colleague, who had assaulted me, as crazy and advised me to file a complaint against him.After having stayed near the watchtower for another 20 – 30 minutes, I felt a little better. Some Palestinian young men helped me walk to my car, the engine of which was still running. My relative Muhammad drove the car and took me to my house. After having stayed at home for about an hour, I decided to go to the eastern entrance of the town and request information about the jeep which contained the soldiers who had beaten me. As a matter of fact, I saw that jeep stopping on the western side of Road # 60 at a distance of about 50 metres north of the town’s entrance. I took down its registration plate number, which was 611379, and then returned to my house in order to rest. However, I continued to suffer from pain, especially in the right side of my waist. At around 7:30 pm, I went to a private clinic where I had some medical checks. The doctor prescribed medicine, which I bought right after having left the clinic. I continue to suffer from pains because of the assault and I am still taking medication.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 14 July 2011