Affidavit No. 2314/2005
2005
At 11:30  am, 19 April 2005, my children Sa'id (14), 'Isam (10), As'ad (9) and  Rasha (12) and I reached the Beit Iba Israeli barrier to go to our  second home located in Deir Sharaf village. As we reached the barrier,  there was nobody at that barrier except for two male and female  soldiers. We proceeded towards the soldiers and gave them my ID card.  The female soldier took my ID card, looked at it, and told me, “You are  from Balata camp and you are not allowed to pass through the barrier  because you people carry out suicide bombings inside Israel”. I asked  her why she was talking in that manner with me, adding that those are my  children and we have no business with what she was talking about. Talk  between us became more serious, and as a result the soldier told us to  go back, although I told her that my children live in Deir Sharaf and  that they passed through the barrier a few days ago. But she insisted  that we return.The  discussion became more intense and one of the officers came towards us.  He was wearing black eyeglasses, approximately 25 years old,  brown-skinned, and had two emblems on his shoulder, which meant that he  was an officer. I talked to him about my children, explained that they  wanted to go to their home in Deir Sharaf. But the officer insisted on  our return back and so the argument between us became more heated. I  told him that my children have no place to go except their home in Deir  Sharaf, but he did not pay attention to what I was saying, and pushed me  backward while my children were shouting. The soldiers told me to turn  back to put the cuffs on my wrists, but I refused and left with my  children, although the officer was still talking to me.I walked  about 50 metres with my children to the east, where my son Rami works in  a carpentry workshop beside the barrier. I was in a state of tense  anger, wondering what I could do so my children could pass the barrier.  Meanwhile, the same Israeli officer in an Israeli patrol car, followed  by another patrol car, came to where I was standing. The officer told me  to approach the jeep in order to arrest me, but I refused. Then he  aimed his weapon at me from a close distance. I was not scared while the  soldier fired two bullets towards the ground directly in front of me.  My children started to shout while my son Rami (16) intervened by  talking with the officer, asking him not to shoot at me and telling him  that I supported a family of seven. But the officer did not care and he  shot another two bullets from a short distance (less than two metres),  which hit my right leg, and I fell on the ground, bleeding. The officer  and the soldiers (around ten) prevented anybody from approaching me  while I was shouting and crying. I got up and walked for a short  distance while my son Rami left to call an ambulance. After five  minutes, an ambulance arrived and I was taken to Rafidiya Hospital,  where I received surgery and two plastic bullets were taken from my leg.  I finally would like to add that my talk with the female soldier and  the officer was in Hebrew.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 19 April 2005Signature: Muhammad Wahdan