Affidavit No. 2782/2006
2006
On 13 January 2006, I was with my husband Mustafa at home in our village of Kufr al-Deek. While we were sleeping, between two in the morning and the dawn prayer, we were awoken by a strange movement around our home. Trying to identify the movement and noise, my husband told me that it was the Israeli army. After a few minutes, there was knocking on the door. My husband immediately opened the door and the soldiers took him out. While taking him, he was saying to them, “My elderly wife is alone inside the home,” but the soldiers did not pay attention to what he was saying. Meanwhile, I heard the soldiers knocking on the doors of our neighbors, taking them out of their homes, and putting them all in one home.A few minutes after my husband was taken and while I was still inside my home, all of a sudden, I saw a brown dog enter my room. At first, I thought that it belonged to our neighbors, but after looking closely at it, I realized that it belonged to the Israeli soldiers because there was something on its neck. The dog started barking, and I started reciting the name of God and tried to shoo the dog away by a movement with my hand. All of a sudden, it attacked me and seized my right arm. I started shouting and was able to take my right arm from its teeth, but it again attacked my left arm and started to chew the flesh of my arm. I started to shout with my loudest voice while I was bleeding. This continued for about ten minutes. Then tens of Israeli soldiers entered the house and opened fire everywhere in it, except in the room where I was. They opened fire at everything in our home: the walls, furniture, windows, glass, etc. Then a number of the soldiers came to the room where I was and took the dog away from me.One of the soldiers asked if I could walk and I told him that I could not. After that, the soldiers carried me to one of the neighbors’ empty houses while I was bleeding. They then moved me and put me near my brother-in-law’s home, where I stayed for around half an hour while I was still bleeding, until an Israeli ambulance came. The reliever took care of my wounds and made me drink three cups (coffee cup size) of liquid, one with a bitter taste. The Israeli ambulance carried me until Huwwara checkpoint, where I was taken in a Palestinian ambulance to Rafidiya Hospital in Nablus. So far, I have been under treatment in the hospital. Lastly, I would like to mention that the breaking into houses by Israeli soldiers is done arbitrarily and without justification.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 4 February 2006Signature: Salha al-Deek