Affidavit No. 2438/2005
2005
I was  arrested on 8 December 1990 on security charges and the Ramallah  military court sentenced me to 15 years. I was released from the Israeli  prisons on 22 June 2005, after I completed 15 years' imprisonment,  during which I moved from prison to another. I spent the longest period  in 'Asqalan Prison, where I spent approximately 6 years. During my  imprisonment, I knew all the methods of oppression used by the  occupation apparatuses, which impose series of collective punishment  against prisoners such as compelling them to strip off their clothes,  breaking into their rooms, throwing the suffocating gas inside the  closed rooms, putting prisoners in solitary cells, prevention from  family visits, etc.At the  beginning, I would like to talk about stripping off the clothes of  prisoners, which has been used for a long time. However, in 2001, the  arrogance of the occupation increased and stripping off the clothes of  prisoners occurs at any time and soldiers have the right to order any  prisoner to strip off his clothes whenever they want especially if they  suspect a prisoner. Not only this but also there are types of stripping.  Every prison has its own style and every soldier has his own way. For  example, in Jalbou' Prison, one of the prison guards ordered me to stand  opposite to him in a room where he and I were alone and asked me to  take off my clothes piece by piece, wave by every piece and then put it  on the floor. After I took off almost all my clothes (99 percent) and  only my underwear was left, he cuffed my hands to the back, fiercely  took off my underwear and ordered me to sit on the floor and then stand  up. After I did that several times he ordered me to put on my clothes  after he uncuffed my hands and went out of the room. In al-Damoun  Prison, stripping is different. I was received by four policemen and  four officers, who forced me to strip off my clothes in front of them.  The only piece left on my body was my underwear, which they took off  with a fierce movement after they cuffed my hands to my back. Then they  ordered me to sit on the floor and stand up several times and then  ordered me to put on my clothes. Every time this happened with me, I  felt that I was raped.As  regards the collective punishments imposed on prisoners, it included  prevention from family visits under different pretexts and as the  occupying forces always claim, prevention is due to security reasons.  For example, my family has not been able to visit me for two consecutive  years. This prevention was very hard on me. It was very difficult for  me to be separated from my family's news, concerns, and seeing the faces  of my father, mother and brothers for 24 months. This prevention has  deprived me from the love and tenderness, which I used to see in the  eyes of my mother and all those who visited me in the prison. The Prison  Authority knows very well that the family visit is the lung through  which the prisoner breathes. By preventing family visits from the  prisoner, it prevents air from reaching him. During the 24 months, I  felt alienated and strangulated. After two years, my mother, some  relatives and my younger brother Marwan visited me. The last time I saw  Marwan was in 1995, and then he was prevented from visiting me for  security reasons and then I saw him in June 2005 after I was released  from prison.I  remember that in 2004 while I was in Jalbou' Prison, the prisoners could  not any more endure the behavior of the prison's administration,  especially the stripping, the prevention of family visits, and the  collective punishments imposed on them. For these reasons the prisoners  started knocking at the iron doors of the rooms for several minutes and  saying Allah wa Akbar (God is Great). The prison policemen responded by  spraying gas inside therooms,  resulting in many casualties among prisoners, most of them suffocation  cases. More dangerously, powder stuck in the room for several days and  it became very difficult to get rid of it or of its effects.Other  means of punishment is the isolation of the prisoner. Fortunately, I  have not experienced this kind of punishment, but my friend Ahmad Shukri  has been in solitary confinement for approximately 10 years. I consider  isolation as murder inside murder or it is murdering what is murdered.  To be a prisoner is a disaster but to be in isolation is a great  disaster. For example, Ahmad Shukri has been transferred from the  security prisoners division to the Israeli civilian division. There he  lives in a solitary confinement and spends his break alone while his  hands and feet are cuffed. It really kills a human to live for 10 years  alone without speaking or reacting with others. No doubt it is a  disaster.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 4 July 2005Signature: Sami Yousef