Affidavit No. 4315/2008
2008
On 12 July 2008, I sat for my final examination at al-Quds University in the town of Abu Dis. At about 12:00 am, I travelled on board a bus to return home. The bus departed from Abu Dis town to the bus station in the area of Bab al-'Amoud in the city of Jerusalem. The bus stopped at the Israeli checkpoint near the area of al-Z'ayyem. A female Israeli soldier and a guard, wearing a dark blue uniform, stepped on the bus. The female soldier demanded that passengers present their ID cards. I opened my handbag to take my ID card out. I was amazed, however, to discoverer that my ID was not in my handbag. I thoroughly searched my handbag for the ID card as I may have mistakenly put it in another pocket in the handbag. Meanwhile, the Israeli female soldier approached and asked me to produce my ID card. "I do not know where I had put it", I replied.The soldier continued to examine the other passengers' ID cards. She then returned and asked me about my ID card again which I was still searching for. Finally, I realised that I had left it at home. When I told her that I forgot it, she demanded that I step down from the bus. With tearing eyes, I left the bus. After about ten minutes at the checkpoint, the bus driver tried to convince soldiers to release me. However, they rejected and demanded that he leave. Indeed, the bus departed, leaving me behind. I was left alone at the checkpoint with only soldiers. Meantime, I tried to phone my father, who was at home, however, his cell telephone was busy, so I then dialled our house number. I told my mother what had happened to me and asked her to look for my ID card on my bed or desk and to bring it to me so that I could leave the checkpoint and return home. The phone call only took five minutes, after which the Israeli female solider demanded that I stay in my place and not leave it.I noticed that all the soldiers and guards were gazing at me with very strange looks, which I never understood. About an hour after I phoned my mother, my father arrived in his car with my ID card. He presented it to the soldier who stood near me  (about four metres away). Then, my father took me home. This was the worst hour in my life. Soldiers' weird glances intensified fear in my heart. I cried of fear. I thank God that not one of them approached me or attempted to harass me.