Affidavit No. 2858/2006
2006
On 24 February 2006, at approximately 10:00 pm, I was setting rubber tires on fire at the northern entrance of the Toulkarem camp near the UNRWA school. I was born in this camp and I was setting the tires on fire in order to prevent the Israeli military jeeps from entering the camp. While I was doing this, a 2006 blue Hyundai came driving very fast towards me. The car belongs to the Palestinian General Intelligence. There were two young men in the car; one of them was Nizar Nayef, a member of the Palestinian Intelligence Forces and a citizen of Toulkarem camp.The car drove towards me at a crazy speed. I realized that the men in the car wanted to prevent me from burning the tires so I threw a stone at the car and broke one of the windows, and then I ran away. Nizar Nayef tried to chase me but I escaped and hid in the home of Jamal 'Amara. Jamal's home is located in the Balawna quarter in the camp. At 11:00 pm that day, a number of Palestinian security patrols surrounded the home where I was hiding and arrested me. A number of policemen were dressed in civilian clothes and were carrying arms.The policemen brutally seized me and put me inside a model ‘87 grey Subaru. This car also belongs to the Palestinian intelligence. The car was speeding frantically. One person sat on each side of me and they started beating me in the face, using strong blows. I was taken to the Palestinian Intelligence headquarters in 'Izbet al-Jarrad in Toulkarem. Immediately after I got out of the car, a number of people started to beat me strongly. They were all armed with pistols, Kalashnikovs and M16s.I was brought into one of the offices where I found Nizar Nayef. He also beat me. Nizar and some other officers interrogated me. One of those officers asked me if I was a collaborator with the Israeli army. I said “no,” and then they beat me and cursed my family, including my sisters and my dead mother. Among these officers, I also knew Sa'ed Samir al-Qura’n, a citizen of Toulkarem Camp. He also beat me and cursed at me.I was placed under arrest and held in solitary confinement in the Palestinian Intelligence headquarters. While there, I was subjected to very bad treatment. I was only allowed one meal a day. Moreover, I was not permitted to communicate with my family. They beat me and cursed at me continuously but they only interrogated me once. After two days, I was moved to another prison under the control of the Palestinian National Authority, located in the Salam quarter in Toulkarem. Before moving me to the second prison, I underwent a medical check-up administered by the Palestinian Medical Services Committee.As soon as I reached the Salam prison, a number of people wearing Palestinian police uniforms started beating me forcefully and brutally without reason. Of those present, I knew the prison director Rawhi (Abu-Ahmad). To my knowledge, he is from Falamiya village. I also knew the policeman Sharif Abu-Shanab from 'Izbet al-Jarrad. There were also a number of other policemen there whom I do not know. They all participated in beating me while my hands were tied. Then they escorted me into one of the rooms and again beat me without justification, using a form of torture known as Shabeh. They accused me of being a collaborator with the Israeli occupying forces. This is not true at all; everyone in the camp knows me and they are sure I am not a collaborator. I swear to God that I am not a collaborator. While I was in the prison, they did not give me a chance to talk, they only beat me.Moreover, one of the policemen, Sharif Abu-Shanab, put his pistol in my mouth and threatened to kill me because I was accused of being a collaborator. Is it possible to be treated this way based on accusation? Once again, I was held in solitary confinement. I was detained in the Salam prison for ten days. They eventually moved me from solitary confinement to normal confinement with the other prisoners.The Palestinian policemen interrogated me daily. In fact, it was not so much interrogation as it was beating and insulting me. For example, my mother is dead and they said bad words about her. They beat me with a very thick club on my back and legs and sometimes on my face. I cannot describe the way they beat me. Look at the marks on my face, back and legs. They threw my food at me as if I were a dog rather than a human being. I was not allowed to communicate with my family during that entire ten day period. My brother 'Imad (13 years), my stepmother, my cousin and my brother-in-law were only allowed to visit me after the tenth day had passed.On 5 March 2006, at 10:00 am, the policemen released me. Before releasing me, they told me to “go drink and get away from Hamas and al-Jihad,” and two policemen cursed these two factions. Today, as you can see, my psychological state is very bad. I always have the feeling that someone wants to kill me. As a result of the torture I suffered in the Palestinian prisons, I am no longer a normal person. I have not committed a crime that justifies my being tortured. I cannot believe the bad treatment and torture I witnessed the prisoners of the Salam prison go through. There are children in that prison. The policemen force them to take out the garbage and clean the prison. They are always beaten.Sometimes, I cannot control myself and my mind. I shout and beat myself and sometimes I beat the people surrounding me. I was not like this before I was detained by the Palestinian police and the intelligence forces. I cannot describe the suffering I went through and I prefer not to remember it. I appeal to Al-Haq to expose these practices and punish every one who is responsible for me reaching this state. Keep your eye on the Salam prison so that my tragedy does not happen to others.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 6 March 2006Signature: Ra'ed Mahmoud