Affidavit No. 3346/2007
2007
On the morning of 22 January 2007, I was in my house in Sour Baher, which is located to the south-east of Jerusalem city in the neighbourhood of al-Qasaba. At approximately 8:00 am, I looked out a window and saw Israeli military jeeps and ambulances parked at the main junction leading to Um Touba road, which runs parallel to my house.I left my house and walked towards the military jeeps, which were parked 50 metres from my house. As I was walking, I saw military jeeps parked at the entrance to Mahmoud al-A'mas’ house, which is nearby. There were soldiers and police everywhere. The special squads were dressed in grey uniforms, the police were wearing blue uniforms, and the border police were wearing their green uniforms. They were carrying batons and guns. I saw that they had started closing the road in front of the house.The soldiers stood at the doors of the buildings which face onto the front yard. From one of the houses located inside the yard, I heard women screaming. Mahmoud al-A'mas’ building, which was comprised of four floors, was also situated in the yard. I asked an Israeli policeman, who was referred to as "Hajay" by the other soldiers, to allow me to go and help the women, but he refused my request. He told the soldiers not to allow me into the yard.Thereafter, ten soldiers gathered around me. One of them put his hand around my neck and pushed me backwards in a violent manner. He wore a grey uniform and carried a gun and a baton. I told the soldier that I have heart problems. He answered by saying that he did not care. All of the above took place at the yard’s entrance, which is next to the main road.I then saw two massive yellow bulldozers move towards Mahmoud al-A'mas’ four-storey building and begin to demolish it. Furthermore, I saw a number of Israeli soldiers beating Mahmoud al-A'mas, who is 67-years-old. Some of the soldiers used their fists while others used their batons. They also aggressively beat 35-year-old Abu-Zeid 'Awadallah, who resides in the area, and then tied his hands with plastic cuffs. The soldiers in question wore grey uniforms. I was standing approximately 20 metres away from where the soldiers attacked Mahmoud and Abu-Zeid.