Affidavit No. 3974/2007
2007
On Sunday 25 November 2007 at approximately 1:00 pm, I was in al-Baba café in the Muraba’at Hannoun quarter of the Toulkarem refugee camp in the vicinity of Toulkarem city. On that day, everything was normal and quiet. The aforementioned café is located on the main street’s north side. Right west of the café is a narrow path leading to the Muraba’at Hannoun quarter. While standing at the entrance of the café, I saw a number of young people, at least five of them, standing and talking at the entry of the narrow path. Some were activists and “wanted” by the Israeli army, but none of them was armed. Among these young people I recognised Muhammad Qozah, a citizen from the eastern quarter of Toulkarem. This young man is known by all of the camp citizens as he is always in the camp. Also present was Mushir Lafi Mansouri and Muhammad Qozah, both residents of the camp, in addition to a number of young people who I did not recognise.At that moment, as I was looking at these young men, I saw a new, white Volkswagen vehicle, known as Shatl, with a white and green Palestinian licence plate. I also saw the driver of the car who was wearing civilian clothing. The car was coming from the west at normal speed. It stopped three metres from the young men, and immediately three men in civilian clothes quickly got out of the vehicle. One of them was wearing a red shirt while the others were wearing olive green, or army coloured, jackets and jeans. The men who came from the back seat were carrying short, black weapons. As soon as they got out they aimed their weapons at the young men, who were standing at the entry of the path, and shouted, “Stop! Stop!” They also yelled bad words at them.I continued to observe them and slowly crossed the street, moving to a grocery store located opposite al-Baba café. My new position inside the grocery store enabled me to see what was happening in the narrow path which was now directly opposite to where I was standing, to the north. I saw the young men fleeing; some entered the café  while others ran away and down the path. At the same time I saw a member of the undercover Israeli army unit pointing his short weapon at them and opening fire.Muhammad Qozah fell to the ground after he had run approximately 20-25 metres, which means that the distance between Muhammad and the shooter was only 20-25 metres. The Israeli soldier who fired at the Palestinian young men was the one wearing the red shirt. The other two young men were able to escape. Although Muhammad fell and was lying on the ground, the shooting continued and was deliberately directed at him. I clearly saw bullets hitting Muhammad because I was standing in a place directly opposite the lane in which he was trying to flee and there was nothing to prevent me from seeing what was going on there. After two or three minutes, the firingstopped. Then a large number of Israeli military jeeps arrived at the site of the incident. I then saw two members of the undercover Israeli army unit, accompanied by an Israeli soldier in an olive green military uniform and carrying weapons, heading toward the place where Muhammad Qozah was lying on the ground. They pulled him by his clothes for about 20 metres and placed him at the entrance of the café.At that moment, I could see Muhammad Qozah directly in front of me at a distance of less than seven metres. From the grocery store, I kept observing what was going on,  especially around Muhammad Qozah. I saw a number of soldiers gathered around him. One of the soldiers, who over his military uniform was wearing a white doctor’s  overall, gave Muhammad an injection. He stood beside him for several minutes before leaving the place and going to one of the big jeeps. Around 20 Israeli jeeps of  different sizes continuously moved around the site of the incident. Some Israeli soldiers were standing beside the jeeps while others entered al-Baba café, in which manyyoung as well as old Palestinians were held up. At the same time the red-shirted Israeli army undercover soldier remained standing where the incident had taken place. He was in his early thirties, well-built, with a light beard and hair, white skin, and wearing sports shoes.The soldiers arrested all the young men who were inside the café, and after they cuffed their hands and covered their eyes, they put them in large jeeps. After that, the  occupying forces started to leave the place. Muhammad Qozah did not move, and it seemed to me that he had been killed when the soldier opened fire at the beginning of the incident. Before leaving the place, the soldier in the red shirt kicked Muhammad’s head with his foot and then got into the car of the Israeli undercover unit, which also left the place. The operation took exactly an hour, because I looked at my watch when the Israeli forces left, and it was 2:00 pm.As did many other Palestinians, I left my hiding place and went to where Muhammad was lying on the ground. I saw a number of young Palestinians carrying Muhammad to a Palestinian ambulance, which carried him to Thabet Thabet Governmental Hospital in Toulkarem, where his martyrdom was announced. I learned from the Palestinian  citizens that Mushir Mansouri, who was fleeing with Muhammad Qozah, was hit in the leg but escaped, unlike Muhammad who was also hit in his leg but fell to the ground and was then killed. I also learned that the Israeli army arrested Ibrahim Anis and Mu’ayad Abu-Tammam from Toulkarem Camp while they were in the café. It is worth noting that these two young men were “wanted” by the Israeli occupying forces due to their activities in the Palestinian resistance. They were detained by the Israeli army while the others were released. It is also worth noting that no armed resistance took place during this incident, and that Muhammad Qozah, known as “al-Zalayem,” is an activist in Fateh’s al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 3 December 2007Signature: Fawzi ‘Radwan