Affidavit No. 3375/2007
2007
At approximately 2:45 am on Friday, 2 February 2007, I received a phone call from my brother-in-law 'Isam Qaddoumi and his wife asking for help, as some strangers were outside the door of their fourth-floor apartment in al-Dik building, near 'Ein 'Arik intersection. During the conversation, my brother-in-law’s wife told me that she suspected that members of Hamas or some related movement were attempting to break into their apartment since her husband 'Isam is the manager of the office of Jibril-al-Rjoub, the former director of the Palestinian Preventive Security Service in the West Bank.My wife 'Abir and I immediately left our house, also located in Bitouniya, to go to 'Isam's house, which is about 500 metres away. As we arrived at al-Dik building and got out of our car, we saw an armed man wearing civilian clothes getting out of an Israeli-registered red Mitsubishi car. My wife asked him what he was doing there. He explained that he was coming to help 'Isam and introduced himself as Abu-'Arab. We walked 15 metres to the elevator at the western side of the building.I did not notice anything suspicious, or the presence of anyone in the area. Abu-'Arab prepared his gun and loaded it with bullets. When we entered the elevator, my wife stood in the back left corner, I stood in the front left corner and Abu 'Arab stood in the right corner leaning back against the mirror with his hands on his weapon.When we arrived at the fourth floor, the elevator opened and we saw three to five armed men pointing their weapons towards us. It was very dark as there was no light in the landing, only the light of the elevator. The armed men were no more than four metres away from us. Abu-'Arab asked, "What is going on guys?” The men began shouting in Hebrew. I did not understand since I do not speak the language. Abu-'Arab, who still had his gun on him, answered, in Hebrew, "Okay." The soldiers immediately fired five to six bullets at him.I then saw that the men, who had blackened faces, were actually soldiers wearing the helmets and uniform of the Israeli army. This all happened within 30 seconds. Abu-'Arab collapsed on the ground. Blood poured from his body, covering the elevator. The soldiers then asked us to leave the elevator and brought us to the small landing of the fourth floor. There I saw approximately five soldiers, all with their faces blackened. The soldiers searched us, took our ID's and kept us there for approximately ten minutes, preventing us from approaching the dead body or even speaking to each other.While we were there we heard the sound of another four to five bullets being fired. The soldiers then took us to the third floor where there were more soldiers in the same uniforms. Less than ten minutes after we arrived, we heard loud screaming to the effect that, "Khaldoun is dead.” The soldiers kept us on the third floor for approximately 50 minutes. I was prevented from speaking to 'Abir and we were guarded by two soldiers who kept their weapons constantly aimed at us and did notspeak to us until we heard someone screaming, "Khaldoun is dead, bring an ambulance."I did not understand what was going on outside or where the shooting and the screaming had come from. At approximately 4:00 am, the soldiers took us down to the yard in front of the building where my car was parked. There I saw an ambulance belonging to the Palestine Red Crescent Society leaving the area. I also saw a Palestinian Preventive Security Service jeep and up to six members of the Preventive Security forces in their official uniform, as well as eight Israeli soldiers and three Israeli military jeeps.My wife and I stood beside the Preventive Security officers and found out that one of their members, Khaldoun Shuman, had been killed. I informed them that another man called Abu-'Arab had been killed on the fourth floor. One of them started screaming, "Poor man, bring an ambulance." This man was hysterical. After 15 minutes, a Red Crescent ambulance arrived and removed Abu-'Arab's body.Meanwhile, there was an ongoing dialogue between one of the Preventive Security officers and the Israeli soldiers. One of the soldiers called me over. He asked what I, my wife and the armed man were doing at the same time in the building. I explained to him what had happened, after which he forced me and my wife into one of the Israeli military jeeps. On the floor of the jeep I saw two different types of guns.The jeep took us to 'Ofar prison near Bitouniya where they left us in the yard for about 15 minutes. I was interrogated by a captain who took my testimony. His questions focused on whether the soldiers had asked the armed man to put down his gun. I told him exactly what had happened. Approximately 15 minutes later, 'Abir and I were left standing outside in the cold in the yard. Then, the soldiers asked us to come inside what looked like a cafeteria, where there were tables and hot water for tea and coffee.Another 15 minutes later, the soldiers called us and took us to a military jeep and gave us back our mobile phones. The jeep took us to the beginning of the Bitouniya road, where they ordered us to get out. I phoned my brother-in-law who came and picked us up from 'Isam's house. I discovered that the man who was killed was Muhammad 'Abd-al-Qader Abu-'Arab.