Affidavit No. 6344/2011
2011
On Sunday 15 May 2011 at around 10:00 am, my son Khamis (17 years old), went missing. Khamis has been developmentally disabled since he was a child and is unable to recognize his name or even his home address. He usually stays in the vicinity of our home does not wander off anywhere but there were about five incidents where he wandered off. In these incidents, we were able to locate him with the help of the Palestinian police. That day, my children and I searched for Khamis in the area around our house until 12:00 pm with no luck. At that point I contacted the Police stations in Jabaliya, North Gaza and al-Shaja’iya in Gaza City to report my son’s disappearance. I gave them his description and told them he was developmentally disabled and would not be able to identify his name or home address. I then waited at home and was extremely worried about Khamis, especially since I was following the news of the demonstrations organized near Erez crossing, Northern Gaza Strip, in commemoration of the 63rd anniversary of the Nakba (the Catasrophe). It was reported that a large number of protesters had been injured.At around 7:00 pm that day I heard local radio stations reporting on a child martyr that had been killed as a result of tank shelling in al-Shaja’iya neighborhood in eastern Gaza city. They announced that the martyr was a teenager of about 18 years of age and that no one was able to identify him. When hearing this, I became overwhelmingly anxiousand had a feeling that the victim could be my son Khamis. I quickly went to al-Shifa Hospital in Gaza city and asked one of the staff to confirm the news that was circulating about the death of an anonymous teenager. He confirmed it and asked me to follow him to the morgue to identify the victim. I arrived to the morgue and instantly identified myson Khamis, who had been injured by several shrapnel in the head and left side of his abdomen below the heart. I instantly collapsed and cried for my disabled son, for whom I had long wished martyrdom.I then went to the Hospital administration and asked the doctors and paramedics how they had found my son. They paramedics told me that they had found Khamis’ body near the Nahal ‘Oz Crossing area, about 300 meters away from the eastern border of Gaza city, which is controlled by the Israeli occupying forces. They also told me that Khamis was killed by Israeli army tank shelling fired in his direction from behind the borders while he was walking in the area. The next morning, I received my son’s body and buried him in the eastern cemetery in the eastern part Gaza city.