Affidavit No. 7165/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Muhammad ‘Awwad Abd al-Khaleq at-Tawil, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 403206592, born on 26 November 1975, a ninth grade student, and a resident of the Far’ata village, Qalqiliya governorate, would like to declare the following:I am a resident of the Far’ata village, located at a distance of approximately 21 kilometres east of Qalqiliya city. I live with my mother and father in my family’s house. My family comprises of 15 members. Our home is located in an area called “Ras al Bakra” east of the village. The so-called settlement outpost of ‘Hfad Gil’ad’ is located on top of the village’s Eastern Mount at a distance of about one kilometre east of our home.At around 12:00 pm on 28 February 2012, I assisted my father who was working on some agricultural land cultivated with local thyme plants. The land is almost 50 metres east of our house. During this time, I saw about 30 Israeli settlers in civilian clothes approaching our house. They were at a distance of about 50 metres from the house. Some settlers put on masks and others carried shovels, sticks and sharp tools. Immediately, my brothers, my mother and I returned to the house and went up to the roof. We had tightly shut the main door out of fear that the settlers would storm into the house. Having stopped at a distance of two metres from the house, the settlers started to throw stones, breaking the glass window to the north of the house. My brothers and I threw stones at the settlers so that they would move away from the house. About ten minutes later, ten Israeli military patrols arrived with around 30 soldiers. At that time, young men were throwing stones at the settlers near our house. Israeli soldiers, who were in military uniform, fired sound and tear gas canisters towards the young men to disperse them. While we were on the roof, settlers pointed to my brothers Tawfiq and Fadi at-Tawil and me. Later, almost 20 Israeli soldiers raided my family’s house. Because they prevented them from arresting me, the occupying soldiers assaulted my mother Tamam Mohammed Mustafa at-Tawil and my aunt Muna Abdul Rahman Tawil. The soldiers beat my mother and aunt with rifles. Having inquired about my name, two Israeli soldiers grabbed me and forced me out of the house.“Who was with you near the settlement outpost of ‘Gil’ad’? Who bought fireworks?” A soldier questioned me.I denied that I had been near the settlement outpost or bought any fireworks. A soldier tied my hands with plastic handcuffs behind my back and forced me into a military patrol. Soldiers also arrested my brothers Tawfiq (22 years), Fadi (24 years), and Shaher at-Tawil (45 years). Soldiers transported us by military patrols to the Israeli settlement of ‘Qadumim’ north of the Far’ata village. I was admitted to a room where an Israeli Police officer interviewed me. Having introduced himself as Salim, he accused me of burning a house in the settlement outpost of ‘Hfad Gil’ad’.“Who was with you? Who watched the road for you? Who brought the fireworks that set the house on fire?” The Police officer interrogated me.“I did not go there and I did not bring the fireworks?” I answered.About ten minutes later, the Police officer demanded that I put the prints of both my hand palms on a piece of paper written in Hebrew. He also took my fingerprints one after the other. There were boxes on the paper in which I left my fingerprints. Later, I was taken to a room where my brothers Fadi and Shaher were held. Every ten minutes, an Israeli Police officer in a blue uniform came in, took one of my brothers, and turned him back after interrogation. About half an hour later, the Police completed the interrogation of my brothers. We were detained in the room until the next day, 29 February 2012. At around 8:00 am, an Israeli Police officer informed me that he would get me out. My brothers Fadi and Shaher continued to be detained in the room. I got into an Israeli military patrol. About half an hour later, the patrol dropped me near my house.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 3 March 2012I, the undersigned, Muna Abdul Rahman at-Tawil, guardian of the child Mohammed at-Tawil, hereby confirm that this affidavit has been taken in my presence.