Affidavit No. 5345/2010
2010
In 2009, I was diagnosed with colon cancer. At first I received medical treatment at al-Watani Hospital in the city of Nablus. I had sessions of chemical therapy. Several months later, I was transferred to Augusta Victoria Hospital in Jerusalem to continue my medical treatment because radiation treatment is not available in the West Bank hospitals. To reach that hospital, I had to apply for a permit from the Israeli authorities. In early August, my wife Fatima (about 35 years old) submitted on my behalf an application to the Israeli Coordination Office (DCO), at the Huwwara military camp, in order to obtain a permit by which I could access the Augusta Victoria Hospital. My wife also submitted medical reports that diagnosed my health condition, as well as a patient transfer report issued by al-Watani Hospital. At the DCO, my wife had to wait for more than three hours in a waiting hall before any DCO officer would interview her. Later, a DCO officer interviewed my wife for a period of less than one hour and told her that the DCO refused to issue a permit for me on security grounds. My wife presented all the medical reports, which confirmed my need of medical attention at the said hospital, and insisted that she receive a permit for me. At the end of the interview the DCO officer gave my wife a permit, which was valid for one month.My treatment took place between August and late December. During this period, I received each of the four permits that I had applied for. Each permit was valid for one month. Each time my wife applied for a permit, she had to sit for a similar interview and wait for approximately the same time. During the last interview, which took place in December, the Israeli DCO officer told my wife that next time she would be required to submit the application to the Palestinian DCO in Nablus. They would then hand it to the Israeli DCO. The officer also demanded that my wife bring a detailed report describing my health condition and attach it to the application when she applied for the new permit. My wife reported these instructions to me when she returned.In December, I had surgery, whereby the tumour was removed and an opening was made in my side for excretion. I stayed at hospital for several days and then went home. On 18 February 2010, I was scheduled to go to the hospital and continue my medical treatment. I requested that the hospital give me a detailed report on my health condition so that I could submit it to the Israeli DCO when I applied for a permit. The hospital gave me the report. Two days prior to my appointment, I submitted an application to the Palestinian DCO to receive a permit in order to continue my medical treatment at the Augusta Victoria Hospital. The Palestinian DCO handed the application over to the Israeli DCO. Upon reporting to the Palestinian DCO on the second day, my wife was told that the Israeli side was still examining the issue from a security perspective. Therefore, I lost my appointment. Because an alternative treatment is not available in the West Bank hospitals, my health condition has deteriorated.Thereupon, I appeal to Al-Haq to help me to put pressure on the Israeli authorities to grant me a permit to access Jerusalem so that I am able to receive medical treatment at Augusta Victoria hospital and prevent my health condition from degenerating further under the pretext of a security examination. At the time I am giving this sworn statement, my health condition is worsening.I should note that I have never been arrested or wanted by the Israeli authorities. Additionally, I am married and father of five children, the youngest of whom is three years old and the eldest, 15 years old.