Affidavit No. 6777/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Ammar Khaled Hasan Bardiyyah, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 081054371, born on 21 July 1977, an aluminium trader, and a resident of the Qalandiya – al-Matar neighbourhood, Jerusalem governorate, would like to declare the following:I am a Palestinian citizen who resides in the Qalandiya-Al-Matar neighbourhood northeast of the city of Jerusalem which was occupied in 1967. For 12 years, I have been living in an apartment located inside a building made up of ten apartments in total; my wife and daughters Wafa’ (13 years old), Qamar (8 years old), and Iyan (4 years old), live with me in this apartment.Recently, the building has encountered problems with the National Insurance Institute of Israel, which started to send agents on abrupt visits to check on many of the building residents in order to verify their places of residence and so they could provide them with proof that they live within the borders delineated by the Israel’s Municipality of Jerusalem following the Israeli occupation of the city in 1967.These visits targeted Palestinian residents who hold blue ID cards (Jerusalem IDs) and are married to persons from the West Bank. These residents needed to prove that they live within the Israeli-delineated borders of Jerusalem before they could complete “family reunification” procedures.In March 2009, employees from the Israeli National Insurance Institute started to bother me with frequent visits to my house in order to verify the place of my residence; that is, the aforementioned apartment. Without prior notice, the Institute seized all its services to my family in July 2009; these included social and medical allowances and services. They claimed that my family and I did not live in Jerusalem. The National Insurance Institute further demanded that I return a sum of NIS 1 million. According to them this would compensate – for all the financial services and allowances they had offered to my family and I over the past 12 years. I presented various papers to the National Insurance Institute to prove that I had been living within the borders of the Municipality (Municipality of Jerusalem as defined by Israel). However, the National Insurance Institute refused to consider these papers.“We do not have any business with the Municipality.” They literally told me.The National Insurance Institute insisted that the building was located in the West Bank; that is, outside the borders of Jerusalem. I filed a case against the National Insurance Institute before the courts. Again, I presented a series of papers which demonstrated that I have been a resident of the city of Jerusalem. I also hired a surveyor who examined the area and showed where the Jerusalem line passed, i.e. where the border delineated by Israel for the Jerusalem city following its occupation in 1967. The surveyor stated that three quarters of the building where I reside is located in the West Bank area while the other quarter was located within the Jerusalem Municipality borders as defined by Israel. According to the surveyor, 85 per cent of my house is located in the Jerusalem quarter while the other 15 per cent was located in the West Bank. However, the Israeli National Insurance Institute and the court did not recognise the fact that my house was located in the Jerusalem area and considered it as part of the West Bank.At the court, I noticed that the judge talked about the area in general, not about my house which is the main element in this case. I wonder if I could do something to help my case with the residents of the building in which I am living. The court requested that I present papers from the Israeli Land Authority in order to prove that my house is located in the Jerusalem area. However, these papers were delivered late. On 21 September 2011, the court ruled that my apartment was located in the West Bank area and stated that I had not presented papers from the Israeli Land Authority, proving that it was located within the Jerusalem Municipality border [as defined by Israel]. Ramzi Naddaf, the lawyer I hired to represent me and my family, will submit an appeal against the aforementioned court decision. As a result of this judgement, the Israeli National Insurance Institute has continued to deny my family and I from the national insurance services we are entitled to receive, including medical treatment. It should be noted that my youngest daughter suffers from several health problems and needs constant monitoring in Israeli hospitals. As I understood from my lawyer, the court decision means that my status as a resident in the city of Jerusalem will be withdrawn. Although my wife and I still have them, our IDs are considered to be null and void. The Israeli occupying authorities would be able to withdraw them along with the birth certificates of my daughters at any time; on any military checkpoint.I have moved to another house in al-Matar neighbourhood, which is located in the Jerusalem area. I rented the house for a sum of NIS 2,000 per month in order to prove that I reside within the Jerusalem area as defined by Israel. It should be noted that I bought my flat for JD 40,000. This means that I have lost the price of my flat, and I am now paying the rent for the new house. I did this because the withdrawal of my ID and National Insurance entitlements will severely damage my business. I travel abroad a lot, especially to China, in order to purchase aluminium. I am now so worried. The problem is that if my ID is revoked, the Israeli occupying authorities will not give me a replacement. On the other hand, the Palestinian Authority will not give me the West Bank ID. This means that the status of my wife, daughters and me will be undetermined. We will not have IDs that would enable us to move and receive medical treatment like all other human beings.It should be noted that I went to the Israeli Jerusalem Municipality and requested that they return the money I paid for the Arnona tax (a tax which Jerusalem residents pay for buildings) seeing as the National Insurance Institute considers my apartment to be t located in an area outside Jerusalem..“We have no business with this. Go away from here.” They replied.I was born at my grandfather’s house in the ‘Aqabat al-Saraya area in the Old City of Jerusalem. My uncles still live there. My father lives in the Shu’fat Refugee Camp in East Jerusalem. The Separation Wall and Qalandiya military checkpoint separates us from one another. If my ID is withdrawn, I will be deprived of visiting my relatives due to the Israeli military checkpoints which would prevent me from accessing the city of Jerusalem.My family of Badriyyah is an ancient Jerusalemite family. We have been living in Jerusalem for more than 500 years. It is ironic that the Israeli occupation, which is only 43 years old, is now determining who is a Jerusalemite and who is not.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 8 October 2011