Affidavit No. 2681/2005
2005
At approximately 12:30 pm on Thursday,  17 November 2005, I was driving back from Jenin to al-Yamoun on my  motorcycle. Driving directly in front of me was a white Mercedes with  Palestinian registration plates. Driving towards us was another Mercedes  similar to the one in front on me, and it flashed its lights to the car  in front of me. At this moment, I passed the car in front of me because  it was driving very slowly. After driving 500 metres, I stopped on the  side of the road in an area called Bir al-Sa'ada to talk on my cellular  to a friend of mine.As I was talking, I heard shooting  behind me. I looked back in the direction I was coming from, and saw the  white Mercedes I was originally driving behind standing in the middle  of the road about 40 metres away from me, and another car, a grey Polo  model 2004 moving slowly in front of it. Initially I thought the Polo  was moving slowly as a result of an accident with the Mercedes.Suddenly, five people wearing black  civilian clothes, black masks covering their faces, and carrying arms  began shooting heavily at the Polo car. There was no more than five  metres between the men and the Polo. I realized that these men were from  the Israeli Special Squads. Out of fear, I began running away from the  scene towards al-Yamoun. I stopped at the north entrance of al-Yamoun,  and after 5 minutes, I saw the Mercedes car drive in the direction of  the Salem military camp, which is located at the end of Jenin-Haifa  street.After the Mercedes left, I hurriedly  returned to the site of the incident. By this point there were a number  of people gathered around the Polo, which was standing in a field. Once  closer to the car, I saw youths inside. They had been killed by the  bullets that had penetrated the car from every side. I could not  recognize the driver as he had been hit in the head, chest, and hands.  The body of the other man next to him was torn apart by the bullets. I  recognized him; he was my cousin Ahmad Saber 'Abahra (20 years old).  From the other citizens gathered around the car I discovered that the  other man was Mahmoud Jamal Zayed (also 20 years old). Both men were  from al-Yamoun. After several minutes, the Red Crescent Society  ambulance arrived and, with the help of the people around, we carried  the two bodies to the ambulance to take them to the Jenin government  hospital.In the lead up to the incident, and  throughout it, I did not notice the presence of any Israeli military  forces, nor did I hear any voice calling the two youths to stop their  car before shooting at them. Moreover, I did not notice any arms in the  Polo car or that they fired towards the Israeli Special Squads. The  Israeli officials allege, through the media, that the soldiers asked the  two youths to stop but they did not. As stated before, this is not true  because there was no Israeli presence in that location when I was  there. The Israeli Squad members could have arrested the two youths but  they assassinated them intentionally. They were buried the same day in  al-Yamoun village.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 26 November 2005Signature: Marwan 'Abahra