Affidavit No. 4360/2008
2008
I am ‘Abd-al-Majid Ibrahim Ahmad al-A’raj, 48 years old, married and father of ten children. I live in the area of Mu'askar Khan Younes and work as a teacher at the ‘Abdallah Abu-Sitta Boys Basic School (A), which is located on the al-Qassam Street in the centre of Khan Younes. I am also Deputy Secretary of the Teachers Union in Khan Younes.At about 11:00 am on Sunday, 24 August 2008, a number of Internal Security officers were dispatched to my house and handed one of my sons’ a summons, stating that I should report to the Internal Security Headquarters in Khan Younes. Immediatelyafter I received the summons, I travelled to the Internal Security Headquarters, located in an area called "Muharrarat Neve Dekalim" west of Khan Younes, where the occupying forces had withdrawn from in 2005.I should note that before the Internal Security force came to my house, my colleague Khaled al-Seiqali, Secretary of the Teachers Union in Khan Younes, phoned me and said that he was also served a summons by the Internal Security. When I arrived, a person in civilian clothing requested that I hand over my personal belongings, which I did. Another person arrived and led me into a cell, measuring two x three square metres. Inside was Mr. ‘Abd-al-Karim Ahmad ‘Ashour, a resident of Jorat al-'Aqqad neighbourhood and member of the Teachers Union in Khan Younes.The person who guided me into the cell ordered me to sit down on a chair, with my face against a wall. I and Mr. Abdul Kareem remained inside the cell for about two hours. Then, a person came and led us into another cell. There, I saw Mr. Khaled as Seiqal and Mr. Isma'il Salama, principal of the ‘Abdallah Siyam Basic School. About 30 minutes later, they brought in Mr. Sa'id 'Umran, Chairman of the Examinations Department at the Directorate of Education District Office in Khan Younes. I also saw them bring Mr. Anis Daoud, 54 years old, into an adjacent cell. At around 4:00 pm, a person arrived, blindfolded me, led me into a room and ordered me to sit down on a chair.I knew that I was in an interrogation room. A person, who seemed to be the interrogator, asked me about my name, age and the school I work at. He also inquired about the nature of activities carried out by the Teachers General Union in Khan Younes and my relationship with Union members in the West Bank. "I want to make the long story short: You will sign a pledge to oblige you to attend school," he said. He also threatened to arrest, beat and humiliate me. He ordered me to sign the pledge even though I was blindfolded. As I insisted to read the pledge so that I could sign it, he removed the blindfold and ordered me to only look at the piece of paper. I read the pledge. It was as follows:"I, the undersigned, hereby pledge not to contravene the laws and regulations in force and not to exercise any union function or activity and not to breach public order. I admit legitimacy of the government in Gaza under the presidency of Isma'il Haniyya. I will be committed to attending school or I shall be subject to legal liability." He forced me to sign the pledge under threat of beating and Shabeh. After he blindfolded me again, a person guided me outside. Several metres ahead, he removed the blindfold, handed my personal belongings back to me and released me. I returned home at about 7:00 pm on the same day.