Affidavit No. 6427/2011
2011
On the morning of Friday, 20 May 2011, I took my family’s sheep out of their house - the sheep pen –, which is located in Wadi al-Bat, in order to let them graze on the hills east of our town. My brother, Sufiyan, about six years, accompanied me. We took the sheep out at around 8:00 am and headed towards the pastureland where I usually graze them, approximately 400 metres to the east.When I reached the pastureland, I found a cylinder-shaped object wrapped in tin foil on the ground. It was about 20 centimetres long and about 4 centimetres in diameter. It had a plastic cover on one of its sides. I carried the object, walked for a distance of about 20 metres, showed it to my cousin Muhammad Yousef Muhammad Da’ajna, about 15 years, and asked if he knew what it was. Muhammad replied that it might be a bomb. I started to remove the tin foil on the cylinder-shaped object. Within moments, an intense white smoke came from the object, so I dropped it on the ground and fled with Muhammad towards Yatta. Meanwhile, the smoke spread around the area. I stopped at a distance of about 30 metres and realised that my right shoe and foot were burning. I quickly took off my shoe using my other foot. I was unable to the shoe with my hands as they felt like they were burning. I also realised that the lower part of my trousers had melted. I asked my cousin Muhammad if my face sustained any burns, but he said it did not. I saw burns on Muhammad’s left hand and leg. We screamed out of pain. My uncle Jihad, about 35 years, who had guided me to the pastureland and left shortly before I found the object, came back and made phone calls in an attempt to arrange for a car to transport us [to a hospital]. My uncle also brought water from a nearby well and poured it on our burns. About 20 minutes later, Muhammad’s father arrived in his car and transported us along with my uncle Jihad to Yatta Governmental Hospital where we received medical treatment. After being at Yatta Hospital for almost half an hour, a civilian car transported me and Muhammad to Zif Junction north of Yatta. There, I saw different cars which belonged to the Israeli occupying forces. Later, I was informed that my uncle Jihad called the Israeli Police and reported what had happened to us. The Police had requested that we be brought to Zif junction. Muhammad and I were brought down on stretchers and laid on the ground. Military medics conducted examinations on us, administered IV infusions, and wrapped our gauzes, which had been administered at Yatta Hospital, with tin foil. While the medics were carrying out their work, military interrogators, who  spoke Arabic well, inquired about the nature of the object which exploded, or rather from which smoke was emitted, and requested that we describe it as the interrogators tried to sketch the object until we could identify it. Later, the interrogators fetched various bombs and objects and requested that Muhammad and I identify whether the object we found was among them. The objects which the soldiers presented included an object that was similar to that which produced the smoke and we indicated this to the interrogators. Later, I was informed that my father arrived and requested that the soldiers transport me and Muhammad to Israel for medical treatment because our injuries were caused by the army’s unexploded ordnance, but they refused. About 45 minutes after arriving at the Zif Junction area, Muhammad and I were transported by a military ambulance to al-Fahs Junction at the southern entrance to Hebron city. There, we were relocated to two ambulances of the Palestine Red Crescent Society, which transported us to Hebron Governmental Hospital. Additional treatments were administered at the Governmental Hospital. According to a medical report issued later by the hospital, my injuries included first and second degree burns on my right hand fingers and on the outer part of the right hand; burns on the outer part of the left hand fingers; burns around the right ankle; first and second degree burns around the front part of the left knee; and first and second degree burns under the right eye – the right cheek.On that day, members of my family were requested to go to the pharmacy and buy medicines and gauzes at their own expense for Muhammed and me so as to bandage our burns at Hebron and Yatta hospitals. At around 1:00 pm, we left the hospital. On the next day, our relatives took us to the hospital in Hebron where our bandages were replaced. We then returned home.On Sunday, 22 May 2011, children found an object similar to that which caused our burns and informed our adult relatives, who called the Israeli authorities. On the next day, the army arrived and detonated the object on-site.I continue to take various medicines. Both my hands are bandaged and I can hardly walk because of the burns on my foot.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 24 May 2011Signature: ‘Eid Da’ajna – He could not sign due to the burns on his hands.Name not withheldI, the undersigned, Khalil Muhammad Khalil Da’ajna, guardian of the child ‘Eid MuhammadKhalil Da’ajna, hereby confirm that this sworn statement was taken in my presence.Signature: Khalil Da’ajnaField researcher: Hisham Sharabati