Affidavit No. 3950/2007
2007
My name is Khaled Jamal Kamel Bulbul. I am 30 years old, and I am married with three children. I live in al-Rimal quarter in Gaza and work as a journalist in the Zoom Press Centre for Media and TV Production in Gaza. On Monday, 12 November 2007, I went with my 20 year old friend, ‘Awad Harb, to the Brigade Square located opposite al-Azhar University on Street 30, west of Gaza city, to cover the Loyalty Rally organised for the third commemoration of the late President Yaser Arafat. There were tens of thousands of citizens, estimated at half a million persons. I saw most of them carrying Palestinian flags and yellow Fateh banners and I heard them chanting for Fateh and the late President Arafat. I also heard a number of Fateh leaders delivering commemorative speeches and calling on the people to unite and reject military solutions. Among them were Ibrahim Abu-al-Naja and Ahmad Hilles.While I was taking photographs of the people, including youth, children, women and the elderly, I saw a large number of members of the Executive Force. Their faces were covered and some were dressed in black uniforms while others were wearing blue police uniforms. They were carrying clubs and weapons: Kalashnikofs and M16s. Being a journalist, I know these types of weapons very well. These armed men were surrounding the celebrating people from four sides. While I was standing in the vicinity of the Brigade Mosque, also referred to as Sheikh Zayed Mosque, and photographing the rally activities, I heard very intense shooting. I also saw members of the Executive Force, police officers, and the masked persons in black uniforms, shooting. I saw some of them pointing their weapons upward and some directing their weapons towards the participants and firing. Meanwhile, the participants started to leave the place in all directions from fear of the shooting. I saw a number of them falling on the ground and bleeding. I also saw citizens carrying the injured and taking them toward al-Azhar Roundabout. Al-Quds Hospital is located west and al-Shifa’ Hospital east of that roundabout.I photographed all these events and saw members of the Executive Force, the police and the masked persons chasing the citizens in all directions and beating them with clubs, and arresting a number of them. I also heard a number of the young boys saying “Shiite! Shiite!” and throwing stones at the police and the Executive Force. I ran to the Mobilization and Discipline Office of Fateh, located on the first floor in the building of the PLO Executive Committee beside the Mosque, which is at around 50 metres from where the incidents occurred. I went there to protect myself and to take photos of what was going on.While I was photographing the confrontation, about 20 members of the Executive Force and masked persons who were dressed in green and black and carrying clubs and weapons, entered the building. Approximately six of them instantly came towards me and started beating me with their clubs and gun butts on my back, hands and legs. They then confiscated my camera and broke it in front of me with their clubs, although I showed them my journalist card and identified myself to them. My camera is a DV cam and is worth USD 10,000. They led me outside the building and one of them said they would take me to the Navy centre. But I escaped while they were chasing citizens.It is worth noting that this is the fourth time I have been subjected to beatings and confiscation of my camera by the Executive Force since Hamas has controlled the Gaza Strip. After half an hour, I headed to the Navy Centre west of Gaza City to ask about my camera. Initially they refused to deal with me. As I persisted, one of the Executive Force members told me that the camera was not with them, but instead was with the al- Qassam Brigade. I went to the headquarters of the Interior Ministry in Gaza city and met with Ihab al-Ghusein, the spokesperson of the Interior Ministry in the deposed government, and described to him what had happened. He asked me to submit a complaint to the headquarters of al-‘Abbas Police Station in Gaza. I went to that headquarters where I met Hamas PLC member Dr. Salah al-Bardawil and told him what had happened. We went together to the Navy Centre again, where they told us that they did not take the camera and affirmed that the camera was with al-Qassam members.I went to the hospital where I was treated for bruises. Until now I do not know the whereabouts of the camera after it was confiscated by the Executive Force and al-Qassam Brigade while I was on duty.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 13 November 2007 Signature: Khaled Bulbul