Affidavit No. 1881/2004
2004
I am the wife of the prisoner Usama  Ahmad 'Abd-al-Qader Abu-Muhammad, of Palestinianorigin, who came to  Jenin camp from Jordan in 1998. After marrying, we lived in Jenin  camp.My husband Usama entered the country with a visit permit via  Allenby Bridge. He decided tostay and marry here. This is what actually  happened. After our marriage, I submitted a familyreunification  application so he may obtain a Palestinian identity card. During the  first years ofour marriage the situation was stable, and he started to  work. I gave birth to 'Izz-al-Din, 3 yearsold, and Jawaher, 2 years old.  I registered both of my children with my identity card because  myhusband cannot register them, because he himself does not have an  identity card.Honestly,  I always felt that my husband not having I.D. would always cause  problems for ourfamily. When the al-Aqsa Intifada broke out in September  2000, the circumstances of our lifeturned upside down. The Israeli army  besieged Jenin city and camp, which upset my husbandand he started to  be afraid, as I did too. Then the Israeli army started to attack the  Palestiniancities and camps, which further complicated our life. My  husband was always frightened, and welost all feelings of security. We  always were afraid that my husband would be detained ordeported until  that day became real. The night of 7 October 2003, the Israeli army  attackedJenin city and camp and imposed a curfew. Then the army started  its search campaigns bybreaking into houses, especially in Jenin camp.  At 10:00 p.m. the Israeli soldiers broke into ourhome located in  al-Damaj Quarter in Jenin camp.At that night, 10 soldiers entered my  home, and when the soldiers asked for my husband’sidentity card, he told  them that he was Jordanian and does not hold a Palestinian identity  card.The soldiers arrested my husband after they blindfolded and  handcuffed him. They first took himto Salem Camp west of Jenin, then to  'Ofar Camp near Ramallah. Since then, my husband hasbeen incarcerated by  the Israeli occupation army, and he is being threatened with  deportation toJordan. The detention of my husband has changed my life as  I became responsible for thesurvival of my children and the management  of my home. Moreover, in case my husband isdeported to Jordan, our  family will break apart because my husband will not have any hope  inreturning to his home, especially under the existing circumstances  that the Palestinian peoplemust live through. Please help me in putting  pressure on the Israeli army to release my husbandand not to deport him.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 7 July 2004