Affidavit No. 4997/2009
2009
Ibrahim and I then approached a policeman, who stood near a police car. We realised that he was an officer, as we saw a number of insignias on his shoulders. We asked him in Hebrew, which we speak fluently, about the reason the police, army and settlers were present in the area. I estimate that the police officer was about 30-years-old.“We have no problem with you. Our problem is with them, the settlers. They will withdraw in five minutes.” The police officer replied and told us to get back into our houses.I went up to the roof of my house and Mr. Ibrahim went back to his house. On the roof, I called the Palestinian Liaison office in Nablus and reported the incident. Five or six minutes later, I saw the patrols leave, but the settlers remained positioned in the area. About three minutes later, I saw settlers approach our houses, carrying stones in their hands. They stopped at a distance of about 40 metres east of our houses. I estimated that these settlers were between 15 and 25 years of age. In the meantime, dozens of the village youths arrived and dispersed themselves around our houses. We were afraid that settlers would attack our houses. About ten minutes later, a Palestinian ambulance belonging to the Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) arrived and stopped west of my house. Someone might have called the PRCS and reported that settlers had been present in the area.About 15 minutes later, three or four Israeli patrols arrived from inside the village. We knew that these patrols belonged to the Israeli Border Guard (the Druze soldiers). More than 15 soldiers stepped down from the patrols and started to shout at the village youths to return to their houses. Other soldiers also fired tear gas and sound grenades at the village youths and at our houses. I continued to watch as the settlers threw stones at our houses, the village youths threw stones at the settlers and the army, especially the Druze soldiers, fired sound and tear gas grenades.Ten minutes later, I saw a tear gas grenade enter my house from the western staircase window. I immediately went down to see what had happened. My family members were screaming as a result of the gas smell. They felt suffocated and were shouting for help. My wife carried Hadil in her arms, but was dizzy and disorentated My sister-in-law sat in her chair, but could not breathe. I immediately carried my infant daughter Hadil, who was stiff and unconscious. I took her outside and shouted for help. As I went out, a solider watched me, but did not offer any help. A PRCS medic saw me and took Hadil away from the house and gave her first aid. Had the medic not intervened, Hadil could have lost her life. Another medic and several other persons entered my house and brought out my family members. Taking them to a remote place, the medics provided first aid to my family. If the medics had not done so, my sister-in-law could have died. She had already suffered several brain strokes.I do not exaggerate when I say that approximately 70 tear gas and sound grenades were fired within one hour towards our houses and at the village youths who were present in the area. Meanwhile, settlers continued to throw stones at our houses. The soldiers never prevented them from doing so over the time mentioned. As was evident, the soldiers were aiming to prevent any young persons from the village from being present in the area. An hour later, the soldiers had managed to prevent the village youths from staying near our houses. Even we ourselves – the house owners – had to escape and leave our houses due to the intense smell of the tear gas.Finally, 65 minutes after it had all begun, the settlers left the area and returned to the settlement. Following this, all of the Israeli troops also left for the settlement. Later, I returned to my house. I did not see any damage caused to the house. However, I found ten tear gas and sound shells on the house roof and on the staircase. I also learned that other houses had not been damaged either.