Affidavit No. 5090/2009
2009
At around 4:00 am on Sunday, 27 September 2009, I left my house in the neighbourhood of the Remission Gate in the old city of Jerusalem for al-Aqsa Mosque to perform the dawn prayers. I entered the al-Aqsa Mosque compound through the Remission Gate. The situation was quite normal. As usual, I saw a guard of the Islamic Waqf Department, an Israeli police officer and a border guard officer positioned at the Gate. There were no other reinforcements. After the dawn prayers, I lay down inside the mosque. There was the same number of worshippers as usual.At around 7:30 am, I heard shouts and many sounds and woke up. I heard the explosion of a sound grenade. I could distinguish its sound because I was accustomed to it and heard it many times in the old city of Jerusalem. I hurried towards the door of the al-Aqsa Mosque and put on my shoes. When I went outside, I saw dozens of Israeli police officers in dark blue uniforms in the yard. I heard the sound of rubber-coated steel bullets and tear gas grenades. I also saw suffocating tear gas spreading around and I felt short of breath.Whilst the police officers were spreading out, I was standing opposite the Dome of Rock, north of the al-Aqsa Mosque. Suddenly, I felt something hit my face. Specifically, I felt pain in my left eye. I put my hand on my eye, which was bleeding heavily. I started to scream, but there were no medics around.During this time, small clashes were taking place between Israeli police officers and dozens of civilians. I saw a number of civilians throw shoes at the Israeli police officers. As my face was bleeding more and more, some youths took me to the first aid room in the mosque yards. For an hour and a half, I waited for an ambulance. Medics told me that the Israeli police were detaining ambulances at the Lion’s Gate and denying their access to the al-Aqsa Mosque compound.The youths put me on a stretcher and carried me approximately 500 metres to the Lion’s Gate. An ambulance transported me to the al-Maqassed Hospital in al-Tour mountain, about three kilometres from al-Aqsa Mosque. Doctors told me that the injury had affected my eye. Therefore, I was transferred to the St. John Ophthamalic Hospital in Sheikh Jarrah. As I was injured in the head, doctors at the al-Maqassed Hospital quarrelled with those at the St. John Ophthalmic Hospital about who would be more qualified to treat me. The dispute took place for two or three hours. During this time, I decided to go to the Hadassa ‘Ein Karem Hospital.At around 12:00 pm, I arrived at the Hadassa ‘Ein Karem Hospital. For several hours, I was diagnosed and treated. At about 5:00 pm, my father arrived. He told me that I suffered from a laceration in the eye and that it should be removed. My father and I agreed that my eye be removed. The wound near the eyebrow was then stitched. I stayed under intensive medical care until 2 October 2009.Now, I am receiving medical treatment at home in the old city of Jerusalem. I have completely lost my left eye.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 7 October 2009.Signature: Rami al-FakhouriName not withheldField researcher: Manaf ‘Abbas