Affidavit No. 7590/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Subhi Muhammad Ahmad Ghaythan, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 853617389, born on 16 December 1992, a worker, and a resident of Qibya village, Ramallah governorate, would like to declare the following:I live with my brothers, sisters and step-mother in the Qibya village west of Ramallah city. I am the eldest of my unmarried siblings, the oldest of which is 13 and the youngest is eight. I am therefore responsible for supporting the family. My older brothers are married and have their own families; they do not live with us. My father and mother died a while ago. I was unemployed because employment opportunities are lacking in the West Bank. About a year ago, I found a job in Israel. I started working in construction illegally because the Israeli occupying authorities do not issue work permits for people my age. My brother and I sneak into Israel. He is married and has nine children. He does not have a work permit for security reasons.At around 8:00 pm on Sunday, 29 July 2012, my brother Ahmed, 40, and I travelled to Ramallah. We intended to travel to Hizma village east of Jerusalem, from where we could reach our workplaces in Israel. A white, six-passenger Ford Transit with Israeli registration plates was waiting for us. We reached Hizma at around 10:00 pm and waited until all the workers arrived. There were 14 of us from different villages. I was not acquainted with the other workers, but knew that they had come from Bettilo and Deir ‘Ammar. One worker sat in the front seat, six workers and I sat on the middle bench, on each other’s laps, and seven workers sat in the back seat. The martyr was sitting on the middle bench, beside the left window. Another worker was sitting in the martyr’s lap.At around 10:30 pm, the car drove to the al-Za’yyam checkpoint east of Jerusalem. The driver was a Palestinian and held an Israeli-issued ID card. He said that another car was ahead of us, checking out the road and the situation at the checkpoint. When we were 30 metres from the checkpoint, about five cars were in front of us and several others were behind. I could clearly see soldiers at the checkpoint. There was an entrance leading to the al-Za’yyam village to the right of us. It was around 12:15 am then. The driver ahead of us called our driver on the walkie-talkie. He was nervous, and said that the soldiers were approaching him, and told our driver to turn back. He meant that the soldiers knew who we were. At that time, two soldiers came towards us. The driver tried to reverse, but couldn’t because other vehicles were behind us. When the soldiers reached us, one of them stood at the front and the other to the right of the car. They demanded that the driver stop. Just before the soldiers arrived, the driver had tried again to start the car and reverse, but again the car stopped. With soldiers at the front and to the right of the car, the driver drove to the right, and sped off to the al-Za’yyam village after crossing a median on the right side of the street.When the driver started the car, the soldier who had been in front of the car fled. I saw the other soldier fall to the ground. At that time, shots were fired from behind and from the left side of the car. It seemed to me that soldiers positioned in the watchtower opened fire on us. The bullets that penetrated the car and hit the windows came from above. We tried to seek shelter under the seats. Shots were fired for about a minute and a half. When we were at a distance of 100 metres from the checkpoint, the soldiers could no longer see us. In the meantime, workers were shouting at the driver demanding that he stop, but he continued to drive. However, a worker used the handbrake to stop the car. When the car stopped, I did not know if any of us had been injured. We opened the door and fled to the village, where we dispersed. I ran with my brother and seven other workers. We walked to the village and sat down in front of a supermarket. We did not know what had happened. While I was running away, I saw the car moving again. The driver drove into the village and I could no longer see the car. We ran for a distance of 500 metres and I was very tired. About ten minutes after I sat down, I felt pain in my left ear. When I touched it, I felt blood gushing out from behind my ear. A worker, whose name I did not know, had hurt his hand. Residents of the village gathered around us and offered us first aid. We waited until around 3:00 am, and then travelled to Ramallah in a taxi. When the taxi was near the checkpoint, soldiers stopped us and demanded that we present our ID cards. They asked where we had been, and we said we had been on a construction site in the village. An ambulance stopped near the checkpoint, but I did not see anyone inside. At around 3:30 am, we reached the Ramallah hospital where I received medical treatment.I was told that a worker was martyred and two others were wounded. The worker who was martyred was sitting beside the left window on the same bench as me. Another worker had been sitting on his lap. Later, I learned that the martyr’s name was Hasan, also known as Akram. I sustained shrapnel wounds, and left the hospital after receiving the necessary medical treatment.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 31 July 2012