Affidavit No: 2496/2005
2005
I am  originally from ‘Imwas village, located to the south-west of Ramallah.  The villagewas occupied and destroyed by Israeli military forces in  1967. I was 26 years oldwhen the village was occupied. I was out in the  fields when the Israelis invaded thevillage on the morning of Tuesday 6  June 1967. When the residents felt it was safe,they returned to their  houses.30 minutes after we did so, the  Israeli military forces arrived and told all the residents to go out to  the main Ramallah-’Imwas road. We were then ordered to start  walkingtowards Ramallah under threat of being shot. We were not able to  take anything withus as they gave us no time to do so. Some residents  were not even allowed to get dressed. The elderly and disabled people  were exempted from expulsion since theywere unable to walk. These people  were: Nimer Abu-Khalil, Hasan Shukri Abu-Ghosh, Ahmad Hasan al-Sa'id,  Heijar Khalil (Im Roubin), Zeinab Hasan Khalil, Amnaal-Sheikh Husein,  Hadya al-Qbeibiyya, Fatima al-Qbeibiyya, 'Aysha Salama, and 'AliIsma'il  'Abdallah.When they told us to leave our houses, the soldiers spoke in  Arabic. Afterwards, we started walking towards Ramallah. There was  approximately 3,000 of us. We continued walking until we arrived in  al-Tira village, located west of Ramallah and about 15 kilometres from  ‘Imwas. We stayed there for one night. Some others went to Ramallah by  the 'Ein (Jaryout) road. I was the only one from my family as my mother  had died and my father and his wife were amongst the people who had fled  previously. I did not know anything about their situation. My brothers  were in Jordan.On the  morning of Wednesday 7 June 1967, we continued on our way from al-Tira  village to Ramallah. We arrived in Rafat camp, which was previously used  by theJordanian army but was by this point occupied by the Israeli  army. The camp is now known as 'Ofar. The soldiers stopped us and  arrested the young men. They arrested23 from ‘Imwas village, myself  included. They and blindfolded us and took us toSarafand military camp.  It is in the al-Ramla Governorate. 48 hours later we weretransferred to  'Atlit prison near Haifa.In 'Atlit we met prisoners from the  Jordanian, Egyptian and Syrian armies. Theprisoners were separated  according to their nationality. We remained in 'Atlit for onemonth. We  were then released and transferred to Ramallah in buses. We had not  yetrealized that our village had been destroyed. Several people had died  during theexpulsion from our village due to exhaustion and hardship.  These includedMuhammad Shihada Abu-Elias, Zeinab Ahmad Mousa and Sheikh  Khalil Jazar, whowas 65 years old and was killed after being shot by an  Israeli soldier.Before being expelled from the  village, I was a schoolteacher and depended on mysalary to survive. I  did not take any legal action as the occupation did not provide thatkind  of opportunity. The number of inhabitants in the village before the  displacementwas approximately 3,500. This number of people used to live  on a land with a surfacearea of 35,000 dunums. Approximately 22,000  dunums were registered in the namesof the village's residents. This was  the surface area of the village before 1948, beforethe construction of  the area currently marked as a demilitarized zone, whichseparates the  village from the green line.The  village contained two primary schools: one for boys and one for girls.  It also hada post-box, wells and archeological land marks such as Roman  wells, tunnels carvedin the rocks, and religious land marks such as a  Byzantine church. All of thesebelong to Latroun. One could also find  Abu-'Ubayda's and Mo'az Bin Jabal’s shrines,as well as the Latroun  monastery. No battles took place when the Israelis invaded,since the  Jordanian army had withdrawn from the village on the night before  theinvasion. We were not aware of the military objectives of the Israeli  army when theyinvaded the village.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 1 July 2005.Signature: Mahmoud Theeb Yousef Abu-Qteish