Affidavit No. 5328/2010
2010
My name is Muhammad Jouda Younes al-Nahhal and I am 45 years old. I am a member of the Fateh Revolutionary Council in the Gaza Strip and a resident of al-Sina’a Street near the Barcelona Public Park in Tal al-Hawa neighbourhood west of Gaza city.Since 1996, I have suffered from diabetes and high blood pressure. About a year ago, I had a surgical operation on my heart at the Jordan Hospital in the city of Amman. During the operation, doctors replaced three coronary (main) arteries. I also suffer from a kidney disease. According to the last medical checks I had conducted, it appears as though I have stones in my kidneys. Doctors in Gaza told me that I required a surgical operation to break them up. On 7 March 2010, the doctors helped me obtain a patient transfer report to receive medical treatment and undergo the operation at the Jordan Hospital in Amman. Earlier, the Palestinian District Coordination Office (DCO) had submitted an application to the Israeli authorities to allow me to cross the Erez Crossing. Through this procedure, I obtained a permit to cross to the Allenby (al-Karama) Bridge, the duration of which was only six hours.According to the procedures imposed by the Ministry of Interior of the deposed government on citizens who wish to leave the Gaza Strip, I applied for a permit to travel to Jordan in order to have the surgery. I also presented all of the documents that provided evidence of my deteriorating health condition and the necessity of my operation at the Jordan Hospital. Having waited for three hours at the Ministry of Interior, they told me that I was forbidden from departing from the Gaza Strip. Then, al-Mezan Centre for Human Rights intervened and contacted Mr. Hasan al-Seifi, Inspector General of the Ministry of Interior of the Gaza deposed government. He promised to reply within an hour, but he did not. A lawyer at al-Mezan Centre for Human Rights sent a written letter to Mr. al-Seifi’s office in Abu-Khadra Governmental Compound, but it was also in vain. Later, they told me that the decision to prevent me from travelling was made by higher authorities (which meant it was a political decision).At around 10:30 am on Monday, 15 March 2010, my wife, who was supposed to accompany me to Jordan, and I went to the Erez Crossing. When we reached the police checkpoint of the deposed government, which is set up on al-Jamarek (Customs) junction leading to the Erez Crossing, police officers requested that I present my documents (the medical file and patient transfer report) as well as my ID card. They told me that I was prevented from leaving the Gaza Strip, seized my ID card, and ordered me to go back to my house and report to the Internal Security agency in Abu-Khadra Governmental Compound in the centre of Gaza City.I hold the deposed government in Gaza responsible for the deterioration of my health condition because they did not allow me to travel to Jordan and continue my medical treatment.