Affidavit No. 6474/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Adnan Mohammed Abdul Qader Ghuneimi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 985912047, born on 1 May 1967, First Aid Centre Director, and a resident of Al Far’a refugee camp, Tubas governorate, would like to declare the following:At around 5:30 am on 13 July 2011, I was working the night shift in the Toubas First Aid Centre of the Palestine Red Crescent Society (PRCS) in the city of Toubas. My colleague in the centre received a telephone call, stating that a citizen had been shot by Israeli soldiers in Al-Far’a refugee camp in Toubas governorate. The injured young man was said to be close to the Abu-Bakr al-Siddiq Mosque in the refugee camp. Ra’ed Ali Jum’ah, a 37-year-old first aid officer who also worked in the PRCS and I immediately left the centre  and drove in the ambulance  towards Al-Far’a refugee camp, which is about six kilometres southwest of Toubas city. About ten minutes later, we reached the area where the injured young man had reportedly been injured. Residents of the house near this location came out and told me that the Israeli soldiers had taken the wounded man to the western refugee camp located almost 500 metres wet of our present location.. After I had reached that area, I realised that it was close to the house of Muneer Rushdi al ‘Abboushi, [a resident in al-Far’a refugee camp]. About two minutes later, I arrived in the ambulance at the location to which I was directed by the residents. From a distance of about 20 metres,I saw about 15 Israeli soldiers, who were in military uniform and carried weapons. As soon as I noticed the soldiers, I turned on the ambulance siren sound to make them aware of our presence as medics.. An Israeli officer signalled that I could move forward towards them. I could tell he was an officer by the military insignia on his shoulder. Immediately thereafter, a group of about three Israeli soldiers came out from an alley near by where we were parked. Pointing his weapon at me, a soldier demanded that I should not drive on. I used the ambulance megaphone to speak to the officer who had initially given me the permission to move forward.“Hey, officer! Look at this soldier. He is threatening me with his weapon. They do not want me to come closer. Does he want to shoot and kill me?” I spoke in Hebrew, a language I speak fluently.The Israeli officer then shouted at the soldier and ordered him to allow me to move on. Indeed, I drove on towards the group of Israeli soldiers. Upon getting closer, we saw wounded young Ibrahim Omar Mohammed Sarhan (21 years old) and found that he had been put on the ground in a yard used to dispose of garbage west of the refugee camp. About four Israeli soldiers of the aforesaid group of soldiers were surrounding him.“Who is the medic?” The officer asked me in Hebrew.I said I was the medic and that I was accompanied by two other medics. The medic Ra’ed approached the wounded young man and I fetched the first aid kit from the ambulance. We started to take vital signs and check the injured young man’s body. I found that he was breathing and that his heart was still beating. I also saw dressings (pressure bandages) on his right and left thighs. In particular, there were pressure bandages on his right leg. A wooden stick was used to fasten the bandage and control the bleeding. The medic Ra’ed and I then decided to put the injured young man on the stretcher. Ra’ed then supplied the young man with an IV infusion bag in order to replenish liquids and blood he had lost. He was already sufferingfrom dehydration. We realised this because of the quantity of blood which had spilt on the ground and had soaked the young man’s clothes and bandages. While I was driving to the Rafidiya Hospital in the city of Nablus, Ra’ed continued to monitor the young man’s health condition inside the ambulance. At around 6:00 am, we arrived at the Rafidiya Hospital. We admitted the young man to the Emergency Unit, where doctors started to offer medical aid to him. My colleague and I assisted the medical staff to save his life. However, we left him after we had received a telephone call, reporting that another citizen had been injured in Al-Far’a refugee camp. According to the phone call we received, Nash’at Muhammad Abu-al-Hasan (20 years old) had been beaten by the occupying soldiers.At around 6:40 am, I received a call on my personal telephone from a relative of Ibrahim Sarhan, stating that he had passed away. He requested that I take his corpse back to the refugee camp, but I told him that there were special vehicles to transport the dead.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 18 July 2011