Affidavit No. 3867/2007
2007
I live in the Nour Shams Refugee Camp, which is located to the east of Toulkarem city. My son, Muhammad Ahmad Younes, 34 years old, is married to Haifa ‘Abd-al-Rahman Younes, aged 30 years, and has six boys and girls with the youngest being less than 12 years old. My son had cancer in his head in 2004, and started his treatment in the Jerusalem hospitals Augusta Victoria and al-Maqased. There he had surgery on his head the same year; he recovered and his situation improved, and so he went back to his normal life.At the beginning of this year, in January 2007, Muhammad suffered again from severe pain in his head, and returned for treatment at the said hospitals, where he had three head surgeries. At the beginning of July 2007, he started chemotherapy at Augusta Victoria Hospital in Jerusalem, where went monthly for treatment. My son had received a special permit to ease his crossing of the Israeli checkpoints and enable his travel to the hospital for treatment. He used to be transferred from our house at Nour Shams via a civilian car with a yellow Israeli plate, belonging to another son’s wife Muntaha Radi Rifa’i, who holds Israeli nationality. She would take Muhammad to Jerusalem by crossing the Jbara military checkpoint south of Toulkarem, which separates the West Bank and the territories that were occupied in 1948. Muhammad’s permit allowed him to cross at the Jbara checkpoint, and this is what happened several times. On 15 September 2007, my son Muhammad was at our house in the refugee camp, and said he felt weak and needed treatment. Therefore, Muntaha Rifa’I took him in her car and headed for the Jbara checkpoint, in order to drive him to the Augusta Victoria Hospital in Jerusalem for treatment. They left the house at around 10:20 am, accompanied by three of my sons, all holders of special permits which enable them to enter the territories occupied in 1948. When they arrived at the Jbara checkpoint a debate started between my sons and the Israeli soldiers, who refused to let them cross the checkpoint. I do not want to name my sons who were accompanying Muhammad. This debate continued for around 40 minutes, during which Muhammad was screaming in pain. Although this occurred in front of the Israeli soldiers, they would not allow him to cross the checkpoint for treatment.Muhammad passed away, inside the car, at about 11:15 am at the Jbara checkpoint,  within sight of the Israeli soldiers. When the soldiers saw that he had died, they called a civilian Israeli ambulance whose men checked my son and confirmed his death. They then let a Palestinian Red Crescent ambulance move him from the military checkpoint to my house at the Nour Shams refugee camp. I was shocked when Muhammad Younes was brought back dead. He had left while living and came back dead a short while later, due to Israeli occupying soldiers blocking his crossing at the checkpoint. I therefore blame the Israeli occupation and the soldiers at Jbara military checkpoint, and hold them responsible for the death of my son, and for depriving six children of the kindness and care of their dad. You cannot imagine how sad and in pain we are at the loss of my son. I do not deny that my son Muhammad was sick and in bad condition, but at the same time the delay of his crossing at the checkpoint by the occupation soldiers, contributed in large extent to his death.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 4 October 2007.Signature: Munira ‘Isa YounesName not withheldField researcher: Tareq al-Haj Mahmoud