Affidavit No. 5403/2010
2010
My name is Ahmad Sa’id Muhammad Sabbah. I am 40 years old, married, and father to a 10-year-old child. I am a Naval Police officer in the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) and previously lived with my wife and son in the village of Thinnaba in the governorate of Toulkarem. I am one of the PNA employees who returned to the homeland through the Gaza crossings in 1994 in accordance with the Oslo Agreements but the rest of my family members live in Jordan.On 1 November 2001, I was arrested by the Israeli army and an Israeli court sentenced me to nine years imprisonment. I served my sentence in a number of Israeli prisons in northern West Bank, including in al-Jalama Detention and Interrogation Centre and in the prisons of Megiddo, HaDarim, al-Damon and Galboa’. I served the majority of my sentence however in al-Naqab Desert Prison.On 21 April 2010, my imprisonment sentence expired. After al-Naqab Prison Administration had verified my documents, I was about to board the bus, which was supposed to transport me to al-Thahiriyya checkpoint where my wife and son were waiting for me. At that point, however, an officer from the Israeli Prison Administration told me that he had orders to deport me to the Gaza Strip in implementation of Military Order No. 1650. The Israeli officer claimed that my national number had been issued from Gaza when I returned to the homeland in 1994 from Yemen. I rejected the decision and refused to board onto the bus debating with the Prison Administration, arguing that my family and I resided in Toulkarem, drawing attention to the fact that I did not have family, a house or relatives in Gaza.They left me alone for about 45 minutes, during which time they communicated with others. Then, a number of officers from the Prison Administration returned and demanded that I sign a pledge, which stated that I either stay in prison for an additional period of 6 months (during which I would be subject to any decision made by the Prison Administration or the Israeli army) or accept the decision which would result in my deportation to Gaza. I refused to sign the pledge and rejected both of these options.They later forced me to board the bus but I was under the impression that I would meet with an Israeli security official at Erez Crossing. At around 6:00 pm, I arrived at Erez Crossing, officers told me that no security officials were present at the Crossing and forced me into the Gaza Strip. I should note that the Prison Administration refused to give me my ID card before I left the prison.As soon as I entered the Gaza Strip, I erected a sit-in tent on the Palestinian side of Erez Crossing in protest against military order No. 1650, as a result of which thousands of citizens would be deported from the West Bank to the Gaza Strip.I am now living separated from my wife and son and live with some friends on the seventh floor of al-Thafer four residential tower in the Tal al-Hawa neighbourhood west of Gaza city. I have managed to contact HaMoked – Centre for the Defence of the Individual- in Israel in order to follow up with the Israeli authorities hoping to be allowed to return to the West Bank.