Affidavit No. 1981/2004
2004
At 1:30  am Tuesday, 21 September 2004, while I was sleeping in my home located  in Kamal al-Sabbagh quarter in Jenin Camp, I was awakened by a loud  blast, heavy shooting and the commotion of Israeli military machineries.  I was at home with my wife and children (10 persons). I immediately  realised from the strong blasts, heavy firing, and the machinery, in  addition to the Apache helicopter soaring above Jenin city and camp,  that the Israeli army had attacked Jenin city and camp. Half an hour  later, I heard the Israeli megaphones announcing the imposition of a  curfew on Jenin camp. This convinced me that the operation would take a  long time.My  children were frightened by the loud explosions. We sat together in one  place, scared, especially because my 18-year-old son Yamen was  assassinated on 13 September 2004 with Mahmoud Abu-Khalifa and Amjad  Husni. They were killed when the Israeli army shelled the car they were  driving near Jenin municipality. My son was an activist in al-Aqsa  Martyrs Brigades wanted by the Israeli army, which had broken into my  home three times in search of him; each time they damaged our home and  its contents during their search. We were afraid that the army would  attack our home, and this frightened us, especially my children. This  happened.At 3:00  am, I heard military jeeps in front of our home, and then I heard the  Israeli soldiers coming up the stairs and knocking at the door of our  home. I hurriedly opened the door and saw around eight soldiers aiming  their guns at me. These weapons were giving off strong light that made  it difficult for me to look at them. One of the soldiers asked me to  take off my upper clothes, which I immediately did. They then asked for  my identity card, which they looked at and returned back to me. They  entered my home, and one of the soldiers who was blonde, tall, and  hardly spoke Arabic asked my family and me go into my children's  bedroom. The soldiers imprisoned us in one room and asked us to sit on  the ground. My children and wife were trembling from fear while the  soldiers thoroughly searched the entire home.After  half an hour, the same tall, blonde soldier came to the room where we  were imprisoned and asked me to come close to him, asking me in Arabic,  “Where is your son Yamen”. I told him that he was killed eight days ago.  He then asked me how he was killed, and out of fear, I told him that  the car in which he was riding was exploded. The fact is that the car  was bombed by an Israeli rocket. He asked me about who died with him in  the car. I told him Mahmoud Abu-Khalifa and Amjad Husni were killed as  well. The same soldier said, "Listen, I want your son’s weapon; where is  it.” I told him I did not know, and that I had never seen Yamen carry a  weapon. He then asked about a photo of my son and his comrades hung on  the wall picturing Yamen with a weapon. I said this is just a photo and  the weapon that Yamen is carrying was borrowed from his friends for the  photo.This  soldier scornfully laughed, shook my hand, and said, “We are sorry for  killing your son Abu Yamen.” I was obligated to shake hands with him and  then the soldiers left. Then at around 5:00 that the same morning, I  heard the Israeli army declare over megaphone, “Zakariyya al-Zubeidi,  surrender in order not to hurt the residents of Jenin Camp.” The  soldiers repeated this phrase many times. The Israeli army remained in  the area until 7:00 am, when they left Jenin city and camp. In the  morning, I learnt that around 40 machineries and jeeps attacked Jenin  city and camp and the Israeli soldiers broke into the home ofmartyr  Mahmoud Abu-Khalifa, who was assassinated with my son, and they arrested  his brothers. Moreover, the soldiers on that day attacked al-Aqsa  Martyrs Brigade leader Zakariyya al-Zubeidi's brothers' and relatives'  houses. They arrested one of his brothers and some of his relatives as a  means of pressuring him to surrender, or so it seems.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 21 September 2004Signature: Feisal 'Abd-al-Wahhab 'Isa AyyoubField researcher: Tareq al-Haj Mahmoud