Affidavit No. 5839/2010
2010
I was born in Um-Tuba village in Jerusalem governorate in 1951. I have lived in the village with my family my whole life and have never left the village for any significant periods of time. I hold a Jerusalemite ID card. My residency in the village is legitimate and I enjoy the rights and obligations of the residents of Jerusalem city, or rather the holders of Jerusalem ID cards.Between 1972 and 2006, I was the imam of al-‘Umari Mosque in Um-Tuba village, which is managed by the Jordanian Waqf. In 2006, I ran for Palestinian legislative elections as a candidate of the Change and Reform List, and was elected a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC).On 28 May 2006, I was summonsed by the Israeli Police to al-MaskobiyyaInterrogation and Detention Centre (the ‘Russian Compound’). I was handed a decision, written in Hebrew, a language that I understand well. The decision demanded that I resign from the PLC or leave Jerusalem. This implied that my Jerusalem ID card would be withdrawn from me. I refused to submit my resignation or sign the pledge to leave Jerusalem. I was therefore detained on the basis of my involvement in the election, and my political affiliations, and I was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of four years.I was released on 20 May 2010 after I had served my prison term. On the evening of the same day, I was summonsed by al-Maskobiyya Police for an interview. The Police Commander (as he introduced himself) told me that the Israeli Ministry of Interior had issued a decision to revoke my ID card and expel me from Jerusalem. He said that they would give me a period of 30 days to make family and social arrangements and put the deportation into effect. During the period I had spent in prison in 2006, I learned that lawyer Usama al-Sa’di had been hired to work on my case and challenge the deportation decision.After the deportation decision was confirmed to me last May, and after I was released from prison, the Ministry decided not to implement the deportation. I was therefore arrested 40 days after the start of the respite period that the officer had announced. I was detained for five months and eight days. On the first day I was detained, they demanded I sign a pledge, stating I would not enter Jerusalem, which I rejected completely. I was then detained as an infiltrator to the land of Israel, according to their definition.I attended five hearings at the Israeli Magistrates’ Court, which is located near al-Maskobiyya Interrogation and Detention Centre in Jerusalem. The last court hearing was held on 8 December 2010. After the hearing, an Israeli military vehicle took me to the village of Bitouniya in Ramallah without the court having issued an order to implement the expulsion decision. During the hearing, I was referred to as an infiltrator in the land of Israel, as if I were not a resident of Jerusalem my whole life. The prison sentence for infiltration cases is not more thanone month. The period of my detention, therefore, exceeded the prescribed term and should be considered sufficient. Nevertheless, they implemented my expulsion order even though I never signed any pledge to leave [Jerusalem] and I refuse to sign any document that would force me to leave. It is my right to live in my homeland, where I have always been with my family. I lived here before the occupying State of Israel was established and took control of Jerusalem.I would like to state that they refused to give me my [Jerusalem] ID card – a card which all the residents of Jerusalem hold. Now, I do not have an ID card. Consequently, I am prohibited from entering Jerusalem. I have been detained by the Israeli authorities on seven occasions; the longest period of detention was 11 years and the shortest was five months. I have been imprisoned on charges relating to political activity in Jerusalem for a total of 30 years.