Affidavit No. 4112/2008
2008
I own a plot of land estimated at 51 dunums, planted with 350 olive trees and located on the southeast side of Kufr Qaddoum village. This land is located in Area “C” and is approximately 900 metres from my home. It was my only source of living, which I made from my olive trees.My suffering began in 1986 when half of my land was confiscated by the Israeli occupation army due to its vicinity to a bypass road called the security road for the Qadumim settlement. This street is assigned for the use of Israeli vehicles only and a watchtower was established near it. After the confiscation of my land, I took legal action against the Israeli army with the Israeli Liaison in 1986. But nothing changed and the situation continued. I was prohibited from reaching half of my confiscated land.A year and two months ago, as I went to take care of my remaining land, I was shocked to see an Israeli military jeep two metres from my land. When the soldiers saw me approaching, they got out of the jeep. They were wearing military uniforms and helmets on their heads and they were carrying weapons. I don’t know what kind of weapons they were as I have no experience in this area. They were of medium size. One of the soldiers asked me in Hebrew, which I speak and understand, what I was doing there. I told him that this was my land and that I had come to take care of it.One of the soldiers prevented me from going to my land. He aimed his weapon at me and threatened to kill me if I went to my land again. I returned home. After two months, I went back to see what happened to the olive trees because the Israeli army had confiscated the second half of the land. I found out that all my trees were uprooted and the land was levelled and two greenhouses were built on it. When I saw this, I got mad and again I took legal action against the Israeli army through Yesh Din, [an Israeli human rights organisation], but so far I have gotten no answer from them.It is worth noting that an Israeli military jeep is continuously placed near my land to prevent us from reaching it. I always hope to reach it, but my hopes are always dashed because the soldiers prevent me every time. Currently, another greenhouse is being built by the Israelis. I thus lost my only source of livelihood and my family is suffering from our dire financial situation. My family is big and embraces my wife, my old mother and my daughters Rasha, who is 22 years old, Hiba, 20 years old, Hilwa, 15 years old, and my sons Fadi, 27 years old, Fida, 24 years old, Ihab, 22 years old, Muhammad, 19 years old, and Subhi, 12 years. All of them need money for studying, medication, marriage, etc. I call upon the legal organisation to help me restore my land which I inherited from my grandfathers.