Affidavit No. 4371/2008
2008
On 4 September 2008, I was at my home with my wife Nahil ‘Awni ‘Abd-al-Rahim, 21 years old, and seven-months pregnant, and our daughter Shatha, a year and a half old, in our village Qusra in the governorate of Nablus. I was asleep. Suddenly, my wife woke me up. My watch read 11:50 pm. I asked her what was wrong. She said she felt pains in her stomach and had a light bleeding and that she should see a doctor. I immediately called Dr. Fathi Ibrahim 'Oda, from the neighbouring village of Jurish, on his mobile telephone.At about 6:00 pm earlier that same day, I had taken my wife to him after she suffered pains in her stomach. Following a diagnosis, Dr. Fathi said that her pain was minor and that her disorder was normal. He also prescribed her some medicine, which I bought on our way back home. When I called him on his mobile telephone, I told Dr. Fathi about my wife's condition."I will bring her to you." I said. He replied, "What can I do for her? Give her two Acamol pills [a headache reliever and fever reducer]. It is better that you wait till morning. I cannot receive her now." I was bewildered to hear such a reply, especially from a doctor. Given that my wife was in pain and had started bleeding more heavily, I decided to take her to the Rafidiya Hospital in Nablus, since it is the closest to us. I was afraid of any complications that might happen to my wife. I was also afraid for the baby. As our little daughter Shatha was born at seven months, I feared that this would also happen to our second baby. I immediately phoned my brother 'Uday, 24 years old. His house is about one kilometre from mine. "Where are you," I asked my brother. "At home," he answered.I told him about my wife's condition and asked him to come along in his red, 1983-model, Opel Ascona to transport her to Rafidiya Hospital in Nablus. He said he would come quickly. I called my brother, not an ambulance, because there are no ambulances in our village. However, there is an ambulance in the village of Qabalan. Since it was urgent, I thought that if I had called the ambulance in Qabalan, the driver would have surely been asleep and would have taken a long time to arrive at our village. The journey would have taken 20 minutes so I did not call the ambulance.Then, I phoned my mother, Rabiha, 54 years old. Her house is adjacent to mine. I also called my sister Um-Osama, who lives nearby. In five minutes, my brother, mother and sister were at home. I gave our daughter Shatha to my sister Um-Osama. I helped my wife into the back seat of the car and kept her company. My mother also came with us, as well as my brother 'Uday who drove the car. The car set off speedily to the city of Nablus. To get there, we have to cross Huwwara checkpoint, which is 30 kilometres to the north of our village. It was then 12:05 am on 5 September 2008.To indicate that there was an emergency in the car, my brother turned on the hazard lights. Within about 20 minutes, we reached Huwwara checkpoint, which is at the southern entrance to the city of Nablus. To access Nablus, we have to stop at the checkpoint and wait for soldiers to allow us pass. We stopped and waited in the car. The checkpoint was lit up but in the middle of the street there was a plastic divider, which indicated that the checkpoint was closed.  lifted my ID card along with those of my wife, mother and brother. I opened the front door of the car and got out, and I stood in front of the car. I looked at the place where soldiers usually stood at the checkpoint. About 20 to 30 metres to the north, I saw a black soldier and talked to him in Hebrew, which I am fluent in. "I have an emergency. My wife is suffering from a bleeding. I want you to open the checkpoint. I want to transport her to the hospital in Nablus," I shouted. For two minutes, the soldier did not comment, nor move from his place. "Wait. I will ask the officer." he replied later.He went to a small cabin in the middle of the street to the west. While waiting, I continued to demand that the soldier open the checkpoint. My wife screamed from the pain. The black skinned soldier, who I estimate was 22 years of age, returned after about 15 minutes. He carried a long weapon and was in the regular military uniform, but did not wear a helmet. Another soldier also came; he was in regular military uniform, blond, with a long weapon and without a helmet. I estimate that he was also 22 years old, I did not see any insignias or distinctive marks on the blond soldier. Both soldiers stopped at an approximate distance of three metres away from us, to the northwest. The blond soldier asked me in Hebrew what the matter was.Replying in Hebrew, I explained to him that my wife was suffering from a bleeding and screamed from the pain. "We want to access Rafidiya Hospital in Nablus," I said. "Do you have a permit?" he asked. "No I do not have a permit," I replied. "You cannot cross then," he said. "I have a permit to the Jordan Valley. I also have a vehicle permit to access the Jordan Valley," I said. "This does not work on this checkpoint," he responded. At that point, my mother got out of the car and opened the back door, where my wife was lying, and pointed to her, but the soldier insisted that we were forbidden from crossing the checkpoint. "Look at my wife. She is dying. Allow us to cross. Detain me or any one of us or even all of us, except for my brother, who drove the car, so that he can transport her to the hospital," I continued. "Take our ID cards, but allow my brother to transport my wife to hospital," I went on. "No way," he insisted.After 40 minutes of begging him to grant us access, three other soldiers from the checkpoint arrived from the western area, from the cabin which I mentioned earlier. Of these, a tall, blond soldier was carrying a wireless communications device on his back. "Why are you making noise at the checkpoint?" the latter soldier asked. "We do not want to make noise. We are only requesting you to please allow us take my wife to hospital. Look at her; she might die at the checkpoint. She is bleeding. She is pregnant," I protested.He did not show any interest. In the meantime, my wife screamed from pain. My brother had gotten out of the car and stood beside her. Instead of helping us, the soldier with the wireless communications device pushed my brother with his hands. At that time, my wife was in labour and screamed more and more. I watched her. Part of the baby was out her womb while another part was still inside. We all shouted and we were in a dilemma. I was tormented by fear for my wife and baby's lives. What could I do? The soldiers only stood looking at us. Then, I called the Red Crescent Society, the number is 101, from my mobile telephone and told them where we were and what happened to us. The person who replied told me that they knew about my wife's case since she left the village. "I told the person who called us to inform us when he reaches the checkpoint to wait for us there." he said. "I do not know who called you and now we are in a difficult situation," I replied. "We are on our way to you," he answered.I asked my brother if he had phoned the Red Crescent Society. He said he did but that he could not understand what they told him as he was so anxious about my wife. In less than 20 minutes, an ambulance belonging to the Red Crescent Society arrived and soldiers allowed it to approach us. Two medics stepped down, took my wife out of our car, and put her in the ambulance. At the checkpoint, they helped my wife deliver the baby. But it was too late. The male baby was still-born. Had he lived, I would have named him Zeid but because of what happened to him I decided to name him ‘Abdallah. In the ambulance, my mother went with my wife and medics to Rafidiya hospital in Nablus.The soldiers did not impede its access. My brother returned home. At the hospital, the doctors stopped my wife's bleeding. My dead baby was kept at the mortuary and my wife stayed one day in the hospital. Then, she left with her dead baby to bury it. We suffered severely due to what happened to us at Huwwara checkpoint.