Affidavit No. 5330/2010
2010
I am a resident of the village of Kufr Dan, located at a distance of about five kilometres west of the city of Jenin and home to approximately 4,000 residents. I am a member of a family of six brothers. We own a water well in the area of al-‘Aqoula, about one kilometre east of the village. Five years ago (in early 2005), we dug this well, which was designated for agricultural purposes. We use the water to irrigate our eight dunums of land, with the well at the centre.At around 10:00 am on Wednesday, 24 February 2010, Israeli military forces arrived at the Al ‘Aqula plain. The forces included ten military jeeps, two yellow bulldozers driven by soldiers, and three white cars that belonged to the Israeli Water Authority. The people in the white cars were not wearing military uniforms. Claiming that the wells were not licensed, the Israeli forces began to demolish several in the area. When the incident was reported to us, my brothers, a number of my relatives, and I hurried to our well in order to remove the valuable water pump, which is worth approximately NIS 10,000. The pump was installed at a depth of 180 metres down inside the well.As I was lifting it with a tractor, two soldiers who were wearing military uniforms and carrying long, black weapons reached us. One of the soldiers pointed his weapon at us. He was about 24 years old, short, of fair complexion, and wore a helmet on his head. Shouting in Hebrew, which I did not understand, he came close to me and pushed me with his foot and weapon. I submitted and moved away from the well and water pump, which we had managed to lift before the soldiers arrived. Suddenly and without any justification, the same soldier fired a bullet at me from a distance of one or two metres. The bullet hit the right side of my stomach and penetrated through the left side. I immediately fell to the ground.When the soldier fired at me, I had been moving away from the well, as he had demanded I do, and was not doing anything suspicious. I was at least ten metres away from the well. The soldier was walking behind me, despite the fact that I was moving away from the well. As I started to bleed, my brothers and some of my relatives tried to help me. However, the two soldiers prevented anyone from approaching me, threatening to use force and to open fire on anyone who came close. At gunpoint, my brothers moved to a distance of twenty metres away from me.Meanwhile, the other soldier approached me and said to me in English that he was a physician. As he started to offer first aid to me, all the Israeli military cars arrived. By that time, the Israeli bulldozers had demolished five wells and ours was next. After I had been given first aid, I was placed on a military stretcher and transported to an Israeli military car, which seemed to be designated for injured military personnel. The car left the area for the Salem military camp west of the city of Jenin. Several minutes after I had been wounded, a Palestinian ambulance arrived to the area, but the Israeli troops prevented the Palestinian medics from offering any medical aid to me.As soon as I arrived at the Salem military camp, a white and red Israeli civil ambulance, with a Star of David inscribed on it, transported me to the al-‘Affoula Hospital inside the Green Line. An Israeli soldier accompanied me. At the hospital, I received medical treatment and had an operation on the bullet wound. After 30 hours at the hospital, some of my relatives who live inside the Green Line picked me up. I returned to my house in the village of Kufr Dan.I learned that the Israeli force had seized the water pump and withdrawn from the area after they had demolished five wells and damaged ours. Israeli troops confiscated the pump and destroyed its pipes and accessories, leaving the well partially demolished. It should be noted that a curfew had not been imposed on the area when the incident took place.As you see, I am now confined to a bed and am not able to move. Finally, I would like to state that I was shot by an Israeli soldier and nearly died without being guilty of anything and with no justification.