Affidavit No. 2736/2005
2005
We own a  plot of land estimated at 13 dunums and planted with different types of  trees, particularly citrus trees, as well as vegetables. We have been  cultivating this land for over ten years. The land is located three  kilometres west of our village. This land is the main source of  livelihood for our families which consist of 29 persons. We need  constant access to our land in order to take care of it and to pick the  crops. But the situation changed after the construction of the  Separation Wall around Qalqiliya city and Tulkarem in 2003 by the  Israeli occupying authorities.The Wall  has isolated many villages including our village. The Wall is a fence  approximately six metres high and 12 metres wide with two gates, one on  the west side and the other to the north. Therefore, we can only go to  our land, located behind the Wall, through the gates which are  controlled by the occupying authorities. They control the opening and  closing times of these gates, in addition to who passes through them. We  have to obtain permits from the occupying forces, which is not an easy  process.Many of  my family members have not been able to obtain permits and they have  always been denied permits due to security reasons. Nevertheless, those  who have obtained permits are also subjected to delays of several hours  while entering or exiting our village through the gates, and are  subjected to curses and inspection as well. All these actions are  practiced in order to humiliate us for no reason. This is all in  addition to the long hours we spend at the gate waiting for the soldiers  to open them, despite the fact that the permits state that the opening  hours are from five in the morning until five in the evening. But the  soldiers do not abide by these hours and they open and close the gates  whenever they like.In  December 2005, the Israeli soldiers held me at the west gate for  approximately two hours upon entering or exiting, on a daily basis, for  no reason except to humiliate me. For example, on 15 December 2005 at  around 7 am, I reached the west gate on the way to my land, and one of  the soldiers asked me to take off my jacket, which I did. He then asked  me to take off the rest of my clothes, but I refused because I felt that  the soldier was trying to humiliate me since he was laughing at me.  When I refused to take off my clothes, the soldier called other Israeli  soldiers who came to the gate within half an hour. A number of soldiers  including intelligence officers came close to me and told me literally  that I have to do whatever the Israeli soldiers order me to do without  any objection or they would withdraw my permit. On that day, I was held  for four hours before I was allowed to pass.It is  worth noting that I am not the only citizen subjected to such  sufferings. All citizens who pass through this gate experience the same  sufferings whether they are men, women or children. Therefore, I call  upon all institutions and members and professionals to put pressure on  the Israeli occupying authorities to remove these gates and the  Separation Wall which has swallowed our land, or to at least stop the  suffering resulting from humiliation, curses and delays to which we are  subjected on a daily basis while passing through these gates on our way  to and from our lands. The west gate number is 943.This is my statement and hereby I sign, 22 December 2005Signature: Muhsen Mas’oud Hasan