Affidavit No. 7406 /2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Hasan Hussein Abdullah Hijaz, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 995759115, born on 19 June 1951, internist and nephrologist, and a resident of the ‘Anabta town, Tulkarem governorate, would like to declare the following:Since 1987, I have been working as an internist and nephrologist at the Al Watani Hospital in Nablus city. I was responsible for following up with the health condition of the late Zuheir Rashid Lubbadah, 51 years old and resident of Nablus, since the beginning of his illness. After he was deported to the Marj az Zuhour area in southern Lebanon in 1991, Lubbadah started to suffer from chronic infections in his kidneys. Later, he suffered from chronic kidney failure. He received dialysis treatment in preparation for a kidney transplant. A kidney was successfully transplanted at the time. Several years later, however, the kidney failed; that is, it sustained damage. Then, Lubbadah underwent dialysis treatment again for four hours a day, three times a week. During the period of his illness, Lubbadah sustained several health setbacks. He suffered from Hepatitis C, causing cirrhosis of the liver. His glands, including his thyroid, were overactive, leading to a speedy hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis) and calcifications building up all over his body. He also experienced severe retrograde changes in the bones and joints, causing difficult movement.It is known that Lubbadah was detained on several occasions by the Israeli occupying authorities. The last time he was detained was about a year ago. His health condition further deteriorated in prison as a result of his illness as well as other diseases that were generated by his primary illness. On 24 May 2012, the Israeli occupying authorities released Lubbadah in light of his worsening health. He was in a very critical condition. He suffered from a hepatic coma resulting from cirrhosis of the liver, which was caused by Hepatitis C. Necessary medical tests of similar conditions were performed. He also had dialysis treatment as usual. However, Lubbadah’s health condition did not improve, but instead deteriorated further. At 9:00 am on 31 May 2012, Lubbadah died at the Al Watani Hospital in Nablus.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 5 June 2012