Affidavit No. 4464/2008
2008
In mid-2006, my brother Khaled, 38 years old, had a surgical operation for the placement of a “stent for the portal vein in the liver" at 'Ein Shams Specialised Hospital in the Arab Republic of Egypt. He had suffered from an occlusion in that vein. Following the operation, his health condition improved and he returned to the Gaza Strip. During July 2008, however, my brother's health condition deteriorated.Having conducted medical checks, it appeared that he suffered from an obstruction in the stent which had been placed in the operation in Egypt. After his physicians had decided to transfer him abroad for medical treatment, my brother managed to obtain a transfer to Tel HaShomer Specialised Hospital in Israel in late July 2008. Thus, we started coordination procedures so that my brother could pass through Beit Hanoun (Erez) Crossing to the hospital. Meanwhile, the Israeli Intelligence agency summoned my brother for an interview.On 9 September 2008, my brother reported to the Israeli Intelligence at Beit Hanoun Crossing, despite the fact that his health condition was very critical. As he suffered from a malfunction in his liver, he suffered from a swelling of the stomach. As he could not eat, he also suffered from severe exhaustion and physical weakness. Due to his critical health condition, the intelligence officer told him that he could enter Israel on the next day. At 3:00 pm on the same day, however, the intelligence officer called my brother again. He said he had not completed his conversation with my brother and that he should report to him on the following day. My brother replied that his health condition was bad and that he could not come back. However, the intelligence officer insisted that my brother appear so that he could go to the hospital.On the next day, 10 September 2008, my brother reported to the Intelligence Agency. There, my brother was surprised when the intelligence officer proposed that he cooperate with him; that is, to report information about Palestinian resistance activists to Israeli Intelligence in order to be allowed passage into Israel for medical treatment. My brother told me that he rejected the offer outright. Therefore, the intelligence officer refused to allow him to enter Israel. "Go to Gaza and be treated there. I hope you will be cured," the officer said. After my brother returned, we got another transfer to Palestine Hospital in the Republic of Egypt. However, he could not travel due to the siege imposed on the Gaza Strip and the closure of Rafah Crossing. During thistime period, my brother stayed at Gaza European Hospital in Khan Younes. At about 8:00 am on Tuesday, 28 October 2008, my brother died.