Affidavit No. 5227/2010
2010
At around 12:30 pm on Friday, 8 January 2010, I returned to my house after I had performed the noon prayers. I was surprised when my son Arkan, 25 years, told me that an armed force of the General Investigations unit at the Ministry of Interior of the Gaza government had arrived at my house in order to arrest me. As they did not find me, they left a summons for me, demanding, without stating any reasons, that I should immediately go the General Investigations headquarters in the Jabaliya refugee camp. Having changed my clothes, I immediately went to the General Investigations headquarters in the Jabaliya refugee camp. After I arrived, I handed over the summons to a General Investigations officer. Then, four General Investigations officers, who carried clubs, plastic pipes and electric cables, arrived and led me to a room inside the headquarters. They ordered me to take off my clothes and leave only my underwear on. I asked them why they wanted to arrest me.“I am an old and sick man.” I said. “What have I done so that I should take off my clothes?” I went on.However, they hit me on the head severely with their fists and feet and forced me to take off my clothes. I was naked except for my underwear. Then, an officer blindfolded me with a piece of cloth and tied my hands and feet. Thereafter, they severely beat me on every part of my body using clubs, plastic pipes and electric cables at a continuous pace. I screamed and said I was ill. I explained that I had had several surgical operations on my feet due to old injuries and that I could not bear to be beaten However, they did not listen. They then placed wooden sticks under my feet and raised them up. Using the bastinado method, three General Investigations officers suspended me and hit the soles of my feet with cudgels, plastic pipes and electric cables. I screamed and felt intense pain. I begged them to stop and pay respect to my old age.“You are the age of my children.” I beseeched them, but it was in vain.Later, I started to yell at them and inquire why they beat me.“You are a member of Fateh and act like a leader.” They said to me.They continued to beat me severely with clubs, plastic pipes and electric cables all over my body. They poured water on my feet and forced me to jump and move around the room several times. However, I fell unconscious and only regained consciousness after they splashed some water on my face. I demanded that they transport me to hospital, but they refused. Then I requested that they allow me to perform the afternoon prayers. They forced me to perform the prayers in my place, while I was blindfolded and my feet tied. Only my hands were untied.I heard other persons nearby scream as they were being beaten. Having performed the prayers, I was subjected to shabeh against a wall. My feet were hung upwards and my head downwards. Whilst in this position they severely beat me with clubs, plastic pipes and electric cables as well as with their fists on my head and all over my body. I was again subjected to bastinado. They beat the soles of my feet and the palms of my hands with electric cables. I was subjected to severe beating and shabeh for almost four consecutive hours.Later, they took me to a neighbouring room, where I was interrogated for almost half an hour. During the interrogation session, I was charged with taking part in setting fire to a jeep belonging to a General Investigations officer in the area. I denied the charge and said I that did not even know that a General Investigations jeep had been burnt in the area. I also said that I always stayed at home and do not go out except to run essential errands for our home. During the interrogation, I was again beaten with clubs and plastic pipes. In the end, interrogators forced me to sign a pledge, stating that I would not carry out any activity against the Gaza government, or else subject myself to arrest. I left the General Investigations headquarters and returned to my house. From there, I was transported to al-„Awda Hospital in the town of Beit Lahiya, where I received medical treatment because of the severe beatings I suffered from the General Investigations officers.