Affidavit No. 6773/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Mohammed Ahmed Mohammed al Qarajat, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 854564937, born on 8 December 1995, a shepherd, and a resident of the Ras Hassan area, Halhul town, Hebron governorate, would like to declare the following:In the afternoon of Thursday, 13 October 2011, I took my family’s 40 sheep to graze them in our land in the Wadi al-Amir area. The land is cultivated with grapevines and we had already harvested the grapes crop. Our land is located at a distance of almost 100 metres south of the fence of the Karmei Tzur settlement.At around 4:30 pm, I reached an Israeli army camp, which is located at a distance of about one kilometre southeast of the settlement. After I had passed the camp, I saw four young settlers who were walking around the area, and with them was a large, brown dog that was not leashed and did not have a muzzle on its mouth. The four settlers were almost the same age; they were around 25 years old. Heading east, the settlers were going in a direction opposite to mine. They talked to me in Hebrew, but I did not understand what they said. Shortly after, a settler ordered the dog to attack me. I understood that from how the settler motioned his hand and his body language. The dog ran quickly towards me and tried to attack me. However, I hit it on the stomach and it moved away from me. I then ran east and the settlers chased me and started throwing stones. Fortunately, I was not hurt. I fled, leaving my sheep behind. The settlers and their dog chased me for a distance of about 50 metres. Then, I stopped and watched what was going on from a distant location. I saw the settlers ordering the dog to attack my sheep. I saw the dog attacking and biting a number of sheep. I talked to my father on my cellular telephone and reported what was happening to me. I then went to a different location nearby, overlooking the road.About 20 minutes later, my father arrived in a white Mitsubishi van, which belongs to our relative Hasan Muhammad Nouh ‘Aqel (47 years old). When my father arrived, the sheep had been dispersed in various directions. Hasan drove the van west towards the gate of the settlement. When the van arrived at a distance of about 100 metres from the gate, the settlers threw stones at the van which then took a detour road. I also saw the settlers taking one of the sheep to the settlement. Another sheep fled from the settlers’ dog into the settlement. Later, Police and Israeli army cars arrived to the area as my father had called the Police. I went back and gathered the sheep along with my father and relative. The soldiers brought the two sheep back from the settlement. A relative of ours had also) reported what had happened to the Police and also to the Israeli army.The settlers’ dog bit three sheep in the head. The head of one of the sheep swelled heavily. The Police officers and soldiers took photographs of the sheep that were bitten by the dog. They also told us to go to the Israeli Police station near to the settlement of Kiryat Arba’, east of Hebron city. As a result of the stones that were thrown, Hasan’s van had some dents and some of its paint was scratched off. Also, one of the van’s lights was broken.At the Police station, Hasan and I gave our statements about the attack. The Police had brought in two settlers of those who had assaulted us. Hasan and I identified them and I confirmed that they were among those who had attacked us.At around 8:00 pm, we left the Police station. When we reached the external door, we saw the two settlers who had attacked us walking outside the Police station, free men. Later, my father bought medicine at a cost of NIS 200 for the injured sheep. The sheep still suffer from health problems – they do not eat well due to the wounds on their mouths and faces.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 19 October 2011