Affidavit No. 5303/2010
2010
On 28 January 2010, my wife Ni’ma (about 40 years of age), our six children, including boys and girls, and I were present in our flat on the third floor in my family's four-storey building. The building is located east of the al-Haj Ma’zouz Secondary Girls School in the village of Balata. Surrounding the school on all sides is a cement wall, which varies in height from two to five metres and separates our building from the school.Some members of my family, including my wife and I, were staying up late in the master bedroom, which overlooks the area west of the school. Suddenly, we heard someone forcefully strike a metal object to the west of our house. As they were so loud, we inferred that the strikes were taking place inside a flat in the building or inside the school. Immediately, I looked at my watch, which indicated it was 11.00 pm. My wife and I thought that some thieves were breaking door locks in the building in an attempt to steal from our flats. They may also have been destroying door locks in the adjacent school for the same purpose. Therefore, my wife and I got up and stood near the window, which overlooks the western area. I saw several lights within the walls of the aforementioned school.From the first moment, I could see about ten to twelve people present in the school yard. A number of the people carried torches so I could clearly see what was happening. All of the people wore white and brown civilian clothes and the majority of them had long sideburns. Some of them also wore caps on their heads. I could not verify whether they carried weapons or not. A group of more than four, some of which wore caps and had sideburns, were banging on the metal doors with tools. I could not identify what kind of tools. The doors were located on the western side of the school, at a distance of approximately seven metres from my house. We immediately realised that these people were settlers. I was sure that they were settlers for several reasons. First, no one else would dare to enter the school at that time. Second, settlers frequently visit the Prophet Joseph Shrine, west of the school, for prayers, as they claim. Each time they had come, a number of the settlers had raided the school yard.Fearing that settlers might see us, we moved away from the window after a short time. Sitting inside the room, we heard the settlers’ movements as well as the occasional sound of many objects breaking. However, we did not know exactly what was taking place. Several minutes later, I used my cellular telephone to call Mrs. Intisar al-Ghoul, the school principal, and reported the incident to her. When she answered, I told Mrs. Intisar what I had seen and heard. The call lasted for a few moments. About half an hour after I had seen the settlers in the school yard, suddenly and without warning, settlers began throwing stones at our building. Standing near the window again I saw several settlers, who wore caps and had long sideburns, throwing stones at our building. My family members and I moved to the eastern room. We moved because the master bedroom was adjacent to the settlers and only the school fence separated it from them. Unlike all other windows in the building, iron bars are not installed on the western windows of this room. They would have would have prevented the stones from hitting the window panes. Even after we had moved to the eastern room, I continued to hear stones being thrown at our building for about ten minutes. I also heard several windows break in the master bedroom.We remained in the eastern room and did not dare to do anything. We could not look outside for fear that the settlers would see us and hurt us. After a while the situation calmed down and I could no longer hear anything. Two minutes later, I went to the room where we had been present and saw the glass of four windows broken as well as an Israeli patrol travelling along the street. I did not see the settlers. Minutes later, however, I saw the patrol withdraw from the area.In the morning, I called the school principal to inquire about the damage caused to the school. She told me that a number of door locks were destroyed, the call ended quickly.It should be noted that at around 12:00 am about three weeks ago, I was again in the aforementioned room in my house. From there I saw more than 100 settlers in civilian clothes. I did not check whether they carried weapons or not. Most of them had long sideburns. The settlers spread inside and outside the Prophet Joseph Shrine. A number of settlers were also inside the school. During that time, I heard the sound of objects breaking, but I did not know exactly what was going on. An hour later, some settlers threw stones at our building for several minutes. A stone that weighed over half a kilogramme crashed through the window of our bedroom and landed on the bed. If it were not for God, the stone would have hit and hurt my wife. We again moved to the eastern room. The settlers remained in the area until 5:00 am, shouting and disturbing all the residents of the neighbourhood.With regard to the school, I did not follow up with the damage that had been caused to it.