Affidavit No. 1995/2004
2004
Zeita is a  village located north of Toulkarem and with a population of  approximately 3500persons. Zeita is one of the agricultural villages  prominent for cultivating olive trees and oneof the villages close to  the Green Line that separates the occupied territories in 1948  fromoccupied territories in 1967. Zeita inhabitants were living  peacefully: a part of them work inagriculture and the other part work  inside the Green Line.With the  outbreak of the intifada on 28 September 2000, the situation in the  village started toworsen and it reached the worst with the construction  of the Separation Wall, which wasconstructed to separate the West Bank  from the 1948 occupied territories. Being adjacent tothe Green Line, the  part of Zeita village from which land was confiscated for the benefit  ofthe Wall was considerable. On 8 August 2002, the Israeli authorities  issued military ordersattached to aerial maps showing the lands to be  confiscated for the Wall. These confiscatedlands included lands located  in the north, south and west of Zeita village. Then the  Israelibulldozers embarked on bulldozing process to prepare the lands  for the construction of theSeparation Wall. During this process,  thousands of fruitful olive trees have been uprootedand tens of  greenhouses demolished. The Israeli bulldozers leveled the land in the  threeabove-mentioned areas with a width ranging between 70-120 metres.After the leveling processes, work on  the construction of a metallic fence stretching along theabove-mentioned  sides started as follows. On the western side, a fence has been  installedalong 500 metres, from the north about one kilometer and from  the south a little more thanone kilometer. So, Zeita has been besieged  from the three sides and only the southremained opened for the village.  As a result of the bulldozing works and land confiscation,the citizens  of Zeita lost approximately 922 dunums of their land. This includes the  land onwhich the metallic fence has been built as well as the other part  remained behind the fence.It is worth noting that the total area of  Zeita village land is about 2000 dunums: 230 dunumsremained behind the  Separation Wall and the Wall has been built on about 170 dunums (Imean  here the metallic fence) stretching along and beside the Green Line from  Baqa al-Sharqiyya to Nazlet 'Isa. This fence has exceeded the Green  Line in different depths fromone place to another.After  completing the construction of the metallic fence, the Israeli  occupation constructedanother metallic fence on the northern side of  Zeita village, which reaches to Baqa al-Sharqiyya and Nazlet 'Isa. This  fence, which was built in 2003, has isolated these twovillages to the  north of Zeita, although this fence is located inside the Palestinian  territoriesoccupied in 1967. This metallic fence stretches along eight  kilometers. Its construction hascaused the isolation of approximately 62  dunums of land from Zeita village, while thebulldozing works intended  for opening an asphalt road along this fence have destroyed  theirrigation networks in these lands as well as destroying tens of  dunums for the constructionof the asphalt road. This metallic fence was  removed in February 2004, one day beforeholding the hearing before the  Hague Court on the Separation Wall case, while the asphaltroad remained.  Here, I would like to point out that this road stretches along eight  kilometresand passes through the lands of Zeita, Baqa al-Sharqiyya,  Nazlet 'Isa and Qifin.After removing this fence, these lands  have been set free, which resulted in a big problem:the land was  confiscated by an Israeli military order, but no military order  entitling the ownersof these lands to reuse their lands has been issued  yet. Owners of these lands startedreclaiming and cultivating their lands  under very difficult and dangerous circumstances.Sometimes, in the  freed lands nearby the metallic fence constructed on the Green  Lineaccording to the Israeli allegations, Palestinian citizens are  subjected to harassment by theIsraeli occupation soldiers. The asphalt  road has not been removed and is sometimes usedby the Israeli army,  especially by military patrols and it is sometimes used by Zeita  citizens,on their own responsibility and under danger, although the  Israeli army prevents Palestiniancitizens from using it.As I mentioned above, the construction  of this road has damaged the water and electricitynetworks of the north  lands, which rely on irrigation, and also the municipality water  network,which has been connected to a house built on these lands. I am  the owner of agriculturalland which has been isolated for two years. My  land consists of eight dunums planted withcitrus trees in that area,  seven dunums of smooth and uncovered agricultural land, threedunums with  greenhouses, and five dunums planted with olive trees. As a result of  theconstruction of the metallic fence and the asphalt road, three dunums  of my land wereconfiscated and damaged for the fence and three dunums  for the road. After these landswere freed, I am unable to cultivate  these lands due to the dangers I am exposed to on onehand and because  the land itself has been damaged by the construction of the wall and  theroad. Moreover, restoration of this land needs huge amounts of money  and I, like otherfarmers, lack the financial capacity to reconstruct  these lands.I,  personally, believe that the removal of the metallic fence came as a  result of the pressureput on the Israeli government before convening the  Hague Court concerning the SeparationWall in order to beautify the  wall, which cut off the lands of Zeita. It is worth noting that  thatfence was separating the villages of Baqa al-Sharqiyya to Nazlet  'Isa from the West Bank.The harm was more on the citizens of Zeita  because their lands were isolated from them andthey were deprived of  their livelihood. The situation of Zeita village farmers was worse  thanthe situation of Baqa al-Sharqiyya to Nazlet 'Isa citizens who were  isolated with their landsfrom the West Bank but Zeita farmers were  isolated from their lands.Finally, I  would like to point out that as the olive harvest season is  approaching, Zeitacitizens cannot reach their lands located beyond the  metallic fence separating the villagelands from the north, south and  west because the Israeli Civil Administration refused to giveZeita's  farmers and residents permits to reach these lands, and imposed strict  and difficultconditions for obtaining these permits such as submitting a  land ownership limitation ofsuccession and registration document from  the Civil Administration of Qadomim settlement.Such requirements are  long and complicated, which discouraged most of Zeita's citizens andmade  them decide not to obtain the permits, except for very few of them.  This means loss ofthe current olive season, knowing that last year the  Israeli Civil Administration refused togive Zeita farmers entry permits  for their lands isolated from the south and west sides of thevillage  while it granted permits for villagers whose lands are isolated from the  north sidewithout giving any reasons.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 30 September 2004.Signature: 'Ahed Rushdi Muhammad 'Id