Affidavit No. 7733/2012
2012
After having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Amjad Muhammad Nimer Abu Ghosh, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID number 900031113, born on 9 October 1976, a private sector employee, and resident of the Balata refugee camp, Nablus governorate, would like to declare the following:I am a resident of the Balata refugee camp east of Nablus city. I live with my family in a three-storey building. My mother lives on the ground floor. My brother As’ad Muhammad Nimer Abu Gosh, a 37-year-old former prisoner freed on 2 September 2012 after spending five years in Israeli jail, lives on the second floor, with his wife and four daughters. I live on the third floor with my wife and three children. On 2 September 2012, the day my brother was released, at around 8:00 pm, visitors, relatives and other citizens came to a yard near our house to congratulate my brother on his release from the Israeli prison. Three members of Nablus’ Preventive Security force, armed and wearing military uniforms arrived. One of them called out to me and told me that he wanted to talk to my brother. I criticized this on the grounds that he was recently released. Then one of them gave me a written summons to deliver to my brother ordering him to go to the Preventive Security headquarters on 8 September 2012. On that date, my brother went to the Preventive Security headquarters in the al-Tour neighbourhood south of the city. There, he was arrested and sent to the al-Junaid prison and neither my family nor his wife or daughters were allowed to visit him throughout his time in prison, from 8 to 17 September 2012. On that date, he was released on bail following long and tiring procedures that ended at 11:00 pm.My brother told me, after he was released, that they interrogated him concerning the list of crimes of which he was accused by the Israeli occupying forces. He also said that he was threatened by the interrogators who said “you won’t see your family, considering that you were recently released as we want information from you other than the information you gave the Israelis”.On 18 September 2012 at 8:00 am, my brother received a call from the Preventive Security on his cell phone. They told him that they wanted to see him immediately. My brother turned off his cell phone and ignored their call, but at 8:00 pm, two Preventive Security military patrols, a green van and a civilian car, arrived at our house. Three people in civilian clothes got out and started calling out to my brother As’ad. I went outside with my other brother Ayman and two of my cousins. I started talking to one of the officers who asked me where my brother As’ad was, so I asked why he wanted him. He said that they had summoned him but he did not come. I asked what the point was of summoning him at 8:00 am after he was released at 11:00 pm the night before. I asked him what the rationale of this was, since he had only seen his family for a few hours, and I told them I wanted them to be more humane in their treatment of him and give him ten days to see his family and relatives since he spent a long time in the Israeli prison. The officer told me that they were following an order of the head of the Preventive Security force After a 15 minute discussion, the officer made a phone call then told me that the head of the Preventive Security agency wanted to speak to my brother personally for an hour. I told him that they always tell us it will only take a couple of hours but my brother ends up spending months in detention. The officer gave me his personal phone number and told me that if he does not return tonight, he will be at home the next morning, on 19 September 2012. At around 8:30 pm, my brother Assa’d came out of his house. His young daughters were crying and blocking the entrance of the house with their hands to prevent him from leaving. Right after that, my brother left the camp with the Preventive Security members. On the next day, 19 September 2012, the lawyer Rim al-Sayid called and told me that my brother As’ad was sent to the Nablus Conciliation Court because the Preventive Security was asking that my brother’s bail be revoked, the bail on which my brother had recently been released by the same security agency. The lawyer informed us that my brother went on a hunger strike right after his arrest and that he was being held in the al-Junaid prison west of Nablus. My brother is still detained in the al-Junaid prison and remains on hunger strike. The Palestinian officer didn’t keep his promise regarding my brother’s release and his family isn’t allowed to visit him.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign on 20 September 2012Signature: Amjad Abu GhoshName not withheldField researcher: Muhammad Ra’i