Affidavit No. 4669/2009
2009
My father, Yousef ‘Amer, inherited two pieces of land from his father, my grandfather, which we, my siblings and I, then inherited from him. These two pieces of land lie on the north-eastern side of our village, Massha, and are less than one kilometre away from the al-Qanat settlement. The name of the first piece of land is Wadi al-Shami. It comprises around 69 dunums and is located on lot number three, plot number 36. The other piece of land is named Khallet Shams, which is around 21 dunums and is located on lot number three, plot number 164. This piece of land lies inside the wire coil fence that was erected in the area over five years ago, where they are completing the building of the annexation and expansion wall with electric sensors and surveillance cameras. Since that time, we have been prevented from reaching our land except at specific times and after receiving a permit from the Israeli occupying authorities, which only ever happens during the olive harvesting season. At those times, we go to our land through the gates that have been built in the Wall constructed on these lands, and then, only after much trouble and harassment.Around ten days ago, the Israeli occupying forces started to bulldoze the land with an orange-coloured bulldozer. This bulldozer works day and night, non-stop. I filed a complaint at the Qadumim Police, where the lawyer, Fathi Shbeita, and the Head of the Military District Coordination Office, Captain Rafi were in attendance. The Captain told the lawyer that the land is within the boundaries mapped for expanding the settlement of al-Qanat. The lawyer told him that the Palestinian owners of the land have title deeds that prove their ownership of the same. The bulldozing has been continuing from 31 January 2009 until now, especially during the day, while it tends to slow down at night.The lawyer informed me that in seven days he would tell me whether my land has been confiscated or not. We do not yet know the reason for the expansion or bulldozing the land, and we do not know whether houses for the settlement will be built on it or whether caravans will be placed there or anything else of the sort. If this land is officially confiscated, we will be deprived of 80% of our land and our economic condition will be gravely affected, especially as they have uprooted about 50 to 60 olive trees thus far and we in Massha rely on olive oil as our primary source of income.