Affidavit No. 5329/2010
2010
I am the director of the Bizariya Cooperative Society for Mutual Benefit, which was established in 2000 in the village of Bizariya in the governorate of Nablus. On 26 September 2005, we obtained necessary licences from the Palestinian Authority’s Ministry of Labour. As part of our activities we opened a supermarket, where six female employees worked. In addition to several healthcare and social programmes, we launched a self-funded saving and lending programme. The Society comprises 112 female members from various classes, political affiliations, and families in Bizariya. The Society’s Board of Directors consists of seven female members. On 26 March 2008, the last election was held under supervision of the Ministry of Labour. Along with projects offered by European donors, such as the Norwegian Assistance to the Palestinian People, financial resources amount to NIS 1,200, paid by each member as fees.In mid-February 2010, I received an official summons to report to the Preventative Security agency in the city of Nablus. From 10:00 am until 2:00 pm, I was interrogated about the activities carried out by the Society, names of female members, names of Board members and political affiliations of members. Preventive Security officers demanded that I present documents relating to budgets, the financial report, and a list of the names of members on the Board and General Assembly as well as employees at the Society. Three days later, I returned to the Preventive Security offices and submitted the required documents. Later, a summons was sent to ‘Abla Bassalat, Chairwoman of the Society, who was interrogated about the same subject. The next day, Basalat and I returned to the Preventive Security agency, taking Society account statements retrieved from the Islamic Bank in the city of Toulkarem. On 2 March 2010, ‘Abla Basalat, the Chairwoman, and Khuloud Salem, the Treasurer, travelled to the city of Nablus for an interview with Preventive Security officers after receiving a telephone summons. A number of officers accompanied the women to the Islamic Bank in the city of Nablus and forced them to withdraw the whole balance of the Society, which comprised USD 45,000 and NIS 56,000. Officers confiscated the money, transported the women to the Preventive Security offices, and refused to give them any papers that stated that the money had been seized.We addressed several official authorities, including Palestinian ministries, Security Institutions, the Office of the Governor of Nablus and the Prime Minister’s Office. At 6:00 pm on 2 March 2010, a Preventive Security force arrived at the village of Bizariya. Without presenting a warrant, the Preventive Security officers closed the Society's offices, as well as the supermarket and confiscated papers, documents and a computer. The Society has by now been closed for seven days and no positive developments have occurred. On Sunday, 7 March 2010, we were surprised to hear that the Preventive Security agency intended to dissolve the elected Board of Directors and to constitute a new board as an ‘acting committee’.All of these measures were taken against us on the grounds that the women in charge of the Society were affiliated with the Hamas movement and that the financial resources were provided by Hamas. This is completely false. In the Society, we are a mixture of several political affiliations, including Fateh and Hamas. Apart from receiving some projects from European donors, our financial resources are independent.I demand that the Preventive Security agency be forced to stop harassing the Society and its Board as well as to return the properties it confiscated. I would like to reiterate that all our papers and licences are legal and prove that the Society operates in a valid manner. I should note that contents and supplies in the supermarket, which has been closed for seven days, were damaged to the cost of JD 30,000. All these are losses incurred by the Cooperative Society’s capital.