Affidavit No. 3451/2007
2007
Beit Lid village is located 17 kilometres east of Toulkarem city. It has 6,500 inhabitants and is where I was born. It is located roughly halfway along the road that connects the cities of Toulkarem and Nablus. Since 7 March 2007, the residents of Beit Lid have been suffering as a result of military manoeuvres and training exercises carried out by Israeli forces inside the village.There have been four such incidents; the first took place on 7 March 2007, the second on 8 March 2007, the third on 14 March 2007, and the fourth and most recent on 28 March 2007. These military manoeuvres and training exercises usually started at around 2:00 am. They involved 400-500 Israeli military soldiers wearing dark green military uniforms and carrying a new type of gun.The soldiers get out of Israeli military jeeps and armoured personnel carriers in the area around Beit Lid, particularly to the west, where Safarin village is located, and to the south, where Kour and Kufr Qaddoum villages are located. The soldiers enter Beit Lid on foot, in groups of 15-20 soldiers, and then spread out on all the roads and alleys of the village. They do so without shooting.All of Beit Lid's inhabitants have witnessed these manoeuvres. On several occassions, we have seen the Israeli soldiers holding human shaped cardboard cut-outs. They placed these on a number of the houses’ facades. We also witnessed them training for the evacuation and transfer of injured persons. We saw exercises whereby the Israeli soldiers carried other Israeli soldiers using specialised stretchers used to transfer injured persons. We have also noticed that each group of soldiers would he holding maps and would tour around the village according to these maps.These training exercises and the soldiers’ movements take place in a very organised manner. These forces have not yet entered any of the houses except for one deserted house located in the middle of the village. Furthermore, we have noticed that the majority of soldiers hold guns that are empty of bullets. The soldiers can see the village's inhabitants looking at them from their houses’ windows. Sometimes it even happens that a few citizens will pass by the soldiers at night. To date, the soldiers have not attacked any citizens from the village.These manoeuvres last from approximately 2:00 am until 7:00 am, when the soldiers leave in groups from the northern entrance of the village. This entrance leads to the Toulkarem-Nablus road. At the entrance, the soldiers enter armed personnel carriers and leave the area. Throughout the training operations and military manoeuvres, Israeli military jeeps roam the roads of Beit Lid. The last time these training exercises were carried out, on 28 March 2007, we noticed the presence of an Israeli military helicopter in the sky above the village. The soldiers do not impose a curfew or closure on Bit Lid area during the manoeuvres.The [whole] village, especially women, children and old persons, is living in a state of continuous fear and tension as a result of the military manoeuvres that take placeinside the village. Everyone fears that the night will come when Israeli forces will enter his/her house. The youth in the village are scared of staying out late at night on the roads and alleys of the village. At night, Beit Lid looks as if it were under curfew because every one remains at home out of fear of the Israeli military manoeuvres. Tension, fear and horror control Beit Lid village, which is now used for Israeli military manoeuvres and the village often appears as if it is empty of residents.