Affidavit No. 1927/2004
2004
At 7:00  pm Sunday, 25 July 2004, I was standing in front of my handcart, selling  grilled meat in the southern quarter of Toulkarem near Abu-Nidal  restaurant. The situation was very calm and there was no Israeli  military force presence. I looked to 30 metres the north where I saw six  young men standing and talking together; some of them were carrying  weapons. I knew of them Muhammad Shantir, my neighbour who was not an  activist nor wanted; and Hani 'Weida and Mahdi al-Tanbouz, both wanted  activists with the Fateh Movement. Meanwhile, I looked to the west and  saw a white Volkswagen bus with yellow Israeli registration plates  driving at a normal speed. When it passed in front of me, I saw the  driver, in his twenties, who had a short beard and white skin. He looked  at me when he passed by.The car  continued going forward but then started to slow down and stopped 30  metres away from me to the north. I had an instinct to continue to look  at this car, which then stopped nearby the aforementioned young men.  Quickly, the doors of the car opened and five persons in civilian dress  got out of it while opening fire in all directions. At the beginning, I  believed that what was going on was just a problem among young men from  the Fateh movement or similar factions. But the duration of the shooting  made me change my mind and protect myself in a shop behind me, from  where I looked from time to time to the scene. First, I saw Muhammad  Abu-Samaha (I learned his name later), lying on the ground and another,  Mahdi al-Tanbouz, lying beside him.The heavy  firing was so intensive I went back to the shop. After two minutes of  the heavy firing, I saw a large number of Israeli military jeeps arrive  to the scene, and I then realised that the group that opened fire on the  young men was an Israeli Special Squad. Once again, I looked towards  the scene and saw that the soldiers started to get out of the jeeps,  which made me go back into the shop once again. I did not look any  longer, fearing that these soldiers might see me. The army remained in  that area for around 40 minutes without any shooting. Then the Israeli  military jeeps started to leave the area. Soon, I hurried to the scene  of the shooting.There, I  saw that six young men have been assassinated. They were Ahmad Nabil  Barouq and Muhammad 'Adnan Shantir, neither wanted nor activists, but  were standing with some wanted young men at the time of the incident;  Said Nasser, who was not wanted but an activist in al-Aqsa Brigades;  Mahdi Tanbouz, 'Abd-al-Rahman Shadid, and Hani 'Weida all were wanted  activists with the al-Aqsa Brigades. These six men were laying on the  ground, side by side each other with not much space separating them. I  also saw that the heads of all of them were shot up and their brains  were on the ground. I learned that Muhammad Fathi Samaha and Khalil  Zeidan were injured and taken inside the Green Line by the Israeli  jeeps. Also, Ibrahim Jayyousi, an activist with the al-Aqsa Martyrs  Brigades had been injured and taken into one of the Israeli prisons  where he was sentenced to six months. I was also informed that another  person called Sheikh al-Zeitawi, a wanted activist with the al-Aqsa  Brigades, escaped. I am still suffering from a bad psychological state  after witnessing the injured heads and scattered brains on the ground.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, on 25 August 2004