Affidavit No. 3426/ 2007
2007
At 7:30 am on Wednesday, 28 February 2007, I was leaving Jenin camp, where I was born, in order to go to Hittin School, where I teach. The school is located in Jenin city. I went towards the eastern entrance of the camp, where there is a road I cross from the southern to the northern side in order to get to a small alley that leads out of the camp and onto the main road. While I was crossing the road, I looked to my left and saw a white Toyota pick-up truck. The truck, the back of which was covered, had Palestinian license plates. It was located on the southern side of the road.When I looked to my right, I saw a dark green Isuzu car, which I knew belonged to 'Ala' Breiki, who sold gas in the camp using his car as transport. 'Ala' was driving the car. I did not pay attention to who else was inside the car. After that, I crossed the road and proceeded into the small alley. Thereafter, I was surprised to see 'Ala' driving towards the same alley. His car passed right by my left side. This was accompanied by the sound of one bullet being fired. I then saw 'Ala’s car collide with the wall of a house located to my right. The car was now blocking the path in front of me. This happened right before my eyes. Everything happened very fast.Immediately after the car had crashed, intensive shooting began. Bullets were flying over my head from behind and hitting the car that had crashed. I lay down on the ground in order to avoid being shot. I felt the glass from the car’s windows flying over my body. The shooting was coming from behind me; from the south. When I looked behind to see the identity of the shooters, I saw three armed men wearing civilian clothes. They were wearing black jackets and jeans. They were holding short guns and were standing three metres away from the aforementioned car and myself.I decided to crawl towards these armed men. There was no other direction for me to move in as the targeted car was blocking the road. I crawled for approximately three metres, during which time the shooting continued. As I came towards the armed men, one of them lifted me up, looked into my eyes and then threw me down to the ground. He put his feet on my back and continued shooting towards the car.The armed man was about 25 years old, and had a white complexion, a small beard and little hair. The bullet casings were falling on my head and body. The shooting towards the targeted car continued for less than five minutes. I heard these individuals speaking Hebrew, which I do not fully understand. As a result, I realised there they were members of the Israeli special squads. When the individual who was standing on me finished shooting, he grabbed me and dragged me towards the south. He told me to crawl away, without standing up. I crawled towards the main road. The two other armed men continued shooting. At this point, I could not see 'Ala’s car as there was a wall blocking my line of sight. However, I did see two of the armed men going into the alley and approaching the car. They were continually shooting.One of the armed men stayed with me and pointed his gun at me. At this moment, a Palestinian ambulance belonging to the Red Crescent Society arrived from theeastern part of the camp and stopped 150 metres away. One of the armed men shouted at the ambulance and told it not to approach the area. I estimate, from what I saw, that about five to six members of the Israeli special squads participated in the operation.The ambulance stopped, but the driver asked to approach the area, talking over the ambulance’s loudspeakers in Hebrew. The armed men refused and fired once in the air in the ambulance’s direction to warn it against coming closer. I understood what they were saying in Hebrew. Then, I heard the sound of shooting aimed towards the special squads. The shots came from the west. The special squads returned fire to the source of the shooting. Immediately after this, three military jeeps arrived at the scene. I only saw three jeeps and have no idea if there were other jeeps in the area.Shooting continued in the area, but not in the aforementioned alley. Approximately five soldiers got out of the jeeps. They were wearing dark green military uniforms and helmets and were carrying weapons. They dispersed in order to provide the special squad members with protection. None of the soldiers were shooting. The special squad members then got in their vehicles and left from the eastern entrance of the camp. I want to specify that the shooting of 'Ala’s car was carried out only by the special squads, and not by the Israeli soldiers, who did not participate in the actual operation.After the squads withdrew, I went towards 'Ala’s car to see what had happened to it. First, I saw Muhammad Abu-Na'sa, who was 34 years old and was from Jenin camp. He was well known to us. He was thrown to the ground near the right side of the car. He was lying on his front and was not moving. Blood was poring from his head. Dozens of citizens began to arrive to the location, together with the aforementioned ambulance. I then saw 'Ala' Brieki being taken out from the driver’s seat by first-aid personnel.I left, and was later told that a third individual was found dead at the location. His name was Ashraf al-Sa'di. He was also known to be wanted by the Israeli army as he was an activist in the al-Quds brigades, which belong to the Islamic Jihad movement. 'Ashraf was also from Jenin. He was found several metres away from the car, to the north. Finally, I would like to indicate that I was not shot throughout this operation. However, I suffer from a very bad psychological condition as a result of being exposed to the real risk of imminent death.