Affidavit No. 5793/2010
2010
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Nariman Mahmoud Hasan al-Tamimi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of identity card number 411693005, born on 13 January 1976, housewife, and a resident of al-Nabi Saleh, Ramallah district, would like to declare the following:I recall that on 15 October 2010, at around 12:00 pm in the afternoon, immediately after Friday prayers, I went out on the weekly march that is organised in the village to protest the activities of settlers. We encountered occupation forces from the border guards and the regular army at the main entrance to the village. They prevented us from heading towards our land, which is designated for annexation by the settlers. From the beginning the occupation soldiers used different types of teargas grenades to break up the protestors. I mean the kind of teargas grenade which is launched by hand and is circular in shape, and also rounds made from rubber and aluminium, in addition to sound grenades made of metal. I would like to point out here that the aforementioned rounds have been launched previously and are used randomly. I saw a grenade pass over the heads of the participants, while the metal rounds filled with gas were fired from weapons which appeared to be M16s, or at least to my knowledge they were M16s. Later, some of the protestors began firing, or more accurately throwing, stones at the army, or occupation soldiers, to protest their launching of teargas grenades, and the oppression of the demonstration. At a later stage the soldiers additionally began to fire metal rounds covered in a thin layer of rubber, or rubber bullets, in the direction of the participants. This was around 3:30 pm. I was on a hill overlooking the main entrance to the village, or the main road leading to the village, and I was about five metres from the main street. There was a group of youths around me throwing rocks at a military jeep standing in the middle of the road. During that time a group of vehicles was coming from the neighbouring village of Beit Rima towards Ramallah. The vehicles were in what appeared to be a marriage celebration procession. A group of people got out of the vehicles after they lined up along the roads and began shouting at the youths who were throwing stones, causing arguments between them and against them. During the arguments between the youths and the aforementioned people, the military jeeps moved and left the area. After the jeeps left the area, the stone-throwing youths went down to talk to the people in the wedding procession. I was standing at a close distance watching the course of events, about five metres from the road. The jeep started to leave, for reasons which I could not understand. In the meantime, I saw about five youths leaving the wedding procession. They wore civilian clothes and were putting masks over their faces. I saw one of them pointing his weapon and following the youths, and I heard him shouting in a loud voice, “Lads, there are intruders, run away!” Two of the intruders had seized two of the youths from the village and were hitting them forcefully. They had sticks and were hitting the youths with them, and when I headed over to protect the youths one of them hit me with his stick on the wrist and I felt a sharp pain. I don’t recall what happened in detail, but in the end the Israeli soldiers, who had arrived back on the scene, tried to arrest me, One of the soldiers hit me and they took away a medical kit that was with me, and also my mobile phone, and placed me in the jeep. During that time I was unable to run away. After the arrival of the intruder forces, the intruders arrested three youths: Muhammad ‘Atallah, around 22 years old; Malek Talal, around 21 years old; and also Mahdi ‘Abd-al-Wahhab, around 18 years old. They put them in the car that the intruders had gotten out of, which was white and had a Palestinian number plate. The intruders were firing a new kind of weapon they had with them, which fired a chemical or what looked like a chemical. Everyone who was injured by this weapon, whose photos are attached to the statement as they tell me, I saw that they were struck by a feeling of numbness. I would like to point out here that all of the youths they arrested were released last week.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 25 October 2010