Affidavit No. 7176/2012
2012
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Maysoun Muhsen Muhammad al-Abed, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 951300557, born on 19 January 1969, a housewife, and a resident of the Beit Iba village, Nablus governorate, would like to declare the following:I am a resident of Beit Iba village west of Nablus city. I am married and live with my family of eight members. In 1993, I obtained a diploma in Library Science and Documentation from the An Najah Community College of the An Najah National University in Nablus city. Since 1994, I have been submitting applications for a job at the Ministry of Education. Unfortunately, I have not had an opportunity to get a job. On 14 May 2008, however, I had a single opportunity when I was appointed to replace a teacher. I was appointed at the Beita Girls Secondary School and Jamma’in Girls Secondary School, where I supervised books in their libraries. I worked for a period of 20 days only. In May 2010, I sat for the Ministry’s exam in the field of my specialisation (library science), which I passed. In late May 2010, the Ministry of Education District Office in Nablus city called me and reported I had an interview after I had passed the exam. In July 2010, I called Nael al-Huneidi, who was in charge of employment at the Ministry of Education District Office of Nablus, and reported the result of the interview. He told me that I was first on the list to get employed. In 2010, the Nablus Ministry of Education District Office appointed employees and announced their names in official newspapers. I was surprised that my name was not on the list of approved employees. I went to the Ministry of Education District Office and asked Nael why they had not recruited persons specialising in library science.“We did appoint persons with that specialisation.” Nael replied.“How come you have not appointed me while I was first on the list to get a job?”Having reviewed the list of names on the computer in front of him, Nael said that “Rejected” by the Palestinian security agencies” and “Not recommended” were typed next to my name. He told me to report to the security agencies because I had a problem with them, not with the Ministry of Education District Office. My husband tried to solve my case with the security agencies in Nablus, but it was in vain. In late December 2011, I reported to the Palestinian Intelligence agency in Nablus and met with an Intelligence officer. As I had been informed, that officer was in charge of the education file. He said that the rejection had not originated from the Intelligence or security agencies.“Perhaps the Ministry of Education District Office does want to hire you due to your age.” He said.“If that had been the case, they would have not received my application right from the start.” I replied.Following the interview, the Intelligence officer said he would reply to me after he had examined my case. He said he would reply within a week, but he did not answer my question about the agency that rejected my employment.About a month and a half ago, I went to the Nablus Ministry of Education District Office to apply for a document, which would prove that I had been on the employment list and that my position had been taken over by another person. However, the Office refused to give that document. I was advised to go to the Ministry of Education in Ramallah. I wrote a grievance letter, explaining my story, to Lamis al-Alami, Minister of Education. I handed the letter to the Ministry staff and went back to my home in the village of Beit Iba in Nablus. In March 2012, I reported to the Ministry of Education, which provided a reply to my letter I had addressed to the Minister. Dated 27 February 2012, the reply was titled Reply to a Complaint and read as follows:“Having examined your complaint by the relevant departments at the Ministry, we hereby inform you that you were in first position on the Register of Library Appointments at the Nablus Ministry of Education District Office. Your position on the list of appointment was bypassed according to the recommendation sent to us by security agencies, stating that your appointment was not approved. You can follow up with the respective security bodies to revoke the decision not to approve your appointment.”Addressed by the Minister’s Office, the letter had the heading of the Ministry of Education.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 22 March 2012