Affidavit No. 4929/2009
2009
I live in the village of Fahma, located approximately 17 kilometres southwest of the city of Jenin. My house is situated in the western quarter of the village of Fahma. At around 10:00 pm on Tuesday, 5 May 2009, I was in my house with my wife and seven children, when I heard someone knock on the house door. When I opened the door, I saw three persons wearing civil clothes and pistols around their waists. They were in the company of my brother Yousef Sa’abna, whose house is located in the same village.The three people identified themselves as members of the Palestinian Intelligence Agency, without stating their names and had ordered Yousef to bring them to my house. I recognised one of the three men from the Palestinian Intelligence Agency. While I know who he is, I do not wish to mention his name here. The said persons entered my house.I invited them to sit down but they refused. They told me that they wanted to search the house. I was surprised and requested that they present a search warrant. “We are Intelligence. What kind of warrant are you talking about?” they replied. Then they dispersed and started to search the house.I had moved my family members to a yard opposite the house. My wife and daughters were scared. The three men thoroughly searched the house for about one hour, until 11:00 pm. They searched everything and every room in the house. Although I protested, they even searched my bedroom and everything inside it. When they finally left, they confiscated my children’s computer, which they had seized from the living room, as well as my mobile telephone, which I handed to them upon their request, fearing a clash.They also confiscated my check books, issued by the Bank of Palestine and the Arab Islamic Bank, as well as some of my personal and professional files, including land registration certificates, receipt vouchers, payment orders, and many other papers. I asked the members of the Intelligence to record what they had seized from my house, but they ignored my request. When they left my house, they demanded that I accompany them to my stores, which are immediately adjacent to my house. I am raising chicken in these stores. After they looked inside the stores, they left in a white and green car with civil registration plates.Later, I tried to call the Palestinian Intelligence headquarters, which is located in al- Jabiriyat neighbourhood in the city of Jenin in order to ask for my belongings. However, each time I called, no one would answer me and there was no officer to whom I couldhave talked. Until this moment, I have not  redeemed my belongings.Members of the Intelligence did not justify their raid, the violation of the sanctity of my home, and the confiscation of my possessions without any search warrant or confiscation order. I should note that I have never been detained by any Palestinian Security Agency. Therefore, I am bewildered that my house was raided and searched in such a manner. Since they witnessed the search and raid, my family members have been suffering psychologically. I should also note that my reputation has been severely damaged in the aftermath of this incident. The homes, which are normally raided, are those of drug dealers and criminals and I am neither. I have really suffered from this incident and have demanded that the Palestinian Intelligence reveal to me the reason or goal of the home raid and to tell me what exactly they were looking for. Nonetheless, they refused to give me any answers.