Affidavit No. 6529/2011
2011
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned, Mohammed Hussein Mohammed Jubour, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 984385328, born on 1 January 1949, farmer, and a resident of the Um-Nir area, Yatta town, Hebron governorate, would like to declare the following:My children and I own an 18-dunum piece of land in the Um-Nir area north of the Sussia settlement that is less than one kilometre away from our land. My brother ‘Isa owns a piece of land, about 15 dunums big, near my land. Heirs to my late brother Mousa also own about 18 dunums of land in the same area. Until three years ago, my family and I used to live in Yatta. Then, my wife and I moved to live on our land in the Um-Nir area. At the beginning of this year, my relative Mahmoud Ahmed Jubour and his eight family members also moved to Um-Nir. They lived in tents and in an old cave on their land. My relatives and I used to plant grains on our land. Until about 10 years ago, we planted olive seedlings that had already started to grow on the land. About five months after I had moved to Um-Nir, I started to dig a well in the rocks, using simple tools. The process was slow. We dug the well until it had a capacity of about 70 cubic metres, but were still not finished. About two years ago, we brought a hydraulic excavator and drilled a well with a capacity of almost 70 cubic metres. We finished it quickly.After we had completed drilling the well mentioned above, I found three documents written in Hebrew. They were attached to the land with stones. Two documents were placed on the two wells and the third inside the cave on the land. When I presented them to persons who knew Hebrew, they said that the documents were notification telling us to evacuate the land under the pretext that it was [Israeli] state land. I did not challenge the aforementioned notifications or consult with a lawyer because I expected the occupying authorities to abandon their claims as this was our land.On 22 February 2011, however, an Israeli military force and workers of a private company equipped with a bulldozer and a hydraulic excavator arrived at the Um-Nir area. The bulldozer and the hydraulic excavator destroyed the two water wells and dismantled two tents belonging to me and to my relative Mahmoud. The workers also uprooted the approximately 2,000 olive trees with the hydraulic excavator. Together with other residents, my wife and I tried to prevent the demolition, but soldiers assaulted and beat us. As a result, my relative Mahmoud, my wife and I had to be transported to the hospital in Yatta. The army loaded the uprooted olive trees on a truck and left the area.Regardless, other relatives of mine moved to the area. These included my brother ‘Isa, his wife and two daughters; ‘Isa’s son Majed and his wife; my relative Rateb Yousef Naji Jubour and his family; Ribhi Khalil Ahmed Jubour and his family; Taleb Mohammed Ahmed Jubour and his family; Omar Badawi Jubour and his family; and ‘Isa Badawi Jubour and his family. Some of them resided permanently in tents, which they had erected in the area while others stayed only during the daytime.On 29 March 2011, a large army forces arrived at Um-Nir came once more, dismantled the tents, and destroyed the well which we had drilled using the hydraulic excavator. We had gottengot rid of the rocks that the army had dropped in the well during the previous demolition. On the reported day, the occupying forces dismantled eight tents using a bulldozer and a hydraulic excavator and then left.On 30 March 2011, Salam Fayyad, the Prime Minister of the Palestinian Authority in Ramallah, arrived at Um-Nir. He had bought bricks and tin sheets and donated them to residents. He also participated in the building of eight rooms made out of bricks. Each one with a surface area of about 50 square metres, the rooms were roofed with tin sheets. Construction of these rooms lasted for about one month, and then residents moved in.At around 5:00 am on 5 May 2011, an Israeli army forces equipped with a bulldozer and a hydraulic excavator came to Um-Nir and demolished all the rooms that we had built of bricks within about two hours. After the army had left, we started to clean and removed the rubble and the tin sheets from the locations of the rooms in order to prepare a place for us to sleep. At around 8:40 pm, however, two bulldozers guarded by about seven military jeeps arrived once more at the area. The bulldozers smashed and scattered the bricks around and levelled the land, which we had worked on. Before expelling us from our land, the soldiers said that they had announced the area to be a closed military zone and that we were prohibited from being present in the area. Most residents fled to Yatta. My wife and I stayed at the house of our neighbours from the Nawaj’ah family, which was in the south. The other residents did not come back to live in Um-Nir. My wife and I erected a tent north of our place of residence and stayed there for about two weeks. Then, we moved back to our previous place.Several days ago, the Palestinian Authority brought us 12 water tanks, with a capacity of about 2,000 litres each. They had been filled with water by three tank trucks. At around 11:00 am on Tuesday, 5 July 2011, a bulldozer and a hydraulic excavator accompanied by Israeli military forces arrived in the area and destroyed 10 tanks, loaded them on a truck, and left the area.Following four demolitions, no one wishes to reside in the area anymore. It is only my wife and I who live in the area. We transport water on a donkey from Yatta. Because of the water shortage, I have sent my 20 sheep to Yatta so that my children who live there take care of them.This is my declaration, which I hereby sign, 7 July 2011