Affidavit No.: 1871/2004
2004
On  Thursday 10 June 2004, at around 2:00 a.m., I was awoken by the sound of  gunfire directly beside my home. Immediately, I started to look through  the windows to see what was going on outside. I saw through the west  window a number of Israeli soldiers moving around all sides of my home.  They were continuously moving and some were lying face down. I thought  that perhaps there was an armed confrontation between Palestinian youth  and the Israeli forces in the area, causing such a large number of  Israeli soldiers come to the area. I also saw ten jeeps and two Israeli  army ambulances on the asphalt road below my home to the south. Feeling  very fearful, I requested that my wife, as well as my daughters and sons  and their spouses (we were all living in one house consisting of  several flats), not to make any movement or noise. It is worth noting  that I did not hear any gunfire after the first burst that woke me up.  At 3:00 a.m., I heard my nephew Mu’tasem Abu-al-Hasan, whose house is  located directly near my home to the east, shouting “Ma’moun Ma’moun”. I  realized that the Israeli military was targeting my nephew Ma’moun  Husein Abu-al-Hasan, who had been wanted by the Israeli forces for two  years. At 4:00 a.m., the Israeli jeeps started to leave and I knew that  the Israeli soldiers had withdrawn from the surrounding area. I was the  first to go out through the eastern door of my home to look and see what  the soldiers had done to the house of my brother Husein Abu-al-Hasan. I  looked to the north side of my home and saw a young man lying face down  at the bottom of the wall that separates my home from my brother’s. I  approached him and realized that it was my nephew Ma’moun Abu-al-Hasan.  He was bleeding heavily from the head, back and legs from the back. I  then shouted “Ma’moun has been killed, God is Great”. At this moment, my  sons and my brother Husein Abu-al-Hasan ran towards the place. We  called the Palestinian Red Crescent Society and asked for an ambulance.  The ambulance carried Ma’moun to Jenin governmental hospital and we  buried him on the same day. I did not see any weapon beside Ma’moun  Abu-al-Hasan, who I had not seen for a month because he was wanted by  the Israeli army due to his activities with the Al-Aqsa Martyrs  Brigades.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 29 June 2004Signature: Hasan Yousef 'Abd-al-Rahim Abu-al-Hasan