Affidavit No: 2494/2005
2005
My name  is Ahmad 'Ali Mahmoud 'Isa. I am a resident of Bitouniya neighbourhood  of Ramallah city in the occupied West Bank. I am originally from Beit  Nouba village, oneof the villages of Latroun that were located  south-west of Ramallah. The residentswere displaced during the 1967 war  but our village was not immediately destroyed. Iwas 12 years old at the  time. I remember that indications of an impending Israeli attack on the  village started on a Monday (5 June 1967). It was harvest season and  Iwas with my mother and father when people started telling each other  that there wasgoing to be an Israeli invasion in the area and that  residents who were in the fieldsshould go back home.At dusk,  my family, relatives and I gathered in one big house called “al-Balad.”  My uncle, the head of the family, left to get information. He returned  with news that theJordanian army had withdrawn from the area that  morning (Monday) at 2:00 am. Onthe morning of Tuesday 6 June we heard  that the Israeli army had invaded theneighbouring villages of 'Imwas and  Yalo and had started expelling people by force.My uncle, Jaser  'Abd-al-Rahim, went to the police station to ask about the situation.He  was informed that he had better leave in order to avoid being killed by  the Israelis,who were known for committing crimes and massacres.Following this recommendation by the  head of the police station, my parents, brothers, sisters, and I started  going towards Beit Liqiyia village. There were ninefamily members in  total and we took four cows with us. A few minutes after weentered Beit  Liqiya, the Israeli helicopters bombarded al-Nawadir, where thecollected  harvest was stored. The massive fire that ensued scared the families  andso we were forced to leave Beit Liqiya. We went to Beir Dako village,  leaving thecows behind. There, we went to the home of Sheikh Yakin, who  is a friend of mygrandfather and father. We stayed there for five days  and then asked al-Sheikh toallow us to go to Ramallah. Al-Sheikh  proposed to my father that the rest of usremain in the house while he  (my father) would go to get the cows. My father went toget the cows.We walked on the main road towards  Ramallah. Israeli army personnel positioned themselves on both sides of  the road and were taunting people. When we arrived inBitouniya, we  entered the boy’s school where several families from Yalo and ’Imwaswere  present. The Israeli army arrived and besieged the school. They forced  us tostay in the playground and started acting very aggressively and  shooting at people’sheads. They then told us to leave, telling us to “Go  to King Hussein in Amman.” Wethen left towards Ramallah. We found  shelter in a house located in the Batn al-Hawaarea, which still exists  to this day. We stayed there for five days without going outsidethe  house, for fear of being attacked by the Israeli army.My father used to go to the market in  Ramallah to get food. At this time the Israeli army controlled all the  lands of the West Bank, including the centre of Ramallah andal-Manara  square. The soldiers started announcing in Arabic via loudspeakers  thatvillage residents could return to their villages. My father informed  us of this news andwe were very happy to learn that we would be able to  return to our village, BeitNouba. We returned using the 'Ein 'Arik road  and arrived in Um Saffa very late, andtired from this difficult  journey. Accordingly, we slept in Um Saffa that night. The nextmorning  we went towards Beit Nouba. We arrived in Beit Sira village on foot.  There,we were stopped at an Israeli checkpoint to the south of the  village. The soldiersrefused to allow us to pass to our village. They  started to scream at my father, whowas tending to a donkey that my  cousin was riding. My father, who was holding mycousin, was distracted,  and thus my cousin fell and broke his hand.We tried  to enter the village from several locations, but we were prohibited from  doing so by the soldiers. Accordingly, we were forced to take refuge in  Beit Sira,which is close to our village. My father and I snuck to our  house in Beit Nouba inorder to bring back food, oil and mattresses. We  saw horrible things along the way,namely several men and women who had  been killed: Lutfi Mahmoud Hasan Abu-Rahhal, Mahmoud 'Ali Baker, who was  blind and who appeared to have been killedas a result of his house  being demolished while he was inside it, 'Abd-al-FattahThaher,  'Abd-al-Rahman Mousa 'Ali Hammad, 'Ali Ibrahim Muhammad Zidan,  MousaAhmad Abu-Haniyya, Zeinab al-Bahlouz, Fatima 'Abd-al-Rahman  Suleiman Hamad,Halima Hamdan and Hsaan 'Abd-al-'Aziz. The bodies of  another three men who werealso killed had been thrown amongst the trees:  al-'Abed 'Ayyad, 'Isa Muhammad and'Abdallah Zuhdi.My father owned more than 100 dunums  of land as well as a huge house for our family. The total area of Beit  Nouba is 14,700 dunums. There were approximately3,000 inhabitants. These  residents moved to the areas of Ramallah and al-Bireh, aswell as to  other refugee camps. The vast majority are outside Palestine. We used  tohave a police station, an agricultural association, a well, a medical  clinic, a girl’sschool with 122 students, a boy’s school with 182  students, a mosque at Nawdir andmany archaeological landmarks. There  also was the fountain constructed by Ibrahim,may God bless him, a  spacious Roman house named “al-Balad” as well as “al-Masrajah” area  where Islamic soldiers were stationed at the time of Salah al-Din  al-Ayyoubi. One of the first Israeli settlements in the West Bank, “Mevo  Horon,” wasestablished on the land of our village. There had been no  clashes in the areabetween the Israeli and Jordanian armies as the  Jordanian army had withdrawn. The Israeli military leaders for this  operation were: Uzi Narkiss, Yitzhak Rabin and MosheDayan.This is my declaration and hereby I sign, 20 June 2005.Signature: Ahmad 'Ali Mahmoud 'Isa