Affidavit No. 3374/2007
2007
Sworn StatementAfter having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else I shall be subjected to penal action, I, the undersigned Wisam Ya’qoub Mousa Rafidi, of Palestinian nationality, holder of ID No. 954440160, born on 23 December 1959, an employee and a resident of al-Bireh city, Ramallah Governorate, would like to declare the following:At approximately 1:00 am on Thursday, 8 February 2007, as I woke up to use the toilet, I heard a loud explosion nearby. I went to the western widow of my bedroom, from where I saw three Israeli jeeps belonging to the regular army. My wife Roula was woken by the sound of the explosions.My apartment is in a two-storey building located to the north of al-Bireh city. Each storey contains two apartments. Mine is located on the western side of the second storey. 'Izz- al-Din al-Qassam is located to the west of my apartment, where al-Tahouna café and the Palestine International Bank are located. Al-Nahda Street is located to the south of my apartment.My daughter Anmar, who is eight-years-old, woke up and asked me about the explosions. I told her that Israeli soldiers had caused them. I saw a great deal of fear and tension in her eyes. I have already been arrested in my home, with the result that Anmar connects the presence of Israeli soldiers near our house with the loss of her father. Whenever I looked out of a window I saw Israeli military jeeps.My other daughter Dara, who is six and a half-years-old, also woke up terrified and trembling. She stayed close to her mother. Roughly 15 minutes after I had woken up, the Israeli forces, using loudspeakers, called upon the occupants of the various apartments in broken Arabic to exit the building. The call was repeated several times. After this, I heard someone knocking on my door. I opened the door to find Maysa’, the daughter of my nephew Joni, who lives in the apartment next to mine.Maysa' told me that the soldiers were calling us and that we must leave the house. Roula decided to go and speak with the Israeli soldiers. While she was gone, I dressed my daughters in heavy clothes that would keep them warm, as it was very cold outside. As I dressed them, I tried to reassure them. I could sense the fear on their faces and in their voices. I told them not to be scared. “We are strong” I said, “and the Israelis are not scary”.Ten minutes after Roula left, we went down to the road. When I arrived, I saw that there were three military jeeps. One contained a soldier who was wearing a black mask made of wool. To the east of the building, I saw three soldiers. They were standing directly behind a wall. I could only see their helmets and guns. Roula was standing five metres away from me. The masked soldier spoke to me and told me to send the girls to their mother.I sent my daughters to my wife and went back towards the soldier. The soldier ordered me to lift up the clothes on my upper body and to take off my pants. Then, he handed me transparent plastic overalls and told me to go behind the jeep, take off my remaining clothes, and put them on. I did what he asked me to do. Then, the soldiers put me in a military jeep and took me to al-Tahuna café, which is close to my house. There, I found Roula and the two girls. I kissed them and attempted to reassure them. This was important, considering that they were being guarded by soldiers in an open building that was still under construction.The soldiers tied my hands behind my back with plastic cuffs. They did this in full view of my two girls and my wife. I was left there for approximately fifteen minutes. Then, a number of soldiers arrived and took me away again. I believed that they were going to arrest me. I saw my daughters trying not to cry or to scream. The soldiers would not even allow me to bid them farewell.The soldiers took me to the yard of the building, where the military jeeps were parked. One of the soldiers was wearing the uniform of the regular army. He approached me and asked, “Who resides in this apartment?” He then pointed to the eastern apartment on the first floor. I replied that a man in his mid-fifties, named Abu-Anas, lived there. He had rented the house eight days ago. As for the apartment next to it, a western family resides there. They live in the USA but their son Louay, who is 26-years-old, sleeps there. He usually comes home very late or sometimes not at all.The soldier then informed me that they wanted Abu-Anas. I suggested that they call him and ask him to come outside. Then, he asked me for the keys of Abu-Anas’ apartment. I told him that I did not have a key. The soldier asked me to open the door to Abu-Anas’ apartment, warning me, “There is a bulldozer that is waiting to receive orders regarding the demolition of the whole building, so you better open the apartment.” I stood at the door and called upon Abu-Anas several times. I told him to open the door, and that he should not be scared to come outside. There was no reply from inside the apartment.The doors were locked and I continued shouting. Also, the soldiers were calling upon anyone still inside the apartments to come outside. There was no movement in any of the apartments. I told the soldier that there was no one inside. However, the soldier replied, “Should I bring the bulldozer and destroy the whole building over the heads of its residents? Either you open the door or we demolish the building.”Since the door is made of iron and is very thick, I had to break the glass using my hands, injuring myself in the process. Then, the soldier asked me to go inside the apartment, turn on the lights and ask anyone inside to surrender. I did everything that he asked me to do but found no one inside. Then, I went back outside to the soldier. My hands were bleeding, and he washed them with water and applied a plaster.The masked soldier, whom the other soldiers referred to as Rjoub, told me, “There is someone inside and you have to bring him out.” I assured him that there was nobody inside. Nonetheless, he sent huge police dogs to search inside. They returned without finding anyone. Then, the soldiers brought a remote controlled machine equipped with a camera. It was one metre in width and one and a half metres in height.After sending the machine inside the house, one of the soldiers called me and asked me to go back inside because one of the doors inside the apartment was closed. I entered and found that the bathroom door was closed. The machine did not find anyone in Abu-Anas' apartment. Rjoub told me, “If 'Abu-Anas is not here, we will bombard the house with rockets.” I told him that there was no one in the western flat and that it is very hard to open the door to that apartment since it is very thick and made of iron. I also said that if Lou'ay was inside, he would have opened the door.Meanwhile, I saw Joni wearing the same type of overalls I was wearing. He was taken to the second floor, where both our apartments are located. He lives with his mother, wife and baby girl, who is three-years-old. The machine was with him. Rjoub told me to get into one of the jeeps, which I did. I saw the soldiers taking missiles from a bag on the floor of the jeep. These missiles looked like copper bullets. They were approximately 60 centimetres in length and 10 centimetres in diameter. Soon after, Joni was placed in the jeep with me. As I recall, the soldiers took four of these missiles. According to the soldiers, they were ‘lao rockets’.At approximately 2:45 am, the soldiers took Joni and I to the one of the gardens that belongs to the houses located west of my house. My house was approximately 20 metres away and was guarded by soldiers. There were jeeps positioned in the street the whole time. After approximately one hour had passed, soldiers arrived and took Joni and me to Abu-Anas’ apartment. I saw 30 soldiers when we entered the apartment. One of the soldiers pointed me out to a captain who had several stars on his shoulder. The soldier pointed to me and said “This is Wisam.” Then, they returned us to the garden where we had been held previously. From here I could see the second floor of my house but not the first floor.Fifteen minutes later, the soldiers came back and took Joni away. I was left there alone. Throughout my time there, I continually heard the sound of bullets, bombs and destruction. I also saw my house fully lit, even though I had turned the lights off before leaving with my daughters. At approximately 5:50 am, the soldiers came and placed me in a closed military vehicle, which I assume is generally used for transferring soldiers since there were several seats inside it. When the soldier saw me sitting on the seat closest to the back door, he told me to sit on the seat furthest back.I sat there for only five minutes. Then, the soldiers released me and I saw a number of Israeli military jeeps belonging to the regular army leaving the area. When I entered my house, I found massive destruction. Dozens of bullets had been randomly fired inside my house. The bullets had penetrated the walls and the furniture, damaging everything. There were bullet holes in the clothes that were hanging in my daughters’ wardrobes. Even my daughters’ mattresses had been shot. In addition to all this, a bullet had damaged one of the main water pipes in the bathroom near my daughters’ bedroom. The house was flooded with water and all the carpets were damaged.Ten minutes after I returned home, my wife and two daughters entered the apartment. Anmar looked very sad when she saw her room. Dara asked, “Why did the Israelis do this?” Roula was shocked when she saw all the contents of the house thrown everywhere. All the book shelves in my special library had been thrown to the ground. Each one of us was extremely upset and sad. My younger daughter Dara said she would not sleep on a mattress full of bullet holes. Anmar, who was getting ready to go to the house of a friend of ours until our house was reorganised, was looking for clothes to wear. She told her mother, “Look, all my clothes have holes. I have no proper clothes to wear. The Israelis destroyed them all.”Several friends, relatives and members of the Palestinian security forces arrived. I went to Abu-Anas’ apartment, which I had rented to him fully furnished. The glass in the windows was completely broken, and the two sets of furniture had been badly damaged with a knife. The southern bedroom appeared to have been hit by a rocket because it was completely burned and there was a hole in the wall. There were bullet holes in all of the bedroom’s walls. The other bedroom was in a similar condition. The doors of the apartment were broken and thrown on the ground. All the dressers were destroyed and thrown on the ground. Even the washing machine’s door was broken. The smell of bullets and burning was everywhere. All the furniture was destroyed. In addition to this, when I entered the western apartment, I found the traces of two rockets and a completely burned bedroom. The whole place looked as if an earthquake had hit it a few seconds earlier.