INDONESIA: Sukamulya villagers fight for their land but face attacks and criminalization
November 24, 2016
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been updated by Jakarta Legal Aid regarding the prosecution against 23 labor activists, two public lawyers, and one university student in the...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), received information regarding Mr. Rajapaksha Madagam Gedara Rathnasiri, of Pahurugolla Estate, Udawela, Theldeniya in Kandy District. He was ma...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from national human rights organizations regarding forced evictions and police brutality. These actions have been taken ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding regular shelling between India and Pakistan at the Line of Control (LoC) near villages in border areas...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding two student activists who have been arrested in Chaiyaphum province, north eastern Thailand, for distr...Dear Friends, The Terai Human Rights Defenders Alliance (THRDA) has informed the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) that Bijuli Prasad Mahaut (31), resident of ward number 1, Khajurakhurd Village De...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has information provided by the Land Reform Commission (KPA), a national NGO documenting land conflicts. It is regarding land grabbing and a fabr...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the brutal attack and shooting committed by the police in Sanggeng, Manokwari West District, West Papua province. ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you that a human rights defender in Talisay, Cebu was killed by an unidentified man. Before the shooting, the rights def...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding on-going judicial harassment of three human rights defenders who support and protect torture victims ...Dear Friends, The Terai Human Rights Defenders Alliance (THRDA) has informed the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) that 4 police officers attached with Maruwahi Police Post Mahottari District bruta...Dear Friends, According to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), Mr. Sumesh Jeevantha Kumara (17) and his mother, Mrs. Herath Mudiyanselage Podi Kumari (49) residents of 20...Dear friends, Mr. Dissanayaka Mudiyanselage Sarath Dissanayaka of Piliyandala, Colombo District was illegally arrested, detained and tortured by police officers attached to the Colombo Crime Division ...Dear friends, Mrs. Hashika Shashi Kanthi of Palugasdamana, Saliya Wewa in Puttalam District, was tortured by four policemen attached to the Saliya Wewa Police Station. At 10 pm on the night of 23 July...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the death threats against a lady teacher and her husband after a senior police officer initiated an in...Dear friends, Mahesh Kumara Fernando of Boralessa, Naththandiya, Puttalam District was illegally arrested, detained and tortured by police officers of the Wennappuwa Police Station. On 15th August 201...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the abduction of four women and two men amidst fighting between two influential armed tribes, the Thah...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Madushanka Liyanage , 23, of 271/D, Kattappuwa Galhinna, Ankumbura, Kandy District has made a complaint to the ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from a prominent human rights NGO, the Commission for the Disappeared and Victims of Violence (KontraS), Surabaya branch...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned about the killing of an indigenous leader while on his way home in Compostela province. A week before the incident, the victi...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367