UPDATE (Bangladesh): Alleged fabrication of charges against 2 NGO leaders soon after the High Court&#8217;s release orders
March 1, 2007
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from its local partner in West Bengal, India, MASUM that a family was brutally assaulted in the presence of police in Pa...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that Advocacy Forum, one of the leading human rights organizations in Nepal providing legal aid services to detainees, has been refus...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned that as we worried, the police now allegedly fabricated charges against two prominent NGO leaders: Mr. Md. Abul Kashem Pala...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about an alleged arbitrary arrest and severe torture of a 16-year-old boy by police officers in Eheliyagoda, Sri Lanka. ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the alleged brutal torture and sexual abuse of Mr. Hartoyo, an NGO worker, and his partner Bobby while in dete...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed of the alleged arbitrary arrest and detention of two prominent NGO leaders: Mr. Md. Abul Kashem Palash, Principal Programme Coo...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is happy to inform you that the Magistrate of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (CMM) Court has rejected the bail petition of Mr. Jafor Mollah on...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from its local parter in West Bengal, MASUM, about Mr. Gopen Sharma, who was illegally arrested and is currently...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from a reliable source of the alleged assault and arbitrary arrest of a public bus driver in Dhaka on 23 January 2007. W...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from its local partner in West Bengal, MASUM, regarding an alleged brutal torture of a young man by the Bally police in ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you about the alleged illegal arrest and torture of a farmer in Quezon. On 4 April 2006, Mr. Fernando Tawagon was allegedly arre...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) forwards below a list of persons recently abducted in Sri Lanka, based on a report issued by the Civil Monitoring Mission on February 7, 2007. Th...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that an army general named Heng Kham Van, who is also the chief of the Committee of Immovable Property Management for the Royal Cambo...[NOTICE: The AHRC have developed a new automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal, we could not include e-mail addresses of some of the Indian autho...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) calls for your immediate intervention to ensure the security of torture victim Mrs. Shahin Sultana Santa and her husband Mr. Atinur Rahrman, who ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the case of 23 year-old Mr. Gareesh Kumar who is from the Hindu minority in Pakistan and was kidnapped...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned of the extra-judicial killing of a 23 year-old business administration student named Farly Alcantara in front of his college in Daet ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from a reliable source regarding an alleged brutal torture of a man by the Kotwali police in Bogra district on 25-26 J...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that on 11 February 2007 at 11:20 am, two military officers named Vy and Thol allegedly demolished the home of a villager named Keo S...[NOTICE: The AHRC have developed a new automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal, we could not include e-mail addresses of the Bangladesh authoriti...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367