BANGLADESH: Perpetrators of grenade attack on Awami League rally must be brought to justice
February 22, 2005
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the burning of more than 300 houses and the mass rape and murder of innocent civilians by a mob backed by the ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that an 11-year-old boy named Mahesh Kumara was illegally detained and charged by the Wattegama Police Station between F...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information of the arbitrary imprisonment and torture of a Sri Lankan youth in Matale District, Sri Lanka. On 21 February 2005, Mr. ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned by the arbitrary arrest and torture of three men by the Kandana police on 2 March 2005. Due to several assaults, two of the v...[RE: UA-152-2004:  PHILIPPINES: 127 families lost their homes due to illegal demolition in Davao City on 15 November 2004] Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned b...[Re: UP-18-2005: NEPAL: Additional lists of arrested political leaders/activists and human rights defenders; UP-16-2005: NEPAL: List of arrested political leaders and human rights defenders; Internati...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Promotion of Church People’s Response (PCPR) in Eastern Visayas regarding the attempt on the life of Fr. ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from a number of sources that three local government officials in Taunggut township, Arakan state, western Burma, have b...[RE: FA-06-2004: THAILAND: A human rights lawyer Mr. Somchai Neelaphaijit missing; UP-14-2004: THAILAND: Mr. Somchai Neelaphaijit is still missing and the police may be involved in his disappearance; ...[Re: UP-18-2005: NEPAL: Additional lists of arrested political leaders/activists and human rights defenders; UP-16-2005: NEPAL: List of arrested political leaders and human rights defenders; Internat...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received the information that a 12-year-old boy named A.M. Shriyantha Bandara was severely assaulted by the officers from the Wattegama Polic...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is concerned by the attack on an Awami League rally that killed Bangladesh’s former finance minister Shah AMS Kibria, his nephew Shah Manju...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is concerned by the attack on an Awami League rally that killed Bangladesh’s former finance minister Shah AMS Kibria, his nephew Shah Manju...[Re: UP-16-2005: NEPAL: List of arrested political leaders and human rights defenders; International intervention is urgently required; UG-01-2005: NEPAL: Latest information on the situation in distri...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that torture victim Lalith Rajapakse was acquitted by the Magistrate of Wattala regarding charges of obstruction of poli...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned by the extraordinary delay in the case of Mr. T. Lilananda, who has been waiting for justice for over 11 years. Mr. T. Lilana...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward updated information to you regarding recent arrests in Nepal’s worsening crisis. The following are some cases of arrest a...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the defense lawyer of Asaru Pulige Sarath Jayaweera Sandanayake (43), who had filed a Fundamental Rights Applicatio...CAMBODIA: withdrawal of parliamentary immunity; violation of constitution provision; criminal defamation Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the w...[RE: FA-01-2005: SRI LANKA/ASIA: Tsunami rehabilitation; Statement of the World Forum of Fisher People (WFFP); FA-02-2005: SRI LANKA: Recently declared emergency may cause the increase of offences by ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367