PAKISTAN: A young man killed in fake police encounter- police refuse court and interior minister&#8217;s orders for inquiry
February 7, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that four disappeared persons bullet riddled and torture marks bodies were found from Balochistan province who were prev...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that Mr. Charles Hector Fernandez, a human rights defender and lawyer, is facing threats of legal action by Asahi Kosei (M) Sdn. Bh...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a student leader from Balochistan was abducted from the check post of the Frontier Corps in Quetta while he was ret...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 10 year-year-old girl was the victim of attempted rape by an influential person. The child was admitted to the Na...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Herath Mudiyanselage Suranji Sampath Kumara (35), the driver of a three-wheeler vehicle was severely tortured b...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that the Pallabi Police of Dhaka killed an 18-year-old college student named Imtiaz Hossain Abir in so called “cross fire”...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) brings you details of the latest case in which a group of democracy and human rights activists has been accused of involvement in a series of bom...Dear friends, Further to our previous appeal, the reading of verdict on the case of Somchai Neelaphaijit was again postponed. The court issued an arrest warrant, as required by the criminal procedure,...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to share with you the latest developments in Hom Bahadur Bagale’s case. This former police officer was initially tortured and illegall...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Alagumail Mohan (25) of Line-10, Thalawakele Estate, Thalawakele in the Nuwara Eliya District who was diagnosed...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 9-year-old girl was raped by a influential wealthy businessman. The child was admitted to the Kandy Teaching Hosp...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 13-year-old school child, Amuwaththe Mudiyanselage Lahiru Ruwan Chamara of R/Galagama Vidyalaya in Belihul Oya in...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Barak Human Rights Protection Committee (BHRPC), Assam concerning the case of rape of a 20 year-old-woman by he...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a lawyer’s son was killed in a fake police encounter after one hour of his abduction by six police officials ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Waharagedara Ranjith Sumangala was arrested by officers attached to the Mirihana Police Station and detained fo...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has obtained the details of a case in which six men in 2010 were accused of having contact with an insurgent group in the east of Burma. Soldiers...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information that Mr. Davarathnam Yogendra, a complainant of the bribery case No. 50600/01 in the Chief Magistrate’s Co...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a Police Constable (PC) P G W G Jayarathna was tortured by an Inspector of Police which resulted in the perforation...Dear friends, The thwarting of justice continues in the case of disappeared human rights lawyer Somchai Neelaphaijit. Having postponed reading of the verdict in the appeal case concerning the convicti...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man, Mr. Karasinghe Arachchilage Kumarasinghe Appuhami (55) was illegally arrested and detained by the Kolonna po...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367