SRI LANKA &#8211; Severe Torture and Illegal Arrest by Biyagama police
May 21, 2003
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends While AHRC welcomes the release of Tien Chua, Saari Sungib and Hishamuddin Rais, we urge the Malaysian Government to release the other detainees still in custody under the ISA. We should ...INDONESIA: attacks on human rights defenders reaching crisis point ———————————————————...Dear Friends We are pleased to update you with the following on Michael ‘Tony’ Fernando: SET ASIDE ‘PATENTLY FLAWED’ DECISION SWIFTLY UN Rappoteur Tells the Supreme Court of Sr...Dear Friends On the 20th of May, 1,000 civilian militias arrived at the headquarters of the National Human Rights Commission of Indonesia (Komnas HAM) to threaten violence if the investigation into th...INDIA – Due process; administration of justice —————————————————————...Dear Friends SITUATION: The International Security Act (ISA), that was enacted in the 1960s, remains frequently used to arrest, and indefinitely detain without trial, human rights and opposition campa...Severe Torture and Illegal Arrest- Chandana Kumar and Ajith Shatha by Biyagama police Victims Hetti Kankanamalage Chandana Jagath Kumar (23 years old) and Ajith Shantha Kumana Peli (32 years old) Dat...Dear Friends SITUATION: The International Security Act (ISA), that was enacted in the 1960s, remains frequently used to arrest, and indefinitely detain without trial, human rights and opposition campa...INDONESIA: Crime against Humanity – state-organised mass killings, disappearances, torture, long-term political imprisonment and lifelong discrimination, threats to human rights defenders —...SITUATION: On 21 April 2003 five Human Rights activists were abducted and two of them tortured and killed in Naujan Town, Oriental Mindoro province, Southern Tagalog. The bodies of Eden Marcellana, S...Dear Friends Great news! Professor Salai Tun Than has been released! The Irrawaddy Online (05 May 2003) reported that, on Sunday, 4 May 2003, eighteen political prisoners, including Dr Tun Than, were ...SITUATION: Complaint Against Young Seok, Song (Y.S. Song). Tel number in Korea: Tel:+82-2-2272-4340 Tel/Fax:+82-2-545-1031 Name of the factory in Sri Lanka – Young Jee & Ones Lanka (Pvt) Ltd...Dear Friends Below is an email from the Free Dr Salai Tun Than group. We cannot, at this stage, verify the information, but we will confirm as soon as we can. Statement on the Hunger Strike of Dr. Sal...Dear Friends Tiananmen Mothers and the Association of Parents of Disappeared Persons (APDP) are both members of the Asian Federation Against Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD), a federation of organiza...SITUATION: Two Human Rights activists, Mukhlis Ishak, aka Choy, 27 yrs old, from Darussalam Banda Aceh, and Zulfikar, aka Joul, 24 yrs old, from Kramat Banda Aceh, have disappeared. The Banda Aceh Leg...Dear Friends, Over 2,800 persons have signed the online petition to the President and Prime Minister of Sri Lanka urging immediate action to be taken to undo the blatant injustice suffered by Michael ...SRI LANKA: Torture and Illegal Detention; Police Hit Man with Iron Bars ——————————————————...Dear Friends, A local solidarity group for Mr. Michael Anthony Emmanuel Fernando (aka Tony) in Sri Lanka has launched a petition for release of him. AHRC has launched a petition on behalf of Tony on 2...Dear Friends, We reproduce below a letter written by the Asian Human Rights Commission at the request of the parents of Mr. Michael Anthony Fernando, to the Sri Lankan authorities. We urge you again t...Regarding our previous appeal on the torture case of human rights defender, Mr. Michael Anthony Emmanuel Fernando, who was an applicant in a case of fundamental rights.(Ref: S.C. [F/F] No. 55/20030), ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367