UPDATE (REPUBLIC OF KOREA): Scholar Song Du-yul indicted for violating the National Security Law
November 26, 2003
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned that the Appellate Court in Thailand ordered the extradition of Mr. Sok Yoeun to Cambodia on 28 November 2003. Mr. Sok Yoeun ...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that one Dalit woman’s house in Baglung district was burnt down by her upper caste neighbor on 13 November 2003, af...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Korean-German scholar Song Du-yul, 59, was indicted by the prosecution for violating the National Security Law on 19...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that S.L. Kulatunga had serious head injuries after being tortured by the Nivithigala police and died at the Genral Hospital of Colomb...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that two migrant workers who were facing forced deportation by the Korean government have committed suicide. It is estim...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the police searched the premises of the People’s Watch-Tamil Nadu, a prominent human rights organization in Ta...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) notes with grave concern that the father and mother of torture victim Dawundage Pushpakumara (14 years old) have left their home due to threats fr...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that 16-year old boy was brutally tortured by the police. The manner of torture was so brutal that clear evidence of viol...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a seven-year-old boy has been illegally detained and tortured by the police from the Polpithigame Police Station. Ac...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from The Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (COHRE) and the Asian Coalition for Housing Rights (ACHR) regardi...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Korean-German scholar Song Du-yul, 59, who returned to Republic of Korea (ROK) after 37 years of exile in Germany, w...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information on another serious torture case in Sri Lanka. According to information we have received, an innocent man was brutally tor...Dear Friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that two young girls, Janaki Chaudhari (16 years old) and Chinki Chaudhari (14 years old), were gang-raped by seven armed...Dear friends The Asian human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man died in police custody at the Hogelberia Police Station in West Bengal, India. The reason of his death is clea...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a young man named Mr. V. L. Joy was illegally arrested and tortured by the Sub Inspector of Police of the Anthikkad...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) that Irene Fernandez was sentenced to jail for 12 months by the...SRI LANKA: Update on Michael Anthony Fernando (Tony) —————————————————————...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that human rights activist Irene Fernandez, who is charged under Section 8A(2) of the Printing Presses and Publications A...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that there was a threat to the life of the torture victim Lalith Rajapakse. Lalith Rajapakse, who was tortured by the pol...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that the Lhokseumawe Military Court in Aceh released 12 soldiers from Infantry Battalion (Yonif) 301, who had tortured the civilians,...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367