INDIA: Expulsion of Sr Vanalselvi while in detention
February 6, 2002
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends  For your information, following is a letter AHRC has written to the National Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka, to urge them to take action against Assistant Superintendent of Police...We have received astounding news relating to the inhumane treatment and dismissal of a nun by her order. Sister Vanaselvi osm, a woman who has completely devoted her life to the service and upliftment...We have received the information below from our contacts in Hong Kong, the Family Link Mental Health Education Program. We ask you to click on their web site and sign the online e-postcard atDear Friends,  We would like to send you a copy of the 18th open letter sent by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) to the Jesuit superior general in Rome regarding Fr. Pallath¡¦s case.  Read...We wish to alert you to a case of serious miscarriage of justice in Sri Lanka. A young Tamil woman, Ms. Victor Joyce Scholastica, has been imprisoned for almost four years under the Prevention of Terr...This Urgent Appeal is regarding a high level police attack on the National Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka on 22 January, 2002.This appeal is for an international response to the arrest and detention of 74 year-old Dr Salai Tan Thun, a retired Burmese university rector who has publicly petitioned the military government to re...This is an appeal for urgent legal assistance as well as for sending emails and faxes in support of an aboriginal widow, Letty Scott, who is fighting for justice in the High Court of Australia.State of Emergency and TADO enable gross human rights abuses NEPAL: ‘Anti-Terrorism’ law and ‘State of Emergency’ deny right to freedom from torture, arbitrary arrest, extra-ju...HONG KONG: Denial of right to family unity ———————————————————– Because of the i...Dear Friends,  We would like to send you a copy of the 17th open letter sent by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) to the Jesuit superior general in Rome regarding Fr. Pallath’s case.  R...AHRC draws your attention to the casse of Angline Roshana who was arrested and tortured on 3rd December 2000. Despite many interventions, the Attorney General of Sri Lanka has refused to act Under Act...Dear Friends,  As this year comes to an end, we cannot but help reflect on the human rights situation in Asia and worry about our friends who are still suffering under miserable conditions. The Asian...As you may be aware the Asian Human Rights Commission together with many other organizations has been carrying out a campaign to get the Sri Lankan Government to bring to justice the perpetrators of m...Dear Friends We are pleased to give a piece of good news from East Timor: the first prosecution of ‘militiamen’ – who were organised and actively supported by the Indonesian military...Dear Friends  Further to the appeal we made for you to write to Ms. Mary Robinson, High Commissioner for Human Rights (regarding her failure to raise the discrimination and atrocities faced by dalits...SRI LANKA: Denial of right to vote resulted in mass deaths ———————————————————– ...AHRC welcomes the recent capture by the Indonesian police of Tommy Suharto - fugitive son of Gen. Suharto, accused of crimes ranging from corruption and graft to bombings and the assassination of a ju...NEPAL: Innocent arrest and detention without any criminal evidence ———————————————————...We have learned that a meeting addressed by the United Nations High Commissioner on Human Rights, Mrs. Mary Robinson, with the theme 'Including the Excluded in South Asia', has completely ignored the ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367