THAILAND: Migrant worker raped and killed
September 4, 2003
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.THAILAND: Violence against women ———————————————————– Dear friends, The Asian Hu...Dear friends Name of victim: Okanda Hevage Jinadasa (50), Married man with 5 children; a mason by occupation Date of victim’s death: 5 September 2003 Address of victim: Okkampitiya, Moneragela D...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Ravi Kiran Regmi, alias Nirjeeb, 59, a teacher, has been held and tortured by the army security forces in Narayangh...Dear Friends Inhuman Assault by the Bagawantalawa police of three young men The victims are; Name : Ramaiya Dhanapala Singham Age : 23 years Civil status : married with one child Address : Chapelton E...Dear friends Victim: Padukkage Nishantha Thushara Perera (23 years old) Address of the victim: No. 63, St. Sebastian’s Road, Kandana Perpetrators: Police officers attached to the Divulapitiya...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has recently communicated with John P. Abraham, who is involved in the campaign for the rights of the indigenous Adivasi tribals in India. The Ad...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received news that a female Burmese migrant worker was raped and killed by three men in Mae Sot, on the Thai border with Burma. One of three ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received another two cases of deaths in custody in Sri Lanka. It is already the third custodial death case that AHRC has received in the past...Dear friends, Disappearance of 26 year old man after arrest and torture by Watthegama Police officers in Kandy District Victim: Saliya Padma Udaya Kumara (26 years old) Date of incident: from 26 Augus...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) had previously issued urgent appeals and wrote appeal letters to the Congregation of Mother of Sorrows Servants of Mary calling for the justice fo...Dear Friends We are forwarding updated information from the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) regarding the killing of the Blancos, a Mangyan family, by elements of the 16th Infantry Bata...Dear Friends Torture of two young persons and fabrication of charges by Ankumbura Police; Illegal arrest; Illegal detention for 8 days Victims: Bandula Padma Kumara (14 years old) and Saman Kumara (17...Dear Friends Further information has been forthcoming from Mr John P Abraham, who, despite threats to his life, continues to campaign for the rights of the indigenous adivasi tribals in India. A judic...Dear Friends We are pleased to be able to give you good news that Mr. Stephen Khan, a Kashmiri asylum seeker, was released on 6 August 2003 after five years of immigration detention. Federal court jud...Dear Friends, Doctors informed Chamila Bandara and his family on Aug. 19, 2003, that Chamila Bandara has lost the use of his left arm permanently. Chamila Bandara is at present being treated at the Pa...Dear Friends Brutal Torture of a 17 year old and others, causing permanent injuries; Illegal arrest; Illegal detention for 8 days Victim: B.G. Chamila Bandara Jayaratne of 166 Godahena, Dolapihilla (...Dear Friends The controversy over the large dams project on the River Narmada has come to symbolise the struggle for a just and equitable society in India. We are forwarding updated information from t...Dear Friends We are forwarding updated information from the National Centre for Advocacy Studies (NCAS), Pune, regarding a case of torture and brutal beating to death of an Adivasi tribal, leading to ...Dear Friends On 21 July, about 100 police and the Maharashtra State Farming Corporation (MSFC) security personnel destroyed about two hundreds huts of adivasis – indigenous people – and mo...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is delighted to inform you that MP Gundalai has been released from detention 25 hours after he was arrested at the airport in Ulaanbaatar on July...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367