INDONESIA: Security Forces forcibly terminated Workshop on 1965 massacre
August 14, 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, According to the information that the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received, Ms. Sashikala Maduwanthi Dharmapalain was severely assaulted by her husband’s family on 14 Augu...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about Ram Kishor Harijan and his son Parikshan Harijan. They had been beaten by non-Dalits Mohan Prasad Yadav and his so...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the death of a 17-year-old Christian student, after the continuous hateful remarks of a teacher. The s...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding a fabricated case against Mr. Heri Budiawan. He is known as Budi Pego, a villager of Sumber Agung vill...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has taken note of news reports from various media channels on the deaths of several manual scavengers across the country and especially in New De...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the abduction and illegal confinement of a peasant, Nawaz. He was abducted by a local influential man,...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from MASUM, our partner organization in West Bengal. It concerns the extra-judicial killing of a civilian at the hands o...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. K.M.H Sudath, a resident of Kandy District. On 22 July 2017, he was illegally arrested and detained at the Headqu...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding false cases being filed against two persons in Malda, West Bengal. The cases were filed against them f...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding continuous harassment meted out by the Mahiyangana Police and the Badulla Police to Herath Mudiyansela...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the disappearance of a young activist by the Pakistan Rangers. He was organizing villagers protesting ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the committee of International People’s Tribunal (IPT) in Klender, East Jakarta city, Jakarta, Indonesia. It rela...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Alternate Law Forum (ALF), Bangalore, concerning the plight of migrant workers in Abu Dhabi, particularly an In...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the brutal police torture and subsequent suicide of a young boy in Thrissur, Kerala. Vinayak (18) was ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the extra-judicial killing of Mr. Sathasivam Madisam (17) of Karadiyanaru in Batticaloa District. On 24 July 2017,...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the sudden increase of disappearances of activists including peasant leaders, human rights defenders a...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Human Rights Alert, our partner organization in Manipur, about the custodial death of a Manipuri woman within the p...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the extra-judicial attempt to kill Mr. Sarath Kumara Yapa, a resident of Meegalewa in the Anuradhapura District. O...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Love Commandos, a New-Delhi based volunteer organization dedicated to assisting couples who face familial or societ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding two missing persons. A brilliant, 16 ½ year old student and a 21 year old day laborer who were picked...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367