UPDATE (Sri Lanka): Mt. Lavinia police&#8217;s apparent inaction to arrest/prosecute those responsible for the death of a torture victim, Mr. M. Ranson Peiris
January 9, 2005
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is extremely concerned about the discriminatory relief operations against Burmese migrant workers affected by the tsunami by the Thai authorities...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned by new information received by Asia Forum, a local human rights organisation, of the attempted second re-arrest of a person ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man named Mr. Tharuka Fernando has been severely injured by a criminal who has a nexus with the Panuadura police ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that four men, namely Laxaman Pun, Prithvi Gautam B.K. (also known as Suraj), Sher Bahadur Budha (also known as Dinesh) ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from MASUM, a human rights organization in West Bengal, that a woman named Mrs. Gedulal Mondal, was raped and then kille...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from MASUM, a human rights organisation in West Bengal, that torture and rape victim Hasna Mondal from East Daukimari, D...[Re: UA-180-2004: SRI LANKA: Ministry of Health announces list of medical items required to deal with tsunami aftermath; and UP-02-2005: SRI LANKA:  List of items urgently required in Kalutara, Matar...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding bribery and corruption by police personnel from the Mahiyangana Police Station in Sri Lanka. On 18 December 20...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Pol. Lt-Col. Suebsak, who was involved in two other brutal torture cases that the AHRC had reported on (Reference:...Dear friends, The AHRC has received information that Mt. Lavinia police, who is in charge of the investigation into the death of Mr. M. Ranson Peiris is purposely evading being present at the non-su...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission is sharing information it has about items urgently needed for the people affected by the tsunami in Indonesia/Aceh. Prompt foreign aid is required to as...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to you to report further illegal arrests and the forced disappearance of four persons in Parbat District.  According to the information w...(UP-01-2005: SRI LANKA: Police officers interdicted regarding three torture cases of Gerald Perera, Lalith Rajapakse and Channa Prasanna Fernando; UP-54-2004: SRI LANKA: Urgent protection is necessary...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission is sharing the updated information about items urgently needed to the people affected by tsunami through local authorities in Kalutara, Matara and Batti...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man named Mr. Kavirathna Priyantha Kumara de Silva (37) was severely tortured by the Sub Inspector (S.I.) Weerasi...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to inform you of death of two young children on 20 December 2004 after the explosion of an army shell, which had been carelessly discard...[RE: UP-81-2004: SRI LANKA: Continuing death threats to human rights activists and torture victims after murder of Gerald Perera; UP-77-2004: SRI LANKA: More death threats to a torture victim and a hu...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) shares the grief of those faced with one of the worst natural catastrophes of recent times by way of the tsunamis that devastated several countri...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to inform you that Mr Jeewan Shrestha, who we have reported on in the past (UA-159-2004), has been re-arrested for the third time by secur...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to inform you of the gang rape of a woman by police personnel in Chuadanga, Bangladesh. On the night of 18 December 2004, 14 policemen fro...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367