SRI LANKA: A man suffers from serious head injuries after being tortured by police officers
September 21, 2003
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Dr Cynthia Maung and her clinic staff will not be deported to Burma. Forum-Asia, said in its statement last week tha...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the Kerala police, India, have arbitrarily arrested 19 persons and caused damage to their property. Your urgent act...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received the information that Zafar Iqbal, who had been in police custody in connection with a house robbery attempt, has allegedly been tort...Name of the victim: Mr. Velraj, 38, formerly residing at Ervadi Village, Tirunelveli district, Tamilnadu, India Perpetrators: Constables Mr. Chelladurai; Mr. Kanthasamy; Mr. Senthil Murugan; Mr. Siv...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man was severely tortured by the police officers after he was illegally arrested. Currently, the victim is in seri...Dear friends, We need your solidarity urgently for the Adivasis people! The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the Adivasis people are on a hunger strike continuously a...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that two young men were illegally arrested and tortured by the police officers after they tried to make a complaint about...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from FORUM-ASIA that Dr. Cynthia Maung’s Mae Tao Clinic in Mae Sot District of Tak Province, which provides health...Case of Lalith Rajapakse before the Wattala Magistrate’s Court ——————————————————̵...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the police illegally arrested and severely tortured 10-year-old Tasawar Abbas, in order to know the whereabouts of h...Dear friends Name of the victim: Mr. M. V. Babu (37 years old) Address of the victim: s/o Velayudhan, Mambully Parambil house, Alagappa Nagar P.O, Kallur Village, Mukundapuram Thaluk, Thrissur, Kera...THAILAND: Labour slavery; Inhumane working conditions —————————————————————...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has grave concerns that the family of torture victim, Dawundage Pushpakumara (14 years old), is being threatened by the police and a local politic...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received the information that the torture victim, Chamila Bandara (17 years old) and his mother have fled their home after being severely thre...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man named Babai Biswas, 22, was killed by police officers after being arbitrarily arrested and tortured. I urge yo...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man named Kurupanawa Gamage Nihal suffered serious head injuries after the police officers of the Udugama Police S...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Kurukulasuriya Pradeep Niranjan, 30, was arrested and imprisoned for 21 months without any concrete evidence of his ...Dear friends Victim: Dawundage Pushpakumara (14 years old) Address of victim: 21 Mile Post, Ranavarapitiya Rd, Saliyawewa Junction, Putlam Perpetrators: Officer In Charge and other officers of Saliyaw...Dear friends Illegal Arrest and detention, torture, and fabrication of charges to wreak vengeance for lodging complaints with the Human Rights Commission – VICTIMS: Mohamad Ameer Mohamad Riswan ...THAILAND: Violence against women ———————————————————– Dear friends, The Asian Hu...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367