INDONESIA: Three indigenous Papuans illegally detained after distributing statements on the street
July 7, 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information concerning Mrs. P K Deepika Priyangika (26), of Matele District. She was a victim of maternal death due to the gross med...Dear Friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the gang rape of a young woman. The rape was recorded and she was blackmailed into marriage. The perpet...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a girl (11) of Yaku Arun village development committee (VDC) 5 in Bhojpur District was raped in December 2016. Whil...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Yogarasa Dinesh (24) of Nelliady, Point Pedro in Jaffna District. Two police officers attached to the Point Pedro...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Kariyawasam Wickramarachchilage Milan Saman Wickramasinghe (21) permanent resident of Kantale Police Divis...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the abduction of a minor from the Bhutto family home. Previously, two brothers from this family were a...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Makassar Legal Aid (LBH Makassar) regarding the criminal action against 13 farmers in Bulu Ballea, Pattapang villag...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received reliable information regarding death threats aimed at the human rights activist, Mr. Sudesh Nandimal Silva who is fighting for the rights o...Dear Friends, Asian Human Rights Commission has received reliable information regarding death threats received by the Chariman of the Committee for the Protection of Rights of Prisoners – Mr. Se...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from its partner organization in Kerala, Nervazhi, regarding the torture and violence meted out to a poor lotter...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Karna Bahadur Sarki, 42, was mercilessly beaten after he dillydallied in washing utensils after drinking alcohol at...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from MASUM, its partner organization in West Bengal, regarding the alleged torture and custodial death of a Musl...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Mining Advocacy Network (Jatam), a human rights organization in East Kalimantan province, about a teenager drowning...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the case of the missing poet and activist Farhad Mazhar, who has been found. His disappearance and sub...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the gang rape of a constable’s daughter by influential persons. The district police of Jacobabad, Sindh prov...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from a local partner about the arbitrary arrest and detention of three indigenous Papuans in Nabire, Papua province, Ind...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Makassar Legal Aid (LBH Makassar), South Sulawesi Province, regarding the attack committed by a military officer an...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the case of Mr. Thilanga Roshan Perera who is a prisoner in New Dumbara (Bogambara) Prison, Kandy. According t...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from noted writer and poet, Farhad Mazhar has disappeared and been reported missing from Dhaka in Bangladesh sin...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Kushan Shalika Herath (30), a teacher at the Kuliyapitiya Central College. Mr. Kushan has been transferred to Nar...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367