SRI LANKA: Alleged serial killers take the life of the 18th woman, in Kotakethana in Kahawatte
April 10, 2015
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has gathered detailed information on the cell death of an innocent man at the Kalutara North Prison on 5th April 2015. Mr. Goniyamalimage Suraj P...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Baswadi Meghwal Samaj and Anusuchit Jati and Samasat Jan Sangharsh Samiti, Nagaur, Rajasthan, about a brutal attack...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding military intervention in academic discourse on the subject of Balochistan. A talk scheduled at the Lahore Univ...According the information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) a mother and her 18 month old infant has died suddenly, on 6th April 2015, as a result of continued domestic violence an...Dear Friends, On 9 March 2015, Jeevandarage Ashan Tharanga, a 17 year old young man of No: 62, Balummahara, Dekatana in the Gampaha District, was illegally arrested and severely beaten by police offic...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is issuing this special Urgent Appeal following a spate of alarming, serial killings, particularly of women in the Kahawatte Police Division, dur...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information on an extra-judicial killing of an innocent man in Attanagalle in Gampaha District in Sri Lanka on 2nd April 2015. Mr....Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the forced eviction of Mrs. Christina Gurning (85) from her house in Jalan Kusumaatmadja No. 76 of Menteng Sub...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information of an 8-year-old boy who was recently kidnapped, sold, and by chance rescued. However, by willfully neglecting their res...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the disappearance of Mr. Sajan Avinash, a young man belonging to the Hindu faith. Sajan has gone missing follo...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. J M Piyathilaka, who is a social activist and a member of the Justice of the Peace (JP.), was assaulted in pub...Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that members of the Southern Peasants Federation of Thailand (SPFT) continue to face death threats in Surat Thani Province. Despite...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about a minor girl and her mother being set on fire after their being gang-raped by three men. The girl, who suffered 90...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a young man belonging with Ahamadi religious minority group was killed by the unknown men amid the military operati...Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has detailed information on the killing of Sameera Dananjaya Pathirana (39) in the cell where he was detained in Ja-Ella Police Station. Sameer...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that human body parts have been found scattered in several parts of Sri Lanka between 14th March and 18th March 2015.  ...Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes with deep concern regarding ongoing threats by soldiers to a woman human rights defender. She had been forced to act as their guide in m...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information, that a business couple from Meetiyagoda, in the Galle District, had been brutally murdered in broad daylight, in cold b...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Manipur concerning death threats faced by a senior journalist after the journalist spoke against corruption in a televised discus...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) regrets to inform you that three months after a land rights activist was killed in Negros Occidental, there is no progress in the investigation of his case. He...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367