CAMBODIA: One village chief illegally sells indigenous people&#8217;s land to a private company in Mondolkiri province
January 28, 2007
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the arbitrary arrest of Mr. Muzibur Rahman and Mr. Waheduzzaman by the army in the Paikgachha Upazilla...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) received information has received updated information about the case of arbitrary arrests of over 400 political and human rights activists in the...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned about the information regarding alleged disappearance of another four persons within the first week of February 2007.Â  Forc...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is writing to inform you about the continuing killings in the Philippines this time of seven people including one professor who was shot in the U...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from its local partner the People’s Vigilance Committee on Human Rights (PVCHR) based in Uttar Pradesh, India, reg...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received a report of the alleged gang rape of a 16-year-old girl by 11 persons in Ubaro Town, Ghotki district, Sindh province, Pakistan on 27...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission is gravely concerned by another horrible case of police torture reported from the Khairpur district, Sindh province, Pakistan. Two brothers were arreste...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed of the alleged arbitrary arrest and torture of an NGO leader named Mr. Shahidul Islam by the Army in Tala upazilla (sub distric...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission(AHRC) have been informed that 14-year-old W. K. Sajini Vasana Perera was insulted both physically and mentally by her class teacher in front of all clas...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed that a human rights defender namely Mr. F M Abdur Razzak and his father, Mr. Nur Ali Fakir, were summoned twice by the Army in ...[NOTICE: The AHRC have developed a new automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal, we only could include e-mail addresses of a few of the CambodianÂ ...Dear friends, The Working Group on Justice for Peace (Thailand) has informed the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) about the alleged horrific torture of a 42 year-old rubber plantation worker named...[NOTICE: The AHRC have developed a new automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal, we only couldÂ include e-mail addresses of a fewÂ of the PakistanÂ...[NOTICE: The AHRC have developed a new automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal, we could not include e-mail addresses of some of the CambodianÂ au...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information about a horrific case in which a 24-year-old young man, Mr. Hazoor Buksh Malik, wasÂ severely assaulted on his penis while bein...[NOTICE: The AHRC have developed a new automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal, we could not include e-mail addresses of some of the IndianÂ autho...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed that three men were allegedly tortured by the Army deployed in Paikgachha, Khulna district, Bangladesh, after their arbitrary a...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has obtained information that a group of soldiers and forestry officials in northern Thailand raided a village on January 22 and forced their way...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that Mr. Ket Bun Thann, chief of Pou Teut village has sold 400 hectares which is under a collective ownership of a Phnong indigenous ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the second arbitrary arrest of a businessman named Muzibur Rahman and his relative Mr. Muzibur by the ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367