PHILIPPINES: Three indigenous miners were found buried in a shallow grave
April 16, 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received disturbing information from Civil Society Women’s Organisation (CSWO), an anti-corruption and women’s rights organization ba...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that five farmers, all members of the Alyansa ng mga Manggagawang Bukid sa Asyenda Luisita (AMBALA), were arrested by the lo...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. A.A. Aberathna Bandara was illegally arrested, illegally detained for 39 days and severely tortured by officers...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that seven persons were arrested and charged with being involved in a fracas that caused the death of one Mr. Renganathe...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a group of nine men were arrested by the Matale police at the instigation of the Superintendent of the Hunnasgiriya...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you that after being missing for several days, three people were found buried in a shallow grave near their hut. The thr...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is pleased to inform you that a broadcast journalist whom we reported earlier to have been threatened for exposing corrupt practices, illegal log...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the torture case of Riko Yeyandra, an inmate who was tortured by two prison guards at Solok Correction...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the killing of around 40 persons in military operations in different parts of Balochistan province conducted y...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Jakarta Legal Aid Institute (LBH Jakarta) regarding the death of a detainee in police custody in Tangerang. The...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is concerned about the case of a group of farmers who were accused of trespassing and destroying the teak field of a company, NRDC, in the forest...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Human Rights Alert, a human rights organization based in Manipur regarding the arbitrary detention of Mr. Khumukcha...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that a peasant leader was hurt after protecting his land from perpetrators that set up markers on disputed land. The dispute...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the attack by members of the Mobile Brigade of the Nabire District Police on three Papuans in Nabire. The Papu...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding threats to the life of Nasrullah Baloch, the Chairperson of the Voice of Baloch Missing persons (VBMP) and a p...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that a labour leader has been under surveillance. The person concerned is actively involved in the campaign for justice for ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that two nationalists from Sindh province, Mr. Maqsood Quereshi and Mr. Salman Wadho, were shot and injured from close r...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you about the disappearance of a peasant leader in Isabela. The victim was arrested by persons that introduce themselves as agen...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Tika Ram Pokharel, a lawyer working with the Forum for the Protection of People’s Rights (PPR Nepal), has bee...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) regrets to inform you that three persons have been killed while four others were arrested in separate incidents in February. The AHRC is deeply c...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367