SAUDI ARABIA/PHILIPPINES: Melanie Cordon serves out sentence as government turns its back
October 3, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the arbitrary arrest and torture of 15 Papuan villagers, including several minors, in Horas Skyline village,...Dear friends,  Mr. M H A Sameera Sandaruwa (28) of ‘Sameera Sevana’, Dumkola Watte, Daragala, Waimada in the Badulla District is single and is also a worker at Noratel Lanka Ltd in the Fr...Dear friends,  Mr. Maharambage Pradeep Kumara Priyadarshana (28) of Jambolagahamullahena, Dippitiya, Mahapallegama is single and works at Noratel Lanka Ltd in the Free Trade Zone (FTZ) in Katunaya. O...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is making an exceptionally Urgent Appeal following the assault on Dr. N J Nonis, the Registrar of the Sri Lanka Medical Council (SLMC) by two u...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that A 12-year-old Christian girl was abducted and raped for eight months. The rapists have not been arrested because ...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM) concerning two more cases of police violence from West Bengal. It is...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM) concerning yet another case of absolute savagery by the Border Secur...Dear friends,  Mr. Kamaranga Hannadige Lalith Susantha Peiris (32), No: 80, Tsunami Housing Scheme, Modara, Moratuwa in the Colombo District was arrested and extrajudicially killed by police officers...Dear friends,  On 2 June 2011, members of the Persiapan Rantau Kopar Sub-district Police killed Mr Syafrudin, a resident of the Rokan Hilir area in Riau. Police alleged that the officers had arrested...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concern about the continued detention of a man that the police have arrested as a suspect in the Maguindanao Massacre in place of the...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is making an exceptional Urgent Appeal after observing the increased numbers of systematic extrajudicial killings of beggars in Sri Lankan citi...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the five police officials allegedly responsible for torturing to death a poet in their custody are still at large...Dear friends,  Mr. K H Rangana Pushpakumara (31) of No: 140/A, Webada West, Webada is married and works at Noratel Lanka Ltd in the Free Trade Zone (FTZ) in Katunaya. On 30 May 2011 Rangana participa...Dear friends,  On 25 September body of Ms. Srini Wasana Amaratunga was found at the Elakanda, Wattala in the Gampaha District. Srini had been missing since the morning of the 24th and her relatives m...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learnt that a woman victim of police abuse committed suicide in Jemoumapara village, Murshidabad district, West Bengal, India. Ms Mithu Dey...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from the Institute for Research, Recognition and Development of Legal Aid (LP3BH) in West Papua regarding the ...Dear friends,  Further to our last update, the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you that Melanie Cordon, a domestic worker convicted in absentia over a fabricated case, h...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is disturbed to learn that India’s National Human Rights Commission has deemed on 15 September 2011 a case of custodial death to be close...Dear friends,  Mr. Ganearachchi Appuhamilage Gayan Saranga (29) of Katulanda, Dekatana, Dompe in the Gampaha District was arrested and extrajudicially killed by the police officers attached to the Do...Dear friends,  Mr. Alahakoonge Supun Piyal of Pahala Madampella, Katana in the Gampaha District was admitted to the Negombo Base Hospital for medical treatment for abdominal pain on 18 June 2010. He ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367