PHILIPPINES: Police take no action against fleeing gunmen who shot and killed a human rights activist
December 16, 2008
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) regrets to inform you that another activist has been arrested and charged with subversion over his role in organizing a peaceful protest two mont...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you regarding the sexual abuse allegedly perpetrated upon an 11-year-old Buddhist novice by the head of the temple where he stay...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that a man, who had to endure a court trial over false charges laid on him for assaulting policemen two years ago, has been ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you of yet another killing of a peasant activist. Witnesses to the incident reported that when the shooting took place, ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding an incident in which a girl was abducted by a staff of Civil Defense named Mr. Sanjith on November 16, 2008. S...[NOTICE: The AHRC encourages you to send your appeal letters via fax or post to them. Fax numbers and postal addresses of the Indonesian authorities are attached below with this appeal. You may reprod...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding an incident in which two young men were harassed by air force officers attached to the Koggala Air Force Bas...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Kegalle jailors illegally detained a man. They asked for money to release him even though there was an order of r...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) strongly condemns the arbitrary arrest and detention of eight women and their children as hostages by police, in order to secure one man from t...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that the policemen responsible for the death of a man while in their custody eight months ago have not been charged, despi...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed that police assaulted two men at the Kalubowila Junction on November 10. As a result of the assault, one man’s spinal v...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed by the CrCF (Cross Cultural Foundation) that the Provincial Court in Yala is due to give its verdict on 27 November 2008 on t...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is informed by the Human Rights Alert (HRA) about the murder of a journalist in Manipur, India. It is reported that the scribe, Mr. Konsam Rish...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you of the killing of three persons, including two political activists, in separate incidents recently. The AHRC is gr...Dear friends, After closely following the case of Razzak and Shankar (please see further: AHRC-UAU-065-2008 and AHRC-UAU-067-2008), the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed that R...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you regarding the continuing arrest of political and human rights activists over fabricated charges of murder. Three of ...Dear friends, As earlier reported the fabricated charges against Mr. Razzak and Mr. Shankar and their risk of torture in police custody (AHRC-UAU-065-2008), the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) ha...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you that a local court in southern Thailand has ordered after four years of hearing the post-mortem inquest over the dea...Dear friends, In the latest in the series of cases of persons involved in last September’s mass protests in Burma, the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) brings you details of the first charge...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has obtained information that Yosias Syet was found dead in his house on 17 October 2008. The autopsy confirmed that he had been murdered and i...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367