NEPAL: Reporter targeted by the police for exposing brutal crackdown
July 24, 2015
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Indian Army personnel in Kokrajhar District of Assam have gang raped Mrs. Sarita Devi, who is eight months pregnant...Dear Friends, According to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission, Mr. Anthony Kingsley, a casual labourer living in Hantana Estate, Kandy had been arrested by police officers attac...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the brutal attack on members of the Evangelical Church of Indonesia, who were protesting outside a mosque in K...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission regrets to inform you that eight persons were arbitrarily arrested while three men were tortured in separate incidents in Mindanao. All the victims were...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you of the illegal arrest and detention of the Lampusay siblings. One of the victims is a former volunteer educator of the Rural...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the arbitrary arrest, illegal detention, and torture of two young men by the Jacobabad District Police, Sindh....The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding three women being sentenced to four months imprisonment, with labor, for leading a peaceful prayer. In March, the women led ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to express concern regarding the disrespect of the religion and dignity of 20 prisoners presently detained in General Santos City Jail. To...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to share an updated appeal from Protection International about the high-risk situation of Ms. Waewrin Buangern (Jo), coordinator of the Ra...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about a 17 year old young man. His grandmother was missing and later found dead, floating in the Maussakele Reservoir ne...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a young man named Mehmood Ahmed Kharani has been killed by the police in a fake encounter. Additionally, policemen ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information about the lack of access to medical facilities by the women of Sunabeda Plateau in Nuapada District of Odisha. The women belong...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the brutal torture of Mr. Suhaili by the Police Drug Force (Satnarkoba) of Bangka Police Resort (Polres Bangka...Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a Labour rights’ activist is being prosecuted for allegedly trespassing on land confiscated by the military. Sh...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the case of Mr. Sudirman, a drug dealer, who was burnt alive by Brigadier Sony Saputra, a police officer of th...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the arbitrary arrest, detention and torture of Fiki Arfindo (13), by police officers of the Widang Police Sect...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the death of Aslin Zalim in police custody in Bau-Bau Regency, South East Sulawesi Province, Indonesia...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the extrajudicial killing of a disappeared person, Mr. Raja Dahir, who was abducted by Pakistan Ranger...Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about two girls having been forced into the sex trade after being trafficked by a relative. Government officials in a ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the Nepal Police has clamped down on peaceful protesters at the Shree Ram Naresh Yadav Model Higher Secondary Schoo...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367