INDONESIA: Authorities refuse to treat political prisoner with tumour
January 26, 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) received information that the police shot local farmers who were demonstrating against the gold exploration plan in several sub-districts in Bima...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from MASUM concerning yet another case of brutal custodial rape at the Hariharpara police station at Murshidabad Distric...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the continued legal actions against over hundreds of villagers in Gangjeong village, holding peaceful demonstr...Dear friends, As the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has noted in a recent update (UAU-004-2012), we are very happy to see the release in recent months of many people on whose behalf we have camp...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a couple from Pakistani held Kashmir has threatened with being shot on sight by Jihadi militant groups whenever the...[RE: AHRC-UAC-083-2010: SOUTH KOREA: A criminal charge filed against a lawyer for providing legal advice] —————————————...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Kanahipadi Kankanamge Nalin (29) of Dodamgo, Kaluthara is married and a businessman by profession. He was arres...CAMPAIGN PAGE: FREE PHYO WAI AUNG http://www.humanrights.asia/campaigns/phyo-wai-aung  ————————————————...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mohamad Rasul (11) is a resident of No: 33/05, Palliyawatte, Poruthota, Koshshikade. Rasul was a student of Palangu...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Ramesh Kumar, a casual labourer and owner of a three-wheeler which he used to drive for hire, was arrested at t...SPECIAL REPORT Torture in the Philippines & the unfulfilled promise of the 1987 Constitution Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learnt that two complaints of torture in Bas...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Kaluthanthrige Jesus Deneicios Fernando (15), of No: 22/30, Asarappa Road, Asarappa Watte, Negombo was grievous...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Soriyamoorthy Givoshan (25) was forcefully recruited into the LTTE when they threatened to abduct his sister. A...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a fisher folk activist and human rights defender was attacked and killed by land grabbers in December 2011. Three p...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes with deep concern that a community journalist had been threatened for condemning the murder of his colleague in General Santos City. The t...Dear friends, The family members of Mr. L. M. Jagath Kumara (22), a soldier attached to the Vavuniya Army Camp are facing harassment by the OIC and officers of the Thalathuoya Police Station. On 23 De...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from MASUM concerning yet another case of torture by the Border Security Force (BSF), stationed along the Indo-Banglades...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes with deep concern on the continued prosecution of Temogen “Cocoy” Tulawie, a human rights defender, for murder charges based o...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the condition of Kimanus Wenda, a political prisoner at Nabire prison, Papua, who has a tumor in his stomach a...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Ms. Chandramohan Denusha is a student at Ambakotte Tamil Vidyalaya. Twelve year old Denusha was severely beaten by ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367