PAKISTAN: Disappearance of youth whose two older brothers already extra judicially killed
July 28, 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the extra-judicial attempt to kill Mr. Bodhipakshage Manjula Prabath Wijewardana a residence of Aranayaka in Kegal...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from our local partner in Papua Province. It speaks about an alleged brutal shooting and violence committed by the Pania...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the extra-judicial killing of Mr. Rajamuni Devage Gunadasa of second milepost, Rale Kanda, Alawwa, Warakapola in t...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from MASUM, our partner organization in West Bengal. It concerns the enforced disappearance of a civilian at the hands o...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Juwan Arachchilage Lakshan Sandaruwan (18), of No: 120/1, Thrincomalee Road, Kantale in the Trincomalee Di...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the extrajudicial killing of Mr. A D Pushpakumara. He was arrested on 18 June 2017 by police officers attached to ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from our partner in East Java, the Commission for the Disappeared and Victims of Violence (KontraS), Surabaya office, re...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding two Sikkimese women, employed as domestic workers, who are stranded in Saudi Arabia, They have made an...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the disappearance of a youth by the police and persons from intelligence agencies. His two older broth...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding the assault of Mr. Mohamad Ali and his daughter on 7 July 2017, by an influential businessman. When Mr. Mohamad made ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Theo Hesegem, a coordinator of Advocacy Network for Law Enforcement and Human Rights (JAPH-HAM) in Wamena, Papu...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from Nervazhi, our partner organization in Kerala, regarding the filing of a false case, torture and cruel, inhu...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the Khalishpur police of the Khulna Metropolitan city has gouged eyes of a detainee for failing to pay bribe. The v...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the Dhaka police shot tear shells at protesting university students, blinding one student as a result. On 20 July 2...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from its local partner in Papua about the torture of Albert Nawipa (15), a junior high school student. Nawipa was illega...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), has received information concerning Mrs. A. Rohini Aththanayaka (37), No: 131, Akkara Eighty Village, Sorabora Colony, Mahiyanganaya, Polonnaruw...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from MASUM, its partner organization in West Bengal, regarding the alleged torture of a poor farmer by the Borde...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from Nervazhi, our partner organization in Kerala, regarding the abusive behaviour of the police towards a woman...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Edirisinghe Mudiyanselage Samitha Lakmal (18), of No: 65/11, Deewaragama, Kantale in the Trincomalee Distr...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the local network in Papua about torture against Mr. Niko Hisage, committed by army Sergeant Major Lucas and two ot...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367