SRI LANKA: Second torture of a torture victim who was kidnapped by the perpetrator
September 21, 2004
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, Three separate cases of illegal arrest and detention have come to the attention of the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC). Bharat Poudel, 25 and Dil Bhadur Baniya, 19 were both arreste...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Sita Sada, a 14-year old Dalit girl, was raped and killed by upper caste men on 17 May 2004. According to our infor...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned by the continuous attempt by the security forces to weaken the judiciary by ignoring court orders. Advocacy Forum, a local h...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man named Heeralu Mohottalalage Punchi Banda (39) was illegally arrested and tortured by the Sub Inspector (S.I.)...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 20-year-old woman named Saran has been killed by her husband Nawab in the pretext of honor killing on 8 September...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 10-year-old girl (name withheld) has been raped by six persons including her stepfather for over one year. The in...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information by MASUM in West Bengal that a man named Mr. Madhusudan Seth was allegedly arrested with false charges and ill-treated b...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a torture victim, S. Channa Prasanka Fernando (27) was kidnapped and tortured for three days by Sergeant Subasinghe...Dear friends, The AHRC has received information that the life of Mr. Man Bahadru Budhamagar (22) is in great danger. On 16 September 2004 Mr. Man Bahadru Budhamagar was illegally arrested by army pers...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned of 14-year-old Dalit girl, Saraswati Bishwakarma and her mother Shirkumari Bishwakarma, who were sentenced to life imprisonm...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received new documentation from the Burma Lawyers’ Council, Thailand showing that another villager in Henzada Township, Ayeyawaddy Divis...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned by the ban on the Chamar Dalit community in Bhagawatpur-9 village by the upper caste villagers imposed since 6 September 200...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information of alleged torture of Mr. Welgama Ralalage Wijitha Herath (40) by the Officer in Charge (O.I.C.) and one constable attac...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man named Mr. Ganesh Kshetri (44) was severely tortured by the Balaju Ward Police on 28 August 2004. The victim...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that an 11-year-old boy named Khokan Hembram died due to severe assault by Mr. Ujjal Laha and his hired goons who suspec...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a young prisoner named Lewadeni Parirannehelage Senake Weerasinghe has been disappeared from open prison camp at Pa...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received another honor killings case from Sindh Province, Pakistan. According to the information received, Ms. Mehan (22) was shot dead by h...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Mr. R.K.L.G. Dingiri Banda on the serious security threat by two unknown men on 3 September 2004. Mr. Dingiri Banda...Dear friends, It has come to the attention of the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) that Mr. Wijesekara Pathiranage Lionel Weerasinghe (33) was arbitrarily arrested and brutally tortured by police ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that despite the earlier appeal of Mr. R.K.L.G. Dingiri Banda to the Bar Association of Sri Lanka, nothing has yet been ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367