SRI LANKA: Innocent man illegally arrested, detained, tortured and produced before the Courts on fabricated charges
September 18, 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, According to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission, a woman residing at the Special Residential Safe House of Refuge Seekers situated at Mirihana in Nugegoda Police D...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Kariyawasam Wickramaarachchilage Nimal Wickramasinghe, a permanent resident of Kantale Police Division. Ni...Dear Friends, According to reliable information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission, eighteen young girls in the Dehiwala Orphanage in Colombo District have been sexually abused by a male em...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mrs. Jaysekara Mudiyanselage Ramani Kumari permanent resident of Kantale Police Division. Kumari is a mother o...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about Mr. Magoda Pathirage Hemavipul (42). He was extra-judicially killed on 19 September 2017, by Officers attached to ...Dear Friends, Gorakaduwa Gamage Maleesha Nalinpriya (10) of Mahagedara Watte, Bataduwa, Galle, was a resident of Galle District. Maleesha went missing on 10 August 2017. He was residing and training t...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Morawatthegedara Nuwan Vijitha (26) of Kantale Police Division. On 15 June 2017, 3 Police Officers of the ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Kodithuwakku Kankanamage Chaminda Kumara (24) resident of Kantale Police Division. On 19 June 2017, five Kanta...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that 55-year-old Mrs. Raj Kumari Upadhaya, resident of Birgunj Metropolitan city, has been accused of being a witch. She...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Gregory Benedict Selvaraj in the Kandy Headquarters Police Division. On 26 July 2017, he was illegally arrested, ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding the case of Sanath Kumara Wijethilaka (34) of Dambulla Headquarters Police Division, who was killed in the early hour...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Warnasooriya Patabandige Lakshan (21), permanent resident of the Trincomalee District. On 15 June 2017, La...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from the Youth Forum for the Protection of Human Rights (YFPHR), Manipur. It concerns the death of a 22-year-old...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Sudath Darmapriya (40) of Kalawana, Minuwangoda in Gampaha District. Sudath has been missing since 12 July 2017. He i...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a Dalit family was beaten at midnight on 10 September 2017 by non-Dalits, after the 25-year-old son married a non-D...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information that Mr. Mahinda Dammika Manawadu was illegally arrested and severely tortured by police officers attached to the Padukka Polic...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mrs. K A Nilanthi Karunarathna. A resident of Baddegama Police Division, she migrated to Saudi Arabia as a domestic h...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the forced dissolution of a Discussion on truth-seeking and settlement of past abuses. The meeting was held in the...Dear Friends, Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Wasala Munidewage Ruwan Dharshana Premarathne (35) of No: 48/4, Opalgala watte, Pussella, Gammaduwa in the Matale Dis...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the rape of a blind woman at gun point by the brother of an influential government official. The area ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367