SRI LANKA: Innocent man abducted by Blue Police Van in the heart of Colombo
October 19, 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, According to reliable information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), four senior girls and a boy were tortured by the Principal of the Deniyaya Central College. On 17 ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Banten People Legal Aid (LBH Rakyat Banten) about the brutal attack and illegal arrest of Mr. Panji Bahari, a journ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the illegal arrest and detention of Mr. Elibichchi Rajapaksha Appuhamilage Vajira Sampath Rajapaksha, a reside...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information concerning Mr. Don Bosco Dino alias Vindan Ridman 24, of Jaffna Police Division in the Jaffna District. He was extra-jud...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information concerning Mr. Nawalage Kushan Thakshila Cooray (35) of the Minuwangoda Police Division in the Gampaha District. He was ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding three missing females in the Wellampitiya Police Division on 14 October 2017. According to relatives they have...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from our local partner in Papua about the torture and ill-treatment of a high school student, Yunus Manauri, in Teluk Wo...Dear Friends, Mr. Lalsiri Sampath Sugathapala (33) of Meehonda Wewa, Horowpathana was a resident of Horowpathana Police Division. He went missing on 14 April 2017. He was a regular soldier attached to...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the forced deportation of a Turkish family. They had been granted asylum status by the United Nations ...Dear Friends, According to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), a 15-year-old girl in 10th Grade at A/Madatugama Sri Rewatha Navodya Vidyalaya, Madatugama, Kekirawa was ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding the case of 14-year-old Kahingala Waduge Kanidu Minsara Silva, who was illegally arrested, detained and tortured by t...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information that around 500 residents in Dharamsal village, a small village on the Line of Control (dividing the State of Ja...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the extra-judicial attempt to kill Mr. Pathirana Champika Kumara Jayatunga (28), a resident of Biyagama Police div...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Nalaka Danushka Kumara (33) of Moragasmulla, Rajagiriya. He is a resident in the Rajagiriya Police Division. He w...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the attempt to extra-judicially kill Mr. Ranhotigedara Vajira Kumara (41), at the Negombo Police Division in Gampa...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Alawaththa Kamkanamge Tharindu Madusha (31) a resident of the Ragama Police Division. Madusha was illegall...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Pitawalagedara Chandrarathna (47), resident of Bakamuna Police Division. Chandrarathna was arrested on 4 May 2017 ch...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from our local partner in Papua, that the Military Court III-19 sentenced a defendant for burning Bibles to 30 m...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the extra-judicial killing of Mr. D P Premasiri (65) of Stace Road, Grandpass, Colombo 14 in the Colombo District....Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Randeer Kaushalya (22), resident of Ragama Police Division, Gampaha District. On 15 August 2017, Randeer w...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367