PAKISTAN/UNITED KINGDOM: An Ahmadi brutally killed in Scotland, with head stamped on
March 31, 2016
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The AHRC has received information from its partner organization Nervazhi, that a 31-year-old man with a speech defect was tortured and harassed at a police station in Kerala, India. Afte...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information provided by Padang Legal Aid (LBH Padang) regarding the civil service police unit (Satpol PP)’s brutal attack on publi...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned from the UK media that a Pakistani born Ahmadi was stabbed to death in Glasgow, Scotland by a Pakistani Muslim. Asad Shah was brutall...Dear Friends, The AHRC has received information from its partner organization Nervazhi, that one man, aged 52, was tortured and harassed at a police station in Kerala. He was riding his motorbike when...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding a vigilante group sealing off the Santa Clara Church in Bekasi, West Java province, Indonesia. Despite the con...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the murder of a Pakistani human rights defender Ms. Perveen Rehman on 13 March 2013. Since then, the governmen...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Indonesia Environment Forum (WALHI)’s branch office of West Nusa Tenggara province regarding the brutal attac...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the disappearance of a Baloch student leader, who was arrested two years ago, on 18 March 2014, by per...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the death of Mr. Siyono, who was arrested and detained by the anti-terror police unit (known as Special Detach...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learnt that the only person facing charges in the murder case of human rights defender Mr. Chai Boontonglek, has been acquitted by the Wieng ...Dear Friends, The situation in Chattisgarh is veering out of control. Activist lawyers of the Jagdalpur Legal Aid Group, journalist Malini Subramaniam, and activist and politician Soni Sori have been ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed by Padang Legal Aid (LBH Padang) that the judges of Muara Sijunjung District Court have refused the case of restitution submitt...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the disappearance of several activists of a proscribed nationalist group, Jeay Sindh Muttehda Mahaz (J...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has information that after pressure and intensive lobbies conducted by national and international civil society organizations, the Attorney Gener...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. M. Mohan (56) and Sri Devi (35) of No: 84/25/1, Pathana Watte, Sunduhumpola in the Kandy District have been ill...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information provided by Yogyakarta Legal Aid (LBH Yogyakarta) regarding a vicious attack and abuse of power conducted by the Indones...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) regrets to inform you of the continuing delay in the court hearing of Mary Vic Medina, a mother falsely charged of assaulting her own son. The re...Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to express concern regarding the arrest and torture of four men in Cavite. The victims were tied, beaten and electrocuted. They were arb...Dear Friends, The AHRC has received information from its partner organization Nervazhi that five youngsters have been tortured and harassed at a police station in Kerala. They were riding their motorb...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has information provided by the Commission for the Disappearances and Victims of Violence (KontraS), a national human rights organization. A ligh...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367