INDONESIA: Yogyakarta public lawyers attacked and prevented from providing legal assistance by police
May 7, 2018
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you regarding the arrest and trumped up charges against five peasants in Cagayan Valley. The military claims the five farmers ar...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you about the killing of a peasant leader in Negros Occidental. The victim actively led landrights campaign in their are...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you about the killing of civilians in two separate encounters by the military. Three civilians were killed in Camarines ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you about the killing of a priest in Cagayan. Fr. Mark Anthony Ventura was known for being an anti-mining advocate and s...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you regarding the labeling of human rights defenders and activists as terrorists. The human rights defenders in the petition bel...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you of the killing of a peasant leader in Compostela Valley. The victim and his organization were actively campaigning a...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Terai Human Rights Defenders Alliance (THRDA) that 50 Dalit households are barred from entering the local Shiva...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Indonesian Forum for the Environment (Walhi), a credible national civil society organization, about a land disp...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you about the disappearance of National Democratic Front (NDF) consultant and her husband. The couple last contacted their relat...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Youth’s Forum for Protection of Human Rights (YFPHR) in Manipur, regarding the gangrape of a minor girl in Th...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the police attack on six public lawyers of the Yogyakarta Legal Aid (LBH Yogyakarta). Moreover, the police als...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the trial process of Mr. Anoldy Bahari, a resident of Gadog village, Cibitung sub-district, Pandeglang...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from LBH Jakarta (Jakarta Legal Aid), SAFEnet, and Sejuk. All of them are civil society organizations that monitored and...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding cases of forced evictions. They were conducted by the Indonesian Navy (Lantamal V TNI AL) against local reside...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the harassment and intimidation of a human rights activists in Manipur from our partner organisation Human Rights ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from the Commission for the Disappearances and Victims of Violence, KontraS (a national human rights organizatio...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the East Java High Court sentencing of Mr. Heri Budiawan, alias Budi Pego, an environmental activist, ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information of the wrongful shooting of a young man, Aldi Prasetya, carried out by Police Officers of the Central Sulawesi Regional ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Terai Human Rights Defenders Alliance (THRDA) that Mr. Santosh Shah was stopped by plain-clothed Assistant Sub-...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the case of violence against Mr. Ali Nurdin, the chairperson of Gempur, a non-governmental organization (NGO),...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367