THAILAND: Court to read verdict on Somchai&#8217;s case on the eve of his disappearance seven years ago&#8211;observers requested
March 10, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that a 17-year-old boy was tortured on December 11, 2010 in the custody of the police. The victim, who revealed to his par...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Allen Jo (29) 195/1 Welgampola Road, Nawawlapitiya in the district of Kandy was illegally arrested and severely tor...Dear friends,  Since Saturday April 16, 2011 several farmers have been injured by military violence in Kebumen regency, Central Java. The actions of the military personnel included beating, kicking a...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the case of Ang Dorje and Jangbu Sherpa who were beaten and illegally arrested by police officers from...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets, but is not surprised, that the five defendants who were earlier convicted for theft and illegal detention, in connection with t...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Marasingha Arachchige Maithree Narada (27) of No. 30/49,Wijaya Samarugama, Demanhandiya in the district of Gamp...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) informed you on 4 March 2011 regarding death threat to the family of F. M. A. Razzak, a human rights defender by the relatives of an officer the ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that four activists of a nationalist political group were abducted from a crowded part of Karachi city by the police and...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to draw to your attention the case of a young man in Burma who has been sentenced to 10 years in jail for allegedly sending some political...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that working journalists and newspapers employees of Pakistan have been denied an increase in minimum wages since 1996. ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Chaminda Sampath Wickrama Pathirana of Walgama, Bandaragama in the district of Kaluthara was illegally arrested...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from ‘World Without War’, a non-governmental organization that Mr. Ahn Jihwan is currently detained at You...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is calling for court observers to hear the reading of the verdict on the case of Somchai Neelaphaijit tomorrow, March 11, 2011, in Bangkok. The...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Koronchige Nihal De Silva (28) of ‘Ashoka Niwasa’, Parawakandagama, Anamaduwa in Puttalam district ...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the murder of human rights activist Mr. Niyamat Ansari in Kope Gram Panchayat of Latehar District, Jharkhand...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Alahendra Acharige Dinesh Priyankara of Panadura North Police Division in Kaluthara district was illegally arre...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 16 year old girl was abducted along with her brother by the persons from the land mafia for ransom. During the or...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned of the allegation of molestation of a female fourth class employee by a Judge while cleaning his official chamber on 23 February 2011...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding death threat to the family of F. M. A. Razzak, a human rights defender, and his well-wishers from the relative...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from ‘World Without War’, a non-governmental organization that Mr. MOON Myungjin, who refused to do compul...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367