SRI LANKA: Police allegedly torture a man and detain him for four months
October 9, 2008
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned with great alarm that the Phnom Penh Municipality has resorted to certain draconian measures.  It turned off the fresh water supply....Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed by the Campaign for Popular Media Reform (CPMR), Thailand that another community radio station has been raided and had its equi...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a father and his 14-year-old son were illegally arrested and taken to Kurunegala Police Station by officers on 11 J...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the case of Mr. Hartoyo who was tortured and sexually abused in January 2007 in Aceh. The Banda Aceh D...[NOTICE: The AHRC has developed this automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal, we could not include e-mail addresses of some of the Pakistan author...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has previously reported on the case of the nationally renowned Burmese comedian Zarganar, who was taken from his house in June apparently in conn...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) regrets to inform you that a blogger whom we reported earlier to have been charged without evidence has been sentenced on November 10, 2008 to ov...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes with deep concern about the continuing threats to four union leaders, including a union president, and dozens of other workers. Others pre...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that seven police officers assaulted a man and his daughter when they arrested him near a garden in Battambang city, Battambang provi...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Ambalantota police officers assaulted a minor and arbitrarily arrested and detained her and her sister in the custo...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the illegal arrest and detention of a man in Kandy in May 2008 who was not produced before a court for four mo...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has followed with concern reports that a group of soldiers raped and killed a teenage schoolgirl in the north of Burma. It has since obtained det...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been closely following and documenting the detentions and trials in Burma following last September’s mass protests. In this appeal we b...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that the whereabouts of an activist who disappeared on 17 September 2008 remains unknown. The victim’s disappearance t...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received an appeal about the impending execution of a man which is scheduled to be carried out on October 8. The ‘red warrant’ ha...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed that a detainee whom we reported previously to have been detained for over two years without charges filed in court has continu...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information that Mr. Akash, a human rights defender as well as journalist, has been facing unfair trial in an allegedly fals...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that the soldiers responsible for illegally arresting and assaulting a man have remained free. They have not been held accou...[NOTICE: The AHRC has developed this automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. Please click the button for your participation. We also encourage you to send your appeal le...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to bring to your attention a serious threat to the lawyers who practice their profession independently and particularly those who appear f...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367