SRI LANKA: Businessman abducted and family demands a speedy investigation to save his life
June 29, 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Harsha Dammika Dematawala, a teacher at Kuliyapitiya Central College. Harsha continually pointed out finan...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Nihal Ajith Peiris of Helen Wawatha, in Wennappuwa Police Division in Puttalam District. On 25 June 2017 a...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received reliable information about a woman, Mrs. X, resident of Kebithigollewa Police Division in Anuradhapura District. She was sexually assaulted...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mrs. Munisamy Mariannan Gauri. A resident of Mutwal, she migrated to Kuwait as a domestic helper on 8 April 2017. At ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information that the Bekasi district court released three suspects being tried for motorcycle theft. The judgment clearly pr...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the acid attack case against senior investigator of the Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK), Mr. N...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mrs. Siranji Siriyawathi Fernando. A resident of Chilaw, she migrated to Kuwait as a domestic helper in 2014. On 15 J...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Kaluthantri Arachchilage Shanka Sanjaya Perera (24). On 17 June 2017, returning home after work, he was illegally...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding a pretrial judgment cancelling the suspect status of three detainees for motorcycle theft. Assisted by...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from its partner organization, MASUM in West Bengal regarding the abuse of Rohingya Muslims in Bengal. They have...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Sandaradura Nilanka de Silva. On 28 March 2016 he was illegally arrested by police officers attached to the Kalut...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the attack and intimidation of Mr. Arifin Wardiyanto, an independent environmental activist. Arifin and his family...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Ja-Ella Police stealing the wallet of an innocent woman and subsequently filing false gambling charges against her. S...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding the police torture of a 64-year-old man in Kalutara District. On 24 May 2017, Mr. Dissanayaka was illegally arrested ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Press Legal Aid (LBH Pers) regarding the persecution of members of the National Committee for West Papua (KNPB) and...Dear Friends, According to the information the Asian Human Rights Commission has received, a man was illegally arrested, detained and tortured by police officers attached to the Kandy Headquarters Pol...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding medical officers attached to Ingiriya Government Hospital and the Horana Base Hospital refusing to treat a torture vi...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the brutal attack by officers of the military regional command (Korem) 172/PWY in Jayapura, Papua against cong...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the destruction of property by a former police officer. Mr. M G Sarath Gamage legally bought land belonging to...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learnt that a 16-year-old boy was publicly tortured at Dodangoda Junction by police officers after he met with an accident on 1 April 2017. D...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367