THAILAND: Urgent need for witness protection following conviction of five police for murder
August 9, 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Sundaram Sathies Kumar was a detainee under the prison authorities of Sri Lanka. As a result of severe torture ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received a report from Guria – a human rights organization based in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, working against human trafficking – that det...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Gallalagama Arachchige Thilanka Niroshan Gamaarachchi of Bandaragama in the Kalutara District was illegally arr...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Sivapalan Pradeepan (28) of Batticaloa was arrested shortly after his brother-in-law by officers of the Terrori...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) recently brought you details of a case in which police conspired with the employer of a young girl who allegedly abused and murdered her to cover...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that Mr. Mam Sonando (70) was arrested from his home on 15 July 2012 by the police and was formally charged on the following day by P...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Dilshan Suran Janz (27) was severely tortured by police officers of the Negombo police because he refused to wi...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a minor Christian girl, Miss Ramsha, 11, was arrested on the charges of blasphemy when she burned some copies of ne...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Mahalingam Sasikumar (34) of Maratha Madhu, Chettikulam in Mannar District has been in jail for more than three...Dear friends, Ms. K K Neesha Chaturangi (17) of Ambalantota, Baragama, Arawanamulla in Hambantota District was a student of a Ambalantota Kuda Bolana Pajjaseeha Maha Vidyalaya. On 2 June 2012 she ate ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Alexander Thayaparan was abducted by carders of the LTTE in 1991 and was only released after he lost his leg. A...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that when Mr. Dadallage Ajith Kusumsiri (38) of No.113/1, ‘Sriya Niwasa’, Kandakatiya Aluth Para, Ratmalwala...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Don Prasanna Dilrukshana Aquinas Mallawaarachchi was falsely accused of having an extramarital affair and sever...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Mihindukulasuriya Anthony Vinisious Fernando is an elected Municipal Councilor of the Negombo Municipality and ...Dear friends, On 30 July 2012 a court in Bangkok convicted five police officers of murder for the extrajudicial killing of Kiettisak Thitboonkrong during the “war on drugs” in 2004. The su...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received an update from MASUM regarding the case of Krishna Mondal. MASUM and the AHRC had reported earlier (AHRC-UAC-096-2012) that the Bord...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the local administration of the two districts of Punjab province and the owners of kiln factories are using the acc...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the case of Mr. Riaz Fatyana, the chairman of the Parliamentary Committee on Human Rights (PCHR), which highlights...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that an 18-year old 10th grade student, Dipen Limbu, was tortured after being accused of extorting money from local shop...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has obtained information about the case of a child worker whose killing by her employer in the middle of Rangoon the police have covered up. Ten-...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367