SRI LANKA: The State must protect the right to education of children with special needs
April 20, 2015
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the imminent execution of a mentally ill man, who was tried and convicted on illegal drugs charges in Indonesi...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) condemns the brutal murder of a peace activist and human rights defender by the so called ‘unknown persons’ after arranging an open d...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the imminent execution of a Filipina migrant worker. She was unwittingly used as a drug mule by her employer a...Dear Friends, According to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission, Mr. P. Somadasa and his wife of Palalla, Weligama Police Division, Matara District are being denied their rights. ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the Chief Incumbent of the Namal Uyana Buddhist Monastery, Venerable Wanawasi Rahula Thero, has escaped an attempt ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the administration of the Dehiwala Zoological Gardens, under the newly appointed Director has demolished several ac...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding criminal charges brought against Grandma Asyani [63]. She allegedly stole teak wood belonging to the state for...Dear Friends, The Advocacy Forum (AF) in Nepal has informed the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) about the alleged police torture of Mr. Munna Lal Yadav. Munna has been arrested on the fake charge...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the enforced disappearance of Mr. Dedek Khairuddin (30), a resident of Pangkalan Brandan Village, North Sumatr...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that S. Premalatha and her husband P.K. Harishchandra are seeking justice in relation to the sudden death of their daugh...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) regarding the abduction of a Human Rights Defender, Gambhira Prasad, allegedly by...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about a child with special needs being unable to attend school as a result of a leading girl’s school in Colombo refus...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that surveys conducted by State and UN Agencies have indicated an alarming rate of malnutrition among children, pregnant...Dear friends, The Monaragala Wellassa Subagya School, in the Monaragala District is a school providing education to children with special needs in several surrounding districts in the region. The scho...Dear friends, Mr. Manabalasingham Rajkumar (44) of Siriwardana Place, Munnakaraya, Negombo in Gampaha District is a fisherman. He was admitted to the Negombo Base Hospital for urgent medical treatment...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. S. E. Logathayalan, a journalist working for the ‘Uthayan’ and the ‘Thinakkural’ Newspapers in Jaffna w...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you that three people were killed on March 8, 16 and 24, 2015 respectively. One of the victims was an indigenous member ...คณะกรรมการสิทธิมนุษยชนแห่งอาเซียน (AHRC) ได้ทราบว่าสมาชิกของสหพันธ์เกษตร...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that on 14th April 2015 at around 9.45 p.m., three journalists have been threatened with their lives and from continuing...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a woman has been killed by her husband and brother-in-law, who claim to have been acting to defend “honour...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367