PHILIPPINES: Ombudsman exonerates policemen ignorant of the law from liability
June 28, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends,  Mr. Basil Champika and Sunethra Kumari of No: 100, Kandy Road, Manikhinna in Kandy district are the parents of a 15- year-old girl, Malathi. Malathi was abducted on 2 June 2011, by her...Dear friends,  A six and a half year old girl was abducted by dacoits, said to be the henchmen of a tribal leader four years ago and her whereabouts remain unknown. All the persons involved in the ab...Dear friends,  Mr. Saliya Chandrasena and Padma Jayanthi are the parents of an 11 year child, Aruna Dinujaya Chandrasena. They wanted to admit their child to a better school for his education so in M...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding alleged illegal arrest and torture of a 21-year old man whose spine was broken as a result of the abuse. Mr....Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the persecution and intimidation of a human rights defender and filing of fake charges of robbery against hi...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the torture of a woman, Ms. Harkali Pun, by two policewomen following order from a higher-ranking officer in...Dear friends,  Mr. Madasamy Vishwanadan (42), was the principal at Rosella Tamil Maha Vidiyalaya. When his mother died in 2008 he informed his brother who lived in Kilinochchi but the man failed to a...Dear friends,  Mr. Sathiyaseelan Jegadishan (24) of Sogana Upper Division, Pussellawa in the Nuwara Eliya District was illegally arrested by officers of the Pussellawa Police Station on 2 June 2010. ...Dear friends,  The Minahasa district police in North Sulawesi charged Stanly Handry Ering, the whistleblower in a corruption case, with defamation. Ph E A Tuerah, Rector of the University of Negeri M...Dear friends,  Similar to other cases raised with the Ombudsman the office has also ceased its intervention in the complaint of torture by the three victims, collectively known as the ‘Talisay ...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that six leaders of the Parti Socialis Malaysia (PSM) remain in detention without trial under sections 3(1) and 4(1) of the Emergen...Dear friends,  Two members of 756th Wimaneseli infantry battalion of the Indonesian National Military (TNI) in West Papua assaulted and threatened Yani Meage on 31 May, 2011 in the Kurima district, Y...Dear friends,  Surabaya District Police officers attacked several journalists during a public parade when they refused to stop video recording the arrest and beating of a fellow journalist. The journ...Dear friends,  Despite of our appeal, the Office of the Ombudsman also exonerated the policemen, who were responsible in filing a charge for “serious resistance and disobedience” on seven...Dear friends,  Ms. Q. Mahendra Devi (42) is a widow and the mother of three children. She resides at No: 100/36, Dharmaraja Road, Kandy and works as a cleaning labour working for a private company. A...Dear friends,  Impunity is being provided to a perpetrator of sexual harassment by the higher authorities and members of the ruling alliance. It is alleged by women’s organisations that the pri...Dear friends,  Mr. George Jayakody (55) of No: 24, Kundalagama, Kundasale, Kandy is a businessman. In 2008 he wanted to sell his land he came to an agreement in the presence of a lawyer. The second p...Dear friends,  A journalist has been implicated in a fabricated case of murder by persons from the ruling party. The journalist was assisting a rape victim (a 14-year-old girl) and her family in the ...Dear friends,  At least five members of the Indonesian national military killed an indigenous Papuan, Derek Adii on 14 May 2011 while he was boarding the Lalobar ship service, in Samabusa Nabire Port...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding repeated torture inflicted on Mr. Kedar K.C. by a police team deployed from Hanumandhoka Metropolitan Police...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367