INDIA: A man brutally tortured by the Pavaratty Police and Guruvayoor Police now suffers from police inaction
June 6, 2004
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, It has come to the attention of Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) that a case of illegal arrest, detention and severe torture has taken place in Gurutalawa, Sri Lanka. Moningal Akila ...Dear friends, We call for your immediate intervention! The lives of people who were released from prison with a court order are at risk. The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received informati...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received additional information about the killing of Irfan Khokhar in Pakistan (Refer to: UA-49-2004 and UP-24-2004). The victim’s f...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to draw attention to the fact that tomorrow, June 22, the preliminary decision will be given in a civil suit of extreme importance for all...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a person named Mr. Kolavan (60 years) was severely tortured at the Thrithala Police Station on 8February 2004. It i...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 6-year-old boy named Talha was allegedly sexually abused by his Quran teacher, Mr. Altaf at the Lajna Mosque on C...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Punchi Kankanamge Nimal (37, a casual worker) was severely tortured by the Horana Police on 6 June 2004. The police...Dear friends, It has come to the attention of Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) that another killing of a young woman has taken place in Pakistan under the allegation of honor killing. According to...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a person named Mr. Satya Pal has been detained in Jail for about 24 years as an Under Trial Prisoner (UTP) since he...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is concerned about the death of Mr. Senarath Hettiarchchilage Abeysinghe (39) who was working as a reserve police constable at the Trincomalee Po...The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information about the releasing of five suspects in the alleged abduction of human rights lawyer Mr. Somchai Neelaphaijit who has been missing since 12 M...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned about the murder of Madugoda Ralalage Don Saman Priyantha Guneratna (29) by the officers from the Welipenna Police Station on...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Gulshan Ali, one of the two perpetrators who killed Ms. Hazooran, was arrested by the Drakhan investigative police ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned by the severe torture of Aththana Gamaralalage Ravindra (26) by Inspector of Police (IP) Attapattu of the Katupotha Police S...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about suspicious death of G. Francis Udayapan. His body was found in the Klang River on 23 May 2004. It was covered with...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned by another “honor killing” case reported from the Shikarpur district, Sindh Province, Pakistan. According to the ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is happy to inform you that the two arrested human rights defenders Dinesh Prasain and Usha titikchu were released unconditionally from the Anamn...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man named Baburaj P.K, 44, was brutally tortured by police officers from the Guruvayoor Police Station and Pavara...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned by the illegal arrest of Dinesh Prasain and Usha Titikchu by the police from the Anamnagar City Police Office, Kathumandu at ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Vigil India Movement that a man named P.K. Joy was illegally detained in police custody and brutally tortured by he...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367