NEPAL: Police illegally arrest and torture a man
October 13, 2016
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, According to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), Ms. Thakshila Sumanasiri of No. 92, Vidura Gewatta, Kundasale, Kandy District, has made a formal complaint ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about Rev. Fr. Nandana Manatunga, parish priest of St. Mary’s Church in Wattegama, Kandy District. Also well known as ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Jayasinghe Arachchige Dilip Pushpakumara (29) of No: 33, Madama Watte, Ekala, Ja-Ela in the Gampaha District wa...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the prohibition to setting up the church of Gereja Batak Karo Protestan (GBKP) in Pasar Minggu, South Jakarta,...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Sirikan Charoensiri. She is a human rights lawyer and legal and...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Yasin Mohammad Abdus Samad Talukder remains disappeared since 14 July 2016. On that day, personnel claiming to ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Kadireshan Ravishankar of No. 721, Dickoya Road, Dickoya, in the Nuwara Eliya District, was severly tortured by...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Rasika Jayasekara (33), his parents Mr. K.M J Bandara (69), and Mrs. W.M. Kumarihami (60) of No: 22/1, Waragoll...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding two juvenile suspects tortured by police in Prachuap Khiri Khan Province, Thailand. According to the C...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding a professor, a lawyer, and two activists from a political party, who have been arrested and disappeared by a l...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding judicial harassment against human rights lawyer Ms. Sirikan Charoensiri. The AHRC wishes to note that ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that police officers attached to Area Police Office Rangeli illegally arrested and illegally detained Gulephun Khatun an...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from Jacobabad, Sindh Province, of police having abducted four women amidst a dispute between the Qambrani and T...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights commission (AHRC) has received information, that police officers attached to the Dang District Police Office, illegally arrested and tortured Salman Khan of the Da...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the Phu Khiao Provincial Court scheduling a plea hearing for two student activists who have been arres...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the torture and extrajudicial killing of a young engineer in a staged police encounter. The engineer was worki...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that police officers attached to District Police Office Nepalgunj have illegally arrested and illegally detained Rasheed...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a girls schoolteacher has been declared Kari (liable to be killed in the name of “honour”) for establishing a p...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding forced dissolution of a peaceful public discussion organized by the Association of Indonesian Students Press (...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the disappearances and extrajudicial killings of youth in Balochistan Province for opposing the China ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367