PAKISTAN: Attack on the Bible Society in Karachi
February 4, 2004
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned with the killings of Ms. Malookan (45 years old) and Mr. Ali Dost, alias Moran Jakhrani (25 years old) in Kandhkot town, Dist...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned that an attempt was made on the life of Mr. Michael Anthony Fernando when he failed to withdraw the complaints he had made ag...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is concerned at receiving information of yet another case of discrimination against Dalits in Nepal. A number of Dalits were beaten up and forbid...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information of an attack against the Christian minority in Karachi, Pakistan. On 15 January 2004, a hand grenade was thrown through ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that four individuals were arbitrarily arrested on 1 February 2004 by the security forces in Bajura (west part), Nepal, ...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is concerned by the arbitrary shooting of the Gampola police into a crowd, killing young Suranga Sampath. The police have further failed to conduc...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that in an arbitrary act by the government of Maharashtra, the diet for foreign prisoners has been changed, and they ar...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has just learned that there was an attempt on the life of Mr. Michael Anthony Emanuel Fernando (Tony) early this morning (2 February 2004). Mr. Fe...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that three Dalit teachers were transferred from Surendranagar district, Gujarat, India, on 3 December 2003, for objecting...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned about the murder of two social activists, Sarita and Mahesh Kant in Gaya (Bihar) on 24 January 2004. The victims were shot b...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned about the police intimidation against the victims of the police attack in Baddegama village, Madahapola. On 31 December 2003...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned with the death threats received by Mr. James T. Godwin in Mahim, Mumbai, India.  Mr. Godwin, a person who has been challengi...Dear Friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is very happy to give you good news that Mr. Sok Yoeun, 67, who is a political prisoner and prisoner of conscience, won’t be extradited to C...Dear friends Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned of brutal torture of Jayasekara Vithanage Saman Priyankara, 32, at the Matale Police Station. The officers poured boiling water o...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned about the gang rape case of a 16 year old girl Miss. X (Name withheld).  She was abducted by a wealthy man David Kaiser (21...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned about the situation of 73 workers of the Jewelarts International in Maithree Mawatha, Ekala, Sri Lanka. According to the info...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) would like to draw your attention on the case of Kebbeduwa Gamage Prabhath Neel Chaminda, 28, who is arbitrarily arrested and tortured by the pol...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) reproduces below the letter written by the AHRC to the president of India regarding the eviction of 7,000 Untouchables in West Bengal. In the ope...Dear Friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is referring you to two cases of torture, illegal arrest and illegal detention about which complaints have been made to the National Human Rights ...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the torture of Mr. Tennakoon Mudiyanselage Gunesekera by six policemen from the Mahiyanganaya Police Station on...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367