SRI LANKA: Threat to a journalist for reporting torture cases
June 20, 2002
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned that the central government of Indonesia is considering the declaration of a military emergency in Aceh. Indonesia¡¯s chief security mini...Susil Jayalath was arrested by the Sapugaskanda police with two other people. According to the family, when the police arrested the 19-year-old, he was drinking a king coconut in an area where the pol...Eric Antunia Kramer, a 43-year-old father of three children, is a welding mechanic for the Ceylon Grain Elevators Ltd., which is located at Rock House Lane, Colombo 15. He has been employed by this co...Dear Friends, Following is the letter written by Fr. Pulikkal, a well-known retreat preacher, Director of the Ignatian Retreat Centre at Pariyaram and above all one of the most revered and respected o...Regarding the torture case of Jerad Perera in Sri Lanka, issued by the World Organization Against Torture (OMCT) on June 17, 2002, three judges of Supreme Court of Sri Lanka heard the submissions of t...A clear pattern is emerging in cases of torture by the police based on several similar cases in Sri Lanka, that is, a person is arrested on the mere suspicion of committing a crime or some tip-off, no...Dear Friends, We have been informed that Fr. Pallath’s hunger strike was called off yesterday, the 44th day of hunger strike. But his demand for justice is still remained. For your information, ...For the 4th day in succession, after the failed attempt by the Police commissioner to resolve the issue, Fr. Pallath has refused to take any medication. The last of the forceful administering of medic...Asian Human Rights commission (AHRC) is bring to your notice threat to a journalist for reporting torture cases - T.J. A Abeynayake, journalist of Island¡¯s new paper groupDear Friends, We are sending you herewith the following updates on the four cases of torture from Sri Lanka. Unfortunately, none of these four cases has been investigated and the officers who have all...The coming to light of two revealing letters provide ample evidence to the fact that the Kerala Jesuits not only veered around to the conclusion that Fr. Pallath's dismissal was indeed \"flawed - juri...We would like to send you a copy of letter sent by Basil Fernando to the Jesuit superior general in Rome regarding Fr. Pallath¡¯s hunger strike.Sign petition for attorney general to bring justice to May 1998 riot victims INDONESIA: Denial of right to adequate remedy for victims of systematic gross human rights violations ———...Despite the failure of the 5-hour marathon talks he initiated, the Police Commissioner of Calicut Mr. Sanjeev Patjoshi spent a good another 2 hours today exclusively with Fr. Pallath trying persuade h...Fr. Pallath¡¯s hunger strike has entered its 38th day today, with no tangible move by the Jesuit authorities to settle the issue. To the growing number of prominent citizens demanding that justice b...UA-22-2002: Torture case of Herat Pathirannehelage Nandani Sriyalatha Heart in Sri Lanka SRI LANKA: Gross human rights violence against woman – Arbitrary arrest, sexual abuses and torture by pol...(RE: UA/16/2002 – Support Fr. Pallath’s hunger strike for justice – 06 May 2002) UPDATE (INDIA): Letter from the regional secretary in the Jesuit, AHRC’s reply and more updates...31st DAY OF THE HUNGER STRIKE PLEASE VISIT THE JESUIT HOUSES IN YOUR COUNTRY IF YOU CAN NOT WRITE TO THEM For your action, we are sending you the following latest updates on Fr. Pallath¡¯s hunger st...Dear Friends  Following is an URGENT update on the case of Mr. Lalith Rajapakse, a torture victim in Sri Lanka. Following letter has been sent by the AHRC to the National Human Rights Commission of S...UPDATE (INDIA): The latest updates – AHRC visited the Jesuit house in HK and more ————————————————...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367