MALAYSIA &#8211; Prisoner denied access to proper medical care
March 29, 2001
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.INDONESIA: book burning, arson, ‘sweeping’, banning of books and writings, threats to organisations regarded as ‘leftist’ ———————̵...Dear Friends,  We are enclosing a copy of an open letter sent today by the AHRC to the Jesuit Supeior General in Rome regarding Fr. Pallath’s case. The letter is also available at: http://jjpal...Dear Friends, Regarding the arrest of ten Malaysian activists and political leaders, We’re sending you updated news and the following letter received from one of our Malaysian friend who is stru...Indonesia’s new democracy is facing its greatest threat to date.  While the world’s attention is on whether President Wahid will stay in office or not some organisations have taken the op...Indonesia’s new democracy is facing its greatest threat to date. While the world’s attention is on whether President Wahid will stay in office or not some organisations have taken the oppo...Dear Friends, Malaysian police have arrested opposition political leaders and pro-reform activist during last month. Until today, all ten activists are being held under the Internal Security Act (ISA)...Dear Friends,  We have received a letter from Fr. Gregory Naik S. J., the Secretary of South Asia Assistancy regarding Fr. P.J. Joseph’s case.  We are sending you this reply with a reply from ...UA-13-2001: A Christian teacher accused of blasphemy law  PAKISTAN – Death threats to minorities by the fundamentalist  We have received reliable information from religious group in Pakistan r...UA-12-2001: Jesuit Priest abused by his own order – Case of Fr. P.J. Joseph S. J.  INDIA (KERALA) – Physical abuse, unfair dismissal, denial of right to livelihood and right reputation  ...Following is an update from our friends in Indonesia regarding the 19 young activists detained after the labour law and oil prices protests in Bandung, West Java, Indonesia. 7 of the 19 have been rele...A Sri Lankan judge has recently ordered the arrest of four members of the security forces (three policemen and one naval officer) for the following gang rape/torture case. The two women victims are cu...As issued previously (UA 151/00), Mr. Thuingaleng Muivah (67), General Secretary and chief negotiator of the National Socialist Council of Nagalim (NSCN), a leader of the Naga indigenous peoples in th...The Indonesian parliament has authorised the Indonesian Military (TNI) to conduct a 'limited military operation' (re-labelled a 'limited security operation') in Aceh against the Free Aceh Movement (GA...Anwar Ibrahim has been languishing in the Kuala Lumpur Hospital (HKL)

inflicted with a serious spine ailment since November 2000. Anwar is unable to move and constantly on painkillers to alleviate ...UCHITHA THUSSARA KUMAEA, 33 years old, married and the father of two children, was tortured to death by Police at Ja-ela Police station, Sri Lanka on 24th March, 2001. Mr. Kumaea was arrested by the o...Over the last week, more than 2000 activists and politicians have been arrested by Pakistan's military regime.

On March 23rd, Pakistan National day, the 16-party Alliance for the Restoration of Dem...As reported previously (UA 40/00), 26 victims of the 1965-66 Indonesian massacre were exhumed in November 2000 in the first official opening of a mass grave from that period. The organisation which co...Today, March 21, is the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. To mark this day, Asian Human Rights Commission is calling for your urgent action, and also sends a solid...According World Organization Against Torture (OMCT), on February 28, 2001, the well-known 56-year-old writer Mr. Emin Usman died in detention in the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) of Uzbekistan. M...More than 100 stateless people in the Tegal Alur slum in Cengkareng, West Jakarta, have appealed to the government to grant them Indonesian citizenship. All of the stateless people are Chinese migrant...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367