PAKISTAN: Prosecute ruling party legislator for spreading religious hatred
October 16, 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding the case of Mr. Rayan Jayalath, Convener of the Medical Faculty Students Action Committee (MFSAC) of Sri Lanka. Rayan...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information. It regards the hate speech against a religious minority group, the Ahmadi Muslims. It was delivered by a member...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the stagnant investigation of the acid attack case against Mr. Novel Baswedan, a senior investigator o...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Vedamahagedara Janaka Aruna Shantha (40) of Udispaththuwa, Theldeniya a resident of Theldeniya Police Divi...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from our partner organization MASUM in West Bengal regarding the custodial torture of a daily wage labourer from...Dear Friends, Mr. S H Pushpakumara (32) of Uragasmanhandiya Police Division was a resident of Galle District. He went missing on 12 August 2017. He was a regular soldier attached to the Gajaba Regimen...Dear Friends, Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding the case of 31 Rohingya refugees. They were harassed, threatened and warned with more violent assaults unless they left t...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from our partner in East Java province, the Commission for the Disappeared and Victims of Violence (KontraS), Surabaya o...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the extra-judicial killing of Mr. Naiwala Appuhamilage Gamini Edwad (50) resident of Divulapitiya Police Division....Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Andige Lakshitha Piyumal Peiris (26), a permanent resident of the Trincomalee District. On 6 July 2017, Pi...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. D M Jayawardena Minipe in the Badulla District. He was a migrant worker who went to Saudi Arabia from Sri Lanka i...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) would like to inform you about the case of excessive police force against a peaceful public protest at Hambantota Town on 6 October 2017. The pro...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the extra-judicial attempt to kill Mr. Jayalath Pedige Udaya Samantha Sooriyakumara (31), Devala Kanda, Dorawaka a...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) received information about Mr. Susantha Bandara Karunarathna, a journalist working for the ‘Sunday Apple’ newspaper. He was tortured by the A...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received the information regarding the case of Mr. Mohanathas Iyathurai (40), resident of Kopay Police Division in Jaffna, who was arrested by polic...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the decision issued by the police investigators of South Jakarta Police Office discontinuing the inves...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Aandige Charuka Malinda Peiris, a resident of Kantale Police Division. Malinda was illegally arrested by P...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mrs. Kariyawasam Aarachchilage Ramani Kusumalatha (46), a resident of the Kantale Police Division. She was wel...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has taken note of reports about the disappearance of a young man from Manipur in New Delhi. There have been many instances of youth from the nort...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from our partner organization MASUM in West Bengal regarding the police torture of an enclave dweller and failur...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367