PHILIPPINES: A political activist and his family were shot at while asleep in their home
February 26, 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 17-year-old girl was buried alive for marrying by her own choice with a three wheeler driver. She was buried aliv...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a young man was severely tortured in police custody for not paying a bribe in a theft case. The police used acid in...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Abeysinghe Gamachchige Manathunga, a farmer, was illegally arrested and tortured by the Hungama police simply b...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Weerasinghe Gamage Kularathne is a farmer by profession. On 16 January he was taking some bananas that he had c...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) regrets to inform you that a local peasant in Pampanga was shot dead in a violent confrontation on a piece of disputed land in Central Luzon. He ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Ms. Balendran Jayakumari and her daughter Vithushaini (13) both were arrested on 13 March 2014, by officers attache...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Yahaluge Wimalasiri (50) of Veliharanawa, Oluganthota, Balangoda in the District of Ratnapura complained to the...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Wiki Wikramarathna, a freelance journalist, videographer and blogger is under threat of death. Mr. Wikramarathn...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information that the police force of Burma has dismissed several officers involved in the torturing to death of a 39-year-ol...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Samarasinghe Arachchilage Samantha Dassanayake is a jailor of the Sri Lanka Prison Department attached to the N...Dear friends, Mr. Selambaran Wanaraja, a resident at the Hunnasgiriya Estate where he is employed obtained permission to collect fallen branches to use as firewood by the established means of applying...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. A.H Ranjith was falsely accused by some neighbours of stealing a quantity of gold, arrested without warrant, il...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from the Forum for Protection of People’s Rights, Nepal (PPR Nepal), that the Nepal police officers stationed ...Dear friends, Sunil Samaradeera of No: 34/2, Baseline Mawatha, Borella, a human rights activist based in Wanathamulla, in Colombo District was abducted in broad daylight by persons believed to be conn...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from civil society organizations based in Manipur, India, regarding the custodial death of Mr. Thoudam Digbijoy. Mr. Dig...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that six Dalit women of the Siraha district Nepal were beaten after an argument at a local public well. The non Dalit vi...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Indonesian Human Rights and Legal Aid Association (Perhimpunan Bantuan Hukum Indonesia, PBHI) in West Sumatr...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that a political activist and his family were shot at while they were sleeping at home. The bullets pierced the wall of thei...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Forum for Protection of People’s Rights, Nepal (PPR Nepal) regarding frequent and continuous police torture i...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the case of brutal attack by the local police of a lawyer, practicing at Thrissur courts. It is reported that...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367