INDIA: Almost 75,000 people are homeless after being forcibly evicted by the West Bengal government and the Kolkata Municipal Corporation
December 22, 2003
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that one man was tortured by the police on 8 January 2004 because he gave up illegal liquor business. In the past the AHR...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Korean House for International Solidarity (KHIS) that two Bangladesh activists, Khademul Islam Bidduth, and Jama...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned about the brutal attack by the police on the people of Baddegama village, Madahapola on 31 December 2003. When the torture v...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Informal Sector Service Centre (INSEC) in Nepal that a young human rights activist, Mr. Chet Prakash Khatri, was...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply grieved about the vast amount of destruction and the many thousands of people who either died, have been missing or have in some way be...INDIA: Almost 75,000 people are homeless after being forcibly evicted by the West Bengal government and the Kolkata Municipal Corporation  INDIA: Forced eviction of the urban poor; Right to housing; ...Three student leaders arbitrarily arrested by the police for shouting slogans against the monarchy NEPAL: Political right; Freedom of opinion; Arbitrary detention —————...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the torture and false charges against a 15 year old boy in Sri Lanka. This is another example of brutal custom of t...NEPAL: An 8 year old boy is in critical situation after being shot by army security personnel in Sunsari District NEPAL: Right of Children; Ill treatment of Children ————̵...Dear Friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that 3 year old E. M. Shiva died due to starvation today morning (18 December 2003). His family is one of 7,000 Untouchab...NEPAL: Discrimination based on sexual orientation ———————————————————— Dear frie...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) requests your urgent solidarity for Mr. Song Du-yul, who was arrested and indicted for violating the National Security Law of Republic of Korea. M...Dear friends On 28 November 2003, the Appellate Court in Thailand ordered the extradition of Cambodian national Mr. Sok Yoeun, 67, who is a political prisoner and prisoner of conscience, to Cambodia. ...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received another torture case from Sri Lanka. A man named Bamunuarachchi Pathiranalage Sathkumara was brutally tortured by the police officers...INDIA: Ill treatment of children; Torture in police custody ————————————————————...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about another severe torture case from Kandy, Sri Lanka. According to the information received, Shiron Jeewantha Pallekan...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned about the upcoming planned revision of the Law on Assembly and Demonstration of South Korea, which severely restricts the Kor...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is forwarding the urgent appeals of the Asian Center for the Progress of Peoples (ACPP) on the conviction of Mr. Zheng Enchong, a Shanghai lawyer,...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned that torture victim Mahadura Pandula Sri Thaminda was arrested by police officers from the Kandy Police Station on fabricated...[RE: UP-45-2003: Michael Anthony Fernando freed and given an Asian human rights award, UP-26-2003: Update on Mr Michael Anthony Emmanuel Fernando (‘Tony’), UP-19-2003, UP-14-2003, UA-09-20...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367