INDIA: Immediately stop evicting and threatening the floating huts-dwellers of Loktak Lake
February 27, 2013
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned that the pattern of targeted attacks on human rights and political activists, which was common in the past, has once again em...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Kitnasami Rajendran(57) of Udayarkattu North, Udayarkattu in Mullaitivu District was illegally arrested in 2008...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the case on torture of 20 prisoners at Abepura Correctional Facility, Papua. After intervention from v...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is extremely concerned by reports that the Executive Director of the Human Rights Alliance was assaulted by six unidentified persons in retaliati...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the lack of progress in the investigation into the circumstances surrounding the disappearance of Chhori Maiya...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Varnakulasingham Arulanandam was rearrested by the Terrorist Investigation Division after he was released by a ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed that a murder case has been filed against members of a demolition team who killed a boy. The result of investigation conducted ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Gopalan Surendra (32) was involved in a minor traffic accident. When the police ‘arranged’ a lawyer...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a human rights organization, working on women and children’s issues was banned by the government of Gilgit-Ba...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed that a man, whom we reported in September 2010 to have died under suspicious circumstances, did not escape from the custody of ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Janaka Darshana Kumara was arrested on suspicion of rape by Officer-in-Charge of Sub Police Watch, Deniyaya, wh...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Ms. Punchibandage Indrani was severely tortured by the Officer-in-Charge (OIC) of Rajanganaya Police Station. On th...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the custodial torture of Mr. Suntharallngam Ketheeswaran at the Tangalle Prison. Ketheeswaran was severely bea...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Centre for Research and Advocacy, Manipur regarding continued eviction of floating hut dwellers and destruction of ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the police of Kushtia district tortured five women from one family. Three of them were detained arbitrarily, follow...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a young man was tortured and killed in military custody within 24 hour of his arrest. The only apparent reason for ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the torture of twenty prisoners at the Abepura Correctional Facility, Papua, on 21 January 2013. Information g...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the arbitrary arrest and torture of seven Papuans which took place on 15 February 2013. The victims were drivi...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the case of a 14-year-old domestic worker in Burma who was repeatedly raped, assaulted and subsequently trafficked...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a father sold his two young daughters so that he could marry a second wife. The police of two different stations ar...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367