SRI LANKA: Police fail to investigate the abduction of a businessman in Vavuniya
July 8, 2016
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The AHRC has received the following information from its partner organization MASUM in West Bengal. A woman, about 40 years of age, was allegedly assaulted and tortured by Border Securit...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that on 5 July 2016, Mr. Kethesawaran and his wife Savithri, residents of Sivanagar in Oddusuddan, Mulativu have been ar...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the torture death and fabricated case against Mr. Juprianto. These things were committed by the police officer...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. L.A.L. Charlis and Mrs. R. Indrani of 271/D, Kattappuwa Galhinna, Ankumbura, Kandy District, were abducted by g...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Shanmugam Selvarajah from Velikkulam in Vavuniya was abducted by an unknown group of persons on 21 June 2016. H...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Santhiyogu Anton Dani, a resident of Mannar, was illegally arrested by military officers on 29th June 2016 at S...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding a torture death conducted by police officers in the North Central Timor regency (TTU), East Nusa Tenggara prov...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 10-year-old girl has been tortured on the instructions of her teacher at Anula Devi Girls’ College in Galle Dis...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Niroshan Chamara Rupasinghe of the Kandy District was tortured by two traffic police officers attached to the K...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from Thai Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR) regarding military officers and police officers harassing activists wh...Dear Friends, According to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), Mr. Freddy Gamage, journalist and Editor of the Meepura, a newspaper and news website, was violently attack...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the result of the trial process with respect to the assault and torture to death of Mr. Salim Kancil, a land right...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Udayan Livingston Bastian of Ambatenna in Kandy District died under mysterious circumstances on 3 July 2015. De...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Ms. Subramaniam Rubini of Katugastota, Kandy District, has been harassed by police officers attached to the Katugas...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has information provided by the Land Reform Commission (KPA), a national NGO documenting land conflicts, and other national NGOs against human ri...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Velauthapilai Renugaruban, a British citizen who was visiting his relatives in Jaffna, Sri Lanka, has been ille...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information that the Supreme Appellate Court of Gilgit Baltistan (GB), a newly occupied territory of Pakistan federation, ha...Dear Friends, The AHRC has received the following information from its partner organization MASUM in West Bengal. A man, about 21 years of age, was allegedly forcibly picked up by Bangladesh Border Gu...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information, provided by the Indonesian Forum for the Environment, a branch office of Jambi province (WALHI Jambi). It is re...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned about the continued harassment and killings of the Talaandig ethnic tribe in Agusan del Sur. As a result, hundreds of residen...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367