INDIA: MASUM activists intimidated and falsely charged by corrupt police in West Bengal
November 10, 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the abduction and disappearance of a peace and civil society activist, Mr. Raza Mehmood Khan. Since he...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about two important situations. First, there was a brutal attack against local community members and student activists i...Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you that two human rights defenders were killed and one wounded by unknown armed men in Negros Oriental. The victims w...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Terai Human Rights Defenders Alliance (THRDA) that traffic police officers attached with the Lahan District Tra...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the brutal attack against Mr. Saldi Hermanto, a journalist in Timika, Papua. He was attacked by the police aft...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Ko Ko Linn, a Rohingya community leader who was living in Bangladesh, has been picked up from a bus on 17 Novem...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the disappearance of five activists belonging to the Baloch Student Organization Azad (BSO-Azad) and B...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Banten People Legal Aid (LBH Rakyat Banten) about land grabbing and a fabricated case against the local community o...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received the following information from our local partner. Violence and a brutal attack were carried out by Police Officers and the Civil Ser...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from MASUM, our partner organization in West Bengal, about the tactics used by police personnel to intimidate and suppre...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the forced dissolution of a national workshop on access to economic, social and cultural rights for victims and fa...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received the following information from the Terai Human Rights Defenders’ Alliance (THRDA). On 29 October 2017, a 17-year-old Muslim girl, ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about a fabricated case lodged by police officers of the South Aceh Police Office and Sawang Police Office in South Aceh...Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the enforced disappearance of a Shia man, Muhammud Bilal, by officials of a Law Enforcement agency. He has been ...Dear Friends, Asian Human Rights Commission has received the information regarding the case of Mr. Sudarshana Wijekoon (49) who is resident of Wattegama Police Division. On 9 September 2017, team of p...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about a 14-year-old Dalit girl who had been raped. It was carried out by a non-Dalit male named Santosh Shrestha (19). H...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Kurukulasooriyage Nuwan Chamara Perera of No: 215/5, Jayalath Place, Modara, Moratuwa, in the Colombo District. O...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) would like to inform you about an incident on 13 July 2017. The pepper farmers organized a Protest March from Pallebedda to Palmadulla in the Rat...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) would like to inform you about an incident on 10 October 2017. Police used excessive force against protesters in a peaceful Public Protest at Kol...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about Mrs. Shobha Mahara (28), a resident of the Arnama Rural Municipality-1 in the Siraha District. On 17 October 2017,...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367