UPDATE (Thailand): Government commits to giving witness protection to missing lawyer&#8217;s family
April 20, 2005
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned by new information received regarding the savage treatment of citizens by a military-sponsored civilian militia group called...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) – Mindanao about a man named Pegie Boquecosa (24) who has ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a healthy leg of Ms. Citthi Naseera (48) was mistakenly amputated at the Negombo General Hospital on 1 March 2005. ...[RE: FA-06-2004: THAILAND: A human rights lawyer Mr. Somchai Neelaphaijit missing; UA-94-2004: Severe torture victims still in custody while police torturers remain in posts; UP-14-2004: Mr. Somchai N...Dear friends, According to updated information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), the Indonesian police have named two further suspects in the death of human rights activist Munir. ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned by the killing of a Mr. Don Wijerathna Munasinghe by the Maharagama police in Colombo District, Sri Lanka. Mr. Munasinghe was...[Re: Case 1: UA-135-2004: Alleged illegal detention and torture of a man by officers at Kuruwita Police; UA-63-2005: Need for inquiry into police and inquiring officers conduct in investigating a tor...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the continual and apparent deliberate delay in seeking justice for a victim of torture against two accused pol...[RE: FA-06-2004: THAILAND: A human rights lawyer Mr. Somchai Neelaphaijit missing; UA-94-2004: THAILAND: Severe torture victims still in custody while police torturers remain in posts; UP-14-2004: THA...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has receive updated information from the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) that charges and violations of Indigenous People’s ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding misconduct displayed by a police official and an officer of the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) during...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been informed of the illegal arrest and torture of Vidana Arachchige Norman Krishantha Jayawardana (43), the assistant regional manager of Ma...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned by yet another honor killing case from Shikarpur District, Sindh Province, Pakistan. According to the information we receive...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from MASUM, a human rights organisation in West Bengal, regarding the case of Mr. Gopen Sharma, a human rights d...[RE: UP-39-2005: SAUDI ARABIA/SRI LANKA: Three Sri Lankans face imminent execution in Saudi Arabia; UP-38-2005: SAUDI ARABIA/SRI LANKA: Please send a letter to the King of Saudi Arabia urging his inte...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information on the death of Nallawarige Sandasirilal Fernando, a 36-year-old man who died of serious head injuries after he was assa...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission urgently requests your intervention to provide special protection to torture victim, Mr. Nimal Silva Gunaratne! Mr. Gunaratne was arrested by the Panadu...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from MASUM, a human rights organisation in West Bengal, regarding a police attack on a human rights defender, Mr Gopen S...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a torture victim, R. Don Nawaratne Bandara, refused to give his statement in the Panadura Magistrate Court fearing ...[RE: UP-29-2005: PHILIPPINES: Two more leaders from the Bayan Muna party are killed in Baguio and Tacloban City, UA-34-2005: Killing of a labor rights activist for the Hacienda Luisita farm workers in...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367