NEPAL: Police arrest and torture two minors and a youth in Morang District
September 14, 2016
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the ban on student unions that has been in force since 1985, when military dictator General Zia-ul-Haq...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the Ratchaburi Provincial Court scheduling a conciliation hearing, for four activists and one journali...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding intimidation and violence against Mr. Sony Misdananto, a journalist of Net TV in Madiun, East Java province, b...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Sirikan Charoensiri, human rights lawyer and legal and documentatio...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the torture of Mr. Asep Sunandar conducted by police officers of Cianjur police resort (Polres Cianjur), resul...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the case of Haris Azhar, a human rights defender and executive director of the Commission for the Disa...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Raviraj Kavichandran a resident of Pussellawa had according to the police, allegedly committed suicide by hanging h...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding an environmental activist, Mr. I Wayan Suardana (alias Gendo.) His critics reported him to the police for his ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that police officers attached to District Police Office Morang have illegally arrested and tortured two minors and a you...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that police officers attached with the District Police Office Siraha illegally arrested and tortured Ram Chandra Mahato ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information that an 18-year-old woman has been murdered in the name of honour by her own uncles and cousins. The father of the girl has fil...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Anugerah Saritama Abadi Company (PT. Anugerah Saritama Abadi) grabbing the land of local residents and farmers...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned about the police’s torture and planting of evidence on suspected drug users and sellers in General Santos City. The police ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding a fabricated case against Mr. Dedi Sutanto. He was tagged on Face book concerning allegations of corruption in...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding four activists and one journalist, indicted over anti-draft constitution leaflets. The Public Prosecut...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding three young activists, one local land rights defender, and two human rights documentation officers fro...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you that three Lumad farmers were killed, while another three were wounded, including a 15-year-old girl. Lumad refers t...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the arbitrary arrest and detention of Tanveer Ahmed, a Kashmiri freelance journalist and researcher on...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the arbitrary arrest and detention of Ms. Musliha Masae and her husband Mr. Ibroheng under martial law...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Commission for the Disappearances and Victims of Violence (KontraS) regarding criminal defamation charges again...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367