BURMA: A man is severely tortured for a month at Rangoon police headquarters and sentenced to 15 years in prison
July 20, 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man was shot dead by police officers while in the custody of an officer attached to the Hanwella Police Station. ...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) previously issued a statement on the case of Phyo Wai Aung, whom the authorities in Burma have blamed for an attack on a festival in April. In ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has been closely following the case of a young man whom the authorities in Burma have accused of involvement in a bombing during April. Phyo Wai ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission wishes to draw your attention on the case of Ram Hari Shrestha, a businessman from Kathmandou who was allegedly abducted on 27 April 2008 by members of ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information that the policemen investigating the complaint of a torture victim made him sign a document withdrawing his comp...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that a woman in her twenties was illegally arrested, strung up in a police station and badly beaten for a number of hours after she...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to draw your attention on the necessity to continue and increase pressure to see that the perpetrators of Arjun Bahadur Lama’s abduc...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received detailed information regarding the illegal arrest and abduction of a man by army personnel at a check point in Imphal. The man was...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the systematic discrimination faced by a Christian teacher in Lahore. After being repeatedly abused allegedly ...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the arbitrary arrest and assault of a man by Balagolla police. Although he was released on the same evening with...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that a man has been beaten and arbitrarily detained by Urubokka police officers. He was hospitalized after the assault, which has c...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that a man was illegally arrested in Kalutara by Baduraliya police, and tortured severely in the police barracks to force a confess...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 16-year-old boy died in custody in unclear circumstances in Rupendehi District. Dharmentra Barai. The boy was a...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that a man has been charged with a series of offences that are unrelated to his arrest. He was first arrested for his alleged involve...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that a businessman was shot dead by the Gulshan Police in Dhaka after having been kept in arbitrary detention for two days. The inc...Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes with deep concern regarding the continuing threats to two human rights defenders. Both of them have received letters containing messages...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned of the illegal arrest, detention and assault of a man by police from Saliyawewa Police Station. The victim was badly beaten by poli...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the unlawful arrest and torture of a farmer by Mathugama police. The man was falsely accused of selling illi...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is extremely concerned for the safety and health of a young boy, after he was badly tortured by the family of a police inspector. The 14 year o...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that a mechanic died violently in the custody of Ramna Police in Dhaka, shortly after he refused to continue paying bribes. The pol...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367