SRI LANKA: Police brutality, threat and torture against civilians
July 21, 2002
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends,  Regarding our previous appeal on the mysterious death in custody of Mr. S. Tharma Rajen, we have been informed that the office of the Chief Justice of Malaysia has ordered the Sepang M...PHILIPPINES: Land rights; Loss of land and deprivation of livelihood ——————————————————̵...Dear Friends,  We have been informed that the President of the Philippines, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo has decided to reprieve for 90 days the execution of Mr. Rolando Pagdayawon, who was previously sch...Mr. Brahmanage Aruna Sheron Suranga WIJEWARDANE (27) of 444B Batagama South, Kandana, was handed over to the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) Head Quarters at Colombo to assist an inquiry by t...On Aug. 15, 2002, the members of the New People's Army (NPA) ambushed a police team in Brgy. Pansoy, Sogod, Cebu, Philippines, injuring two policemen and one civilian. Immediately members of the 78th ...Dear Friends,  Regarding our earlier forwarded appeal on the crackdown on Burmese dissidents and pro-democracy activists in Thailand, we are again requesting you to take action to prevent the arreste...In AHRC's last communication on this matter, AHRC informed of a letter it had received from the Attorney General's Department of Sri Lanka, stating that the case had been referred the Prosecution of P...The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) welcomes the decision of the Supreme Court of Pakistan to overturn the conviction of Ayub Masia, a Christian who was sentenced to death for blasphemy, and the ...Mr. S. Tharma Rajen, a previously healthy young man, died mysteriously in police custody on 21 June, and investigations into the death have thus far been hampered. The cause of death listed on the dea...On Aug. 2, 2002, the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka declared a judgement in favour of Angeline Roshana, a 25-year-old woman who complained to the court of being tortured, illegally arrested and illegally ...On orders of the attorney general of Sri Lanka, the Prosecution of Torture Victim's Unit has now initiated the inquiry into the allegation of torture made by Lalith Rajapakse against several officers ...An additional sessions judge in Lahore imposed the death penalty and a fine of 500,000 rupees (US$8,335) on Mr. Anwar Kenneth, a former officer in the government's Fisheries Dept., in a blasphemy case...Dear Friends,  Regarding our previous appeal (UA-39-2001) about the arrest and trial of Mr. S. K. Pradhan, secretary-general of the Peoples Forum for Human Rights and Development (PFHRD), we are forw...Maldeni Kankanamage Piyaratne was born on Nov. 18, 1969. He entered Peradeniya University in 1991 to study biological sciences and obtained a special degree in zoology in 1996. He was married in 1997 ...- Perpetrators: Officers attached to Matugama Police Station, including Sub-Inspector Thennekone, Sergeant Ajith Vithana, PC 26166 Liyanage and PC 13543 Anil in the presence of about 15 others.INDIA: Human dignity is denied; Cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment against Dalits ————————————————...V. G. G. Chaminda Premalal was arrested by several Aralaganvila police officers while he was at home. The arrest took place on July 9, 2002, at about 7:40 p.m. The arresting officers said that Chamind...Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is happy to learn that the Prosecution of Torture Perpetrators Unit of the Attorney General’s Department has forwarded the information pr...Two children studying at Millika Mahavidyala School in Hiniduma, Sri Lanka, were arrested by officers attached to the Hiniduma police station who were investigating a theft which had taken place in th...Indian police detained 13 people in New Delhi on July 11, 2002, including Mr. Gautam Navlakha, a human rights activist who is a member of the Indo-Nepalese Solidarity Forum that has advocated, among o...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367