SRI LANKA: Urgent medical help needed for torture victim
May 12, 2002
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends,  Following is the latest update on Fr. Pallath’s hunger strike. He was arrested and forcibly shifted to the Calicut Medical College hospital today.  We are urging you once again ...RE: UA/16/2002 – Support Fr. Pallath’s hunger strike for justice – 06 May 2002) UPDATE (INDIA): Priests and Nuns in Kerala Demonstrate in Support of Fr. Pallath despite Pressure from...(RE: UA/16/2002 – Support Fr. Pallath’s hunger strike for justice – 06 May 2002) UPDATE (INDIA): 26th Day of Indefinite Hunger Strike by Fr. Pallath ————̵...Clouds of war and killing of innocent civilians across the Line of Control (LOC) in Kashmir KASHMIR (INDIA/PAKISTAN): Gross human rights violations – Stop the cross-border shelling and need of U...Dear Friends,  Regarding our previous urgent appeal on the torture case of Mr. Lalith Rajapakse (Re: UA-18/2002, http://www.ahrchk.net/ua/mainfile.php/2002/240/), we are forwarding you a copy of a le...Dear Friends,  Regarding the torture case of Mr. Greesha de Silva (Previous appeal has spelled as Grissa) in Sri Lanka, We are sending you the medical report in this case.  No inquiry has yet starte...SRI LANKA: Frequent and cruel tortures by the police – Urging actions to prevent torture and implement the law with participation of UN Agencies ———————...Dear Friends  Two weeks without food are beginning to pay a toll on Fr. Pallath’s health, but he remains committed to continuing his action until he finds justice. It is difficult to comprehend...Dear Friends  Following is an update with some progress on the case of Mr. Lalith Rajapakse, a torture victim in Sri Lanka. We are not requesting any further action at this stage, but we may request ...Munir and Warda attacked by Jakarta militias INDONESIA: Attacks on human rights defenders, destruction of property, public use of weapons with impunity ———————...Dear Friends,  We are forwarding you the first updates of Fr Pallath’s hunger strike for justice, provided by EES Calicut. We will keep you updated on this case as the events unfold in coming d...Urgent medical help needed for torture victim  SRI LANKA – Torture by police, impunity, denial of proper rehabilitation  ——————————&...10 years impunity for Convent well murder of young nun INDIA – Impunity for murder ————————————————...Support Fr. Pallath’s hunger strike for justice  JESUIT ORDER IN KERALA – Physical assault, slander through gutter press, filing of fabricated criminal cases, denial of right to livelihoo...State violence and repression in Asia INDONESIA/MALAYSIA/SINGAPORE/AUSTRALIA: Repression and violence against human rights defenders on May Day 2002 ———————...Dear Friends,  “This as that I will be here between Myanmar Independent Monument and Yangon city hall until either the government agrees to my petitions or simply kills me. I am here offering m...Richard Cook, Director of UNRWA operations in the West Bank: 
"The reports we are getting are of wholesale destruction of a kind more normally associated with natural disasters such as earthquakes.....Dear Friends,  We would like to send you a copy of the 20th open letter sent by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) to the Jesuit superior general in Rome regarding Fr. Pallath’s case.  Reade...Dear Friends We are asking for your urgent action in the light of dramatic developments in the struggle of the ISA detainees for proper medical and legal treatment. The 8-day long hunger strike and se...The UN Commission on Human Rights, meeting in its 58th session, issued a press statement on 16th April including the following reference to the obstacles placed by 'the occupying power' to the propose...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367