SRI LANKA: An innocent man and his brother are tortured by the Kosmodara Police
September 8, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends,  The Manokwari district court in West Papua has sentenced two peaceful activists to seven and a half months and two years imprisonment respectively. The trial was characterised by a ser...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Ms. Kande Shriyani (33) of Sri Darmadara Mawatha, Godaudawatha, Hegoda, Rathgama in the district of Galle migrate...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a Pakistani businessman will be executed on September 21 on the charges of smuggling drugs into China. The death ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that a Filipina domestic worker, who was falsely charged for theft, was convicted in trial in absentia. She is presently det...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the 19-year-old daughter of Mr. R.J.K. Niel and his wife Ms. Ajantha Edirisinghe of No: 13, Vijithapura, Magastot...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM) concerning the abduction by the West Bengal state police of three pe...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that Asraf Jamiri Musa, a 17-year-old Education student, who was tortured inside a military camp and charged with illegal po...Dear friends,  Mr. Yogarasa Shashheran (22) a resident of Kilinochchi District has been detained in Welikada Remand Prison without being charged for more than 3 years. Yogarasa lost his parents when ...Dear friends, Similar to other cases raised with the Office of the Ombudsman, they also concluded to terminate two separate complaints, after years of investigating, against court personnel and the po...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM) concerning the case of torture of an innocent villager by the Border...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man who was kept in army detention centers for more than nine months after his abduction by secret agencies and t...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has once again received information from Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM) concerning the case of threats to a human rights defender...Dear friends,  Mr. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Chandana (29) of Kosmodara, Deniyaya in the Matara District was severely tortured by police officers attached to the Kosmodara Police Station. Despite bei...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that the soldiers tortured a member of an indigenous minority whom they falsely accused of being a member of an illegal ar...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM) concerning the case of threats to a human rights defender Mr Faizud...Dear friends,  Mr. Aadawalage Gayan Indika (26) of No 6th Canal, Kagama in Kakirawa in the district of Anuradhapura is married and father of one son. Gayan was travelling with his brother on his moto...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that an Indian citizen has just completed his 21st year in a death cell in Lahore. He was the victim of the India centri...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Centre for Organisation Research and Education (CORE) concerning the case of arbitrary detention and enforced dis...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) writes to inform you that an armed village chief and his men severely assaulted a tricycle driver whom they wrongly accused of attempting to es...Dear friends,  Mr. D.K.K.S. Shehan Fernando, a young man of 22, is in danger of losing his life due to the actions of a wealthy businessman in the Ja-Ela area The officers of the Ja-Ela Police Statio...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367