SRI LANKA: Alleged brutal assault of a 15 year-old student by his teacher
March 25, 2007
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is writing to inform you the illegal arrest and torture of a mentally retarded young man in Akmeemana, Sri Lanka. The victim, P.K. Dammika, was il...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received details of yet another murderous assault in Burma which officials are trying to cover up. Ko Naing Oo was taken into custody by subu...Dear friends, Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the alleged brutal assault of a 15 year-old student by his teacher at the school on 15 March 2007. The victim was seve...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is forwarding an announcement about a programme to be held at the National Human Rights Commission in Bangkok this Wednesday, March 28, on forced...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has obtained detailed information about a trial in Thailand that has been going on for 14 years. The trial of four men for allegedly planning to ...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from a reliable source (name withheld for security reasons), regarding the cases of abductions of 15 innocent civilians i...[NOTICE: To facilitate your intervention of the urgent appeals issued by the AHRC, we have developed a new automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal...[NOTICE: To facilitate your intervention of the urgent appeals issued by the AHRC, we have developed a new automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is gravely concerned about the security of Mrs. Shahin Sultana Santa, a torture victim who was brutally attacked by the police of the Dhaka Metro...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about alleged torture and death threats of Mr. Puradi Prasad Pandey of Kalikot district, Nepal, from December 2006 to th...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from its local partner the PVCHR, a human rights organisation based in Varanasi, in Uttar Pradesh state, India regarding...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the death and injury of 55 migrant workers by a large scale fire that happened in the foreigner detention centre i...[NOTICE: To facilitate your intervention of the urgent appeals issued by the AHRC, we have developed a new automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal...Dear friends The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from KONTRAS Sumatera Utara about the severe torture of Mr. Aditya Panji Akbar, an 18 year-old boy while undergoing treat...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information from local NGO KARAPATAN regarding the killing of human rights activist, Siche Bustamante-Gandinao on 10 March 2007. The victim...[NOTICE: To facilitate your intervention of the urgent appeals issued by the AHRC, we have developed a new automatic letter-sending system using the “button” below. However, in this appeal...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received further details of the Nandigram massacre on 14 March 2007 (See further: UA-083-2007). The West Bengal state government confirmed 1...Dear friends, Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the alleged arbitrary arrest and assault of a man by the Ratnapura police. According to the information we have receiv...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from its local partner in West Bengal, MASUM, regarding a missing 13 year-old girl from Basanti Colony in Kolkata, West ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information from a reliable source that a number of students of the University of Jaffna have been murdered, arbitrarily arrested and disap...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367