THAILAND: End judicial harassment of pro-democracy activists and reporter
July 18, 2016
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) deeply regrets to inform you that a human rights defender in Bataan, Philippines was killed by unidentified men in front of her relatives. Last...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding student activists who have been arrested in Thailand. According to Thai Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the crack down on Sindh nationalists for holding protests. These are against the killings of Hindus, s...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding behavior of police officers of the Tanah Karo police resort (Polres Tanah Karo). They supported the Developmen...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the enforced disappearance of a Baloch publisher and employee of Civil Hospital Karachi, Sindh by plai...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned about the continued harassment of the Lumad community by members of the 58th Infantry Battalion in Lagonglong, Misamis Orient...Dear Friends, The AHRC has received the following information from its partner organisation MASUM in West Bengal. Following an attack of approximately 25 Border Security Force personnel, 11 farmers ha...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that 18-year-old Ajit Mijar (Dhakal), a Dalit by caste, was found allegedly murdered on 14 July 2016 in Dhading district...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information that seven transgender persons were arrested and reportedly sexually abused by the Cantonment police in Nowshera...Dear Friends, The AHRC has received the following information from its partner organisation MASUM in West Bengal. In West Bengal, a Border Security Force (BSF) Guard allegedly sexually assaulted a 12-...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the investigation into the torture and death of Mr. Marianus Oki, a suspect who had been detained in B...Dear Friends, It has come to the AHRC’s attention that basic human rights are being neglected in Kerala’s textile shops. The women textile workers are forced to stand for over 10 hours per day and...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from Thai Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR) regarding the arrest of activists who attempted to exercise their righ...Dear Friends, The AHRC has received the following information from its partner organisation MASUM in West Bengal. Sabita Pradhan, wife of Mr. Mani Pradhan, about 48 years old, died at Dumchipara tea g...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information revealed by the young victim herself, which we wish to bring to your notice. On the 7th of July when she went to...Dear Friends, According to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), a 14-year-old girl was abducted and raped by her school bus driver on 19th June 2016. Later, she was threat...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that two Christian sisters, with an 18-month baby were taken hostage by the Sarai Alamgir police, Punjab, for the produc...Dear Friends, According to the information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), Mr. Nihal Aruna Shantha, resident of Kirindivita, Ganemulla in the Gampaha District, was baselessly arr...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is deeply concerned about the harassment of the members of the TINDOGA (Tribal Indigenous Oppressed Group Association), a Lumad organization, by ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mrs. Maladeniyegedara Padma Irangani and her two sisters were all illegally arrested by the Katugastota police offi...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367