BANGLADESH: Police inaction narrows the path of justice for wounded human rights defender, who needs constant supports for survival
May 19, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Niroshan Premaratne, a professional journalist attached to the Independent Television Network (ITN) of Wickre...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the alleged gang-rape of a 14-year-old tribal girl by four security personnel in Narayanpatna, Koraput of Or...Dear All,  The Asian Human Rights Commission has earlier informed you about the attack on FMA Razzak instantiated by army officer, Major Mustafizur Rahman Bokul and his family, who attempted to gouge...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the alleged of torture of Atiram Rana by a group of policemen from District Police Office, Banke on 12 April...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. P W Cyril Sarath Kumara (26) of No: 6 B/59 A, Ambagahawella, Paragahakelle, Ampara was illegally arrested and...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a young Hindu scheduled cast man was abducted by a mob of hundreds of persons from a police station. The police s...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Disanayaka Mudiyanselage Nandasena (29) of No: 1 B/107, Namal Oya, Ampara was illegally arrested and severely...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information that an unidentified soldier from Indradal Gulm, beat five villagers who had entered Koshi Tappu Conservation Area until they...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the bodies of five disappeared persons have been found in different areas of Balochistan. The bodies bore bullet ...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the Property Bailiff officer Mr. Nelson Hettiarachchi attached to the Negombo Municipal Council has been suspende...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. W.A. Lasantha Pradeep Wijeratna (36) of No. 98, Galahitiyawa, Ganemulla in the district of Gampaha was illega...Dear friends,  Further to our appeal, the Ombudsman also ceased its intervention into the disappearance and torture of a farmer, Ambrosio Derejeno. He was last seen alive in the custody of a paramili...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding two human rights leaders murdered on May 5 by notorious land mafia from the ruling party, Pakistan P...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that the son of the provincial speaker of the Punjab assembly and his henchmen attacked a village and fired upon the w...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Janith Chandeera a 15 year old and a year 10 student of Kavisigamuwa Sri Gamini Maha Vidyalaya was illegally arre...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. D Weeragunarathna Sahabandu, Ms. K A Sarani and Ms. M L Tharanga of Andurathwila, Wawulugala Kanda, Poddala, in...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Samayakkarage Ravi Nishantha (29) of No: 07, Mundakkuliya, Anamaduwa in the Puttalam district was illegally a...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has learned that human rights defender FMA Razzak is going to die without proper medical treatment due to tremendous pressures from the officials...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Maddegama Acharige Ishan Maleesha (13) of Devrampura, Kapugama, Devinuwara in the Matara district was a grade 7 s...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Ms. Thushanthi Pujani Perera (19) a school girl of ”Haksala”, Dulmura, Talathuoya in the district of ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367