SRI LANKA: Death of a patient through negligence at the Kandy Teaching Hospital
May 23, 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about the torture and forced confession of Mr. Aris Winata Saputra and Mr. Bihin Charles, committed by police officers o...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Jakarta Legal Aid (LBH Jakarta) regarding torture committed by police officers of the Jakarta Metropolitan Police (...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding the arrest, detention and torture of Mr. D V Jeevan Kumara Gunasinghe from Thambuwa, Ma-Eliya in the Kurunegala Distr...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding the illegal arrest and probable torture of Mr. Sandanayaka Mudiyanselage Nishan Priyashantha on 6 June 2017. Without ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Mutthuswamy Sathgunam, 47, of No: 2/2, Maberitenna, Digana, Rajawella, in Kandy District. Police Officers illegal...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Rajapaksha Mudiyanselage Thilakoon Bandara, a resident of Kandubodagama, Ma-Eliya in the Kurunegala District, who...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Anthonysamy Callistus from Rajawella, Digana in the Kandy District. On 28th March 2017, he was arrested illegally...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Siril Sandanaraja, who was illegally arrested, detained and produced before the Teledeniya Magistrate’s Court o...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information from the United NGOs Mission, Manipur and the North East Dialogue Forum (NEDF). It concerns uranium mining and i...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. R.M Padmasiri Bandara (46) of Kandubadagama, Ma-Eliya, Polpithigama in the Kurunegala District. On 2 January 2017...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Murugan Velu Rajagopal (56), No: 1/1, Maberitenna, Rajawella, Digana in Kandy District. On 28 March 2017, he was ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information concerning Mr. Jayalath Kandambige Chaminda (39), a resident of Meegahajandura, Bandagiriya in Hambantota District in Sr...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the disappearances of four persons from Sindh province–a famous writer, a teacher, a government ...Dear Friends, According to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), a 15 year old, boy Z, was sexually abused at the Rantambe Military Camp between 16th-23rd February 2017. Th...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the torture and ill-treatment of Seko indigenous people in North Luwuk, South Sulawesi province. The North Luw...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has obtained information that two soldiers in the north of Burma (Myanmar) raped a 17-year-old girl. Although the girl and her family complained ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Padang Legal Aid (LBH Padang) regarding the torture and ill-treatment of Mr. Muhammad Ridwan, alias Deded. Ridwan w...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the case of, Mr. Sajid Hussain, a Kashmiri frontline human rights defender facing deportation to Pakis...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), received information concerning Mr. Ranjith Sunil Jayatissa (55) of No: 114, Walgowwagoda, Danture in the Kandy District. On 6 July 2016, while ...Dear Friends, According to the information I have received, the 15 year old son of Mr. and Mrs. Newton Perera and Malani Srasinghe, residents of No: 17/1, Arangala, Nattaranpotha in Kandy District had...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367