INDONESIA: Acid attack against anti-corruption activist in Palembang, South Sumatera province
April 26, 2017
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission has received information regarding Mr. Harischandra Raja Niroshan (27) of No: 62, Ambakotte, Kengalla in the Kandy District. He was illegally arrested, ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from Mr. K M M G Sudath of No: 19/1, Watagoda Temple Road, Aruppola, Kandy, about maltreatment of his oldest son. His ch...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Terai Human Rights Defenders’ Alliance (THRDA) that 32-year-old Ramparkhan Kori (Chamar) was abused and beate...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the acid attack against senior investigator of the Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK), Mr. Novel Baswedan...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about an acid attack against anti-corruption activist, Mr. Sukma Hidayat (38) and his wife. Sukma was attacked after he ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the new wave of enforced disappearances in Pakistan’s Sindh province, which has been under the Range...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that an 18-years old ethnic college student named Mr. Romel Chakma had been tortured to death by officers of the Banglad...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is writing about the death threats, rape threats and other abusive messages received by renowned Human Rights Defender, Bondita Acharya, in Assam...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Commission for the Disappearances and Victims of Violence (KontraS), a national human rights NGO, about the tor...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information provided by Bandar Lampung Legal Aid (LBH Bandar Lampung). It is regarding an unfair trial and a fabricated case...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the arbitrary detentions of academics by the Pakistan Rangers in a bit to stop them for holding press ...Dear Friends, According to information received by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), a 14 year old, boy X, and 10 other boys were sexually abused at the Rantambe Military Camp between 16th-23r...Dear Friends, According to information I have received a 15-year-old girl was sexually abused on 25th February 2017. Despite the family members filing a complaint with the Maskeliya Police Station, th...Dear Friends, Mr. Warnakula Patabandige Lionel Emmanuel Perera (NIC No: 502892606 V) of No: 444/4, Faris Perera Mawatha, Ja-Ella in the Gampaha District was illegally arrested and detained. On 21 Dece...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding Mr. Sutrisno alias Lahido (35). In the Sigi Police Station, (Polres Sigi), Central Sulawesi province, Mr. Sutr...Dear Friends, Dilesh Rukmal Anthony, 14, of No: 08 /1, Wariyagala, Nilambe in the Gampaha District, is a student in grade 09 A at the Gurukelle Nilambe Maha Vidiyala School–Sinhala Medium. On 24...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about Mr. Sunanda Dias, a resident of No: 31, Niwandama, Ja-Ella, in the Gampaha District. He was extra-judicially kille...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from a local partner organization, the Association of Human Rights Defenders and Promoters, that a 22-year-old girl had ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information about Mr. Chadik Shyaman Wickramarachchi (42), a resident of Rakgahawatte in Biyagama in Gampaha District. He had been e...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding human rights violations committed by police officers and the Adidaya Tangguh Company in North Moluccas provinc...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367