SRI LANKA: Kirindiwala Police tortured a man to fulfill the whims of a third party
September 19, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends,  Mr. Roshan Chanaka Rathnasekara (22) of Gal-Oluwa, Minuwangoda in the district of Gampaha, succumbed to his injuries on 1 June 2011 as a result of gunshot injuries received in the indi...Dear friends,  Further to our previous appeal, we have learned that Melanie Cordon, a domestic worker convicted in absentia, was told by a government representative that serving her jail term would b...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that human rights defender Mr. Perumal Sivakumara (32) of Kalpitiya Road, Norochchole in the Puttalam District has die...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information regarding the shooting and ill-treatment of protesters by police between 22-24 August 2011 in Tiaka, Central Sulawesi,...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Ms. PAD Ariyawathi Saman Kumari (54) of No: 133, Thummodara Colony, Naththandiya in the Puttalam District has mad...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Krishan Jeewaka Jayaruk of Matara District is the regional news reporter of the Sinhala medium ‘Lankade...Dear friends,  Mr. Rasaratnam Jegatheeswaran (33) of Thiriketheeshwaram in Mannar District is currently detained in Welikada Prison in Colombo. Presently Rasaratnam is being treated at the Intensive ...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a 13 year-old school child was beaten by his class teacher in full view of the other students of his class. The p...Dear friends,  Mr. Jayasinghe Arachchige Chathura Manohara (29) of ‘Darshani’, Deniyaya Road, Pitabaddara in the Matara District was illegally arrested and severely tortured by police off...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that an eleven-year-old girl was gang raped over a period of one month by a power family from the Palari tribe of Sind...Dear friends,  Mr. Udaya Pushparaja Antony Nithyaraja (31) of Jaffna District was illegally arrested and severely tortured by seven police officers in front of the Magistrate of Jaffna while the cour...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received details about the torture of two men in separate incidents in Basilan, Mindanao. The group of soldiers who tortured one of them ha...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received updated information regarding the death in custody of a sixteen-year old teenage boy, one year ago in Rupandehi District. The boy ...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Sanchiarachchige Thushara of Keselwatte, Pitakotuwa in the Colombo District was extrajudicially killed by pol...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Melanie Cordon, a domestic worker convicted in absentia, has been neglected by the government agencies that have ...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Garusinhage Priyantha (45) of Nelu-Yaya Kithulkote at Thanamalvila in Monaragala District was extrajudicially...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that VFM, one of the Sri Lanka’s leading national electronic media institutions networks, journalist Mr. Ruwan S...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that Mr. Kirigalbadage Chaminda Sanath Kumara (38) of No: 171/1, Bodiya Road, Walapola, Papiliwala in the district of ...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information that a man was drowned by police officers while in their custody. He was arrested on 11 August 2011 by the police offi...Dear friends,  Ms. Weerawila Gamage Sepalika (40) was illegally arrested and severely tortured by the police officers attached to the Ambalantota Police Station on 18 May 2011. Four police officers i...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367