Human Rights Groups denounce serious human rights violations in Peru
 06/11/2014 
The Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL) and its partners—the Association for Human Rights (APRODEH) and the Commission on Human Rights (COMISEDH)— condemned the designation of the retired General Daniel Urresti as Minister of the Interior of Peru. Urresti is being prosecuted as an alleged perpetrator of the murder of journalist Hugo Bustíos and the attempted murder of his companion, Eduardo Rojas Arce.According to a presentation given by CEJIL in the presence of Peruvian state representatives on October 29, 2014 at the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), Urresti’s designation as Interior Minister violates the state’s international obligations.
During the meeting the petitioners also alleged the state committed a breach of its commitments to the Commission and to victims of violations of human rights within the framework of the Joint Press Release Case.

In 2001, Peru and the Commission signed a press release documenting the commitments made by the State regarding 165 cases of serious human rights violations processed before the Commission, among them the murder of journalist Hugo Bustíos.

At the time of signing the press release, the Peruvian government said that the commitments ushered in a new dawn for policies geared towards the protection of human rights within the country. However, more than 13 years onwards, Peru continues to fail to meet its obligations. Among them, the pending compliance of the arrest warrants against members of the security forces and the provision of housing to 509 victims and their families.

But to date, none of the warrants have been fulfilled and many of the defendants continue to carry out their public functions. With regards to the housing situation, despite the promises made before the Commission by the State on Thursday October 30 to transfer the property to the victims that week, the transfer has not yet been executed.

According to CEJIL APRODEH and COMISEDH such breaches demonstrate a lack of political will by the state.

"The lack of compliance with the commitments made by Peru in the press release highlight a prevailing climate of impunity and constitute further damage to the rights of victims of serious human rights violations in Peru ," said Viviana Krsticevic, Executive Director of CEJIL .