Nicaragua must ensure the independence of the GIEI in the investigation of grave violations of human rights
 03/07/2018 
San Jose, July 3rd 2018.- Today, the Interdisciplinary Group of Independent Experts (GIEI, by its Spanish acronym) has arrived in Managua. The group comprises of Amérigo Incalcaterra, Sofía Macher, Claudia Paz y Paz y Pablo Parenti. They will monitor the situation to assess if the Nicaraguan State complies with its duty to investigate the grave violations of human rights committed in the context of the current crisis.The GIEI will enter a country that is facing the gravest human rights crisis in recent history. As the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL), we recognize the progress that this group of people with experience in the field, contributes to the analysis of information and the possible lines of investigation of the violent acts that have taken place since April of this year. We also welcome the GIEI’s call to organized civil society to maintain constant communication and to deliver opportune information on the matters under investigation.Despite the fact that the conformation of this group is an advancement in the process, the ultimate responsibility however, lies with the State. In this context, the State must provide all necesary means to guarantee that the GIEI will have the institutional collaboration and access to information needed to carry out its duties.The Nicaraguan State has to guarantee protection to those who are a part of the GIEI, so that they can complete their mandate free of any interferences, threats, or any incident that puts their life and personal integrity at risk. They must also protect the victims, their families, and those who give information and participate in the penal processes.The responsibility that the members of GIEI assume today is historic. The Nicaraguan people entrust them with the task of ensuring that the investigation identifies those responsible for the grave violations of human rights that have been committed over this time period.We call on the international community to monitor and support the process and urge the GIEI to establish the most agile and efficient dialogie channels with those social actors who are relevant to its mandate. We also reiterate our commitmet to the victims of human rights violations and will put all our efforts so that they have access to truth, justice, and reparation.From CEJIL, we reiterate our pledge with the victims of human rights violations. We will put all our efforts into ensuring that they have timely access to truth, justice, and reparation.