What place is occupied by NHRIs within the African Human Rights System ?
October 31, 2018
Family Photo at the Republic of The Gambia State House with CNDH and ACDHRS Officials... (c) Credit: John GbenagnonThe African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights Studies (ACDHRS) is hosting the President of the National Human Rights Council of the Kingdom of Morocco (CNDH), Mr. Driss El Yazami on a two-day working visit to the ACDHRS and the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) from 31st October to 2nd November, 2018.These meetings will allow to discuss the place occupied by the national human rights institutions (NHRIs) within the African human rights system, on the means to strengthen roles and partnership with human rights institutions and NGOs. It will also be a question of examining the means to continuously and optimally develop the achievements of actions with the ACHPR in particular and the African human rights system in general.This visit comes after the Training of Trainers organized from 20 to 22 July 2018 in Rabat, Morocco in partnership with CNDH as local partner on the use of international human rights procedures for the promotion and protection of human rights in Africa.The Training of Trainers (TOT) was an activity under the project ‘Consolidating civil society’s role in the transition from African human rights standards to practice’ funded by the European Commission and to be implemented by the International Commission for Jurists (European Institutions and Kenya branches), Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) and the African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights Studies (ACDHRS).DAY 1 HIGHLIGHTS (31.10.2018)His Excellency, The Vice-President of the Republic of The Gambia Ousainou Darboe received in audience today a delegation of the African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights (ACDHRS) and the National Human Rights Council of Morocco (CNDH) composed of:- Prof. Mabassa Fall (ACDHRS Governing Council Member)- Mr Driss El Yazami (CNDH President)- Mrs Hannah Forster (ACDHRS Executive Director)- Ms. Mesgguid Fatima Zahra (CNDH Department of Cooperation and International Relations)
- Mr. John Gbenagnon (ACDHRS Communication & Information Officer)
The purpose of the visit is to forge partnerships in the promotion and protection of human rights in Africa.
A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between CNDH and ACDHRS will also be signed during the visit.
For more information, please contact the African Centre on +220 4462338/4462340
Email: Mr John Gbenagnon (Communication and Information Officer) at communications@acdhrs.org / Mrs. Adama Cooper-Jah (Administrator) at admin@acdhrs.org
Follow us on Social Media:

Face book: https://www.facebook.com/ACDHRS
Twitter: https://twitter.com/acdhrsorg
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCOs0PVfNXcbD5uSEA2GZrCQ- Mr. John Gbenagnon (ACDHRS Communication & Information Officer)The purpose of the visit is to forge partnerships in the promotion and protection of human rights in Africa.A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between CNDH and ACDHRS will also be signed during the visit.For more information, please contact the African Centre on +220 4462338/4462340Email: Mr John Gbenagnon (Communication and Information Officer) at communications@acdhrs.org / Mrs. Adama Cooper-Jah (Administrator) at admin@acdhrs.orgFollow us on Social Media:Face book: https://www.facebook.com/ACDHRSTwitter: https://twitter.com/acdhrsorgYouTube: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCOs0PVfNXcbD5uSEA2GZrCQThe African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights Studies (ACDHRS)Website: www.acdhrs.orgEmail: admin@acdhrs.orgZoe Tembo Building Kerr Serign,
P.O.Box 2728 Serrekunda, The GambiaTelephone: +220 4462341With the Technical Support of HURIDOCS