Innocent Musabyimana
24.03.2015
facts 

Innocent Musabyimana was born on 1 July 1972 in Giciye, in the former prefecture of Gisenyi, Rwanda. When the Rwandan genocide started in April 1994, Musabyimana was a student in masonry.
Musabyimana and his mother’s family were of Tutsi ethnic origin. However, because his father was Hutu, they were all spared from the genocide.
According to Musabyimana, when the genocide was over and Paul Kagame acceded to power, his family became a target of the new government. Allegedly, because Musabyimana’s father was a wealthy man who refused to support the Rwandan Patriotic Front and because he was a former member of Juvénal Habyarimana’s political party, the President of Rwanda, during the genocide, he was accused of having led an anti-Tutsi militia. As a consequence, Musabyimana contended that he and his family were forced to leave their village, and fled to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
When they came back to Rwanda eight months later, Musabyimana and his mother were reportedly pressured to testify against Musabyimana’s father. When they refused, they were put in prison, along with Musabyimana’s brothers, Fidel and Gilbert Musabyimana.
On 1 July 1997, Musabyimana’s father was shot in his cell. Musabyimana’s younger brother, Fidel, was then placed in solitary confinement, and reportedly left there without food, until he died. Musabyimana reported that after Fidel’s death, his other brother, Gilbert, was released from prison. Two weeks after, Gilbert was shot and killed.
In 1999, Musabyimana was let out of prison, without charges. He fled to Mozambique.
In 2003, he was called to testify before the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, in Arusha, Tanzania. He then benefited from witness protection.
Musabyimana has said that, once he returned to Mozambique, he was threatened again by Rwandan authorities. Consequently, he decided to move to France, where he lived for six years as an illegal immigrant. In 2010, he finally obtained his residence permit.
However, the Rwandan authorities filed an extradition request to France against him with the Rwandan Prosecution upholding a very different story to the one told by Musabyimana.
According to the Prosecutor of Kigali, Musabyimana participated to the massacre of the Tutsis in the former prefecture of Gisenyi. The Prosecution contended that on 7 April 1994, Musabyimana, along with his father, led an attack against an individual in the village of Mukaka, then burned down the house of the victim. On 10 April 1994, he allegedly led an attack against a trading centre, where many civilians were murdered. In June 1994, Musabyimana reportedly killed many of his neighbours, and threw their bodies in the river.
Consequently, Musabyimana is charged in Rwanda with genocide, aiding and abetting genocide, murder, crimes against humanity, rape and criminal association. 