Teiichi Suzuki
26.04.2016
facts

Teiichi Suzuki was born in 1889. He served as a Lieutenant-Colonel in the Japanese Imperial Army and was a member of the Military Affairs Bureau.
In May 1932, following the assassination of Prime Minister Inukai, he was said to have been in favour of forming a coalition government in order to avoid a repeat of such acts of violence. His objective was to bring about the formation of a government in support of the conspirators plans relative to their expansionist designs in China and more particularly in Manchuria.
He also reportedly maintained that the USSR was the unconditional enemy of Japan and was said to have taken part in the preparations to start a war of aggression against it.
In November 1937, Teiichi Suzuki was promoted to the position of Major-General. He thereby became one of the organizers and the key individual responsible for the political and administrative division of the East Asian Development Agency in charge of overseeing Japanese policy in the occupied territories. He was also said to have been involved in drug trafficking according to some sources. In fact, allegations went around that the Agency provided funds to drug traffickers in China.
At the time that Prime Minister Konoye formed his second government in July 1940, he was appointed Minister without Portfolio and Advisor to the Institute of Research into Total War. Subsequently he replaced Naoki Hoshino as President of the Cabinet Planning Board which position he held until the fall of the Tojo government in July 1944. In this position he was responsible for Japan’s war time economy and participated regularly in meetings of the liaison Conference the powerful Japanese political organ. He thus attended the most important conferences which led to the waging of several wars of aggression against the Allied powers.
It was also alleged that Suzuki had submitted prisoners of war to a policy akin to slavery.
At the end of the war, Teiichi Suzuki was arrested and sent to Sugamo prison to stand trial before the International Military Tribunal for the Far East set up by the Allied powers. 