Vinko Kondic
23.04.2016
facts

Vinko Kondic was born on 25 September 1953 in Donje Sokolovo, in Bosnia-Herzegovina. He studied law and qualified as a lawyer. Kondic is married and is the father of two children.
From May 1992 until the end of December 1992, the Serbian army, together with the police forces of the Ministry of the Interior of the Serbian Republic, launched widespread and systematic attacks against the Croatian and Muslim population with the aim of setting up boundaries between both of these ethnic groups and the Serbian population.
Vinko Kondic was charged with having participated in the preparation and subsequent implementation of attacks against the non-Serbian civilian population from early June 1991 in the municipality of Kljuc, in his capacity as Commander of Kljuc police station, member of the Kljuc crisis headquarters and member of the Kljuc Defense Council.
On 18 November 1991, he was reported to have halted a convoy of refugees coming from Slunj, Croatia. During this interception the police, under orders from Vinko Kondic, reportedly apprehended all of the healthy civilian males and forced them out of the bus. After being tortured at the Kljuc police station these men were then transferred to the “Stara Gradiska” camp.
During the period from 27 May 1992 until end August 1992, the military forces as well as the police reportedly ransacked the villages and homes in Kljuc, Sanica and other villages inhabited by the Bosniak population. Civilians were illegally arrested and taken to detention centers set up in the primary schools in Sanica in “Nocola Mackic” school in Kljuc, in the former train station in Sarnica and in the police station in Kljuc. Subsequently, at least 1’161 men were then said to have been escorted by the police to the Manjaca camp. On arrival, one civilian reportedly died as a result of being repeatedly beaten. Afterwards two more civilians were said to have died during their detention at this camp.
On 10 July 1992, military forces were said to have gone into villages in Kljuc municipality. Following this, many civilian men were arrested and taken to the basement of the Donji Biljani primary school. Some of them were then escorted on to buses to be taken to an unknown destination and then killed. At least 219 persons were said to have been murdered on that date.
On 6 December 2007, the State Court ordered that Vinko Kondic be placed in provisional detention to await trial. 