John Jessen
09.05.2016
facts

John Bruce Jessen was born on 28 July 1949. He was former U.S. military psychologist in the U.S military’s Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE) program. This program was designed to train US soldiers to resist interrogation techniques used by authoritarian regimes to extract false confessions.
In the winter of 2002 James Elmer Mitchell and Jessen were asked by the CIA’s Office of Technical Services to review the « Manchester Manual », an alleged al Qaeda instruction booklet containing, amongst others, instructions on how to resist interrogations, and to develop a counter-interrogation program with « enhanced interrogation techniques » to be applied on al Qaeda captives. Mitchell and Jessen developped a program addressed to the CIA and entitled « Recognizing and Developing Countermeasures to Al Qaeda Resistance to Interrogation Techniques : A Resistance Training Perspective ». This report allegedly laid out the CIA torture program.
In 2005 Jessen and Mitchell founded a company called « Mitchell Jessen and Associates » and signed a contract with the CIA to create an effective interrogation program. They received USD 81 million by 2009. USD 6.1 millions of the contract value was earmarked for legal expenses in the event of criminal or civil actions stemming from the contract.
Mitchell and Jessen allegedly recommended to reverse-engineer the SERE program in order to induce « learned helplessness » in the victims. According to this concept, once a victim had been subjected to enough ill-treatments and torture, they would cede to resist interrogations and would eventually divulge information they had otherwise withheld. The concept of « learned helplessness » was devised during research done on dogs in the 1960 and was, for obvious ethical reasons, never tested on human beings.
According to the Senate report, Mitchell and Jessen developed a set of 20 enhanced interrogation techniques, such as the water-boarding, sleep deprivation, stress positions, wall slamming, forced nudity, extreme temperatures, various forms of sensory deprivation and cramped confinement. These methods were meant to instill fear, apprehension and dread. On 4 August 2002, according to this report, Mitchell and Jessen allegedly began personally applying the torture techniques.
On 13 October 2015 the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) filed a law suit in a federal court in the state of Washington against James Mitchell and John Jessen on behalf of torture survivors Suleiman Abdullah Salim and Mohamed Ahmed Ben Soud, as well as a representative of the estate of Gul Rahman. 