Slavko Dokmanovic
08.05.2016
facts

Slavko Dokmanovic was born on 14 December 1949. He was President of the Vukovar Municipality from 1990 until mid-1991. In 1991, after the fall of the city of Vukovar, he resumed his position and he held office until mid-1996.
The events in question relate to the attack on the town of Vukovar by forces of the Yugoslav army, the JNA, from the end of August to November 18, 1991. The JNA unit with primary responsibility for the attack and subsequent occupation of Vukovar was the Belgrade-based First Guards Motorised Brigade, under the command of Colonel Mile Mrksic (see “related cases”). Colonel Mrksic had under his orders Major Veselin Sljivancanin (see “related cases”), who had direct operational command of JNA force in the immediate surrounding areas of the city. Another part of the brigade that took an active role in the siege and occupation of the city was the special infantry unit commanded by Captain Miroslav Radic (see “related cases”), a close associate of Major Sljivancanin.
During this attack hundreds of civilians were reported to have been killed by the Serbian forces and the vast majority of the non-Serbs still remaining were forced to leave. The accusations brought against Slavko Dokmanovic concern more specifically the fate of the people who had taken refuge at Vukovar Hospital in the belief that it would be evacuated in the presence of international observers. On 20 November 1991, 400 of these people were led away by JNA soldiers. The detainees were transported to the JNA barracks where they are said to have been humiliated and threatened. They were then transported to a farm where they were said to have been beaten up by the soldiers. Afterwards the soldiers reportedly drove the detainees by groups of 10 to 20 people in the direction of Grabovo until reaching a ravine surrounded by forest. There, the soldiers are alleged to have killed at least 264 Croats and other non-Serbs taken from the Vukovar Hospital. After the massacre, the Serbian forces are reported to have buried the bodies of the victims at this same spot.
Slavko Dokmanovic was accused of having at all material times aided and abetted or in some way or other, participated in these events.
Slavko Dokmanovic was arrested on June 27, 1997 and transferred on the same day to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. 