Janko Ljikar
25.04.2016
facts

Janko Ljikar was born in 1965.
After war broke out in Croatia in 1990, the Yugoslav National Army (JNA), together with paramilitary formations, surrounded the village of Miklusevci and nearby places after 8 October 1991. They organised an authority called the “Serbian autonomous area Krajina”. In Miklusevci, an important base of the territorial defence was formed and imposed itself as the local authority. From 14 October 1991 until 18 May 1992, the Miklusevci territorial defence, including Ljikar, allegedly attempted to expel all non-Serbs from the area.
During this period, Ljikar and other members of the territorial defence allegedly committed numerous violations of international humanitarian law, with the aim of expelling the villagers. Ljikar and other members of the territorial defence are accused of the confiscation of property, inhumane treatment, looting, intimidation, destruction of property, causing serious pain and suffering, murder and forced labour.
Ljikar is suspected to have been involved in an agreement with a number of other members, to murder three members of the Holik family. He allegedly took them to a nearby forest, after throwing a smoke bomb in the yard of their house, tortured them for several hours, inflicted severe physical pain and suffering, upon which all of them succumbed to the injuries and died. Afterwards, Ljikar, with the others who are implicated in the case, allegedly stole all of the family’s property.
Ljikar was also suspected of being a participant in a process of expelling and transferring a total of 98 persons of mostly Rusin and other non-Serbian ethnicity as of 17 May 1992. He, alongside others, allegedly listed the villagers, threw smoke bombs in the villagers’ yards to make them leave their houses in the night from 17 to 18 May 1992, and the day after forced them to sign the papers according to which they would leave all of their property to the “Serbian autonomous area Krajina” authorities.
On 29 April 1996, District Attorney’s Office in Osijek, Croatia filed an indictment against Ljikar and 34 other suspects for the alleged crimes that occurred in Miklusevci. 