Miro Bojovic
26.04.2016
facts

Miro Bojovic was born in 1977.
In 1999 he served in in the First Battalion of the Podgorica Corps of the Army of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, under the command of Predrag Strugar. According to press reports this military unit was made up essentially of reservists coming from regions to the north of Montenegro where there was a concentration of Montenegrins of Serbian origin.
At the time, Montenegro was tied to Serbia within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Following an agreement concluded between the authorities in Belgrade and Montenegro, it was the Yugoslav army that was put in charge of patrolling and providing security over the frontier separating Montenegro from Kosovo during the conflict which pitted Serbs against Albanians from Kosovo in the period between 1996 and 1999.
The battalion, in which Miro Bojovic served, was stationed in one of these border areas in the region of Hajle. In this mountainous and forested region there were four villages inhabited by Albanians, one of which was the village of Kaludjerski Laz, which lay a short distance from the town of Rozaje in Montenegro.
According to local press reports in April 1999, intense fighting against the Kosovo Liberation Army (UCK) and the expulsion of the local Albanian population by Serb forces took place on the other side of the border in the Rugovo region of Kosovo. The bombing campaign by NATO against Serbian positions had only just begun at that time. As a consequence, numerous Albanians from the villages in the region attempted to flee to Montenegro.
These media reports stated that these Kosovo civilians attempting to flee to Montenegro were killed whilst trying to cross the border. According to the indictment, Miro Bojovicv took part in an assassination campaign against civilians led by Predrag Srugar which resulted in the death of 23 persons of Albanian ethnic origin between 18 April and 22 May 1999. These people, including a 13 year old boy and an elderly man of 77 years of age, were all civilians who had reportedly taken no part in the hostilities.
In particular the press reported an event which has remained engraved in people’s memories under the designation of “the massacre of Kaludjerski Laz” On 18 April 1999, 6 civilians, including two old women and a child, who escaped from Kosovo were reportedly killed and their bodies transported by truck to the other side of the border to be buried in a mass grave in Novo Selo, in Kosovo.
The Yugoslav army at the time assigned responsibility for this event to Serbian paramilitary forces and Predrag Strugar himself stated that he had had no prior knowledge of the event that had taken place in Kaludjerski Laz and that he had been prevented from travelling to the site of the massacre.
As early as the month of April 1999, the Yugoslav army ordered investigations aimed at shedding light on the events in Kaludjerski Laz and a military examining judge was given the task of leading the enquiry. 