Francisco Morales Bermudez
22.05.2017
Facts

Francisco Morales Bermudez was born in 1921 in Lima, Peru. He is a former Peruvian General. He was one of the 1968 coup promoters that deposed President Belaúnde and established the Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces, a military dictatorship which ran the country until 1980.
Under the military junta, he was Chief of Staff of the Army and became Commander in Chief of the Peruvian Army in 1974. In 1975 Morales Bermudez was appointed Prime Minister and Minister of War.
On 29 August 1974, he led the “Tacnazo”, a bloodless coup that removed General Velasco Alvarado and opened the “Second Phase” of the Revolutionary Government, under his presidency, between 1975 and 1980.
Morales Bermudez allegedly agreed to the involvement of Peru in Operation Condor in the late 1970s. In this context, he reportedly authorised in at least two occasions the capture and expulsion of Peruvian and Argentinian citizens, some of them with Italian nationality, accused of being active members of the Montoneros, an Argentine leftist urban guerrilla group. In particular:

On 25 May 1978, 13 Peruvians activists, including three journalists, were arrested by military forces in Lima and transferred them to the Argentinian militaries. They were accused of representing a danger for Peruvian internal security and public order.


In June 1980, Batallion 601 of the Argentinian Army, allegedly kidnapped four high ranking members of the Montoneros, convened for a clandestine meeting in Lima. They were soon after expelled to Argentina through Bolivia. This operation was led with the collaboration of the Peruvian Prime Minister Pedro Richter Prada and the support of the military intelligence service, under the command of German Ruiz Figueroa.

Covered reports discovered in 1992 among the so-called Operation Condor’s “Archives of Terror” documented the infliction of torture, disappearance and killings on political opponents extradited to Argentina under the regime of Jorge Videla. 