Radomir Vukovic
27.09.2014
facts 

Radomir Vukovic, a Serb national, was born in 1974 and became a member of the VRS special police force during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia. In 1995, as a member of the special police forces of the Republika Srpska MUP, he took part in the massacre of unarmed Bosniaks detained and imprisoned, in Srebrenica. He was put on trial, together with Zoran Tomic for the same count of indictment, that of participation in genocide.
Vukovic was a member of the second unit of the Sekovici special police force, whose mission it was to exterminate Muslim groups and Bosniaks and to deport some 40’000 civilians from the eastern part of the region. On 13 July, 1995 he was one of the members of the interior ministry given the task of running the warehouse where Bosniak civilians were being held. The guards opened fire on the prisoners through the windows and Vukovic participated in this assault by throwing hand grenades.
Furthermore, Vukovic and Tomic participated in the opening and closure of the municipal roads over which Bosniaks were transported to the warehouses where many amongst them were to be executed. These deportations were aimed at the overall Bosniak population and included women, children and the elderly. During the trial, the judges highlighted the fact that both defendants were fully aware of the final outcome of these operations.
On 13 July, 1995, both defendants also participated in the capture of a large number of Bosniak men who were attempting to escape from the Srebrenica enclave, a zone under United Nations protection, but at the time wrested from their control by the VRS (Vojska Republika Srpska) or army of the Republika Srpska. Close to 1000 of these prisoners were subsequently taken from Sandici to the warehouse of the farming cooperative of Kravica, by the defendants who knew full well that they were to be executed. Tomic took part in the massacre with a machine gun and Vukovic with hand grenades. The great majority of the prisoners were murdered in this way.
Vukovic and Tomic were both sentenced to 31 years in prison by a first verdict rendered by the Court of Bosnia-Herzegovina on 22 April 2010. On appeal a second verdict was rendered on 25 January 2012, which acquitted Tomic but confirmed the same sentence of 31 years imprisonment for Vukovic. 