Jesús Armando Arias Cabrales
05.05.2016
facts

Jesús Armando Arias Cabrales was born on 13 August 1936 in Lourdes, Norte de Santander, Colombia. Arias was the Commander of the Colombian National Army from 1989 to 1990. Arias studied military science at undergraduate level and International relations, administration, and organisational development at graduate level. He retired from the Colombian military in 1990 and became the dean of the Nueva Granada Military Academy.
On 6 November 1985, a guerrilla commando funded by the famous Colombian druglord, Pablo Escobar, known as “Movimiento 19 de abril” or “M-19”, attacked the “Palacio de Justicia” in Bogota, Colombia. The “Palacio de Justicia” is of special significance as it is the home of the Supreme Court of Colombia, as well as a symbol of the Colombian Judiciary. This guerrilla group was led by Luis Otero and Andrés Almarales. During the siege, the M-19 guerilla group held around 350 hostages including many Colombian Supreme Court Justices and other public servants. This attack led to the deaths of 12 of the 25 Colombian Supreme Court Justices.
This event led to an intervention by both the Colombian National Police and the Colombian Military. Shortly after the M-19 atack, Arias, then commander of the Thirteenth Army Brigade in Bogotá, began planning the retaking of the “Palacio de Justicia”. Arias appointed then commander of an armoured cavalry battalion, Colonel Alfonso Plazas, to personally oversee the operation. The retaking operation commenced on the same day of the attack and concluded the following day, 7 November 1985.
More than 100 people died during the retaking of the Palace, including several Colombian Supreme Court Justices, public servants, guerrilla soldiers (including five M-19 leaders), and other judges. In the aftermath of the attack, eleven cafeteria workers suspected of having participated in the M-19 attack, vanished. According to declarations made by two former police officers, the eleven missing cafeteria workers were taken alive from the Palace and moved to an alternate location, “Casa del Florero” where they were interrogated, tortured, and assassinated by the Colombian military (under Arias’ command). Shortly after these declarations were made, the Colombian government denied the claims and revealed that both former officers had criminal records. On 14 June 2007, Colombian news show, “Noticias Caracol” released a video obtained through a raid of Plazas’ home that clearly showed two of the missing eleven being evacuated from the Palace.
The events of November 1985 received renewed media coverage in 2005, twenty years after the tragedy. This led to a “truth commission” being created by the Colombian Supreme Court with the purpose of investigating the events of November 1985. 