Friedrich Wilhelm Konrad Siegfried Engel
12.04.2016
facts 

Friedrich Engel was born in Warnau, Havelberg, Germany on 3 January 1909. He was former SS-Obersturmbannführer (Lieutenant Colonel) of the occupied Genoa, Italy and made head of the Aussenkommandos (AK), the body in charge of reprisals in the region for the SS Security Service (SD), in January 1944.
The events which became the focus of legal proceedings against Engel took place during his time as head of the AK, namely the Resistance reprisals of Benedicta, Turchino Pass, Portofino and Cravasco between 1944 and 1945.
The Benedicta massacre took place between the 6 and 11 April 1944, an attempt by the SS to secure links of communication between the Ligurian Riviera and the Po valley threatened by a growing Partisan presence. The ensuing SS sweep resulted in the death of 147.
The Turchino Pass incident took place on 19 May 1944 and became the focus of Engel’s later legal proceedings in Germany. The reprisal took place in response to a Partisan bomb planted in the “Odeon,” cinema frequented by German officials, resulting in the death of five persons. According to witness testimony it was Engel who commanded the execution of ten Italians for every German killed. 59 Detainees from the Marassi prison in Genoa were then collected and escorted to Turchino Pass and shot over a ditch dug by Jewish prisoners.
The Portofino attack of 2 – 3 December 1944 involved the collection of 22 detainees from the Marassi prison, who were then tied with wire and thrown into the sea. The motivations of this incident appear unknown.
Finally, the Cravasco reprisal of 23 March 1945 was a response to a Partisan ambush in which 8 German soldiers were killed. Consequently, 20 detainees from the Marassi prison were transported to the Cravasco cemetery and shot.
After the war, Engel returned to Germany where he worked in a lumber-importing business, undisturbed by the law for over 50 years.
In 1994, during judicial investigation surrounding Erich Priebke, the so-called “cabinet of shame,” was discovered in the basements of the Military Attorney’s office in Rome, containing nearly 700 unaccounted-for files documenting war crimes committed on Italian soil by Nazi forces during the occupation. 