Nakhla Adel
25.04.2012
facts 


Adel Nakhla was born in Egypt around 1955. No details of his education or family history are available. Currently he is a U. S. citizen, married, residing in Washington, D. C.
In March 2003, a military coalition led by the United States invaded Iraq and toppled the regime of its then-leader Saddam Hussein. Coalition forces have remained in Iraq as an occupying force ever since. During the occupation, the U.S. military contracted with L-3, a Delaware corporation headquartered in Virginia, to provide civilian translators of Arabic in connection with military operations. These translators worked at, among other places, military prisons and detention facilities in Iraq.
Mr. Nakhla was employed by L-3 Services as a translator in Iraq, including at Abu Ghraib prison, from June 2003 to May 2004. Nakhla worked for the Army’s 205th Military Intelligence Brigade, which was in charge of interrogating prisoners at Abu Ghraib who were believed to have been involved in anti-American attacks.
Mr. Nakhla allegedly participated and co-conspired in the following acts at the Abu Ghraib prison: rape and threats of rape and other forms of sexual assault; electric shocks; repeated beatings, including beatings with chains, boots and other objects; prolonged hanging from limbs; forced nudity; hooding; isolated detention; being urinated on and otherwise humiliated; and being prevented from praying and otherwise abiding by their religious practices. By his own admission, Mr. Nahla admitted before the Court that he was involved in these acts.
On 30 June 2008 a federal lawsuit was brought before the U.S. District Court for Maryland, Greenbelt Division on behalf of 72 Iraqi plaintiffs against Mr. Nakhla, L-3 Services Inc. (formerly Titan Corporation) and CACI International Inc., the U.S. government contractors at Abu Ghraib prison and other facilities in Iraq. CACI International Inc. has since been dismissed as a defendant in the case. The complaint alleges that L-3 Services and Adel Nakhla, a former translator employed by L-3 Services, directed and participated in torture and other illegal conduct at prisons in Iraq, including Abu Ghraib. 