Vladimiro Lenin Montesinos Torres
27.04.2016
facts

Vladimiro Lenin Montesinos Torres was born on 20 May 1945 in Arequipa, Peru. In the mid-1960s, he joined the Peruvian Army, and in 1965, he trained as a cadet in the School of the Americas in Panamá. In 1966, he graduated from Chorrillos Military School He was later named Captain of Peruvian Army.
In 1976, Montesinos travelled to the United States without authorisation, where he lectured at the RAND (acronym for ‘Research and Development’) Corporation, an American think tank providing research and analysis to the United States Army. There, he provided secret information to the US Central Intelligence Office. Montesinos admitted the contacts with those organisations, and a Peruvian military court consequently sentenced him to one year of imprisonment for the crimes of disobedience and forgery of official documents. As a disciplinary measure, he was also dishonourably discharged by the army.
A few months after serving his prison sentence, Montesinos obtained a law degree in Lima. However the graduation occurred in dubious circumstances, and the related supporting documents have never been shown. Then Montesinos registered as a lawyer with the Supreme Court of Lima, and became a member of the Lima Bar Association. As a defence counsel he represented, among the others, alleged Colombian and Peruvian drug traffickers.
In 1990, Montesinos became the defence counsel of Alberto Fujimori, presidential candidate for the movement known as ‘Cambio 90’, then charged on counts of fraud and irregular transactions in real estate. When – in the same year – Fujimori became President of Peru, he appointed Montesinos as Adviser to the Chief of National Intelligence Service (SIN). In fact, however, Vladimiro Montesinos behaved as the actual Chief of the Peruvian Security Agencies.
When on 5 April 1992 Fujimori suspended the Constitution and dissolved the Congress, Montesinos played a decisive role in the reorganization of the Judiciary and in the censorship of all medias.
Montesinos was also the supervisor of the paramilitary armed squad known as ‘Grupo Colina’. The group was deemed to be responsible, among the other things, for the execution of 15 civilians in 1991 in the Barrios Altos district of Lima, for the disappearance of nine students and a professor from the University of La Cantuta in 1992, and for the abduction, torture and execution of Mariella Barreto, a former intelligence agent whose body was found beheaded in March 1997.
A further allegation against twenty members of Grupo Colina, including Vladimiro Montesinos, is the killing of the six farmers in the town of Pativilca in 1992. Allegedly following orders of General Hermoza, in the early morning of 29 January 1992 around 20 members of the Colina Group death squad allegedly drove from Lima to Pativilca, where they searched for and forcibly removed six men from their homes. The victims, who were allegedly tortured with a blow torch and murdered, included a school teacher, farmers, and an 18-year-old mechanical engeneering student. Their bodies were left in a nearby cane field.
On 14 September 2000 the Peruvian press released a video showing Montesinos – in his SIN office – bribing Alberto Kouri, a political opponent of Fujimori. Montesinos aimed at convincing Kouri to change his political side. The subsequent scandal forced Fujimori to resign from presidency, call for new elections and deactivate the SIN. On 24 September Montesinos fled to Panama, but he returned to Peru on 23 October. 