Darko Mrdja
28.04.2016
facts

Darko Mrdja was born on 28 June 1967 in Zagreb, Croatia. He grew up in Tukovi, in the municipality of Prijedor, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and worked nearby, at the Omarska mine. In 1992, during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, he was a member of a special police unit, known as the “Intervention Squad”, serving under the Bosnian Serb authorities of Prijedor.
In August 1992, Bosnia and Herzegovina was the theatre of an armed conflict. Within this framework, a widespread and systematic attack was launched against the non-Serb civilian population of the municipality of Prijedor.
On 21 August 1992, a group of non-Serb prisoners, detained in the Trnopolje concentration camp, was informed that it would be “exchanged” against Serbian prisoners and transported to Travnik. That same morning, several hundred – perhaps over a thousand – civilian men, women and children gathered in the village of Tukovi. They had been told that a convoy would be organized that day to Travnik.
The two groups of vehicles from Tukovi and Trnopolje joined into one convoy at the town of Kozarac and proceeded in the direction of Travnik. After having driven for a certain time, the convoy stopped in a wooded area where the military-aged non-Serb men were separated from the women, children and elderly. The group of non-Serb men was then driven to a location called Korecanske Stijene where there is a sheer rock face on one side of the road and a steep cliff on the other. The prisoners were ordered to leave the bus with their heads down and to kneel at the edge of the cliff. It was reported that the police then started firing at the men. Apart from twelve persons who survived the massacre, it has been estimated that more than 200 men were killed.
Darko Mrdja was alleged to have taken a direct part in this event, personally participating in the disembarkation, supervision, escort, and shooting of these civilians.
On 13 June 2002, Darko Mrdja was arrested by SFOR (NATO’s Stabilisation Force) and transferred the following day to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 