Drago Josipovic
09.01.2012
facts

Drago Josipovic was born on 14 February 1955 in Santici, Bosnia Herzegovina. Before the conflict he worked in a chemicals factory.
Drago Josipovic was a member of the HVO of Santici, a village lying in the Lasva valley.
The HVO was the executive, administrative and supreme military organ of the HZ H-B/HR H-B (Croatian Community of the Herceg-Bosna/Croatian Republic of Herceg-Bosna), created in November 1991. This community considered itself to be a separate distinct legal entity within the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
According to the indictment (modified on 9 February 1998), between October 1992 and April 1993, Drago Josipovic was reported to have persecuted the Muslim inhabitants of Ahmici-Santici and its surroundings on political, racial or religious grounds by planning, organising and carrying out an attack aimed at evacuating or “cleansing” the village and the surrounding region of all of the Bosnian Muslims.
The indictment also alleged that Josipovic had helped in the preparations for the April attack against the civilian population of Ahmici-Santici. The HVO was said to have firstly bombarded Ahmici-Santici from a distance, with groups of soldiers subsequently going from house to house and, using incendiary tracer bullets and explosives, aggressing Bosnian Muslim civilians and taking possession of their belongings.
More precisely, during the attack on Ahmici, on the dawn of 16 April 1993, Drago Josipovic was reported to have participated personally in the attack against two houses inhabited by Muslim families, killing at least three persons, expelling all the others and setting fire to one of the houses.
Around 103 Bosnian Muslim civilians were killed in Ahmici-Santici and its surroundings. Amongst these 103 persons could be counted approximately 33 women and children. In Ahmici-Santici, soldiers from the HVO destroyed roughly 176 houses belonging to Bosnian Muslims, as well as two Mosques.
Drago Josipovic gave himself up voluntarily on 6 October 1997. He was transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on the same day. 