Ivica Perkovic
09.05.2016
facts


Ivica Perković alias Mungos (“Mongoose”), born on 27 June 1965 in Brezici, municipality of Derventa. Ivica Perković, was a member of the 103rd Derventa Brigade of the HVO, the Croat Defence Council.
During the armed conflict between the Territorial Defence Force of Bosnia-Herzegovina and the HVO on one side and the armed forces of the Serb Republic of BiH on the other, Perković intentionally inflicted severe physical and mental injuries and incited others to do the same. During the months of April, May and June 1992, in the region of Derventa, Perković beat, allegedly tortured and in other inhumane ways mistreated Serb civilians who were unlawfully detained the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) detention center in Derventa, known as hangar “Rabić”, and the premises of an elementary school in the village of Zelenika. Perković, abused the detainees, beat and inflicted upon them fire arms wounds, and tortured them in an extremely brutal manner, thus inflicting on them severe physical and mental injuries.
On 26 April 1992 in the JNA Center in Derventa, he “intentionally inflicted serious physical and mental pain” on inhabitants of Serb ethnicity from the settlement of Cardak, following their prior capture by members of the Croat Defence Council (HVO) and the so-called Rijeka Brigade. Perkovic poured salt in one person’s mouth, forcing him to swallow it and then to fight with another prisoner. Displeased with how they fought, he beat them both. Furthermore, Perkovic beat a prisoner, first giving him two candles and saying: “If those candles go out your life will go out too.” Perkovic allegedly participated also in beating prisoners of Serb ethnicity in the “Rabic” hangar, using “a bat, butt of a gun and feet” and he encouraged another Croat Defence Council member to abuse a prisoner in the primary school in Zelenika.
On 9 May 1992, Perkovic took part in the beating of one person in that school.
On 12 March 2010, the Prosecution of Bosnia and Herzegovina filed the indictment against Perkovic, charging him with having intentionally caused severe bodily injuries and suffering of Serbs, who were detained in the Derventa area, during April, May and June 1992. This indictment was confirmed by the Court on the 17 March 2010. 