Juan Manuel Rivera Rondón
15.04.2016
facts

Juan Manuel Rivera Rondón is a former officer of the Peruvian army.
In 1981-1982, he studied at the U.S. Army School of the Americas, a military training centre established in 1946 to teach anti-communist counterinsurgency doctrines to Latin American military. He graduated from school and became a lieutenant in the Peruvian army.
In August 1985, while Rivera Rondón was the chief of the patrol unit « Lince 6 », the Peruvian army decided to conduct a large-scale operation in the district of Accomarca to « capture and/or destroy terrorist elements » in the area. Two units were chosen to carry out the operation: the patrol unit “Lince 6” commanded by Rivera Rondón and the unit “Lince 7” commanded by Telmo Ricardo Hurtado (also known as the “butcher of the Andes”). On 14 August 1985, Lince 6 and Lince 7 entered the village of Huancayo. There, the soldiers allegedly forced villagers to leave their homes, raped and tortured many civilians before opening fire on about fifty of them, as suspected they were the Shining Path supporters. They also allegedly burned and threw grenades toward homes with the villagers inside. Approximately 69 civilians were killed during the operation, now known as the “Accomarca massacre”.
In the early 1990s, Rivera Rondón came to the United States and, with impunity, bought a home in Washington D.C., Maryland.
In 2000, after the repeal of the amnesty law of 1995, the Peruvian authorities prosecuted Telmo Hurtado and Rivera Rondón, especially for their involvement in the Accomarca massacre. However, due to his absence on the Peruvian territory, the proceedings against Rivera Rondón could not go further.
In 2003, Rivera Rondón was arrested in the United States and charged with the sexual abuse of a child. In 2005, the charge was reduced and he was given a one-year suspended sentence.
However, on 23 March 2007, the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement in Baltimore arrested Rivera Rondón for failing to inform them that he had been convicted of a crime. Although his involvement in violations of human rights was cited as a reason for his arrest, the alleged charges against him did not affect his role in the Accomarca massacre.
On 11 July 2007, two Peruvian women, Téofila Ochoa and Cirila Pulido, eyewitnesses to the massacre of their families and neighbours in Accomarca in 1985, filed a complaint against Rivera Rondón in the U.S. District Court for the district of Maryland. 