Vladimir Santic
18.11.2010
facts

Vladimir Santic was born on 1 April 1958 in Donja Veceriska in Bosnia Herzegovina. Prior to the conflict he was a career policeman in Vitez in the Lasva valley.
Vladimir Santic was a member of the HVO (Croatian Defence Council).
The HVO, created in November 1991 was the supreme executive, administrative and military body of the HZ H-B/HR-B (Croatian Community of the Herceg-Bosna Croatian Republic of Herceg-Bosna), and defined itself as “a separate or distinct political, cultural, economic and territorial entity” within the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
According to the indictment, modified on 9 February 1998, Vladimir Santic, between October 1992 and April 1993, was reported to have persecuted the Muslim inhabitants of Ahmici-Santici and its surroundings on political, racial or religious grounds by planning, organising and carrying out an attack aimed at evacuating or “cleansing” the village and the surrounding region of all of the Bosnian Muslims.
During the attack on Ahmici on 16 April 1993, Vladimir Santic commanded the First Company of the 4th Battalion of military police of the HVO.
Vladimir Santic also incorporated into his Company the paramilitary group, called the “Jokers”. The “Jokers” was a special antiterrorist unit. They wore black shirts and seemingly built up a reputation as a “special operations force” through its widespread use of camouflage and sophisticated weaponry.
On 16 April 1993, the village of Ahmici-Santici was firstly bombarded from a distance then groups of soldiers using tracer bullets and explosives went from house to house aggressing Bosnian Muslim civilians and destroying their property.
More concretely, during this assault, Vladimir Santic personally participated in the attack against two houses inhabited by Muslim families, killing at least three persons, expelling the remainder of the occupants and setting fire to one of the houses.
Around 103 Bosnian civilians were killed in Ahmici-Santici and its surroundings. Amongst these 103 dead, were approximately 33 women and children. In Ahmici-Santici, HVO soldiers and paramilitary forces destroyed approximately 176 houses belonging to Bosnian Muslims, as well as two Mosques.
Vladimir Santic surrendered voluntarily on 6 October 1997. On the same day he was transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 