Viktor Bout
03.05.2012
facts

Anatolievitch Bout was born on 13 January 1967. His official birthplace is stated to be close to Douchanbe Tajikistan, whereas he claims that he was born close to the Caspian sea, in Asghabat in Turkmenistan.
A certain confusion surrounds the military career of this former student of the Military Institute of Foreign Languages in Moscow. Although it is clear that, after graduation, he served in the armed forces of the Soviet Union, it is difficult to determine exactly if it was as a lieutenant in the Soviet army, as a major in the Soviet intelligence service (GRU), as an officer in the Soviet air force or then again as a member of a KGB satellite office in Rome.
Being polyglot, Viktor Bout understood very well from the beginning that he could make good use of his ease with languages, a facility which he reportedly used frequently in providing his services to UN personnel. He is said to speak fluently in Russian, Farsi, English, French, Spanish, Xhosa and Zulu.
He was serving in the military at the Vitebsk Byelorussian base when the Soviet Union broke up and his unit was disbanded in 1991. At the age of 24, he then became involved in arms trafficking. That same year, he left for Angola to work professionally as a translator. Sometime later he decided to set up a company in the air freight business in Africa. The end of the Cold War had led inevitably to the redeployment of hundreds of planes belonging to the Warsaw Pact, and Bout decided to take advantage of this situation. Short takeoff and landing cargo planes could very easily land close to former communist arms depots where the guards had not been paid for several months! The result was that phantom units of the ex Soviet Union started selling war materials at ridiculously low prices and these materials began to be traded on the black market and transferred from such depots straight into the holds of the cargo planes.
In 1992, Viktor Bout acquired his first three Antonov wide bodied aircraft for the sum of USD 120’000. Another version of this story is that Bout had in fact been subsidized by Vladimir Marchenko, Director of the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs.
Within a few years, Viktor Bout became the owner of, or at least engaged, several airline companies to transport his arms, such as Air Cess, Aerocom, Transavia, and Centrafrican, but also aircraft registered in Belgium, Kazakhstan and several African countries. Through his professional contacts, he was able to guarantee the procurement of arms from inventories stored in the former eastern bloc (Moldavia, Ukraine and Bulgaria), ensuring their delivery, illegally and without a middleman to numerous actors in Africa, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka and the Philippines during the nineties and into the early 2000’s.
From the beginning of the 2000’s the Bout network was up and running perfectly. A host of fictional companies were set up as a front for airline companies in countries where there was little oversight thereby allowing the flights to take place. The use of falsified end use certificates and changes to the final destination whilst still in the air made deliveries that much easier.
Furthermore, these airline companies also carried legitimate merchandise such as frozen food, flowers and even vacuum cleaners.
In order to be able to effectively run his various companies he gave himself various different identities such as: Viktor Anatoljevitch Butt, Viktor Sergitov, Viktor S. Bulakin and finally Viktor Vitali.
Viktor Bout began thus to play a key role in numerous conflicts and became noticed on the international scene on several occasions, notably in 1997 when he was reported to have sold an aircraft to Mobuto Sese Seko, the then president of the Democratic Republic of Congo. He was also said to have supplied arms to the now defunct regime of Charles Taylor in Liberia, and was also highly suspected of breaching the arms embargo on Sudan. During the civil war in Angola, he reportedly not only supplied UNITA but also the government army with anti-personnel mines then afterwards with demining equipment. However it is subject to controversy as to whether he supplied arms to Al Qaeda shortly after 2001, an accusation which he has always denied.
Nevertheless, in view of his considerable logistic capacity, Bout also contributed to numerous humanitarian and peace keeping operations, providing the UN with transportation for men and materials in Somalia in 1993, or during the Operation Turquoise in Rwanda in 1994, the Iraqi occupation in 2003, then more recently in Indonesia in 2006 after the Tsunami or finally on a regular basis on demand from the World Food Program.
This double dealing in cooperating both with humanitarian organizations but also with unscrupulous clients, allowed Bout to carry on with his trafficking. Even so he was subject to two attempts on his life in 1998.
It is understood that he has at his disposal some sixty aircraft (Antonovs, Iliouchines, helicopters), amounting to the largest privately held fleet in the world. Furthermore, more than a thousand persons are said to work directly or indirectly for him. Thanks to his personal contacts, he is able to guarantee the acquisition of arms from stocks in the former east bloc (Moldavia, Ukraine, Bulgaria), and their delivery without any intermediary.
In 2001, being the subject of sanctions by the UN and with an International Arrest Warrant issued against him, Viktor Bout together with his wife and daughter fled to Moscow where he was able to escape arrest thanks to his 5 passports, his different identities and probably due to support from powerful contacts.
In 2002, the international organization, Interpol published a report entitled “Project Bloodstone” in which it closely reviewed the totality of the African operations carried out by Bout. That same year, as a result of complaint from Belgium for money laundering of 325 million dollars between 1995 and 2001, Interpol issued a strong recommendation that he be arrested.
At the time that a request for sanctions against arms traffickers was lodged with the United Nations, France singled out especially Viktor Bout, just as it was to do when a resolution was voted against Charles Taylor in 2004.
Indeed, it was not really until April 2005, that the extensive commercial empire of Bout began to attract attention. As a result, the American Deputy Secretary to the Treasury announced sanctions against some thirty companies, sanctions which included freezing of Bout’s bank accounts in the USA. Whereas the freeze became effective on 26 April 2005, the Pentagon however continued to take no notice of the Treasury complaints until end 2005. It should be remembered that since 2003, the Pentagon financed hundreds of cargo flights by Bout for the reconstruction in Iraq and Afghanistan, this no doubt being the reason why it was the end of 2005 before the American army relinquished Bout’s services. Though he was excluded from then on from the Iraqi market, Viktor Bout nevertheless did not give up on the other missions which were underway, principally in Afghanistan where deliveries were increasingly necessary due to a return to the offensive by the Taliban.
The story of Viktor Bout inspired a Hollywood production in 2005 called “Lord of War” starring Nicolas Cage.
At the beginning of 2008, just as Viktor Bout was about to enter into a new commercial venture, he was arrested in Bangkok. 