Mladen Drljaca
28.04.2016
facts

Mladen Drljaca was born on 5 March 1958 in Bosanska Krupa (Bosnia and Herzégovina). Lawyer by qualification, he held high office in the municipality of Bosanska Krupa during the war in Bosnia and Herzégovina (BiH). He is married and has one child.
According to the Indictment, from the beginning of April 1992 until 31 December 1992, Mladen Drljaca, as a member of the Bosanska Krupa SDS Municipal Board, the Executive Board of the Assembly of the Serb Municipality of Bosanska Krupa, the Crisis Staff of the Serb Municipality of Bosanska Krupa, and the War Presidency of the Serb Municipality of Bosanska Krupa, participated in a joint criminal enterprise, with a plan to link up Serb-populated areas in BiH, and to create a separate Bosnian Serb state.
The accused was fully aware that the execution of the plans would entail either as a necessity, or as a natural and foreseeable consequence, a permanent removal of most non-Serbs and the crimes that form part of this indictment.
The Indictment reads that between 21 April and 4 May 1992, at least fifty Bosniaks, including both civilians and combatants, were detained for some time in the primary school in Jasenica, and from 1 May 1992, until 21 August 1992, at least seventy-nine persons were detained at the Petar Kocic School the detainees receiving inadequate food and living in unhygienic conditions and were regularly subjected to perform forced labour, being intentionally exposed to life-threatening conditions. During their detention, a certain number of those captives were allegedly beaten on several occasions by various groups of Serb soldiers and as a result, some detainees died.
Additionally, the detainees appeared before the so-called Provisional Military Court where the accused Drljaca acted as the Presiding Judge, where they were questioned without being informed about the reasons for their detention or questioning.
On 3 March 2008, Mladen Drljaca was arrested by decision of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. He is accused of having committed war crimes and crimes against humanity. 