Nenad Tanaskovic
20.02.2013
facts 

Nenad Tanaskovic was born on 20 November 1961 in the village of Donja Lijeska, Visegrad municipality, Bosnia Herzegovina. After completion of secondary school, he became a qualified driver. During the war, he was a reserve policeman of the Visegrad Public Security Station.
In the period from April to June 1992, a widespread and systematic attack was carried out by the military and police of the Republika Srpska, and Serbian paramilitary formations, against the Bosniak civilian population in the municipality of Visegrad, with the purpose of removing them from this territory.
The Indictment alleged that, in mid-May 1992, Nenad Tanaskovic abducted a woman in Visegrad municipality and took her, together with another civilian, to the Visegrad Police Station. The latter was imprisoned in the attic of the Police Station with other detainees, while the woman was interrogated and then raped by two soldiers.
It was further alleged that, on 23 May 1992, together with Novo Rajak, Nenad Tanaskovic captured two brothers in the Osojnica neighborhood of Visegrad, took them to Donja Lijeska, where they were interrogated and repeatedly beaten. The civilians were subsequently detained in the Visegrad Police Station and in the Uzamnica barracks, in degrading and insalubrious conditions. Eventually, after ten days of detention, one of the men was released. His brother was later killed. Two other persons, one man and his father, who had been similarly beaten and brought to the Uzamnica barracks on 25 May, were also killed.
The Indictment further alleged that on 31 May 1992, Nenad Tanaskovic and a group of paramilitary soldiers attacked the undefended Muslim populated villages of Osojnica, Kabernik, Holjaci and Orahovci, using the captured civilian male residents as human shields. Their houses and shops were then looted and the Accused personally participated in setting them on fire. He also severely beat some of the detainees during the night at the Primary School in Orahovci where they were kept. The next day, all the prisoners were released.
Two weeks later, Nenad Tanaskovic was allegedly driving one of the buses transporting Bosniak civilians from Visegrad to Isevic Brdo. There, children, women and elderly people were ordered to get off the vehicles. The men were driven to Rogatica, where they were beaten and their hands tied with wire. They were then transferred to Kalimici, this time without the Accused, and shot.
On 16 June 1992, in Visegrad, Nenad Tanaskovic is reported to have forced two Bosniak civilians to clean blood, bodies and body parts off a bridge in Visegrad. One of them, as well as his wife, were allegedly subsequently beaten by the Accused, , and forced to lick blood off the ground The same day, together with another soldier, Nenad Tanaskovic is alleged to have ordered two persons who were walking home with a group of others Bosniaks in Visegrad to get into his car, and drove them way. Their bodies were later exhumed at Slap.
Nenad Tanaskovic, who had no prior convictions, was arrested by the Bosnian State Information and Protection Agency on 11 July 2006. 