Eusebio Grave Galeano
14.04.2016
facts 

Eusebio Grave Galeano was born in Guatemala in 1955. He was a member of the Civil Defence Patrol (Patrullas de Autodefensa Civil, or PAC) – a Guatemalan organisation created in 1981 to support the national army in its fight against left-wingers. The PAC consisted of around one million armed civilians who were recruited in rural areas and from indigenous populations.
Grave is accused of participating in the massacre of 268 rural villagers from Plan de Sánchez in the town on Rabinal, Baja Verapaz on 18 July 1982. The majority of those who died were women and children and almost all were of Achi Mayan ethnicity. The massacre was carried out by the Guatemalan army and paramilitary groups under orders from the then head of the military junta, General José Efrain Ríos Montt. He had launched a scorched earth military campaign to destroy leftist insurgents.
According to witnesses and the investigation by Guatemala’s Prosecutor for Human Rights, who is attached to the Public Prosecutor’s Office, on 15 July 1982 the army set-up a camp in the village of Plan de Sánchez in order to inspect the houses following suspicions that the community was supporting the guerrillas. The massacre began in the early hours of 18 July 1982 when the army, supported by paramilitaries, bombed and launched mortar shells at the village. At 2pm, a commando unit of 60 soldiers and patrolmen entered the village. They raped and murdered girls and young women before gathering together the older women, men and boys in a large house that they launched grenades at before later setting on fire. A total of 268 people were executed on the day; the majority were Achí Maya people. The few survivors had to dig a mass grave for the bodies and they were forbidden from talking about the killings.
When democracy was restored in Guatemala at the end of the 1980s, survivors began to speak of the events. In 1992 ten survivors submitted a complaint against Guatemala and provided the details necessary to locate the mass grave. On 7 May 1993 the Prosecutor for Human Rights submitted a complaint to the office of the public prosecutor and a criminal investigation was launched. On 2 September 1996 the Attorney General for Human Rights’ office indicated that the State was responsible for the massacre and classed it as a crime against humanity. However, the Law of National Reconciliation, which granted amnesty to those who committed political crimes during the dictatorship, stopped any possible trial. The victims thus decided to submit a complaint to the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights in October 1996. 