Mutware Daniel Kibibi
23.04.2016
facts

Mutware Kibibi was born on 12 December 1964 in Sange, South Kivu province in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). He was formerly a member of the National Congress for the Defence of the People, or CNDP, a rebel group previously under the command of Tutsi general Laurent Nkunda, now believed to be led by Bosco Ntaganda. He was integrated into the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC) in 2009 as part of a peace agreement. Kibibi was the commander of the 43rd Sector of the FARDC’s Amani Leo (Peace Today) operation against rebel groups in eastern DRC. He is married with eight children.
From 1998 to 2003, the DRC was at the centre of an armed conflict between government forces, supported by Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe, and rebels, backed by Uganda and Rwanda. Despite the signing of peace accords in 2003, fighting has continued between the FARDC and local and foreign militias in the east of the country, a region which has become synonymous with rape and other sexual violence; more than 8,000 rapes being reported in the region in 2009 and 11,000 in 2010.
The 43rd Sector led by Kibibi reportedly operated in and around the town of Fizi in South Kivu province. It is alleged that on 1 January 2011, Kibibi, together with his unit, launched an attack on Fizi’s population to avenge the death of a soldier who had been killed following an argument with a local resident. Reportedly, in the course of the attack which started during the evening of 1 January and continued until the early hours of the next day, the soldiers went from house to house raping, stabbing and beating residents of the town and looting their homes. The precise number of rape victims is unknown although it was reported that more than 60 women were treated for rape following the attack. Kibibi was accused of ordering his troops to attack the town and of participating in the attacks. This attack is believed to be the largest single incident allegedly involving the FARDC.
On or around 19 January 2011, ten of Kibibi’s unit were arrested and detained. Reportedly, the UN Organisation Stabilisation Mission in the DRC also called for the removal of Kibibi and asked that he be held accountable.
Mutware Kibibi was arrested on 21 January 2011 and transferred to Uvira, South Kivu, to await trial. 