Zdravko Tolimir
18.02.2016
facts 

Zdravko Tolimir was born on 27 November 1948, in Glamoc, Bosnia-Herzegovina. As assistant commander in charge of intelligence and security within the main staff of the Bosnian Serb army (VRS), Zdravko Tolimir was one of seven assistant commanders who directly reported to the commander of the main staff, General Ratko Mladic.
According to the indictment, due to his functions the accused had knowledge of the project aimed at forcing the Muslim population out of the Srebrenica and Zepa enclaves and he participated in the execution of this project.
On 6 July 1995, or thereabouts, following the order given by general Zivanovic on 2 July 1995, units of the Drina corps bombarded Srebrenica and attacked observation posts manned by the Dutch battalion of the United Nations (Dutchbat) situated in the enclave. On 9 July 1995, President Radovan Karadzic modified the initial order and approved the taking of the Srebrenica enclave. The order was passed on by Zdravko Tolimir to General Radislav Krstic, to the forward command post of the Drina corps. The attack launched by the Drina corps against the enclave of Srebrenica, notably its bombardment, and the attacks against the other observation posts of United Nations continued until 11 July 1995, date at which the forces of the Zvornik brigade, the Bratunac brigade, the 10th sabotage detachment and other units of the VRS entered Srebrenica. On 11 July 1995, NATO planes dropped bombs to try to stop the VRS. In spite of these efforts, Srebrenica fell into the hands of the VRS on 11 July 1995.
During the same period that it was attacking Srebrenica, the VRS also tried to force the Muslim population out of the Zepa enclave. Three different negotiations took place between the VRS and representatives of the Bosnian Muslims from the Zepa enclave. During these negotiations, the representatives of the VRS tried to force the population out of the enclave, by threatening a military attack. The first series of negotiations took place on 13 July 1995. During this meeting, the commander of the Rogatica brigade, Colonel Rajko Kusic, accompanied by Zdravko Tolimir and representatives of the local authorities of Bosnia, met at the Ukrainian control post of the FORPRONU in operation in the heights above Zepa. The Bosnian Serbs said that “Srebrenica had fallen, and now it was the turn for Zepa”.
Zdravko Tolimir then placed an alternative before the Muslim representatives of Zepa: either all the population could be “evacuated” in the same way as at Srebrenica, or the Bosnian Serbs would launch a military operation. The Muslim representatives decided to reject the Serbian proposition as such. Early in the morning of 14 July 1995, the VRS command launched a large-scale attack against the Zepa enclave. On the evening of 14 July 1995, the Bosnian Serbs entered the enclave by the northwest, took over land for redistribution and burned down some villages.
The second and third series of negotiations between the VRS and the representatives of the Bosnian Moslems from the enclave took place on 19 and 24 July 1995, again attended by the accused.
The transport of the women and children from Zepa began on 25 July 1995. On the same day, or around this date, hundreds of Moslem men, most of them young enough to fight, began to cross the Drina to take refuge in Serbia where the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) registered the identities of a good part of them before letting them leave. The Muslim men fled to Serbia because they were afraid of being injured or killed if they surrendered to the VRS.
According to the indictment, Zdravko Tolimir, together with other VRS and interior ministry (MUP) officers and units, was a member of and knowingly participated in a joint criminal enterprise, the common purpose of which was, among other things: to forcibly transfer the women and children from the Srebrenica enclave to Kladanj on 12 July and 13 July 1995; and to capture, detain, summarily execute by firing squad, bury, and rebury thousands of Bosnian Muslim men and boys aged 16 to 60 from the Srebrenica enclave from 12 July 1995 until 19 July 1995.
The joint criminal enterprise, of which Zdravko Tolimir was a member and participant, was conceived by General Ratko Mladic and his accomplices on 11 and 12 July 1995. It was then carried out by members of the VRS and MUP forces during the attack on the Srebrenica enclave.
During several days following the attack on Srebrenica, the Bosnian Serb Army and Ministry of Interior forces captured, detained, summarily executed, and buried over 8’000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys from the Srebrenica enclave, and forcibly transferred the Bosnian Muslim women and children of Srebrenica out of the enclave.
Zdravko Tolimir was arrested by Bosnian Serb police on 31 May 2007 in Banja Luka and the following day he was transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 