Jorge Osvaldo Steding
25.04.2016
facts

During the “Dirty War” in Argentina, Jorge Osvaldo Steding worked as a prison warden at Rawson prison, carrying out and handing down orders from the prison director. These included mistreating prisoners. Steding was held accountable for complicity in the mistreatment of Mario Abel Amaya and Hipólito Solari Yrigoyen.
Several political prisoners were detained at Rawson prison, amongst them former senator and president of the National Convention of the UCR Hipólito Solari Yrigoyen and Mario Abel Amaya, a former MP. At the time, the Argentinian parliament had been dissolved after a military junta seized control of the country under General Jorge Videla. During the time of the last civil-military dictatorship in Argentina, Solari and Amaya were kidnapped in Puerto Madryn on 17 August 1976 by government forces from Bahía Blanca.
On 11 September 1976, Amaya and Solari, along with other political prisoners, were brought to the Almirante Zar air base near the city of Trelew, Patagonia. They were beaten and kicked into a truck which took them to the Rawson prison. Upon arrival at the prison they were once again subjected to violent and long-lasting beatings by the prison guards. Whilst in prison, they were regularly threatened with murder, beatings and torture. Amaya, who suffered from asthma, begged to be given his medicine and inhaler.
Some of Amaya’s colleagues, who caught a glimpse of him on some of the rare occasions when he was taken out of his prison cell said that they had seen a very large and deep cut in his head, making his head look like it was divided in two. Juan Adolfo Acuña, another prisoner, said that he saw Amaya when he was dying. Amaya’s prison cell was trenched in water, thus forcing him to sleep partly submerged underwater. On 28 September 1976 Amaya was brought to the central prison hospital at Villa Devoto prison in a very grave state of health. He died of a heart attack there on 19 October 1976.
In 1981, other former prison inmates launched the process of investigating what had happened to Amaya at Rawson. Their endeavors were stopped with the passing of amnesty laws (“Leyes de Obediencia Debida y Punto Final”) but were taken up again once these laws were abolished. 