Hans Lipschis
15.04.2016
facts

Hans Lipschis was born as Antanas Lipsys in Kretinga, Lithuania on 7 November 1919. When the German army invaded Lithuania in 1941 he became a member of the Waffen-SS and started working in the Auschwitz-Birkena concentration camp. He served there from 23 October 1941 until the end of World War II. Lipschis claims that he worked there as a cook. However, records prove that he only held the position as cook from 1943 onwards. Apart from that he served as a prison guard. In October 1943 he was naturalized as an “ethnic German”. According to Auschwitz survivor Miso Vogel, Hans Lipschis shot and killed a child in the camp.
In 1956 Lipschis emigrated to Chicago, USA where he lived undiscovered and worked in a guitar factory. In 1983, US authorities discovered that he had concealed his connection to the Nazi regime and they revoked his US citizenship. Before being extradited he left the US voluntarily to return to Germany.
In April 2013 reporters at the German newspaper “Die Welt” tracked Lipschis down at his home in Aalen, Germany. During the ensuing interview he told them that he had served in Auschwitz, but only as a cook for the troops. Lipschis also alleged that he had spent the final months of WW II at the eastern front and had only heard about the atrocities committed in the Auschwitz concentration camp. He denied having been a witness to any of it during his time there.
In 2013 the Simon-Wiesenthal Center put Lipschis fourth on its most-wanted list. A German institution designated with dealing with crimes committed during the Nazi era (Zentrale Stelle der Landesjustizverwaltungen zur Aufklärung nationalsozialistischer Verbrechen) had been investigating the case of Lipschis since autumn 2012. After the interview with the reporters in April 2013, the prosecutor of Stuttgart, Germany, began investigations against Lipschis on 9,000 counts of accessory to murder.
He was eventually arrested for accessory to murder on 06 May 2013 in Aalen, Germany. 