Arrested with his wife, tortured and forcibly disappeared
12.02.2016
The Case 
In November 2007, TRIAL lodged an application before the United Nations Human Rights Committee on behalf of Kamel Rakik. The ACT acts as a representative for Mrs. Guezout and M. Abdelrahim and Bachir Rakik, respectively the mother and the brothers of the victim. Kamel Rakik was arrested on May, 6, 1996, in Ouled Moussa, and has been reported missing ever since. This disappearance occurred in the context of the massive enforced disappearances which took place in Algeria between 1992 and 1998.
Kamel Rakik was arrested at his home, around thirty kilometers outside of Algiers, by officers of the judiciary police of Algiers’ wilaya. The policemen burst in his house, using violence and threatening to kill his wife, who they later used as a human shield in order to get to him. Even though nobody in the house was armed, they opened fire on the people present injuring Kamel Rakik. He and his wife and sister-in-law were then taken away, separately.
The three of them were taken to the Chateauneuf police officers’ school, an infamous centre for torture and incommunicado detention, in order to be questioned. After five days of detention, both women – and four other members of their family arrested on the same day – were transferred to another cell where, to their surprise, they discovered Kamel Rakik. He told them that he had been tortured, then taken to a military hospital under a false name, before being tortured again.
Rakik’s wife and sister-in-law were released after 35 days of detention.
Following Rakik’s arrest, his father, Tahar Rakik, convinced that his son had died in the attack, went on to look for him in hospitals and mortuaries. He also turned to different police stations but nobody seemed to be aware of his son’s arrest.
As his daughter-in-law returned home, Tahar Rakik contacted the public prosecutor of the Boudouaou’s tribunal to notify him his son’s disappearance and request that he be placed under protection of the law. This first request was dismissed, as were all the numerous complaints, letters and requests that Tahar Rakik kept addressing him thereafter. The public prosecutor informed him, in June 1998, that his son had been arrested by members of the security services and taken to Algiers’ police station, but kept dismissing his complaints. The public prosecutor made it clear that he was not going to prosecute the police.
Kamel Rakik’s father wrote several letters to the relevant authorities, among whom the Minister of Justice, the Minister of the Interior and the Ombudsman. However, he never received any answer from any of these authorities.
Tahar Rakik died on February 5, 2003 without ever having received any information on the fate of his son who had been reported missing for seven years at that time.
In 2006, the security services suggested Kamel Rakik’s mother to take the appropriate administrative measures in order to obtain reparation, in accordance with the ‘national reconciliation’ ordinance adopted that same year. However, the process implies that an official certificate of death be established, something that Mme Guezout refused to do, and so she kept asking for the truth about her son to be made.
The authors of the communication ask the Committee to recognize that Kamel Rakik was a victim of enforced disappearance, a crime that infringes the most fundamental rights guaranteed in the International covenant on civil and political rights (ICCPR), and of several other violations, due, among other reasons, to the violence he was subjected to during his arrest, and to the torture he underwent while in detention. The complainants request that violations of articles 2 (3), 6 (1), 7, 9 (1), (2), (3) and (4), 10 (1) and 16 of the ICCPR be found as regards Kamel Rakik. They also request that violations of articles 2 (3) and 7 of the ICCPR be found as regards themselves for the psychological suffering they underwent during the many years of uncertainty as regards their son and brother’s fate. 