Paul Schaefer
21.04.2016
facts

Paul Schaefer, born in 1921 in Siegburg, near Bonn, Germany, was a corporal in Hitler’s army during the Second World War.
At the age of 30, he belonged to a religious sect and was responsible for working with children. Following parents’ claims that he was responsible for raping minors, he was expelled. He founded the Private Social Mission, a purportedly charitable organisation; day by day, he became increasingly dictatorial. After further claims from parents accusing him of rape, Schaefer decided to emigrate to Chile with several members of his sect.
The establishment of his mission in Chile was authorised on 21 September 1961; it was named “Dignity Charitable and Educational Society”, also known as the Bavaria Village. Schaefer bought 5000 hectares of land near Parral, 400km south of Santiago. Positioned behind high barbed wire fencing and solid concrete walls, he established dictatorial command over approximately five hundred German families. However, given that the Dignity Colony offered education and free healthcare to the local population, it was looked upon very well by the local people. Its influence was such that it was said to control even the local police.
Feeling threatened by Allende’s agricultural reform, the Colony welcomed the coup d’état with open arms and put its facilities at the disposal of the dictatorship. The United Nations Commission on Human Rights accused the Colony of having been a torture site. Several former prisoners alleged to having been threatened and tortured. According to a former lawyer of Amnesty International, the number of prisoners who had disappeared from the Colony could be estimated to be as high as 132.
A number of Germans who had managed to escape from the Colony accused Schaefer of abusing children. As a result, an arrest warrant was issued against him in Chile. In 1996, the accusations against him became more specific and he disappeared.
In March 2005, Schaefer was discovered by the police in Argentina; he was then extradited to Chile. 