Nikola Sainovic
08.05.2016
facts

Nikola Sainovic was born on 7 December 1948 in Bor in Serbia. He graduated from the University of Ljubljana in 1977 as a Chemical Engineer. He took up a political career as an active member of the League of Communists, joining afterwards the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS). On 28 November 1995, Nikola Sainovic was elected member of the Steering Committee of the SPS and member of its Executive Council. On 2 March 1996, he became one of the Vice-presidents of the SPS, remaining in this post until 24 April 1997.
Nikola Sainovic held several posts in various offices of the Serbian State and that of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY). He was appointed Vice-Prime Minister of Serbia in 1991, then in February 1993, became Prime Minister of Serbia. On 22 February 1994, Nikola Sainovic was appointed Vice-Prime Minister of the FRY, a position which he then held for many years. Slobodan Milosevic (see “related cases”) entrusted Nikola Sainovic with representing him in the affairs related to Kosovo. Nikola Sainovic presided over the Commission of Cooperation with the Mission for Verification of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Kosovo and was one of the official Serb delegates to the Rambouillet peace negotiations in February 1999.
The accusation alleged that, following the commencement of a joint criminal enterprise, beginning on or about 1 January 1999 and continuing until 20 June 1999, Nikola Sainovic, Slobodan Milosevic, Milan Milutinovic, Dragoljub Ojdanic, Vlajko Stojiljkovic (see “related cases”) and others planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted in a deliberate and widespread or systematic campaign of terror and violence directed at Kosovo Albanian civilians living in Kosovo in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY). Forces of the FRY and Serbia, in a deliberate and widespread or systematic manner, forcibly expelled and internally displaced hundreds of thousands of Kosovo Albanians from their homes across the entire province of Kosovo. It is further alleged that forces of the FRY and Serbia committed widespread or systematic acts of brutality and violence and destruction of property against Kosovo Albanian civilians in order to perpetuate a climate of fear, create chaos and a pervading fear for life.
According to the indictment, around 800’000 Albanian civilians from Kosovo were deported from the region. In addition, Serbian forces were also said to have specifically perpetrated massacres in places such as Dakovica, Velika Krusa, Padaliste, Izbica, Vucitrn, the prison compound in Dubrava.
In his position as Vice-Prime Minister of the FRY, Nikola Sainovic was a member of the Government of the FRY, which had responsibility, amongst other things, for defining both its interior and foreign affairs policies, for applying federal legislation, for directing and coordinating the activities of the federal ministries and for organising national defence preparations. In 1998, and during the entire period covered by the indictment, Nikola Sainovic was the representative of Slobodan Milosevic for Kosovo affairs. He was, as such, Chief of the Combined Command, and would have received a certain number of diplomats and other international dignitaries wishing to confer with an official State representative about the situation in Kosovo, and would have played an active part in the negotiations leading up to the creation of the Mission of Verification of the OSCE in Kosovo, as well as in numerous other meetings dedicated to the crisis in Kosovo. Finally, during the entire period covered by the indictment, Nikola Sainovic served as intermediary between Slobodan Milosevic and various Albanian leaders from Kosovo.
Nikola Sainovic was arrested and transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on 2 May 2003. 