Juan Daniel Rauzzino
17.03.2016
facts

Juan Daniel Rauzzino was born on 8 April 1935 in Santa Fe, Argentina and pursued a military career serving notably during the Falklands war. In 1975, Major in the army, he was nominated as the Chief of Police of the province of Catamarca.
In a context of the ”fight against subversives” Rauzzino, in cooperation with Alberto Carlos Lucena, then federal administrator of the same province and in command of the 17th infantry regiment, allegedly conducted numerous repressions during the military regime by means of formally legal measures. The policy was instead intended to establish an illegal parallel and secret state machinery aimed at the abduction, torture, theft, rape and murder of those opposing the military dictatorship.
Rauzzino and Lucena were accused of the alleged disappearances and deaths of Francisco Gregorio Ponce, Griselda del Huerto Ponce, Julio Genaro Burgos and Nelly Yolanda Borda. The facts reportedly took place between April 1976 and January 1977.On 6 April 1976, Francisco Gregorio Ponce, member of an association known as ‘Young Catholic and Unionist Workers’ (‘juventud obrera católica y gremialista’) , was stopped by a car and, threatened with a gun, obliged to get out of his van and enter his kidnappers’ car. Ponce was never seen again. Labelled as a ‘subversive criminal’, he was included on a list of detainees at the Police Headquarters’ D2 in the province of Tucuman, in a secret detention centre.
On 15 December 1976, Griselda del Huerto Ponce y Julio Genaro Burgos, both members of the Young Catholic and Unionist Workers in Catamarca, were illegally deprived of their liberty by a group of five or six people who, without showing any search or arrest warrant, entered their home and threatened them with firearms. Griselda del Hurto Ponce and Julio Genaro Burgos were forced into two cars. Griselda was last time seen in Catamarca – at the Police Department of Investigation of the province – and was then transferred to a secret detention centre in the Police Headquarters, in the Tucuman province. Julio Genaro Burgos was also transferred to the same detention centre in the Tucuman province. Both were included on the list of ‘subversive criminals’ of the Police Headquarters’ D-2 in the Tucuman province.
On 27 January 1977 hooded individuals entered the Borda’s family house. They forced Nelly Yolanda Borda into a car parked in front of the house and then left, along with other three vehicles in the area. Nelly Yolanda Borda – a student of biochemistry at the Tucuman National University and a member of the Workers’ Revolutionary Party – lived in San Miguel de Tucuman. She has never been seen since then.
Following a complaint filed by the CONADEP (National Commission on Enforced Disappearance) after the advent of democracy in Argentina, the Federal Court No. 3 of Córdoba opened criminal proceedings against Rauzzino. 