Charles Ble Goude
23.04.2016
facts

Charles Ble Goude was born on 1 January 1972 in Niagbrahio/Guiberoua (Gagnoa) in the western center from the Ivory Coast. He belonged to the Student and school confederation of Ivory Coast (FESCI) in 1990 before obtaining his baccalaureate one year later. He occupied various stations within this organization before succeeding Guillaume Soro in 1998 at the position of secretary general.
Between 1994 and 1999-, he was imprisoned eight times for the students’ trade-union fights.
In 2001, he created the Panafrican Congress of the young patriots (COJEP) which declared a fight against imperialism and neo colonialism.
Graduate of a prominent English license and of a master in management and prevention of the conflicts, he returned to his country after having suspended his studies at the beginning of the political crisis of September 2002. He gave his support for Laurent Gbagbo and founded the Alliance of the young patriots for the national start. Following the discussed presidential election of November 2010, Charles Blé Goudé is named Minister for youth, professional training and employment.
Ble Goude has made repeated public statements recommending violence against the installations and the personnel of the United Nations, and against the foreigners; directed and taken part in acts of violence made by militia of street, including ways in fact, rapes and extrajudicial executions, intimidation of the personnel of UNO, international Working Group (GTI), political opposition and independent press, sabotage of the international radio stations; obstacle with the action of the GTI, the Operation of the United Nations in Ivory Coast (ONUCI) and of the French forces and with the peace process as defined by the resolution 1633 (2005).
Since April 11, 2011, Ble Goude remained untraceable since the attack of the armed forces of Alassane Ouattara against the Presidential palace of Abidjan held by Laurent Gbagbo and his partisans, whereas U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon issued a statement notifying the incumbent president and his followers, including Blé Goudé, of possible prosecution for war crimes. 