Hjalmar Schacht
02.05.2016
facts

Hjalmar Schacht was born on 22 January 1887 in Tinglev, in Schleswig. He was the son of a rich Danish businessman and studied economics in Germany before joining the Dresdner Bank in 1903.
Appointed President of the Reichsbank in December 1923, he succeeded in stabilising the new Mark after the disastrous hyperinflation crisis of 1923, but handed in his resignation in 1930 to protest against the continuance of war reparation payments, as dictated by the Treaty of Versailles.
Despite having very little sympathy for the Nazis from the beginning, he admired their electoral success, made the acquaintance of Hitler and facilitated contacts for him with the financial community in 1932. He agreed to again become head of the Reichsbank in March 1933 and became Minister of the Economy from 1934 till 1937. However, he became at loggerheads with Goring, who was in charge of the Four Year Plan, demanded a reduction in the cost of armaments and thus became a suspect of the regime. He was obliged to resign from the presidency of the Reichsbank in January 1939. Nevertheless he continued to hold his position of Minister without Portfolio until January 1943. Having made contact with the plotters of the attempted “coup” of 20 July 1944, he was arrested and sent to Dachau prison camp.
He was freed by the Americans but rearrested immediately afterwards due to his former position as a minister to Hitler.
Hjalmar Schacht was accused of having used his various official functions, his personal influence and his contacts with the Führer to promote the accession to power of the Nazi conspirators and the consolidation of their power in Germany, in terms of the count of indictment No1. He was also accused of encouraging preparations for war also in terms of count of indictment No. 1.Furthermore he was accused of participating in political and military planning and preparations for waging wars of aggression by the Nazi conspirators according to the terms of counts No 1 and 2. 