Zijad Kurtovic
25.04.2016
facts

Zijad Kurtovic, known as “Zijo”, was born on 30 January 1967 in Donja Dreznica, a village in the district of Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
During an armed conflict between the Croatian Defence Council (HVO) and the army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Bas-Dreznica region of Mostar, Zijad Kurtovic was promoted to the rank of commander in the independent battalion of Dreznica military police of the 4th corps of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
During the second half of 1993, precisely during the month of October, several notable events took place. The exact dates, however, are unknown.
Firstly, towards the start of October 1993, Kurtovic and members of his battalion captured Croatian civilians and soldiers from the HVO in Bosnia. They detained them in the All Saints Roman Catholic church, in Svi Sveti, Donja Dreznica. During the evening of their captivity, the detainees were made to hold their hands on their head for a length of time which sparked a state of permanent fear among them. The detainees were interrogated in front of the church altar by Kurtovic and his men. They were forced to sing and play the organ and were punched repeatedly, beaten and bludgeoned with metal pipes and wooden stakes. They were then taken to the front between the HVO and the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina where they were used as human shields. They were made to dig trenches and carry out tasks such as transporting food, ammunition and the dead.
During this period, Kurtovic and Hasan Delic, a member of the same battalion, sexually abused two of the detainees, also from the HVO. Kurtovic and Delic then beat the detainees with clubs and used the neck of one of the men to put out their cigarette, causing the man to lose consciousness.
During the night, in October 1993, Kurtovic, along with unknown members of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, captured other Croatian civilians. The civilians were made to hold onto high-tension wire while standing in water. Electrocution, though apparently not a cause of death, led to serious after effects for the detainees.
Several witnesses stated that, on other occasions, Croatian civilians and prisoners of war from the HVO were severely beaten, most notably with crosses and religious statues. Unidentified members of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, along with Kurtovic, forced those they had captured to eat pages from the Bible and other religious books.
Also during October, Kurtovic, accompanied by Hasan Delic, Senad Bobic and Izet Kurtovic, all of whom were members of the Dreznica battalion, destroyed religious objects, burnt the pews and vandalised the All Saints Church with offensive graffiti.
At the end of May 2007, Zijad Kurtovic was indicted by the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 