José Osvaldo Riveiro
25.04.2016
facts


José Osvaldo Riveiro was lieutenant colonel in the Argentinian Army. In December 1974, he was member of the 601st Intelligence Battalion of the Army as an Officer of State Major. The 601st Intelligence Battalion depended on the Headquarters II of the Army Command. This Battalion conducted intelligence analysis, infiltrated guerrilla and human rights organisations, detained and made persons disappear – namely those suspected of being opponents of the military regime. In November 1976, Riveiro was responsible of the 144 Intelligence of the Army in Mendoza. In October 1979 he was also nominated chief of the Intelligence Detachment 181 of Bahia Blanca.
Riveiro took part in Operation Condor, which was a secret and concerted plan of anti-guerrilla fighting and assassinations of political opponents conducted in conjunction with the secret services of Chile, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay in the mid-1970s. The Latin American military dictatorships in power at that time – led by Pinochet in Santiago, Videla in Buenos Aires, Banzer in La Paz, Geisel in Brasília, Stroessner in Asunción and Bordaberry in Montevideo – sent secret agents to pursue and assassinate political dissidents in Europe and even in the United States (Phase 3 of the Operation Condor).
Various methods of terror were employed by the secret services, from drowning to the playing of sound recordings of cries of torture, and closers and close to “death flights” above the Rio of Plata. State terror aimed explicitly at “the leftist guerrillas terrorist” (Tupamaros in Uruguay, Revolutionary Left Movement (MIR) in Chile, Montoneros in Argentina, etc).
Starting with the military coup of 11 September 1973, the DINA (Chilean National Intelligence Agency) started to collaborate with foreign services, and in particular, with those of Argentina and Paraguay.
In May 1975, Jorge Fuentes, a member of the MIR (Revolutionary Left Movement), was arrested by the Paraguayan services, along with Amilcar Santucho, while the former was trying to go from Argentina to Paraguay, in order to contact local militants. The interrogation and the torture of the two militants was carried out in coordination with the Argentinian (represented in particular by Jose Osvaldo Riveiro from the 601st Intelligence Battalion) and Chilean services. On 1 November 1975, Jean Yves Claudet, one of the victims of Operation Condor was kidnapped by Jose Osvaldo Riveiro, who was then acting in cooperation with the liaison officer of the Chilean DINA, Enrique Arancibia Clavel.
In June 1976, a meeting was held at the highest level of the representatives of Condor with eleven deputies including Jose Osvaldo Riveiro. The secret services decided to go to “phase 3” of Condor: carry out the assassination operations outside the member countries, i.e. outside the subcontinent of South America. In June 1980, the last known activity of the Operation Condor took place with the kidnapping of Argentinian activists from Montoneros in Peru.
The day after the arrest of Augusto Pinochet on 16 October 1998 in London, and at the request of Spanish judge Baltasar Garzon, the families of Georges Klein, Etienne Pesle, Alfonso Chanfeau and Jean-Yves Claudet, four Franco-Chilean nationals who were detained and had disappeared during the Chilean dictatorship, registered complaints in France between October and November 1998. 