John Demjanjuk
20.04.2016
facts

John Demjanjuk was born on 3 April 1920 as Iwan Nikolajewitsch Demjanjuk in the village of Dubowije Macharinzjy in the province of Kiev, Ukraine.
He reportedly fought in the Soviet Army against Germany in 1940 until he was captured in May 1942 on the Crimea peninsula and from where he was transported as a prisoner of war into a German concentration camp.
Demjanjuk was accused of having voluntarily signed up to cooperate with the Germans as a so-called “collaborator”. He was allegedly trained to become a warden in the camp at Trawniki and thereafter worked in a number of concentration camps in Poland (Treblinka, Sobibor, Majdanek) and Germany (Flossenbürg). As an SS-member, he was said to have taken part in the deportation of over 2 million Jews from occupied Poland.
After the Second World War, Demjanjuk at first remained in Poland until 1952 when, together with this wife, they left for the USA. Upon arrival he stated to the immigration services that he had been a prisoner of war and changed his first name to John. On 14 November 1958, he became a US citizen. He lived in Indiana and later in Seven Hills (Cleveland, Ohio) where he worked as a mechanic with Ford and had two children.
In late 1970, a criminal investigation was opened against Demjanjuk after concentration camp survivors identified him as “Ivan the Terrible” (in Russian “Ivan Grozny”). According to them he was a warden in Treblinka concentration camp who had tortured inmates of that camp and had worked in the camp’s gas chambers in which more than 100.000 Jews were murdered. However, Demjanjuk was acquitted of this accusation in 1993 after a criminal trial in Israel.
In 1999, the American Ministry of Justice initiated anew an investigation against Demjanjuk to strip him of his US citizenship. He was no longer accused of having been “Ivan the Terrible” but to have worked as a warden in a number of concentration camps and to have been a member of the SS in Poland. In 2002, his US citizenship was withdrawn. In 2005, a US court ruled that he was eligible for extradition. However, as a result of lengthy appeal procedures, he was only deported to Germany on 11 May 2009.
Since his arrival in Germany on 12 May 2009 he has been in provisional custody there pending trial. 