Vlastimir Djordjevic
08.05.2016
facts

Army General Vlastimir Djordjevic was born in 1948 in Koznica in the municipality of Vladicin Han. He graduated in law from the University of Belgrade. From 1 June 1997, he was Deputy of the Serb Interior Ministry (MUP) and Head of Public Security (RJB), a position which he held initially on an interim basis. He held on to these positions as Deputy Minister and Head of the RJB until 30 January 2001.
The original indictment alleges that Vlastimir Djordjevic as well as Vladimir Lazarevic, Nebojsa Pavkovic and Sreten Lukic, planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted in preparing certain crimes. According to the indictment Djordjevic was part of a joint criminal enterprise which had the aim, in addition to other objectives, to expel a major part of the Kosovo Albanian civilians from the province in which they were living in order to maintain this province under Serb control. This joint criminal enterprise reportedly was already in existence by October 1998 and continued until 20 June 1999.
According to the indictment, armed forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) and of Serbia, in a deliberate and widespread or systematic manner, forcibly expelled and internally displaced hundreds of thousands of Kosovo Albanians from their homes across the entire province of Kosovo. In order to facilitate these expulsions and deportations, forces of the FRY and Serbia were said to have deliberately created a climate of fear and oppression by the use of force or by threatening to do so or by engaging in violent acts. Throughout Kosovo, according to the indictment, FRY and Serbian forces were alleged to have undertaken a widespread or systematic campaign of destruction of property belonging to Kosovo Albanian civilians. These coordinated actions made the towns, villages and entire regions uninhabitable for the Kosovo Albanians. Numerous Kosovo Albanians who had not been directly expelled by force from their community were said to have fled due to the climate of terror which had been created in the region by the widespread and systematic campaign of physical aggression, harassment, sexual violence, illegal arrest, murder, bombing and pillaging.
As Deputy Interior Minister and Head of Public Security on 1st June 1997, Vlastimir Djordjevic should have seen to it that all of the subordinate public officials and units of the RJB in Serbia (including in Kosovo) should act in conformity with the decisions taken by the other members of the joint criminal enterprise and with the laws and regulations of the Federation and the Republic. Such subordinates included, but were not limited to, members of the Interior Ministry of Serbia, units of the Territorial Army, Civil Defence units and other army groups.
Djordjevic was arrested in Montenegro on 17 June 2007 and transferred to The Hague. 