John Jodka
15.04.2016
facts

John J. Jodka was born in April 1986. He is from Encinitas, California, United States of America. He graduated from San Dieguito Academy in 2004 and joined the United States of America Marine Corps in May 2005.
In early 2006, Jodka was deployed to Iraq and was part of the 3rd Battalion, 5th Regiment’s Kilo Company.
On 26 April 2006, Jokda, together with seven other members of the 3rd Battalion, 5th Regiment’s Kilo Company went on patrol for a suspected insurgent in Hamdania, a city west of Baghdad, Iraq. The other US marines were Sergeant Lawrence G. Hutchins, Marine Corporal Trent D. Thomas, Lance Corporal Tyler A. Jackson, Lance Corporal Jerry E. Shumate Jr., Lance Corporal Robert B. Pennington, Corporal Marshall L. Magincalda and Navy Hospital Corpsman 3rd Class Melson J. Bacos. It was alleged that after the US marines were unable to locate the suspected insurgent, they entered a house neighbouring the suspected insurgent and abducted Iraqi civilian, Hashim Ibrahim Awad. It was alleged that the US marines then took Awad to a roadside hole, forced him to the ground, bound his hands and feet and then shot and killed him. The US marines then allegedly placed an AK-47 assault rifle and a shovel near Awad’s body. It was alleged that the US marines did this in an attempt to demonstrate that Awad was an insurgent and that he had been planting a roadside bomb.
On 1 May 2006, Iraqis from Hamdania brought the death of Awad to the attention of the US marine leadership in Iraq. On 24 May 2006, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service was requested by the US marine leadership in Iraq to proceed with a criminal investigation into the events that took place in Hamdania on 26 April 2006.
On 21 June 2006, Jodka was charged with murder, kidnapping, conspiracy to obstruct justice, larceny and providing false official statements in connection with the events that took place on 26 April 2006. He was alleged to have fired his M-249 automatic machine gun at Awad and later providing false information to investigators about the incident. Jodka was charged together with the seven other members of the 3rd Battalion, 5th Regiment’s Kilo Company. 