Luis Emilio Sosa
21.04.2016
facts

Luis Emilio Sosa was born on 18 January 1935.
On 15 August 1972, during the dictatorship of General Alejandro Agustin Lanusse in Argentina, 25 political prisoners from extreme left wing organizations who had taken up arms against the military regime, managed to escape from Rawson prison in the Chubut province of Patagonia in Argentina. Six of them were successful in boarding a plane and fleeing to Chile; the remaining 19 being surrounded and held at the airport. Marine Commander Luis Emilio Sosa reportedly agreed to take them back safe and sound to Rawson prison, with guarantees for their physical safety, on condition that they gave up their arms.
The prisoners surrendered, but contrary to the promise given by Sosa, they were taken to the Almirante Zar Naval base in Trelew. At 3 a.m. on 22 August 1972, Captains Luis Emilio Sosa, Rúben Paccagnini and Raúl Herrera, together with Lieutenants Emilio Del Real and Carlos Bravo, allegedly ordered Corporal Carlos Marandino to open the doors of the prison cells, to awaken the prisoners, order them out of their cells and line them up in double file in the corridor. The five marine officers then fired on them at point blank range. Three prisoners survived the shooting, and sixteen of them died as a result, several of them from a bullet in the back of the neck to finish them off.
According to the version of the events from the marines, and that of the Dictator Lanusse, one of the prisoners had tried to get hold of a weapon and to escape.
This incident is considered to be the first illegal act of State terrorism which was to be carried out as a systematic method of repression against armed political opponent organizations in Argentina.
After the massacre, Sosa was promoted and allegedly, to keep him away from the possible repercussions resulting from the massacre, was sent on mission to the Argentinean Naval Attaché in Washington. He went into retirement on 1 April 1981. For a further twenty years his place of residence was kept secret by the marines.
In February 2006, the family of Maria Angellica Sabelli, one of the victims filed a complaint against the marines with the Federal Tribunal in Rawson and this was soon to be followed by other families of the victims. 