Saloth Sar
28.11.2011
facts

Saloth Sar, aka Pol Pot, was born on 19 May 1925 in Prek Sbauv, in the Cambodian province of Kampong Thom. His parents were prosperous Sino-Khmer farmers with ties to the royal family of Cambodia. After attending a Catholic high-school in Phnom Penh, Saloth Sar gained a government scholarship to study radio electronics in Paris where he lived from 1949 to 1953.
On arriving in France, he joined the French communist party and studied Marxist ideology.
On losing his scholarship financing in 1953 he returned to Cambodia where he became a French teacher in Phnom Penh.
When the monarchy was restored in 1954 after the French departure from the country, Saloth Sar went into opposition to the new government and joined the communist party. In 1962 he was chosen as General Secretary of the party. The following year he left Phnom Penh to go underground and started training the first Khmer Rouge with the help and support of China.
In 1970, a civil war broke out in Cambodia following the coup d’état of Lon Nol. As a consequence, King Norodom Sihanouk and his supporters then joined up with the Khmer Rouge. Together they formed a united front in opposition to the new government. Due to the incompetence and corruption of the new regime, the popularity of the Khmer Rouge rose with the result that they came out of their clandestine operations to wage war openly against it.
On 17 April 1975, Phnom Penh fell into the hands of the Khmer Rouge. Saloth Sar then assumed the name of “Brother Number One” or Pol Pot, a designation assigned to him by the Chinese authorities which stands for “Politique potentielle”(or someone with political potential). From this point, 1975 was designated Year Zero by the Khmer Rouge.
Immediately on taking power, the Khmer Rouge subjected the country to a dictatorship and instituted a totalitarian regime which had, as one of its first actions, the elimination of all those individuals with ties to the former government. The new government also forced people out of the cities to the countryside to work in the fields in order to feed the population. In particular the regime cracked down on the urban population and intellectuals.
In 1976, Cambodia became the Democratic Kampuchea and Pol Pot was appointed Prime Minister. The following year, after surviving three assassination attempts, he increasingly took steps to eliminate opponents within his own party. He also had anti-personnel mines planted all along the border. Furthermore, he made a list of three categories of individuals to suppress:
– all those Vietnamese living in Cambodia
– all those Khymers speaking Vietnamese
– all Khmers with ties or interests with the Vietnamese.
Other people targeted were those who had received a formal education or those who demonstrated practise of their religious beliefs.
Pol Pot was said to have ordered five purges throughout the country: two in 1976, two in 1977 and one in 1978. Overall, more than 1.5 million people are estimated to have died under the Khmer Rouge regime resulting from direct execution or torture, from excessive forced labour, or as a result of non-treatment of diseases or from famine.
In 1979, the Khmer Rouge regime was overthrown and Pol Pot went into hiding. He was indicted in absentia by a People’s Revolutionary Tribunal.
In 1985, Pol Pot officially resigned as Commander-in-Chief of the Khmer Rouge, but nevertheless retained a supervisory role. In 1993, with the return to power of King Sihanouk, Pol Pot took up opposition to the government. Three years later, the remainder of the Khmer Rouge group split up with a section defecting to the side of the government.
In June 1997 Pol Pot ordered the execution of Song Sen, a former friend and defence minister, since he was suspected of collaboration with the government. Song Sen’s wife and children were also executed. Following this, Pol Pot was arrested for treason and tried by a People’s Tribunal who sentenced him on 25 July 1997, to house arrest for life.
Pol Pot died on 15 April 1998, at the age of 73, having just learned that Ta Mok, former “Brother Number Five” who had defected to the new government, was about to turn him over to the Cambodian government. 