Carlos Castaño Gil
21.04.2016
facts

Carlos Castaño Gil was born on 15 May 1965 in Amalfi, Colombia. He was brought up alongside his eleven siblings on a dairy farm in the department of Antioquia. As a teenager, Castaño joined Pablo Escobar’s assassins’ organisation, which would murder people when commissioned by a third party. During the 1980s, Castaño’s family started the paramilitary movement in Colombia. His father, Jesús Antonio Castaño Gonzáles was kidnapped by the FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia) and died in captivity in 1989. This incident unleashed a fury in the Castaño siblings and, guided by their brother Fidel, in response they decided to create the Peasants Self-Defense Forces of Córdoba and Urabá (ACCU). The ACCU’s objective was to eradicate guerrilla groups, particularly the FARC, the National Liberation Army (ELN) and M-19, the 19th April Movement.
Initially Carlos Castaño’s mission was to strengthen the ACCU in the city of Medellín. By doing this, it coordinated groups of hired killers that would assassinate, according to Verdad Abierta, “guerrilla fighters, trade unionists, judges, public prosecutors, teachers, human rights activists and politicians”. For example, in 1990, the ACCU murdered Bernardo Jaramillo, the presidential candidate for the left-wing Patriotic Union (UP) political party.
In 1992, in alliance with groups of drug traffickers that were enemies of Pablo Escobar, the Castaño family created “Pepes”. Standing for “people persecuted by Pablo Escobar”, members were people who were being hunted by Escobar. This fight against Pablo Escobar brought the group to collaborate with the Columbian justice department and to create what was called the “Bloque de Búsqueda”, the Search Bloc. As a result of the collaboration with Colombian authorities, the ACCU formed part of the CONVIVIR project. This project, which was sponsored by the central government and supported by 27 departments, aimed to legalise the counter-insurgents’ fight against guerrilla movements.
In 1994 Fidel Castaño disappeared with different versions of how he disappeared in circulation. Some say he died in combat, some say his brother murdered him or that members of the Popular Liberation Army (EPL) killed him. Additionally there are rumours that he was in hiding abroad. With him gone, though, it was Carlos Castaño that was to take the reins of the ACCU.
The CONVIVIR project was closed down in 1996 by then president Ernesto Samper Pizano. With this closure, he ordered the demobilisation of paramilitary groups though many groups refused.
In 1997 Carlos Castaño and his brother, Vicente, brought together different paramilitary groups under one leadership and so the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) was born. The year 1997 was characterised by the strong military offensive that the AUC launched, including the Mapiripán and El Aro massacres, responsibility for which was attributed to the AUC.
The Mapiripán massacre (in the department of Meta) was carried out between the 15 and 20 July 1997. During the massacre, the AUC tortured people as well as dismembering and gutting dead bodies. A total of 49 peasants were murdered. Many of their bodies were thrown in the Guaviare River to make them disappear. On 21 July 1997, members of the Red Cross evacuated inhabitants of Mapiripán from the area and out to the cities of Villavicencio and San José del Guaviare. Once the massacre had ended, members of the AUC remained in the region and took control of coca farms. Their staying in the area caused continual clashes between guerrilla groups and the country’s armed forces. As a result of the armed clashes, thousands of people were displaced to outside of the region.
According to the judicial report, the El Aro massacre (in the municipality of Ituango, Antioquia department) was planned days before in a farm near to a place known as “La Caucana”, in the small town of Tarazá, in Bajo Cauca in Antioquia. According to witnesses, Carlos Castaño, Salvatore Mancuso and members of Colombia’s armed forces participated at this meeting. The massacre was carried out between 22 and 28 October 1997 and killed 15 peasants. Additionally, various people were stripped of their belongings and displaced from the land. Colombian authorities arrived only once the massacre had ended.
According to Human Rights Watch NGO, in 1997 Castaño was responsible for a total of 22 massacres. Moreover, responsibility for the following murders was attributed to him: Jaime Garzón (13 August 1999), Carlos Pizarro (26 Abril 1990), and Jaime Pardo Leal (12 October 1987), as well as the murders of hundreds of peasants and public prosecutors and judges investigating him.
In 2002, Castaño began negotiations with the government to demobilise the AUC. In July 2003, the AUC announced its demobilisation in the Colombian media and in April 2004 Castaño disappeared. On 23 August 2006, the attorney general’s office reported that AUC informants had indicated that Castaño had been murdered by members of the AUC in 2004. The AUC confirmed his death on 4 September 2006 after the Technical Investigation Corps (CTI) completed morphological and DNA tests.
The AUC is accused of more than 1000 massacres, thousands of selective murders and attacks on the civil population. They are accused of having connections to drug trafficking which funded their criminal activities. The AUC was also financed by landowners, businessmen and national and multinational businesses.
On 22 April 2002, the Anitoquia Circuit Criminal Court No. 2, sentenced Castaño, in abstentia, to 40 years in prison for aggravated murder, forced displacement and aggravated theft at the El Aro Massacre. At the same trial, Salvatore Mancuso was sentenced to 40 years and Francisco Enrique Villalba was sentenced to 33 years imprisonment. 