Mathias Bushishi
23.04.2016
facts

Mathias Bushishi was born in 1940 in Nyamagabe in the prefecture of Butare and is now 71 years old. He was allegedly involved in the Rwandan Genocide which saw roughly 800,000 deaths in 100 days, mostly members of the Tutsi minority. This Hutu prosecutor is accused of on the 31st March 1994 in Butare, participating in a small security council meeting which planned to massacre and exterminate Tutsis in his jurisdiction. The massacres in this prefecture which is in the south of Rwanda started after those in the rest of the country. Nearly a quarter of the total Rwandan Tutsi population resided in Butare and in some municipalities the percentage of Tutsi residents reached 40%. In addition Butare was the only region to be led by a Tutsi, Jean Baptiste Habyarimana. Once the plan was passed the killings were particularly numerous.
On the 19th April 1994, M. Sindikubwabo, president of the interim government and prime minister Jean Kambanda both originating from this province attended the inauguration of the new prefect; Sylvain Nsabimana. After the president’s speech the taking over of the Tutsis and the killings began.
Between April 8 and July 14, 1994, in several prefectures, such as Butare, Kibuye, Kigali, Gitarama and Gisenyi, ministers, prefects, mayors, state officials and the military gave the order to commit, encouraged, helped to commit and committed massacres against Tutsis and moderate Hutus.
Mathias Bushishi would have had a coordinating role in Butare. He would particularly have been involved in the stadium killings and killing in 3 villages. On April 25 1994, cars topped with loudspeakers travelled around Butare announcing that the Red Cross had moved to a nearby stadium to provide food and shelter for the population. Thousands of Tutsis went there but it was a trap. Instead of finding food and shelter, the refugees were surrounded and massacred by the Interahamwe (extremist Hutu militia).
When the massacre ended in July 1994, the death toll was at 220,000. The killings began late, but, paradoxically, there were more victims in Butare than in any other region in the country.
Mathias Bushishi was wanted by Interpol (most wanted) since 2009 for his alleged involvement in the Rwandan genocide. The former judge was arrested April 18, 2011 in Brussels. 