Cristino Nicolaides
12.04.2016
facts 

Cristino Nicolaides was born on 2 January 1925. After training as an engineer, he served as captain in the Argentinean Army. In 1970 he was appointed to the post of director of the Argentinean Military School. At the beginning of the Argentinean military dictatorship he was commander of the 7th Infantry Brigade and chief of the « Batallón de Inteligencia 601 » and of the Military Institute « Campo de Mayo ».
On 18 June 1982 he was appointed Chief of the Army and was a member of the military junta until the end of the dictatorship in October 1983. During the time of the military dictatorship (1976-1983) members of the opposition and people critical of the junta were systematically persecuted and murdered. Officially 13.000 cases of murder and disappearances have been registered while human rights organizations believe the total number of victims is more than 30.000.
Women in detention who gave birth during their time in a detention camp had their children abducted by members of the junta and given to families of the military. While officially there are about 90 such cases which have been successfully investigated human rights organizations count more than 500 such child abductions. Nicolaides was said to have known of these child abductions and to have tolerated them. Additionally, towards the end of the dictatorship, he was said to have ordered the burning of the archives which documented these abductions.
Nicolaides was alleged to have been responsible for the kidnapping, torture and the disappearance of six members of the leftist organization Montoneros at the beginning of the 1980s. Furthermore, Nicolaides was suspected of being involved in the disappearance of five political prisoners in the north-eastern province of Corrientes.
Nicolaides was alleged also to have ordered the massacre of Margarita Belén. On 13 December 1976, on a national highway near the city of Margarita Belén, 22 political detainees were tortured, raped and finally murdered by the military.
Nicolaides was arrested in January 1999, together with other members of the military, on charges of child abduction. 