Michael Vernon Townley Welsch
27.04.2016
facts

Michael Vernon Townley Welsch was born in Waterloo, Iowa, in 1942. His father worked at Ford Motor Company and was named head of the company in Chile, so he moved with his family to Santiago. In 1961 Townley married Mariana Callejas, who worked as an informer for the National Intelligence Directorate DINA they had two children. Townley worked as a CIA agent and joined the DINA in 1974, under the leadership of these organizations he allegedly participated in the murder of Orlando Letelier, Ronni Moffit, Carlos Pratts and Carmelo Soria.
Orlando Letelier and Ronni Moffit Case. Orlando Letelier was Minister of Foreign Affairs, Interior and Defense during the Allende government. After the 1973 coup was arrested and imprisoned in a concentration camp for a year, when he was released went into exile with his family in the United States. On 21 September 1976, in the morning, Orlando Letelier was in Washington D.C. he was driving his car to work at the Institute for Policy Studies, along with his assistant Ronni Moffitt and her husband, when a bomb activated by remote control, that was installed under his car exploded. As a result Letelier and Ronni Moffitt died, Michael Moffitt survived.
Carlos Prats Case. Carlos Prats was commander of the army, Minister of the Interior and Minister of Defense during the Allende government. After the military coup promoted by Pinochet, Prats fled the country and took refuge in Argentina. On 28 September 1974, Townley entered the garage in Prats’ home and set an explosive device under of his car. On September 30, Carlos Prats and his wife Sofia Cuthbert returned to their home in Buenos Aires, Townley set off the bomb with a remote – control. As a result Carlos Prats and Sofia Cuthber died.
Carmelo Soria case. On 14 July 1976, in the night, while Soria Espinoza was driving his car to his home in Santiago de Chile, he was intercepted by two members of the DINA, who transported him to the house of the American citizen Michael Vernon Townley, this house locate in Lo Curro functioned as clandestine center of interrogation and torture. There Soria was tortured allegedly by the three agents while they interrogated if he had any relationship with the Communist Party of Chile and his political activities in the country. According to a Dina agent’s testimony, after torturing Soria they assassinated him, injected alcohol to his body and threw his body and his vehicle to a stream simulating an automobile accident.
Those killings took place within the process of systematic repression of opponents of the military regime promoted by the Chilean dictatorship.
In 1978, Chile agreed to extradite Townley to the United States for the assassinations of Orlando Letelier and his assistant Ronni Mofitt, and the case was excluded from the terms of 1978 amnesty law. Townley confessed to the U.S. Justice that he had hired five Cuban exiles, opponents of the Castro regime, to place the bomb under Letelier’s car. 