Mico Stanisic
28.04.2016
facts

Mićo Stanišić was born on 30 June 1954, in the village of Ponor, in the municipality of Pale, Bosnia and Herzegovina. He graduated from law school in Sarajevo. From 21 December 1991, Mićo Stanišić was Minister without portfolio of the Council of Ministers which was named by the Assembly of the Serbian People of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the nineties, given the difficulty to maintain the unity of Yugoslavia, certain regions in Bosnia Herzegovina began to organise themselves into regional structures based on the concept of Associations of Municipalities such as existed under the 1974 Yugoslavian constitution. The Municipality Association of Bosanka and Krajina, based in Banja Luka, was created in April and May 1991. This Association adopted a Serbian political programme.
On 25 June 1991, Slovenia and Croatia declared their independence from Yugoslavia. In Croatia, fighting broke out during the summer of 1991 between the Yugoslav Popular Army (JNA) and the Croatian Armed Forces. With the war dragging on in Croatia, it became likely that Bosnia Herzegovina would also declare its independence from the Federal Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia (FSRY). The Serbian Democratic Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina (SDS), realising that it could not keep Bosnia Herzegovina within the FSRY, undertook the creation of a separate Serb entity within Bosnia Herzegovina. In September and October 1991, the Associations of Municipalities mentioned above were transformed into autonomous Serb districts. The Municipality Association of Bosanka Krajina was transformed into the Autonomous Region of Krajina (ARK)
On 9 January 1992, the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was proclaimed and re-baptised as the Republika Srpska on 12 August 1992. The leaders of the SDS felt that the large Muslim and Croatian population, which were living in the zones they had claimed as part of the Serb Republic of Bosnia, presented a major obstacle to the creation of their State. The creation of this State and the protection of its boundaries therefore eventually implied the complete evacuation, or “ethnic cleansing”, of practically the whole Bosnian Muslim and Croatian population.
A strategic plan was adopted and set going under the impetus of Radovan Karadzic. Crises groups were formed to act as organs of coordination and execution of the main elements of the operational phase of the plan and to take over the administration of the regions and the municipalities. The ARK Crisis Staff was set up on 5 May 1992 with Radoslav Brdjanin as its President.
From 1 April 1992, Mićo Stanišić was Minister of the newly established Serb Ministry of Internal Affairs in Bosnia and Herzegovina (“Republika Srpska MUP”). As Minister of the Republika Srpska MUP, Mićo Stanišić was the highest authority in the MUP and his official responsibilities included public and state security. In his capacity as Minister of the Republika Srpska MUP, Mićo Stanišić had overall authority and responsibility for the functioning of the police forces within Republika Srpska. All commanders of the Security Services Centres were directly subordinated to him. He had authority to appoint and dismiss the heads of police units from duty. He exercised command and control over the police forces in coordination with the Army of Republika Srpska, paramilitary forces and volunteer units, the Territorial Defence, as well as other civilian bodies. All subordinates were under the obligation to carry out all the orders given by the Minister of the Republika Srpska MUP or other superior officers.
According to the press advisory of the ICTY of 14 September 2009, the indictment accuses Mićo Stanišić of having participated as co-perpetrator in a joint criminal enterprise, whose objective was to permanently remove and ethnically cleanse, by force or other means, Bosnian Muslims, Bosnian Croats and other non-Serbs from the territory of the planned Serbian state.
He is alleged to have had effective control over the Serb forces which were involved in implementing the plan, including among others, members of the Republika Srpska MUP, Army of Republika Srpska (VRS), Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA), Yugoslav Army (VJ) and Territorial Defence (TO).
The indictment mentions detention facilities established by Serb Forces of Bosnia, including Omarka, Keraterm and Trnopolje camps, where captives were beaten, tortured, sexually and psychologically abused, humiliated and harassed. Women were raped and many captives died as a consequence of the mistreatment or were killed.
According to the Prosecution, owing to his position of superior authority over the Serb forces, Mićo Stanišić would have not only been aware of the crimes committed by his subordinated but also would have encouraged and facilitated the commission of these by failing to take necessary measure to prevent such acts and punish the perpetrators.
Following the publication of the indictment on 10 March 2005, Mićo Stanišić surrendered to the ICTY on 11 March 2005. 