Mohammad al-Shimi
25.04.2016
facts

Mohammed al-Shimi, an Egyptian national, previously held the rank of Major in the former Egyptian State Security Investigations Service (SSI), Ministry of Interior. Al-Shimi was one of five SSI officers involved in the torture and murder of Sayed Bilal. Bilal, a Salafist, was accused of involvement in a church bombing.
Immediately following a New Year’s Eve mass on 31 December 2010, just weeks after the Arab Spring began in Tunisia and just weeks before the Egyptian Revolution of 2011 began, a bomb went off outside a Coptic Christian church in Alexandria killing 23 worshippers and wounding nearly 100 more. Soon after, police began rounding up Salafists as they protested against the church for allegedly detaining a woman who converted to Islam.
Among those arrested for questioning about the bombing was 31-year old Sayed Bilal, taken from his home at dawn on 5 January 2011. Bilal’s body was returned to his family a day later, signs of torture evident. Bilal was reportedly beaten in the streets in full view of witnesses. Police refused to take responsibility for his death, saying instead that he had died of asphyxia. The forensic report indicated numerous injuries, but that Bilal died specifically of a brain bleed resulting from a head injury.
Shortly after the ouster of Hosni Mubarak and as the Egyptian Revolution intensified, the offices of the Ministry of Interior’s State Security Investigations Service (SSI) were looted by protesters. One of the many documents seized purported to show the SSI’s involvement in the deadly church bombing. According to one of eight documents said to discuss attacks on churches, the SSI used a jailed Islamist to help organize the plot. The document was dated 2 December 2010 and addressed to the interior minister. Other seized files supported the SSI’s reputation for torture. In one file later posted on Facebook, an SSI official wrote that detainees’ questionings often had to be delayed until injuries suffered during questioning had healed.
Following Bilal’s death, his family complained that they were harassed and intimidated by SSI officers when attempting to determine the circumstances surrounding his death. Bilal’s family eventually filed a lawsuit against the SSI accusing their officers of being responsible for Bilal’s death.
Mohammed al-Shimi and four other SSI officers (Hossam al-Shenawy, Osama al-Kunaysi, Ahmed Mustafa Kamal, and Mohamed Abdel Aleem) were ordered by an Alexandria judge on 26 October 2011 to stand trial for the torture and murder of Sayed Bilal. 