Osama Bin Laden
23.04.2016
facts

Osama Bin Laden was born on 10 March 1957 in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, the son of a wealthy businessman who had close ties with the Saudi royal family. From 1968 to 1976, Bin Laden attended a secular school, Al-Thager Model School in Jeddah, although he was raised a strict Wahhabi Muslim. It is said that at around the age of 14, he experienced a kind of religious awakening and that his views further hardened at King Abdul Aziz University in Jeddah, where he studied Economics and Public Administration until 1979. In the course of his life, Bin Laden married six women and fathered between 20 and 26 children.
Bin Laden went to Afghanistan following the Soviet invasion in 1979, where he assisted the Mujahideen, who reportedly received financial aid, arms and training from the United States (US) and were considered freedom fighters against communist repression. In Afghanistan, Bin Laden worked closely with Abdullah Azzam who had taught at King Abdul Aziz University. In 1984, Bin Laden and Azzam formed Maktab al-Khadamat, an organisation which funnelled money, arms and Muslim fighters from around the world into Afghanistan and which set up training camps in both Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Bin Laden split from Azzam and Maktab al-Khadamat in or around 1988 and formed a new organisation named Al Qaeda (“the Base”), which was intended to wage jihad outside Afghanistan. Following Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan in 1989, Bin Laden returned to Saudi Arabia and was hailed as a hero who had brought down a mighty superpower.
In 1990, Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait, as a result of which the US deployed troops to Saudi Arabia. Bin Laden vehemently opposed and publicly denounced Saudi Arabia’s dependence on the US military. As a result, he was expelled from Saudi Arabia, was disowned by his family and lost their financial backing, and his Saudi citizenship was subsequently revoked in 1994.
Bin Laden went to live in exile in Sudan. Following considerable international pressure on Sudan to expel Bin Laden, in May 1996 he returned to Afghanistan.
According to the June 1998 indictment issued by the US District Court of the Southern District of New York, Bin Laden’s Al Qaeda forged close links with other Islamic groups in Sudan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Somalia. Bin Laden also allegedly joined forces with representatives of the government of Iran and Hezbollah in their fight against common enemies in the West, most notably the US. Al Qaeda was further accused of reaching an understanding with the Iraqi government that it would work with that government on particular projects, including weapons development.
It is believed that Al Qaeda-trained fighters were involved in a number of attacks in the early 1990s, including the 1992 bombing of the Gold Mihor Hotel in Aden, Yemen, the 1993 World Trade Centre bombing and the 1997 Luxor massacre. Bin Laden allegedly provided training camps for use by Al Qaeda and its associated groups, recruited US citizens to facilitate Al Qaeda’s aims, purchased weapons and explosives and issued fatwas calling for jihad against America.
In February 1998, an Arabic newspaper in London printed the text of a fatwa issued by Bin Laden jointly with Ayman al-Zawahiri, a founder of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad and referred to as Bin Laden’s right-hand man. The fatwa, entitled “World Islamic Front Against Jews and Crusaders”, ordered Muslims to kill American civilians anywhere in the world.
On 7 August 1998, more than 200 people were killed and more than 4,500 injured in simultaneous car bomb explosions at the American embassies in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania and Nairobi, Kenya. Al Qaeda operatives were allegedly behind the attacks. Bin Laden, as a result, was placed on the FBI’s 10 Most Wanted list.
It is also alleged that Bin Laden was behind, and financed, the attempted sinking of the US destroyer USS The Sullivans in Yemen and the subsequent successful bombing of USS Cole off the coast of Yemen, which killed 17 sailors and injured 39 others, and in relation to which Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri was charged (see “related case”).
On the morning of 11 September 2001, two hijacked commercial passenger jets were intentionally crashed into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Centre in New York. A third plane was crashed into The Pentagon and a fourth, which had been directed towards Washington DC with the White House or the United States Capitol as its possible target, crashed in a field in Pennsylvania after crew members and passengers attempted to recover control of the aircraft. More than 2,600 people were killed at the World Trade Centre, 125 at the Pentagon and 256 on the four planes. The 19 hijackers also died in the attacks.
Bin Laden, as head of Al Qaeda, was suspected of being the architect of the 9/11 attacks, and US government officials offered a reward of US$25 million for information leading to his capture or death. Bin Laden initially denied any involvement but in 2004, he claimed responsibility for the attacks in a video-taped address.
In response to the 9/11 attacks, the US launched a War on Terror against Al Qaeda and the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, which had allegedly been protecting Bin Laden. Whilst the initial attack on Afghanistan removed the Taliban from power, Bin Laden was not found and continued to elude capture for almost 10 years. During this time, several terrorist attacks or attempts were attributed to Al Qaeda, including the 7 July 2005 London bombings, in which three bombs were detonated on the London Underground and one on a double decker bus. 56 people died (including 4 terrorists) and around 700 were injured. Al Qaeda (through Ayman al-Zawahiri) claimed responsibility for the attacks.
On 2 May 2011, Bin Laden was fatally shot by US Navy Seals inside a fortified compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan during a raid authorised by US President Barack Obama. The exact circumstances of his death are unknown but US officials reported that Bin Laden was shot after resisting, although he was unarmed. He was buried at sea following a Muslim funeral on board an aircraft carrier. 