Mohammed Abdel Radi
15.04.2016
facts

Mohammed Abdel Radi is a leading senior member of the Freedom and Justice Party (FJP), which is the most popular Islamist political party in Egypt. The FJP is independent but has close links to the Muslim Brotherhood of Egypt, the largest political group in Egypt supported by President Mohammed Morsi.
Abdel Radi together with Mustafa Al-Khouli, the administrative head of the Muslim Brotherhood’s office in Shubra, is suspected of involvement in the alleged torture of three Egyptian students during the November 2012 clashes between supporters and opponents of President Morsi. These clashes took place in Damanhour in the North of Egypt and were part of a wave of protests and violence set off by President Morsi’s decree to temporarily expand his powers and give immunity from courts to an Islamist-dominated panel that drafted and hurriedly adopted a new constitution.
On 24 November 2012, Abdel Radi and Mustafa Al-Khouli allegdly kidnapped three Egyptian students- Mahmoud Ali Sahin (17), Mohammed Mansour Morsi (18) and Mustafa Faraj Saqr (21) and detained them for up to five hours in the the Damanhour headquarters of the JFP. While in separate detention, the three men were supposedly beaten by sticks and when released, they allegdly had their clothes ripped and bruises and marks on their bodies.
Mohamed Soudan, an FJP spokesperson, denied the allegations against Abdel Radi and Mustafa Al-Khouli. The spokesperson claims the Damanhour headquarters was attacked on 24 November 2012 by members of the Revolutionary Socialist and Al-Dostour Party, who injured several Muslim Brotherhood and FJP members, who were defending the offices. Later on, according to him, three attackers went to the police station and filed a report accusing Abdel Radi and Mustafa Al-Khouli of torture.
In April 2012, the three alleged victims and their supporters protested for two days outside the city’s Prosecution office against what they perceived as stalling the referral of the case to trial. 