Josef Scheungraber
20.04.2016
facts

Josef Scheungraber was born in 1918 in Germany. He was trained as an engineer.
In 1937, Scheungraber voluntarily joined the mountain infantry in Mittenwald and fought in Poland, France and Russia. After recovering from a severe battlefield injury, Scheungraber requested a transfer to Italy to become company commander of the mountain infantry battalion 818, whose task it was either to rebuild destroyed bridges for the advancing German army or to blow up bridges to hinder the approach of the enemy.
After an attack by Italian partisans killed two sappers, company commander Scheungraber and his superior commander allegedly ordered the retaliatory act.
According to the indictment, Scheungraber then ordered his soldiers to search through the area, to gather anyone suspected of participating in the attack so that they might be killed and to immediately shoot any person resisting arrest.
This retaliatory act allegedly took place on 27 June 1944 in the Italian village Falzano di Cortona, between Arezzo and Perugia, Tuscany. Three men and one 74-year-old woman are said to have been shot because they ran into the soldiers. Subsequently, eleven men were rounded up and are said to have been interrogated to determine if they were partisans. Parts of their village were blown up before their eyes and though these men denied any affiliation to the partisans, they were allegedly locked in a farmhouse that was then blown with dynamite. Since there was still screaming after the explosion, the German soldiers allegedly shot at the ruins with machine guns until no sound could be heard. The victims were between the ages of 15 and 74 years and only the youngest, a 15-year-old boy, survived.
Scheungraber lived in Ottobrunn near Munich since the end of the war, where he ran a furniture shop and served on the town council.
In 2008, Scheungraber was found fit to stand trial and charged with 14 counts of murder and one of attempted murder by a German court. 