Dragan Nikolic
08.05.2016
facts

Dragan Nikolic, born on 26 April 1957, comes from the town of Vlasenica in Bosnia Herzegovina.
In June 1992, Serb forces established a prison camp in Susica, the main detention centre for the Vlasenica region. From the beginning of June 1992, until approximately 30 September 1992, Dragan Nikolic was one of the commandants in this camp.
Around 300 to 500 people (men, woman and children) were held at any one time in a hanger measuring roughly 1500 square metres. The building was vastly overpopulated and sanitary conditions were deplorable. Dragan Nikolic subjected the prisoners to a reign of terror which he created by the murder of prisoners, by brutality, by sexual and other sorts of physical and psychological violence inflicted upon them and through inhumane living conditions (by depriving them of food and water, medical care, bedding and toilets). The prisoners suffered immensely from this treatment, both physically and psychologically. Dragan Nikolic contributed to creating and sustaining both this climate of fear and the inhumane living conditions
During the period of the allegations, Dragan Nikolic reportedly persecuted Muslims and non-Serbs alike being held prisoner at the Susica camp, by inflicting on them murder, rape and torture and by participating in the sexual violence perpetrated on the prisoners of this camp.
In general the women and children were held for short periods before being forcibly transferred to neighbouring territory under Muslim control. A large number of male prisoners were transferred to the Batkovic prison camp. By September 1992, scarcely any Muslims or any non-Serbs remained in Vlasenica. Dragan Nikolic was alleged to have been a major proponent in these forcible transfers.
Dragan Nikolic was said to have taken part in the murder of several prisoners (Durmo Handzic, Asim Zildzic, Rasid Ferhatbegovic, Muharem Kolarevic, Dzevad Saric, Ismet Zekic, Ismet Dedic, Mevludin Hatunic, Galib Music). He also was said to have tortured several prisoners.
A good number of prisoners were victims of sexual violence by the prison camp guards and other men who were allowed in. Dragan Nikolic reportedly permitted and even encouraged such practices by allowing the guards to act at will.
The accused was finally arrested on 20 April 2000 by the NATO-led Stabilisation Force (SFOR) for Bosnia Herzegovina and immediately transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia (ICTY), on 21 April 2000. 