Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta
19.04.2016
facts

Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta was born on 16 October 1961 in Nairobi. He is the first son of founding President Jomo Kenyatta. Uhuru Kenyatta attended the prestigious Saint Mary’s School in Nairobi and then graduated in 1985 from the Massachusetts Amherst College in the United States.
Uhuru Kenyatta first became involved in politics in 1997 when he successfully ran for the position of Chairman of his hometown branch of the Kenyan African National Union (KANU) ruling party. In that same year he lost his battle for a parliamentary seat but finally obtained one in 2001. Afterwards, he was nominated Minister for Local Government under President Daniel Arap Moi. Only a year later he was favoured by the President as his successor.
Uhuru Kenyatta was the KANU’s candidate at the presidential election of December 2002 but he was defeated by the opposition leader Mwai Kibaki. This election marked the end of KANU’s political reign, which had started 39 years before, after the independence. Thus KANU was relegated to the opposition. In 2005, Uhuru Kenyatta became the chairman of the KANU. Under Kenyatta, KANU joined the Liberal Democratic Party and formed a coalition known as the Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) which campaigned to reject the government draft constitution of 2005.
During the 2007 election, Uhuru Kenyatta changed side by giving his support to the re-election of Mwai Kibaki. Mwai Kibaki was declared winner of the election, despite the claims of fraud from the ODM. KANU was now incorporated into the Party of National Unity (PNU), a coalition of several parties. Nevertheless a power-sharing agreement had to be reached by Mwai Kibaki and the leader of the ODM, Raila Odinga.
Uhuru Kenyatta was named Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Trade the 13 April 2008.
On January 2009, he was transferred from the post of Minister of Trade to the post of Minister of Finance, maintaining his Deputy Prime Minister position.
The Kenyan National Commission of Human Rights (KNCHR) linked Uhuru Kenyatta to the violence occurred after the 2007 presidential election. According to the KNCHR, Uhuru Kenyatta attended meetings with other ethnic Kikuyu Ministers in order to prepare retaliatory attacks against the supporters of ODM.
According to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), in response to William Ruto, Henry Kosgey and Joshua Sang’s planned attacks on PNU supporters, as well as to deal with protests organized by the ODM, Kenyatta, together with Francis Kirimi Muthaura and Mohammed Hussein Ali developed and executed a plan to attack perceived ODM supporters in order to keep the PNU in power. With that aim, Kenyan Police Forces were allegedly deployed into ODM strongholds where they used excessive force against civilian protesters in Kisumu (Kisumu District, Nyanza Province) and in Kibera (Kibera Division, Nairobi Province). As a consequence, between the end of December 2007 and the middle of January 2008, the Kenyan Police Forces allegedly indiscriminately shot at and killed more than a hundred ODM supporters in Kisumu and Kibera.
Furthermore, according to the Prosecutor of the ICC, Uhuru Kenyatta would have facilitated a meeting with Francis Muthaura and members of the criminal organization Mungiki in order to prepare retaliatory attacks against civilian supporters of ODM. Thereafter Francis Muthaura instructed Kenya Police not to interfere with the movement of pro-PNU and Mungiki members.The consequences of these actions were that ODM civilian supporters were attacked in Nakuru and Naivasha during the last week of January 2008.
The violence, according to the Prosecutor, resulted in more than 1,100 people dead, 3,500 injured, approximately 600,000 victims of forcible displacement, at least hundreds of victims of rape and sexual violence and more than 100,000 properties destroyed in six out of eight of Kenya’s provinces. Many women and girls perceived as supporting the ODM were raped.
On 15 December 2010, the Prosecutor of the ICC requested the Pre-Trial Chamber II of the ICC to issue summonses to appear for Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta, together with Francis Kirimi Muthaura and Mohammed Hussein Ali. According to the Prosecutor, there are reasonable grounds to believe that they are criminally responsible under article 25 of the Rome Statute (individual criminal responsibility) for murder, rape and other forms of sexual violence, deportation or forcible transfer, persecution on political grounds, and other inhumane acts, as crimes against humanity, pursuant to article 7 of the Rome Statute.
Uhura Kenyatta asked the ICC to remove his name from the commission report and claimed his innocence at a press conference in Nairobi the same day the Court summoned his appearance. 