Jose Padilla
25.04.2016
facts

Jose Padilla was born on 18 October 1970 in the neighborhood of Brooklyn New York. His family is from Puerto Rico.
As a teenager, he moved with his family to Chicago. He joined the “Maniac Latin Disciples” street gang, the second largest Latino gang in Chicago in rivalry, among others, with the “Latin Kings”. Padilla participated actively in the activities of his gang and was arrested several times, for example for punching a police officer who had tried to arrest him for theft. In addition, when he was fourteen, he was involved in the murder of Elio Evangelista, a member of a rival gang, while preparing to rob members of that gang. He was imprisoned for three years in a facility for minors.
When he was twenty, he moved to Florida for several years and worked in a hotel (1990) as well as in the fast-food restaurant Taco Bell (1992-1993). At twenty-one, he was involved in the assassination attempt of a policemen and was sentenced to ten months in prison. During his imprisonment, he converted to Islam and chose the name Abdullah al-Muhajir, which literally means “Abdullah the migrant”.
After being released, he got to know Adham Amin Hassoun, a Palestinian activist, teacher of Islam in the Fort Lauderdale mosque (North Miami), and Kifah Wael Jayyousi, a Jordanian engineer working in an Islamic charity. Their relationship caught the attention of federal agents, who started to look more closely after Padilla.
In September 1998, Padilla decided to leave his job and his wife, with whom he had just married, to travel in the Middle East and follow classes of Islamic theology. This travel was partly financed by the Fort Lauderdale mosque. He then moved to Egypt where he married his second wife in 1999 and had two sons. In Cairo, he accumulated low-paid work. Adham Amin Hassoun and Kifah Wael Jayyousi, with whom Padilla was still in touch, encouraged him and sent him some money to help him. Phone tapping by the FBI revealed that, during that period, Padilla and his two mentors were planning to conduct a holy war, or “jihad”.
Padilla allegedly traveled to Afghanistan, Iraq, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Yemen where, with the aim to conduct a jihad to convert the West to Islam, he allegedly recruited mujahidin fighters (who fight in the name of their religion) and raised funds for jihadist purposes. He is said to have provided money and fighters to groups of mujahidin in Kosovo, Chechnya, Somalia, Afghanistan, Libya, Lebanon and other countries in the late 1990s.
Even though Padilla had been monitored by the FBI since the early 1990s, they only arrested him on 2 May 2002, in response to the attacks of 11 September 2001. He was arrested at Chicago airport, upon arrival from Pakistan where he allegedly followed a training with al-Qaeda. 