Delwar Hossain Sayedee
13.10.2014
facts

Delawar Hossain Sayedee was born on 2 February 1940 in Indurkani, a village in Pirojpur District (Barisal Division) in Bangladesh. His father was a well-known Islamic orator in the region. Sayedee completed his primary education at a public Islamic school in his native village.
In 1962 Sayedee received a degree in religion from Sarsina Alia Madrasah and in 1967 he became a “Daye Illah” (caller to the way of Allah), spreading the word of Quran at home and abroad.
The Bangladesh War of Independence broke out on 26 March 1971 as army units directed by West Pakistan launched a military operation in East Pakistan against Bengali civilians, students, intellectuals and armed personnel who were demanding separation from West Pakistan. Among Pakistani forces there were paramilitary units such as Razakar, Al-Badr and Al-Shams made up of non-Bengali Muslims and Bengali collaborators from right-wing religious parties, adherents to the Moslem League and Jamaat-e-Islami.
Sayeedi allegedly took active part in the organisation of Razakar, Al-Badr and Al-Shams forces in Pirojpur, southwestern Bangladesh, in order to assist the Pakistan army. There are allegations that he actively helped the Pakistani forces in their campaign of killings, lootings, rape, arson and allegedly took part in the killing of sub-divisional police officer Faizur Rahman. Al-Badr and Al-Shams allegedly executed systematically approximately 200 of East Pakistan’s intellectuals and scholars in the killing fields, most notably at Rayerbazar and Mirpur.
In 1996 and 2001 Sayedee was elected Member of Parliament from Pirojpur Sadar Constituency. In 1996 he also became the leader of the Jamaat Parliamentary Group. To date Sayedee is a member of the Central Executive Committee of Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami. He is also a patron of different Islamic organisations and schools.
On 12 August 2009, a war crime case was filed in Pirojpur against Sayeedi and four others. A further war crimes case was filed on 31 August 2009 before the Pirojpur senior judicial magistrate’s court.
The police arrested Mr. Sayeedi on 29 June 2010 after a magistrate court issued arrest warrants against him and three other political leaders for failing to appear before the court to face charges of hurting religious sentiments of Muslims. This arrest was not related to the 2009 war crimes cases filed against him.
On 2 August 2010, prosecutors filed a petition with the Special War Crimes Tribunal, asking it to issue an arrest warrant against Delwar Hossain Sayedee alleging that he was involved in war crimes and crimes against humanity during the war in 1971.The application for an arrest warrant was made following the transfer of cases that had been lodged with in Pirojpur on 12 August 2009 and 31 August 2009. 