Freddy Padilla de León
15.04.2016
facts

Freddy Padilla de Leon was born on 10 October 1948 in Monteria, in the province of Cordoba in Colombia. From August 2010 to October 2013, he held the position of Colombian Ambassador in Austria and beforehand held the same position in several international institutions.
Under the Presidency of Alvaro Uribe Velez, which started on 7 August 2002, the Colombian military engaged in a counter-insurgency campaign towards left-leaning guerrillas. Its two largest factions were the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN). Between 2002 and 2010, as violence escalated, Padilla held various military positions, reaching the highest possible rank, that of General Commander of the Armed Forces. Although extra-judicial killings occurred in Colombia prior to Padilla’s nomination to high-ranking positions, during this period they rose to an unprecedented scale and level of organisation. This led to the suspicion that Padilla encouraged, or at least chose to ignore, the systematic murder of civilians by the military.
In fact, the mandates of Padilla from 2002 to 2010 all included an element of monitoring over lower officials. As General Inspector of the Army (2002-2003), he was responsible for controlling the administration, discipline and training of the Army. As Joint Chief of Staff (2003-2006), his mission was to prepare military missions, both strategically and practically. Finally, as General Commander of the Armed Forces (2006-2010), he was in charge of military planning and the protection of human rights in all military bodies. Padilla was even nominated as Defence Minister over a short interim period in 2009. As such, he was second highest in the military chain of command, just below President Uribe.
THE “FALSE POSITIVES” CASE
Padilla’s responsibility was put particularly into question in the case known as “false positives” (“falsos positivos”). During the counter-insurgency campaign, members of the military were put under high pressure to produce results and prove their efficiency. Each military unit had to provide numbers of enemy killings on a regular basis, and those with the highest rates were rewarded with promotions, extra leaves or training. With everything to win from providing high killing rates, a system to boost their number was put into place: civilians were abducted and killed, dressed up as guerrilla fighters. Young men, usually with a low income and/or from rural area, were lured far from their homes with fake job promises. They were taken to remote places and arbitrarily killed. Afterwards, the military personnel dressed the victims in military clothing and put a weapon in their hands, and simulated a combat scene. Photos were then taken and sent to their superiors to “prove” that one or several insurgents had been killed. A total over 3,300 extrajudicial killings were recorded all over Colombia between 2002 and 2008.
The degree of organisation and the recurrent pattern of these crimes across the country point to the hypothesis that they were not the deed of lower soldiers, but an enterprise of which the highest military officials, including Padilla, were either aware of or part of themselves. The forgery of official instructions and photographic evidence, the pressure from the highest military ranks to produce body count, the allocation of national resources specifically for that purpose all seem to indicate that the practice was widely used by the military, and as such Padilla should at least have had knowledge thereof, and done his utmost to prevent it.
“OPERATION FENIX”
In the night of 1 March 2008, Padilla supervised, as the General Commander of the Armed Forces, “Operacion Fenix” a highly organized attack against the FARC in Ecuador. Shortly after midnight, the Colombian air force started attacking a FARC camp some 1.8km inside Ecuadorian territory. They were closely followed by men on the ground. During this operation, the FARC leader known as Raul Reyes (his real name was Luis Edgar Devia Silva) was killed, as well as 24 other individuals, including one Ecuadorian national and four Mexicans students. The Colombian government gave notice of this operation nine hours after it began. This led to considerable diplomatic tensions between Colombia and Ecuador. The former argued that fighting the FARC was a matter of self-defence – a claim backed by the United States – and Ecuador’s inability to efficiently fight the guerrilla group. Ecuador upheld the international principle of state sovereignty, according to which each government is master within its borders. 