Vlajko Stojiljkovic
08.05.2016
facts

Vlajko Stojiljkovic was born in 1937 in Mala Krsna in Serbia. A law graduate from the University of Belgrade, Vlajko Stojiljkovic became Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior of Serbia in April 1997. On 24 March 1998, the Serb National Assembly elected a new government with Vlajko Stojiljkovic as Interior Minister, a post which he held during the entire period covered by the allegations.
The accusation alleged that, following the commencement of a joint criminal enterprise, beginning on or about 1 January 1999 and continuing until 20 June 1999, Vlajko Stojiljkovic Slobodan Milosevic, Milan Milutinovic, Nikola Sainovic, Dragoljub Ojdanic, (see “related cases”) and others planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted in a deliberate and widespread or systematic campaign of terror and violence directed at Kosovo Albanian civilians living in Kosovo in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY). Forces of the FRY and Serbia, in a deliberate and widespread or systematic manner, forcibly expelled and internally displaced hundreds of thousands of Kosovo Albanians from their homes across the entire province of Kosovo. It is further alleged that forces of the FRY and Serbia committed widespread or systematic acts of brutality and violence and destruction of property against Kosovo Albanian civilians in order to perpetuate a climate of fear, create chaos and a pervading fear for life.
According to the indictment, around 800,000 Albanian civilians from Kosovo were deported from the region. In addition, Serbian forces were also said to have specifically perpetrated massacres in places such as Dakovica, Velika Krusa, Padaliste, Izbica, Vucitrn, the prison compound in Dubrava…
In his role as Interior Minister of Serbia (MUP), Vlajko Stojiljkovic was responsible for maintaining public order in Serbia. He oversaw the activities of MUP and its personnel. He defined the structure the mission and the scope of operations of the MUP administration. He had the power, in time of peace, to call up members of the MUP reserve corps and to put a stop to any activities which might put in danger the security of Serbia. Orders issued by him, or by top civil servants in the MUP, to the personnel of this Ministry had binding force excepting only if they constituted a criminal offence. He had also the power to modify any decisions and actions taken by MUP employees. He made the final decision on any appeals lodged against the preliminary decisions taken by MUP department heads. Moreover he had the authority to pass judgement on appeals filed by people being held in police detention.
On 24 May 1999, he was charged with crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war, by the Chief Prosecutor of the ICTY (International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia). 