Akram Hossein Khan
08.05.2016
facts 


Akram Hossain Khan was born on 03 December 1955 to Muhammad Joynal Abedin Khan and Zulika Begum, both of the Bagerhat District of Bangladesh. Before he began service as a mechanic of the government’s agriculture department, Khan is alleged to have participated in the 1971 Liberation War as a member of the volunteer Razakar forces.
Khan is suspected of having been a prominent member of the Razakars unit in Bagerhat region of southern Bangladesh during the 1971 Liberation War. The Razakars were a pro-Pakistan paramilitary force, trained and commanded by the Pakistan Army. They were divided into brigades, responsible for assisting the Pakistani army in stopping Bangladeshi independence and fighting against the country’s independence.
Khan’s accused commander, Siraj Master, was reportedly close to Yusuf Maulana Abul Khalam Muhammad, himself indicted for creating this faction of pro-Pakistani paramilitaries in the region. The Razakars group is accused of committing war crimes and crimes against humanity against the Bangladeshi independence supporters during this period.
In this context, Khan is accused of having helped and participated in committing murder and abductions. During the course of these actions, it is also alleged that forced conversions of Hindus to Islam took place, as well as the looting and burning of several villages. Several hundred people died during these events.  The charges against Khan include individual responsibility as well as one charge involving a joint conspiracy with Khan’s commander, Siraj Master, and Abdul Latif Talukder.
In 2009, war crimes victim and freedom fighter Nimai Chandra Das of Raghuduttakathi village filed a case against more than 20 people, including Akram and Talukder, with a Bagerhat court after the government established the International Criminal Tribunal for Bangladesh (ICT-1) and initiated investigations into war crimes and other international law violation allegations in the territory. 