Helmut Wulf
15.04.2016
facts

Helmut Wulf was born on 14th October 1923 in Dortmund, Germany. He fought in the Second World War as a section Sergeant in the 16th SS Infantry Division under the command of Walter Reder.
From 29 September to 5 October 1944, Wulf participated, together with other officers and sergeants of the 16th SS Infantry Division, in the massacre of several hundred people from the village of Marzabotto in Italy. This massacre occurred only a few weeks after a first massacre committed in Sant’Anna di Stazzema at the beginning of August 1944. During the Marzabotto massacre close to 800 individuals were killed, mainly women, children and elderly people. The Nazis broke into homes, schools and churches, throwing hand grenades, firing on people with their guns and setting buildings on fire. They even continued the shooting spree by firing on the mountain of dead bodies.
This Marzabotto massacre occurred within the context of what became known as the “massacre of Monte Sole”; this appellation grouped all of the atrocities committed in the Marzabotto region and the Monte Sole Mountains in the Italian region of Emilia-Romagna, within which lie the villages of Tagliadazza, Caparra, Castellano, Caviglia, Vado di Monzuno and Grizzana. The massacre of Marzabotto took place within the overall background of the fight between the Nazis and a group known as the Partisans of the Red Star (Stella Rossa), which fought in opposition to the Nazis.
At the end of the war, Reder alone was judged to be legally responsible for these massacres. It was only several decades later that other individuals, who had participated in the massacres during this period, came under investigation.
Indeed, after the Sant’Anna di Stazzema massacre which took place at the beginning of August 1944, Marshal Albert Keselring received information concerning revenge activities being carried out by the Red Star partisans in Marzabotto and from that point on he went there with his soldiers in order to put a stop to the activities of the Red Star and the civilians who were helping them. The Nazi leaders in addition to the members of the Wehrmacht had taken the decision that for every German killed, 50 Italians had to die. During the operations in Marzabotto this ratio was increased to 100 Italians for 1 German. The well-known SS Sturmbannführer Walter Reder commanded 16th SS Armed Infantry Division during the Marzabotto operation, issuing the command to destroy and set fire to homes, schools and churches. More than 800 people were massacred.
At the end of the war, Walter Reder was captured by the American Forces and extradited to Italy where he stood trial and on 31 October 1951 was sentenced to life imprisonment by the Bologna Military Tribunal. Reder appealed this decision, but in 1954, the appeals court confirmed the sentence. As a result of pressure from both Germany and the Vatican, a military court in Bari reopened his case in 1980. Finally, on 24 January 1985, Reder became a free man and left to return home to Germany. Following his release he retracted the excuses and regrets he had expressed with respect to the municipality of Marzabotto during his trial in Bari. Reder died in 1991 at the age of 75.
Reder’s release provoked outrage from the survivors of the massacres as well as the close relatives of those who had died. Their indignation was compounded by the discovery, in 1996, of the “Armoire of Shame” discovered in a storeroom in the Palazzo Cesi in Rome. This cabinet held close to a thousand documents detailing war crimes committed by the Nazis between 1943 and 1944, in addition to other elements linked to SS officials implicated in the crimes, a state of affairs which until then had not been subjected to any inquiry whatsoever. Of the total documents discovered close to 700 were sent to the Prosecutor of the La Spezia Tribunal for examination. From then on the Italian authorities disposed of the necessary elements in order to open up an inquiry into the events which had taken place in occupied Italy in 1943 and 1945, notably concerning the massacres committed in the region of Marzabotto and Monte Sole. 