Sefer Halilovic
21.12.2009
Facts

Sefer Halilovic was born on 6 January 1952 in Prijepolje, Sandzak region, in Serbia.
According to the indictment, the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“ABiH”) in 1993, planned and conducted a military operation called “Neretva-93”, the main purpose of which was to capture territory held by the Bosnian Croat Forces (“HVO”) from Bugojno to Mostar by launching offensives within this area and thereby ending the blockade of Mostar.
It was alleged that, on 8 September 1993, there was continuous shooting in the village of Grabovica (situated on the river Neretva alongside the main road from Sarajevo to Mostar). Over the next two days the bodies of Bosnian Croat civilians were seen in the village and floating in the river. In total, 33 Bosnian Croat civilians named in the indictment were killed in Grabovica.
Further, on 14 September 1993, in the course of the Operation “Neretva-93”, the Prozor Independent Battalion attacked the village of Uzdol (in the municipality of Prozor), which was then exclusively inhabited by Bosnian Croat civilians. During the course of the attack 29 Bosnian Croat civilians and one HVO prisoner of war were killed in Uzdol.
According to the indictment, Sefer Halilovic held the post of deputy commander of the Supreme Command Staff of the ABiH as well as chief of the Supreme Command Staff of the ABiH from 18 July 1993 until November 1993. From 21 August 1993, Sefer Halilovic was head of an inspection team to command and co-ordinate the “Neretva-93” operation and as such he was the most senior military commander for the operation in the field.
It was alleged that, despite his duties as a commander, Sefer Halilovic did not take effective measures to prevent killings of civilians in Grabovica and Uzdol, and did not take steps to carry out a proper investigation to identify the perpetrators of the killings in both Grabovica and Uzdol and as commander of the operation to punish them accordingly. Further, the indictment alleged that the accused planned and was instrumental in the implementation of military operations carried out by the units which took part in the “Neretva-93” operation.
On 25 September 2001, Sefer Halilovic voluntarily surrendered to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and was transferred on the same day to The Hague. 