Zeljko Raznjatovic
08.05.2016
facts

Zeljko Raznjatovic, also known as “Arkan,” was born on 17 April 1952, in Brezice, Slovenia. He spent much of his young adult years abroad in other European countries. After his return to Belgrade, he became president of the fan club of Belgrade’s Red Star football team. He used this group as a base for the establishment, on 11 October 1990, of a paramilitary organisation known as the “Serbian Volunteer Guard” which also became known as “Arkan’s Tigers.”
He led this group in fighting in the eastern Slavonian region of Croatia in 1991-1992 and also in various locations in Bosnia-Herzegovina in 1992. In 1995, he again led his paramilitary troops into fighting in north-western Bosnia-Herzegovina. He commanded this force during its deployment in Sanski Most in September 1995.
According to the indictment, around 15 September 1995, at the invitation of local Serb leaders, “Arkan’s Tigers” entered the Sanski Most area in order to restore order and to check the advance of the AbiH, (the Bosnian Army).
In addition to establishing checkpoints in Sanski Most, “Arkan’s Tigers” also engaged in systematic patrols around the town, in order to identify and detain Muslim and other non-Serb men, to extort valuables from non-Serb families, and to seize non-Serb homes for attribution to Serb refugees. During these patrols, “Arkan’s Tigers» frequently resorted to violence and theft.
Many of the Muslim and other non-Serb men who were abducted were taken to the Hotel Sanus for interrogation by Raznjatovic and his subordinates. They were subjected to repeated beatings and harassment by “Arkan’s Tigers” and a large number of these detainees were imprisoned in a small boiler room located in the basement of the adjoining old hotel building.
According to the indictment, on or about 20 September 1995, soldiers belonging to the group known as “Arkan’s Tigers” took twelve non-Serb men from various locations in Sanski Most and transported them in a truck to a site approximately five kilometres from Sanski Most, in the village of Trnova.
At this location, the soldiers under the command of Zeljko Raznjatovic walked them to an unfinished building situated to the rear of a larger building, which was also under construction. “Arkan’s Tigers” took them into the largest room of this building and shot to death eleven of the men. The twelfth man was also shot and seriously wounded.
On or about 21 September 1995, in the neighbouring village of Sehovci where many of the non-Serbs who had been displaced from their homes had been forced to gather, “Arkan’s Tigers” soldiers compelled a group of non-Serb men to board a bus and took them to the centre of Sanski Most. At the same date, many of the men being held at the boiler room of the old hotel, in addition to other non-Serb men and one woman who had been brought to the Hotel Sanus, were made to board the same bus. The bus then departed from the hotel and travelled from Sanski Most towards Banja Luka and the village of Sasina. On or about 21 September 1995, another group of non-Serb men were forcibly taken from the predominately Muslim village of Pobrijeze, close to Sanski Most, and were also transported to Sasina.
In Sasina, the non-Serb men and woman who had been brought from Sehovci, the Hotel Sanus, and Pobrijeze were removed from the vehicles. At this spot, Arkan’s Tigers”, under the direct command of Zeljko Raznjatovic opened fire on them, killing all but two survivors. All of the men and the sole woman who were executed were buried at this spot in two mass graves. These graves were exhumed on 27 July 1996, and the bodies of sixty-five victims were recovered.
On or about 21 September until around 25 September 1995, soldiers belonging to “Arkan’s Tigers” imprisoned approximately thirty-five non-Serb men in the small boiler room of the old hotel. On order from Arkan, the soldiers beat the men and deprived them of food and water. At least two of these men died as a result of such beatings and cruel treatment.
In early October 1995, as the ABiH approached the town, “Arkan’s Tigers” fled from Sanski Most, along with other Serb soldiers and civilians.
In March 1999, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) announced that Zeljko Raznjatovic (Arkan) had been indicted by the Tribunal, although the detailed indictment was not made public prior to Arkan’s assassination. 