Luis Arce Gómez
15.03.2011
facts






Luis Arce Gómez was born approximately in 1940.
Arce Gómez was one of the organizers of the coup d’Etat in 17 July 1980 in Bolivia, which removed interim President Lidia Gueiler and placed in power General Luis García Meza. Arce Gómez recruited ex nazi commanders Klaus Barbie and Hans J. Stellfeld as counselors and with them, was in charge of the recruitment of paramilitary agents and the establishment of training camps.
The coup d’Etat was resisted by civilians and left many dead and missing, among them, the socialist leader Marcelo Quiroga Santa Cruz, as well as the union leader Carlos Flores who died at the hands of the paramilitary during the assault on the headquarters of the Bolivian Labor Union (Central Obrera Bolivia) and the federal union of Mineworkers of Bolivia (Federación Sindical de Trabajadores Mineros de Bolivia). Subsequently, Arce Gómez recognized his responsibility in the assassination of Marcelo Quiroga.
Likewise, the coup d’Etat was followed by a period of severe repression to political opponents of the regime, among them, members of the Left Revolutionary Movement (MIR) and the Socialist Party 1 (PS-1). It is estimated that during the military dictatorship of Luis Garcia Meza (1980-1981) during which Arce Gomez was Interior Minister, 97 persons where assassinated, 26 went missing and more than 4,000 were detained. Arce Gomez was identified by the United States officials, diplomats and human right groups as the organizer of the Special Service of Security of Bolivia, whose members were later accused of committing systematic torture.
Equally, Arce Gomez controlled the lucrative trafficking of cocaine from Bolivia.
In 1981, after only 13 months, the dictatorship collapsed. Arce Gomez fled to Argentina where he obtained political asylum.
On 27 October 1982, Arce Gomez recognized his responsibility en the assassination of the PS-1 leader, the Bolivian Marcelo Quiroga Santa Cruz.

Trial Watch would like to remind its users that any person charged by national or international authorities is presumed innocent until proven guilty. 