Mohammed Jabbateh
12.08.2016
Facts

Liberian national, Mohammed Jabbateh is born in 1947. He owns a business in Southwest Philadelphia, PA (USA), shipping containers for export to Liberia.
During the first civil war in Liberia (1989-1996), Jabbateh, a.k.a. “Jungle Jabbah”, was allegedly a member of the United Liberation Movement for Democracy in Liberia (ULIMO), a rebel faction composed of ethnic Mandingo and Krahn forces. ULIMO was one of the rebel parties fighting against Charles Taylor’s National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL).
After ULIMO in 1994 split up in two groups, the Krahn-dominated ULIMO-J and the Mandingo-dominated ULIMO-K, Jabbateh became a high commander in the ranks of the latter. In his capacity, Jabbateh has been alleged of having either personally committed or otherwise ordered, facilitated and encouraged among the troops under his control the following non-exclusive list of crimes: murder of civilians non-combatants; sexual enslavement and public raping of women; maiming of civilians non-combatants; torturing and enslavement of civilians; conscription of child soldiers; execution of prisoners of war; desecration and mutilation of corpses; killing of persons because of race, religion, nationality, ethnic origin or political opinion.
On 7 December 1998, “Jungle Jabbah”, applied for asylum in the USA. In his application Jabbateh recognized that he belonged to a guerrilla organization. Nevertheless, in his personal statement Jabbateh reportedly did not mention his role in ULIMO nor in ULIMO-K as a commander or higher ranking officer. On the contrary, Jabbateh allegedly stated that during the whole period of the first Liberian civil war he had been working as a bodyguard with the Special Security Services (SSS), a security force within the government of Liberia dedicated to the protection of the president, at the executive mansion in Monrovia.
On 23 December 1999, Jabbateh was eventually granted asylum seeker status in the US. On 5 November 2002, Jabbateh applied for legal permanent residency in U.S. immigration authorities. 