Mohammed Hussein Ali
19.04.2016
facts

Mohamed Hussein Ali was born in 1956 in Eldoret, in Western Kenya. He attended the Uasin Gishu School and then the Kolanya Boys High School in the Busia District.
In 1977, he joined the Kenyan army. In 2004, while holding the rank of Brigadier in the Kenya Air Force, he was appointed to the position of Commissioner of the Kenya Police by President Mwai Kibaki.
On 8 September 2009, he was appointed Chief Executive of the Postal Corporation of Kenya.
On 30 December 2007, the Electoral Commission of Kenya declared that Mwai Kibaki, candidate for the Party of National Unity (PNU) had won the 27 December 2007 presidential election. This marked the beginning of an extremely violent conflict between the supporters of Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) and the government forces supporting the PNU, over allegations of electoral fraud.
According to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), in response to William Ruto, Henry Kosgey and Joshua Sang’s (see “related cases”) planned attacks on PNU supporters, as well as to deal with protests organized by the ODM, Muthaura, together with Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta and Mohammed Hussein Ali developed and executed a plan to attack perceived ODM supporters in order to keep the PNU in power. With that aim, Kenyan Police Forces were allegedly deployed into ODM strongholds where they used excessive force against civilian protesters in Kisumu (Kisumu District, Nyanza Province) and in Kibera (Kibera Division, Nairobi Province).
As a consequence, between the end of December 2007 and mid-January 2008, the Kenyan Police Forces, allegedly indiscriminately shot at and killed more than a hundred ODM supporters in Kisumu and Kibera.
Concerning particularly Mohamed Hussein Ali, the Prosecution considers that during the post electoral violences he authorized, in his role as Commissioner of the Kenya Police, the use of excessive force against ODM supporters and facilitated attacks against them.
According to the UN, the post election attacks left more than 1,100 people dead, 3,500 injured and up to 600, 000 forcibly displaced. During 60 days of violence, there were hundreds of rapes, possibly more, and over 100, 000 properties were destroyed in six of Kenya’s eight provinces.
On 15 December 2010, the Prosecutor of the ICC requested the Pre-Trial Chamber II of the ICC to issue summonses to appear for Mohammed Hussein Ali together with Francis Kirimi Muthaura and Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta. According to the Prosecutor, there are reasonable grounds to believe that they are criminally responsible under article 25 of the Rome Statute (individual criminal responsibility) for murder, rape and other forms of sexual violence, deportation or forcible transfer, persecution on political grounds, and other inhumane acts, as crimes against humanity, pursuant to article 7 of the Rome Statute. 