Jerome Bicamumpaka
02.05.2016
facts

Jérôme Bicamumpaka was born in 1957 in Mukono, Ruhondo commune, in Ruhengeri district (préfecture), Rwanda. From 9 April to mid-July 1994, Bicamumpaka held the office of Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation in the Interim Government. In this capacity, he was responsible for government policy on foreign affairs. He exercised authority and control over all the institutions and staff members under his ministry. He furthermore attended Cabinet meetings where he was informed about the socio-political situation in the country and where he was apprised of government policy. He also participated in formulating the policies adopted and implemented by the Interim Government.
From late 1990 until July 1994, Bicamumpaka is said to have joined and become wholly dedicated to the elaboration and execution of a plan to exterminate Tutsis. This plan consisted of, among other things, recourse to hatred and ethnic violence, the training of, and distribution of weapons to, militiamen as well as the preparation of lists of persons to be eliminated. In the execution of the plan, Bicamumpaka allegedly organized, ordered and participated in the massacres.
Between 11 April and 14 July 1994, Bicamumpaka and other Ministers allegedly travelled to several of the country’s districts, such as Butare, Kibuye, Kigali Gitarama and Gisenyi, in order to supervise the implementation of the Government’s instructions and directives, particularly in the matters of civil defense and security. As a result of their many travels, they allegedly knew, or should have known, that massacres against the civilian population of the Tutsis were being committed. However, they never acted to stop the massacres, or to punish those responsible.
Between 8 April and 14 July 1994, Ministers, district administrators (préfets), mayors, civil servants and soldiers of the army ordered, encouraged, committed and helped to commit massacres of Tutsis and moderate Hutus in several districts such as Butare, Kibuye, Kigali, Gitarama and Gisenyi. Bicamumpaka allegedly knew or should have known that his subordinates had committed, or were about to commit, such crimes, and did nothing to prevent them or punish the perpetrators. It is considered therefore that he failed in his duty to ensure the security of the population of Rwanda.
Between April and July 1994 the members of the Interim Government, including Bicamumpaka, are said to have, by virtue of their function, their speeches, orders, directives, acts and omissions, exercised control over the local authorities and militias, particularly over the Interahamwe (an extremist Hutu militia). From 6 April 1994, these authorities and militias, in concert with the army, were said to have committed massacres against Tutsis and moderate Hutus throughout the whole country. The Interim Government, of which Bicamumpaka was a member, allegedly knew of these crimes.
Towards mid-July 1994, confronted with the advance of the FPR (Front Patriotique Rwandais, an opposition movement led by Paul Kagame, consisting mainly of Tutsi refugees), Bicamumpaka fled Rwanda.
Jérôme Bicamumpaka was arrested, on request of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), on 6 April 1999 in Cameroon. On 31 July 1999 he was transferred to the United Nations prison complex in Arusha, Tanzania. 