Marko Boskic
31.05.2016
facts

Marko Boškić was born in Tuzla on 9 July 1964. Unlike most members of VRS he is an ethnic Croat, the son of a coal miner in a mountain village near the city of Tuzla. He told friends he attended a construction trade school as a youth.
When war came in 1992, he joined a local unit – the 115th Brigade – of the Bosnian Croat militia (HVO). The Croats were a minority around Tuzla and the brigade did little fighting, but guarded the line between the Muslim-dominated city and surrounding Serb-ruled areas. In 1993, pressed by the Bosnian government to submit to its command, the 115th Brigade instead dissolved itself and many of its soldiers joined the Republika Srpska Army (VRS). Boškić and another Croat, Drazen Erdemovic, became members of 10th Reconnaissance Detachment.
Boškić allegedly participated, together with seven other members of the same squad, in the “summary execution” of several hundred captured Bosniaks at the Branjevo military farm in Pilica village on 16 July 1995. That day, the Bosnian Serb Army took an estimated 1,200 Muslim men and boys in buses from Srebrenica to a farm where the gunmen lined them up in the fields, group after group, and shot them dead.
After the war Drazen Erdemovic pleaded guilty at the United Nations war crimes tribunal at The Hague and testified that he was one of the eight men sent to the Branjevo collective farm to receive approximately 20 busloads of Muslim men and boys sent from Srebrenica on 16 July 1995. He said his squad led men off the buses and stood them in groups of about 10, facing away from the gunmen, before shooting them dead. He named seven fellow executioners, including Marko Boškić.
On 26 April 2000, Boskic entered the United States after allegedly lying in writing and in person to immigration officials about his military service in VRS. He received refugee status and settled in Peabody, Massachusetts where he was working as a tile-setter.
Boskic was arrested on 25 August 2004 as a result of a transnational investigation in cooperation with ICTY that provided the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement office (ICE) with a video of the 10th Reconnaissance Detachment at an awards ceremony in the fall of 1995 in which Boskic is in uniform and holding a rifle. In November 2006, Boškić was sentenced to 63 months in a U.S. prison for two counts of immigration fraud. The U.S. ICE Office of the Chief Counsel in Boston initiated deportation proceedings and an immigration judge ordered Boškić’s removal to Bosnia and Herzegovina on 18 February 2010.
The U.S. ICE office carried out the deportation of suspected human rights violator Marko Boskic to Bosnia and Herzegovina on 27 April. He was turned over to authorities in Sarajevo to face war crimes charges and was ordered into custody on the charges of crimes against humanity.
After deportation to Bosnia and Herzegovina Marko Boškić concluded a Plea Agreement admitting his participation in the criminal offense of Crimes against Humanity under Article 172 in relation to subparagraph (a) of the same article of the Criminal Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as stated in the Indictment of the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina dated 5 July 2010. 