Milojica Kos
31.05.2016
facts

Milojica Kos, alias “Krle”, was born on 1 April 1963 in the village of Lamovita, Prijedor municipality, Bosnia and Herzegovina. He was a reserve policeman who had been called to full-time duty at the time of his involvement in the Omarska camp. He was appointed as one of three shift commanders of guards at the Omarska camp. As a shift commander, and when present in the camp, he was in a position of superior authority to all camp personnel, other than the commander or deputy commander.
According to the bill of indictment, it was alleged that between April and August 1992, Bosnian Serb authorities in the Prijedor municipality unlawfully segregated, detained and confined more than 6,000 Bosnian Muslims, Bosnian Croats and other non-Serbs from the Prijedor area in the Omarska and Keraterm camps.
In Omarska camp the prisoners included military-aged males and political, economic, social and intellectual leaders of the Bosnian Muslim and Bosnian Croat population. There were about 37 women detained in this camp. At the Keraterm camp, the majority of the prisoners were military-aged males.
According to the indictment, living conditions in Omarska and Keraterm were brutal and inhumane. Interrogations were conducted on a daily basis. The interrogations were regularly accompanied by beatings and torture. Furthermore, serious ill treatment, torture, murder, sexual violence and other forms of physical violence were the norm. Finally, the camp guards used all types of weapons and instruments to beat and otherwise physically abuse the prisoners. At a minimum, hundreds of prisoners, whose identities are known and unknown, did not survive the camps.
According to the indictment, Milojica Kos, instigated, ordered committed or otherwise aided and abetted in persecutions against Muslims, of Bosnian Croats and other non-Serbs in the Prijidor region, on political, racial or religious grounds. Furthermore by his approval, his encouragement, his acquiescence and his support, he contributed to the creation and the maintenance of the difficult living conditions in the camp. Finally, he played a role in the ongoing crimes committed against the prisoners in the Omarska camp.
Milojica Kos was arrested by the SFOR (Stabilisation Force for Bosnia-Herzegovina) on 28 May 1998 and transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on the following day. 