Duro Tadic
25.04.2016
facts

Đuro Tadić, nicknamed Mrda, was born in Rajovcima in the municipality of Bihać, Bosnia and Herzegovina on 6 June 1949. He is a Serbian citizen and resident of Novi Sad, Serbia and a former member of the Army of Republika Srpska (VRS). Whilst in this position, he was accused of having committed war crimes.
On 23 September 1992, Tadić, along with seven other members of the Army of Republika Srpska, allegedly participated in the attack of a group of 18 to 25 Bosnian Muslim civilians in the village of Duljci, near the town of Bihać, situated in the northwest of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
According to witnesses, the armed men – including Tadić – arrived with two vehicles on site, where the Bosnian civilians were in the process of collecting plums, within the framework of a penal servitude program that was imposed by Bihac municipality, then under siege of Serbian Forces. Equipped with automatic guns, dressed in police or military uniforms and with their faces covered by balaclavas, the group is alleged to have run around the civilians and opened fire, killing approximately 18 fruit pickers.
One member of the VRS then went over to the bodies and stabbed them with a knife. The bodies were then doused in petrol, set on fire and moved in order to cover up the crime. When Tadić and the others realised that some civilians had hidden themselves in a farm near the road, they threw a grenade at the farm.
Quite a few of those who were working on the site successfully fled to a neighbouring hill and then swam across the Una river, in order to seek refuge in Croatia.
In total, seven victims were able to be identified by DNA analysis. The other bodies still have not been recovered. The majority of the victims were women and elderly people. Amongst the victims was a 13-year-old girl.
In 2012, Tadić’s case was transferred from the Cantonal Court in Bihać, Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the Department of War Crimes in the High Court of Belgrade, Serbia, pursuant to the Act on International Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, and to the Contract between the Republic of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina on Legal Assistance in Criminal and Civil Matters. Additionally, Tadić filed a request that he stand trial in Serbia. 