Raul Eduardo Iturriaga Neumann
21.04.2016
facts

Raul Eduardo Iturriaga Neumann was born on 23 January 1938 in Linares in Chile. He is married. After attending the Military School of Americas in Panama (Escuela de los Americas), he became instructor in counter-insurgency strategy. In 1973, after the Coup d’Etat against Salvador Allende government, he joined the Chilean Directorate of National Intelligence (DINA), as head official of the foreign affairs department.
Iturriaga Neumann was in charge of Operation Colombo, enforced disappearance campaign of Chilean political dissidents in Argentina and Brazil, including the involvement in the murders of General Prats and his wife in September 1974 in Buenos Aires. He was also implicated in the disappearance of Jean-Yves Claudet. J. Y. Claudet was then an activist of the Movimiento Izquierda Revolucionaria (Revolutionary Left-wing Movement–MIR) who was arrested and detained twice in 1973, and then released and transferred to France. At the end of 1975, the MIR chose to settle his operation center in Argentina and Jean-Yves Claudet left for Buenos Aires on 30 October 1975. He was arrested on 1st November 1975 by agents of Argentinean secret police (SIE). He was then placed under the control of the Chilean DINA that was also leading Operation Condor, a coalition among the militaries of the Southern Cone of Latin America (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, and Uruguay) to get rid of political dissidents. Claudet has never been seen ever since. In a memorandum of the DINA in Buenos Aires, it is stated that Jean- Yves Claudet « does not exist anymore ».
In 1977, Iturriaga Neumann became assistant director of the intelligence at the DINA headquarters. He was then appointed at the business department, in charge of the control of the DINA firms. He became general of the armed forces in 1989 and retired officially two years later. 1991 Iturriaga Neumann was interrogated about his involvement in the murder of Orlando Letelier, former minister of Allende, in 1976 in Washington. 