Abdulqader Dibri
23.04.2016
facts

Abdulqauder Dibri was born in 1946 in Houn, Libya.
He has been loyal to Gaddafi for many years, serving as the head of Gaddafi’s personal security. During his years as head of personal security, he has already been considered responsible for directing violence against dissidents, who opposed Gaddafi’s regime.
On 15 February 2011, a series of protests and confrontations started in Libya that led to a large popular uprising. Within a week, it spread across the country, including its capital Tripoli. The Gaddafi regime responded with a military crackdown on protestors and civilians, recruiting foreign mercenaries to supplement his forces as the Eastern part of the country was falling under control of the rebel forces and parts of the military defected.
By the end of February the rebels formed a government called the National Transitional Council based in Benghazi. According to the information of human rights groups, Gaddafi’s forces are responsible for alleged killings in Tripoli, where 228 or more people died in air strikes; in Benghazi where bombing also allegedly killed some 257 people; and in the towns of Misrata, Brega, Derna, Zenten and Ajdabiya where air strikes and attacks by security forces were allegedly responsible for at least 40 deaths.
Due to Abdulqauder Dibri’s loyalty to Gaddafi and his personal history of directing violence against dissidents, he is considered to be implicated in the crimes against humanity and war crimes committed during the repression of the civil protests and the non-international armed conflict that followed between 15 February and 30 March 2011..
The U.N. Security Council, in a unanimous decision on 26 February 2011, instructed the International Criminal Court to investigate into the Libyan crisis that was described as “widespread and systematic attacks currently taking place against the civilian population [which] may amount to crimes against humanity”. The United Nations Security Council also passed a resolution freezing the assets of Gaddafi and ten members of his inner circle and restricting their travel. 