Tihomir Blaskic
02.05.2016
facts

Tihomir Blaskic was born on 2 November 1960 in the village of Brestovsko in the Kiseljak municipality of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Blaskic was a career military officer and graduated from the Belgrade Military Academy in 1983, having been beforehand a Captain in the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA). During the period referred to in the indictment, he held the rank of Colonel in the HVO (Croatian Defence Council) and, from 27 June 1992, he was appointed Commander of the Regional Headquarters of the Armed Forces in central Bosnia. Subsequently, in August 1994, he was promoted to the rank of General and appointed Commander of the HVO, which had its headquarters in Mostar. In November 1995, he was given the post of Inspector in the General Inspectorate of the Army of the Republic of Croatia.
Following international recognition of Bosnia on 6 April 1992, armed conflict erupted between the different communities. As a result, on 8 April 1992, the Bosnian Croats created the HVO, backed by the Croatian Army (HV). The zones which they had control over were contained within the Croatian Community of Bosnia-Herzegovina (HZBH).
Tihomir Blaskic was in command of the HVO troops in the Lasva valley in central Bosnia, which was inhabited, in the majority, by Muslims and Croats.
Between May 1992 and January 1993, relations between the two communities became increasingly strained. The first destructions of mosques and Muslim houses, the first civilian murders and the first looting of property began to be witnessed.
On 2 January 1993, the Vance-Owen plan was put forward. This peace plan, amongst other elements, gave definition to a decentralised Bosnia-Herzegovina, organised into ten provinces, each benefiting from substantial autonomy and each being administered by a democratically elected local government.
Under this plan, the Lasva valley was attached, for the greater part, to a province where the principal responsibilities were attributed to the Croats.
The latter, and in particular the Bosnian Croats, in anticipation of the adoption of the Vance-Owen plan, were resolved to implement it unilaterally, and so set about provoking open conflict between Croats and Muslims in central Bosnia.
On expiration of two ultimatums given to the Muslims in January and April 1993 requiring them to give up their weapons , the Croatian forces, whose hierarchical leader was General Blaskic, reportedly attacked various municipalities in the valley.
The Croatian forces, the HVO and independent units are said to have run amuck pillaging, burning down houses and farm buildings, murdering civilians without distinction as to age or sex, putting down livestock, destroying or damaging mosques, arresting certain civilians, forcibly transferring them to detention centres where living conditions were deplorable, and forcing them to dig trenches at various locations. On occasion, these same civilians were used as hostages or human shields.
Tihomir Blaskic surrendered voluntarily on 1st April 1996 and was transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on the same day. 