Adolf Storms
15.04.2016
facts

Adolf Storms was born in 1919. During World War II, he was a sergeant of the 5th SS Division “Wiking”, a division of the Waffen SS, which had participated in the war of aggression against the Soviet Union between 1941 and 1944. The division’s fallback led it from Hungary to the Czech Republic and finally to Austria.
Adolf Storms allegedly took part in the Deutsch Schützen massacre in Austria as one of the main perpetrators. From January 1945 onwards, about 500 Hungarian Jews were forced to work there in order to build a defensive position, the “Südostwall”. Due to the approach of the Red Army, the local Bannführer (rank) of Hitler Youth allegedly ordered the shooting of the slave workers in March 1945. About 220 Jews were gathered at the Martin church in Deutsch Schützen in the early morning of 29 March 1945 and brought to a trench in groups of 20 to 30 persons by members of the Hitler Youth. The Jews begged for their lifes but were nevertheless pushed and kicked in the trench, where they were shot by two SS-members and one member of the military police. According to witness reports, one of these SS-members was Adolf Storms. The shooting was interrupted at an early stage because marching orders were given. Nevertheless, 58 Jews were killed. The bodies were hastily buried in the trench. During the shooting, the perpetrators allegedly drank wine.
In 1946, seven members of the Hitler Youth were charged for their participation in the massacre. The proceedings were led by an austrian “Volksgericht”, a special court which was installed especially for Nazi-crimes. Five of the defendants were convicted of crimes against humanity and murder respectively aiding and abetting a murder or attempted murder. They were sentenced to prison sentences from 15 months to 3 years. Concerning two defendants, the proceedings were referred to ordinary courts. One defendant was acquitted.
In a second trial in 1956, the Bannführer of the Hitler Youth, who allegedly had given the shooting-order, was acquitted in all charges for lack of evidence.
In 1995, the bodies of the Jews were found in a mass grave. On 23 September 1995, the mortal remains were burried in a Jewish ceremony near the crime scene.
In 2008, the political-science-student Andreas Forster identified Adolf Storms as one of the shooters responsible for the massacre on the basis of old court files. Subsequently, his professor Walter Manoschek interviewed Stroms, other participants and witnesses of the massacre. These interviews were brought together in a documentary. In addition, the researchers reported their findings to the law enforcement authorities. 