Anatole Nsengiyumva
25.04.2016
facts

Anatole Nsengiyumva was born on 4 September 1950 in the commune of Satinsyi in Gisenyi prefecture. He became lieutenant-colonel in the army and held the position of Chief of Military Intelligence within the Army High Command for several years, before taking over, on June 13 1993, the position of Commander of military operations for Gisenyi. In this position he had authority over the military sectors of Gisenyi. Due to his relationships, he also enjoyed personal authority over the militias of the MRND (National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development), over the Interahamwe militia and also the militia of the Coalition for the Defence of the Republic (CDR), the Impuzamugambi.
According to the indictment, Anatole Nsengiyumva, conspired with Théoneste Bagosora, Aloys Ntabakuze and Joseph Nzirorera, in order to develop a plan which by stirring up hatred and ethnic violence would eliminate the opposition and so keep them in power.
In the execution of this plan, Anatole Nsengiyumva was said to have organised ordered and participated in massacres perpetrated against the Tutsi population and moderate Hutus. During the Arusha peace agreement negotiations, Anatole Nsengiyumva was reported to have stated publicly that they would only lead to war and that the consequence of this would be the extermination of the Tutsis.
Moreover, it was alleged that Anatole Nsengiyumva supervised the training of the Interahamwe and the Impuzamugambi, the militias of the MRND, and the CDR. By 10 January 1994, 1,700 militia soldiers from both organisations were said to have undergone such training and, as a result, were said to be capable of eliminating 1000 Tutsis every twenty minutes. He also reportedly participated in distributing arms to these militias.
The indictment also alleged that Anatole Nsengiyumva supervised the drafting of lists of people to be executed, and that these lists were regularly updated under his authority.
It was during the night of 6 to 7 April 1994, according to the indictment that Anatole Nsengiyumva, after discussing with Théoneste Bagosora, was said to have given the order to begin the massacres in Gisenyi. Reportedly, the order given was to massacre all of the Tutsis. The first of the killings then took place under his orders and in his presence.
Nsengiyumva was arrested in Cameroon on 27 March 1996 and transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) on 23 January 1997. 