Dominique Ntawukulilyayo
20.04.2016
facts

Dominique Ntawukulilyayo was born in 1942 in Mubuga in the Gikongoro Prefecture in the south of Rwanda. During the 1994 genocide, he held the position of Sous-Préfet of Gisagara in the Butare prefecture.
The main charge in the indictment issued by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, (ICTR) concerned the alleged participation of Dominique Ntawukulilyayo in the massacre on the Kabuye hill.
From 21 to 25 April 1994, thousands of Tutsis were assembled on the Kibuye hill. A short time beforehand, the great majority of them had been brought together in the marketplace in the town of Gisangara in the Butare prefecture. A large number of these refugees had tried to flee towards Burundi but had been prevented from doing so. These Tutsis were subsequently forced to go to the Kibuye hill, supposedly to be protected and fed. During the days that followed, the gendarmes, communal policemen, the military and even armed civilians set about massacring the Tutsis, held, surrounded on the Kabuye hill. This killing spree lasted for several days in view of the large number of refugees. It is estimated that 25’000 people were massacred on the Kabuye hill between 21 and 25 April 1994.
According to the indictment, Dominique Ntawukulilyayo allegedly ordered the gendarmes and the police to assemble the Tutsis on the said hillside. He was reported also to have had military units and gendarmes transported there from Butare and to have put at their disposal the necessary weapons to carry out the massacres.
On 25 April 1994, Ntawukulilyayo, Callixte Kalimanzira, Bernadette Mukarurangwa and Fidèle Uwizeye reportedly met at the home of the latter and discussed the fact that the attackers had still not been able to kill all of the refugees in view of their great number. Thereafter they were said to have gone to the Kabuye hill to witness the evolution of the massacres.
Under the ICTR indictment, Dominique Ntawukulilyayo was accused of carrying out other reprehensible acts:
– On 20 April 1994 he reportedly prevented Chrysologue Bimenyimana, the mayor of Muguanza commune (in the Gisagara sub-prefecture), from going back to his commune in an attempt to stop the killings which had already started there.
– A few days after the death of President Habyarimana on 6 April 1994, roadblocks were set up in the Gisagara sub-prefecture, in particular close to the residence of the accused. The purpose of these roadblocks was to prevent Tutsis from leaving the region and to identify them in order to kill them. Dominique Ntawukulilyayo was said to have helped and encouraged his subordinates to carry out the killings at the roadblocks in the Gisagara sub-prefecture
– Between 6 April and 17 July 1994, Dominique Ntawukulilyayo was said to have publicly and directly incited people to commit acts of genocide. He allegedly organised and participated in various meetings in the Butare prefecture and in particular in the Gisagara sub-prefecture. During these meetings, Dominique Ntawukulilyayo reportedly demanded that the general public and the local authorities take part in the massacres.
Dominique Ntawukulilyayo arrived in France in 1999. From 2000, he resided, in all legality and openly, in Carcassonne in south west France. He founded an association to help with the education of Rwandan children and was responsible for the immigrants in the diocese of Carcassonne.
In April 2006, 32 Rwandan citizens lodged a complaint in France against Dominique Ntawukulilyayo. 