Branimir Tesic
08.05.2016
facts


Branimir Tesic was the Deputy Commander of the Public Security Station in Bratunac and a member of the police force located in Zvornik. He was indicted with fellow officer and Chief of the Public Security Station in Bratunac, Miodrag Josipovic.
In the summer of 1995, units of the Bosnian Serb Army (VRS) and the Special Police Brigade of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Republika Srpska (MUP RS) initiated a widespread and systematic attack against the Bosniak (Bosnian Muslim) civilian population that was residing in the United Nations safe area in Srebrenica. Over the course of this attack, nearly 20’000 Bosniak civilians were forced to resettle outside of Srebrenica and more than 7’000 Bosniak men and boys were executed.
Tesic monitored the forcible resettlement of Bosniak civilians from Potocari, a village near Srebrenica, the separation of Bosniak men and boys from their families, and transportation operations while Josipovic allegedly ordered the mobilization of police forces during the attack.
Most of the men who were forcibly separated were transported to makeshift detention facilities in Bratunac, specifically a primary school named “Vuk Karadzic,” a building adjacent to the school named “The Hangar,” and the Bratstvo football stadium. Some men and boys were kept in trucks and buses overnight due to the large number of men and boys taken, who were then guarded by Bratunac police forces.
During the evening of 13 July 1995, at least 150 Bosniak men were killed. The next morning, on 14 July 1995, it is alleged that Tesic and Josipovic arranged police escorts for the Bosniak men, who had been kept overnight in the buses and trucks, to be taken to an execution site in Zvornik. Tesic allegedly boarded a bus with five detained Bosniak men who were then taken to another execution site in Orahovac. After all the Bosniak men left Bratunac, the deceased were collected, transported, and buried in a mass grave in the village of Glogova, in Bratunac.
Tesic and Josipovic, are charged with knowingly aiding and abetting the alleged principal perpetrators of the genocide from 12 July to 19 July 1995. 