Darko Dolic
19.03.2013
facts 

Darko Dolic, son of Jozo and Marta Dolic, was born in Mostar on 11 April 1973. Upon completing Elementary School, he joined Military School. He is married and lived in Prozor. During the war, he became a member of the HVO (Croat Defence Council).
In the late afternoon of 4 August 1993, during the armed conflict between the Army of BiH and the HVO in the territory of Prozor Municipality, and as a member of the “Jastrebovi” sabotage reconnaissance, Darko Dolic is accused to have participated, together with the late Zoran Calis, in the physical ill-treatment and plundering of Muslim civilians. Dressed in a military uniform and armed with an automatic rifle, he ordered all the Muslim civilians who were living in the village of Družinoviæi, Prozor Municipality, to line up in front of Zlatif Kmetaš’s house. Here, he hit and kicked some civilians and made bleeding cuts all over one civilian.
In the view of taking money and gold, he ordered these civilians to remove their clothes and shoes so as to make sure they were not concealing any valuables. He then singled one civilian out of the group of lined-up civilians and took her to the floor of the house and forced her to a sexual intercourse in one of the rooms : having previously hit her all over her body and her legs, he stripped her clothes off and ordered her to put his penis into her mouth, threw her on a bed and raped her.
During the first half of August 1993, in another village of Lapsunj, Prozor Municipality, Dolic raped an underage girl on a number of occasions where he forced her to have sexual intercourse by pointing a rifle at her body and threatening to kill her if she resisted. In early June or August, in the same village, Dolic together with four soldiers entered the house of another woman and threw her onto the bed where her 15 month old child was asleep. He held a knife to the child’s throat and threatened to kill the child if the woman did not remove her clothes. She was forced to comply and was raped.
Dolic is therefore accused of violations of International Law which include ill-treatment, deliberate infliction of mental and physical pain on the imprisoned civilians, plundering the imprisoned civilians and coercing persons to have sexual intercourse by making threats.
Dolic was arrested on 20 October 2009 by the State Investigation and Protection Agency (SIPA) who handed him over to the Prosecution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 