Milko Mucibabic
29.05.2011
facts 

Milko Mucibabic was born on 31 March 1951 in Ljeskov Dub, Gacko municipality. He finished elementary school and in 1971, he completed his military service.
According the Indictment, during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the territory of municipalities Nevesinje, Kalinovik, Gacko and Bileća, Milko Mucibabic took part in the persecution of Bosniak and Croat civilians. Members of the Public Security Station Gacko, one of which was Milko Mucibabic, under the command of Krsto Savić, took part in the persecution of Bosniak civilians from the Gacko Municipality. All able-bodied men were on the occasion deprived of liberty and confined in the detention camps established on the premises of the school in Avtovac, Gacko Municipality, and in the basement of the single-room-occupancy hotel (Samački hotel) in Gacko. Around 150 people were confined in these detention camps in inhumane conditions, without adequate accommodation and subjected to daily physical abuse.
On 25 June 1992, the members of the Public Security Station Kalinovik organized and carried out the arrest of all Bosniak men in Kalinovik and the neighbouring villages of Mjehovina, Jelašce and Vihovići. They detained the arrested civilians in the Primary School Miladin Radojević where they were kept until 7 July 1992. On 5 August 1992, all detained men, around 80 of them, were loaded on trucks and taken away, after which they were executed in the place called Ratine and at the location of the Miljevina tunnels.
According to the charges of the Indictment, during the period from June 1992 to September 1992, Milko Mučibabić, together with other members of the Public Security Station Nevesinje, took part in the arrest and torture of Bosniak and Croatian civilians in Nevesinje. In addition, Mučibabić allegedly kept fire arms and ammunition illegally in his family house in Nevesinje Municipality.
Milko Mucibabic was arrested on 7 September 2007 and was charged with crimes against humanity and illegal manufacturing and trade of weapons or explosive materials on 27 February 2008. 