Nestor Ruben Castelli
28.04.2016
facts

Nestor Ruben Castelli was born in Buenos Aires on 15 December 1929. He was a member of the Argentinean Army, where he reached the rank of Brigadier General.
He was already on retirement with the rank of Colonel when, on 24 March 1976, he was designated as de facto Governor of the province of Rio Negro. His appointment came after the coup d’etat in Argentina, in the framework of the National Reorganization Process run by the military leadership. Castelli held the office until the end of the year.
Until December 1977 he was also the Chief of the National Gendarmerie in the administrative Area 524, whose headquarters were located in San Carlos de Bariloche, in the Province of Rio Negro. In January 1978 he was appointed Deputy Chief of sub-area 52, an administrative division which also included Area 524.
Between October 1975 and October 1977 he was also director of the military academy known as ‘Escuela de Instrucción Andina’, located in San Carlos de Bariloche as well. In general, Nestor Ruben Castelli was one of the most prominent personalities in the province of Rio Negro during the years of the military regime.
On 2 April 1976 the two trade unionists Daniel Orlando Ávalos and Carlos Apolinario Lima were abducted in Sierra Grande, in the province of Rio Negro. The two were active members in the town’s section of the ‘Unión Obrera de la Construcción de la República Argentina’, a lefty trade union still operating in Argentina. In 1975 they had been involved in a prolonged strike in the mines of Hipasam.
Avalos was arrested at his home, whilst Lima went spontaneously to the police station, where he was taken into custody and beaten. On 5 April 1976, Lima and Avalos were transferred to Viedma, the capital of the the province of Rio Negro. There they were repeatedly questioned and tortured, and released after about a month in detention.
Initially shielded by the piece of legislation known as ‘Full Stop Law’ (Ley del Punto Final), Castelli was again exposed to criminal proceedings in 2005, when that law was repealed by the Constitutional Court (see ‘context’). 