José Felipe Sande Lima
14.04.2016
facts 

José Felipe Sande Lima, also known as “310”, was born on 15 April 1948. At a young age he joined the Home Office, where he began working for the metropolitan police force. In 1973, the year of the coup d’état, he held a junior rank, but only three years later, in 1976, he joined the Minsitry of Defense Information Service (SID). He worked in the torture centre known as “Carlos 300” which operated within the 13th infantry battalion.
In 1985, in the president’s elected government, Julio María Sanguinetti was named as head of the criminal institutions and subsequently, during the administration of Jorge Batlle, he took charge of the Libertad prison between 11 March 2002 and 22 July 2004.
On 17 February 2005, Batlle promoted Sande Lima to the rank of chief inspector; this was the final step in his career ladder before his retirement.
He was a member of an organization for coordinating anti-subversive operations (OCOA).
As a retired police officer, Sande Lima joined the military and police teams that operated in Buenos Aires and he was linked to the transfer of prisoners to Montevideo.
During the 1970s, the Condor Plan instigated terror throughout the countries where their commanders and officers played a role in the macabre events. The Plan had the consent of the dictatorial governments of Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay. According to the sentence, the aim was “monitoring, vigilance, detention, the use of physical and psychological torture in interrogations, movement between countries and disappearance or death of those considered by said regimes to be subversive to the established order or those against the political or ideological values, or those who were not compatible with the military dictatorships of the area”.
Whilst heavily pregnant, Claudia García Iruretagoyena de Gelman was detained in Buenos Aires, Argentina, during the latter months of 1976. It is thought that she was subsequently moved to Uruguay where she gave birth to her daughter who was handed over to a Uruguayan family. These acts were thought to have been committed by Uruguayan and Argentinian state officials as part of the “Condor Plan”. To this day, María Claudia García’s whereabouts and the circumstances surrounding her disappearance remain unknown.
Additionally, it is thought that the lack of investigation, trials and sanctioning for the culprits, pursuant to Act No. 15.848 Law on the Expiry of the Punitive Claims of the State (referred to as the Law on the Expiry from this point on) published by the democratic government of Uruguay in 1986, caused a number of incidents: the loss of identity and nationality of María Macarena Gelman García Iruretagoyena, daughter of María Claudia García and Marcelo Gelman; the suffering that faced Juan Gelman, his family, María Macarena Gelman and María Claudia García’s relations; impunity and some were denied the right to justice.
It is also thought that Adalberto Soba was kidnapped towards the end of September 1976 in Buenos Aires. He was then thought to have been detained in Orletti and subsequently disappeared.
Together with seven other military officials and police, Sande was one of the first to be sentenced for violating human rights through dictatorial repression. 