Konstantin Von Neurath
02.05.2016
facts

Konstantin Von Neurath was born on 2 February 1873 in W端rttemberg and studied law before joining the German Diplomatic Corps in 1901. He was sent to London in 1903 as Vice-Consul and became Consul of the embassy in 1909. He was posted to Istanbul in 1914. He was an infantry officer during the First World War and after being wounded returned to Istanbul, then back to Germany where he became Governor of W端rttemberg. Between 1919 and 1932 he was posted first to Denmark then afterwards to Rome as Ambassador and subsequently London.
In 1932, he became Foreign Affairs Minister under Chancellor Franz von Papen and kept this position under Von Schleicher and Hitler. He resigned from his position in 1938, being unfavourably disposed to the aggressive foreign policy led by Hitler (who had become Chancellor in 1933 and had assumed total power in 1934). Despite this, he remained as Minister without Portfolio and was appointed President of the Secret Cabinet Council and Member of the Reich Defence Council. He took responsibility for the withdrawal of Germany from the League of Nations, for the negotiation of the Anglo-German Naval Treaty, and for the remilitarisation of the Rhineland.
In 1939, he was named Governor of Bohemia and Moravia which had become a Reich Protectorate. As a consequence of this position, he also held the post of General in the SS. He had laws enacted restricting the liberty of the press, and abolishing companies and political parties. He issued warnings against any acts of sabotage, declaring that the whole Czech population would be held responsible if such acts occurred. From September 1939, a wave of arrests by the security police was carried out against members of the Czech intelligentsia. A large number of them were despatched to concentration camps.
Nevertheless, Von Neurath failed in his campaign against the Czech resistance and was relieved of a part of his responsibilities in 1941, at which date he tried to tender his resignation, but without success until 1943, when Hitler accused him of not being tough enough in his campaign against the Czech resistance.
Konstantin Von Neurath was accused of having used his positions and personal influence as well as his close connection with the F端hrer in such a way that: he furthered the accession to power of the Nazi conspirators as set out in Count One of the Indictment; he promoted the preparations for war, as set out in Count One of the Indictment; he participated in the political planning and preparation of the Nazi conspirators for Wars of Aggression and Wars in Violation of International Treaties Agreements and Assurances, as set out in Count One and Two of the Indictment.
In accordance with the F端hrer Principle, he is said to have both executed and assumed responsibility for the execution of the foreign policy plans of the Nazi conspirators, as set out in Count One of the Indictment, and to have authorised, directed and participated in the War Crimes as set out in Count Three of the Indictment and in the Crimes against Humanity as set out in Count Four of the Indictment, in particular for crimes enacted against persons and personal property in the occupied territories.
After being captured by the Allies, he was handed over the International Military Tribunal in Nuremberg. 