Prosper Mugiraneza
02.05.2016
facts

Prosper Mugiraneza was born in 1957 in Kigarama commune in the district (préfecture) of Kibungo, Rwanda.He was a graduate of the Law Faculty of the Rwanda National University, and became Minister of Labour & Social Affairs in the government of 31 December 1991. He was Minister of Civil Service in the governments of 16 March and 18 July 1993, and was nominated Minister of the Civil Service on the list of the two broad-based governments.
On 9 April 1994, he was appointed Minister of the Civil Service in the Interim Government. He remained in this post until mid-July 1994. In this capacity, he was responsible for government policy in the administration of public sector employment. He exercised authority and control over all the institutions and staff members under his ministry. He furthermore attended Cabinet meetings where he was informed about the socio-political situation in the country and where he was apprised of government policy. He also participated in formulating the policies adopted and implemented by the Interim Government. In addition, he was a very influential member of the Mouvement Républicain National pour la Démocratie et le Développement (MRND), the presidential party.
From late 1990 until July 1994, Mugiraneza is said to have joined, and become wholly dedicated to the elaboration and execution of a plan to exterminate Tutsis. This plan consisted, among other things, of recourse to hatred and ethnic violence, the training of, and distribution of weapons to, militiamen as well as the preparation of lists of persons to be eliminated. In the execution of the plan, Mugiraneza allegedly organized, ordered and participated in the massacres.
Between 11 April and 14 July 1994, Mugiraneza and other Ministers allegedly travelled to several of the country’s districts, such as Butare, Kibuye and Gitarama, in order to supervise the implementation of the Government’s instructions and directives, particularly in matters of civil defence and security. During their many travels, they reportedly knew, or should have known, that massacres against the civilian Tutsi population were being committed. However, they never acted to stop the massacres, or to punish those responsible.
Between 8 April and 14 July 1994, Ministers, district administrators (préfets), mayors, civil servants and soldiers of the army ordered, encouraged, committed and helped to commit massacres of Tutsis and moderate Hutus in several districts such as Butare, Kibuye, Kigali, Gitarama and Gisenyi. Mugiraneza allegedly knew or should have known that his subordinates had committed, or were about to commit, such crimes, and did nothing to prevent them or punish the perpetrators. It is considered therefore that he failed in his duty to ensure the security of the population of Rwanda.
Between April and July 1994, the members of the Interim Government including Mugiraneza, by virtue of their function, their speeches, orders, directives, acts and omissions, are said to have exercised control over the local authorities and militias, particularly over the Interahamwe (an extremist Hutu militia). From 6 April 1994, these authorities and militias, in concert with the army were said to have committed massacres against Tutsis and moderate Hutus throughout the whole country. The Interim Government, of which Mugiraneza was a member, allegedly knew of these crimes.
Towards mid-July 1994, confronted with the advance of the FPR (Front Patriotique Rwandais, an opposition movement led by Paul Kagame, consisting mainly of Tutsi refugees), Mugiraneza fled Rwanda.
Prosper Mugiraneza was arrested, on request of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), on 6 April 1999 in Cameroon. On 31 July 1999, he was transferred to the United Nations prison complex in Arusha, Tanzania. 