Mikaeli Muhimana
02.05.2016
facts

Mikaeli Muhimana, alias Mika, was born on 24 October 1961 in Gishyita, Kibuye prefecture, Rwanda. He was a tradesman in Gishyita until 1988, the year in which he was elected Municipal Councilor for Gishyita. He held this function until July 1994. Muhimana was accused of having played a predominant role in the systematic extermination of the Tutsi in 1994, in various different places throughout the Kibuye prefecture.
Towards the morning of 8 April 1994, Muhimana was said to have summoned civilians, gendarmes and members of the communal police to the Kiziba commercial centre in the commune of Gishyita. Here they were reportedly given arms with the aim of exterminating Tutsi civilians living in the communes of Gishyita and Gisovu.
Between 8 and 14 April 1994, around 5600 Tutsi had taken refuge in the Catholic Church in Mubuga, in the commune of Gishyita, in order to escape from similar attacks which had already taken place throughout the Kibuye prefecture. Muhimana, together with Clément Kayishema, the préfet of Kibuye, were said to have gone to this spot on several occasions in order to gather information on the refugees before launching an attack. Between 14 and 15 April 1994, Muhimana, along with the gendarmerie, the Interahamwe (extremist Hutu militia), and regular soldiers, allegedly stole the food supplies from humanitarian organisations destined for the Tutsi refugees in the church, thereby depriving them of any means of sustenance during the time spent in refuge there. Muhimana and the soldiers were also said to have distributed arms to the Interahamwe and to Hutu civilians with the aim of launching an attack against these Tutsi refugees. Towards 15 April 1994, Muhimana together with Clément Kayishema, Obed Ruzindana, the Interahamwe, soldiers, communal police and Hutu civilians, reportedly launched an attack against the Mubuga church which led to the death of around 5000 people. Muhimana, himself, was reported to have killed hundreds of people and to have wounded many others. Muhimana and others were then said to have taken away three Tutsi women close to a cemetery where they were raped. He was then said to have given the order to the Interahamwe to rip open the abdomen of two of these women, resulting, as a consequence, in their death.
Between 9 and 16 April 1994, around 6000 people, Tutsi in the majority, had sought refuge in the Mugonero compound, in Ngomo, a compound consisting of a church, a hospital and a school for nurses. Between 14 and 16 April Muhimana and others were said to have taken three Tutsi women from this compound and raped them. On 16 April 1994, on or about 9 o’clock in the morning, Muhimana together with Kayishema, Ruzindana, the Interahamwe, soldiers and the communal police allegedly launched an armed attack against the refugees, killing almost all of them. Muhimana and others were reported to have participated in a collective rape of nine Tutsi women and whilst doing so hurling insults at them. Four of them were then reportedly murdered. Muhimana was also said to have raped a Hutu woman then to have excused himself “for having committed an error”, by thinking that she was a Tutsi woman.
In the Bisesero region, located in the Kibuye prefecture which encompasses the communes of Gishyita and Gisovu, the killings went on over several months, from April to June 1994, and resulted in tens of thousands of deaths. In April 1994, Muhimana, accompanied by regular soldiers and the Interahamwe, allegedly fired on around twenty Tutsis in Uwingabo, killing all of them. Towards 13 April 1994, in the centre of Rushishi, Muhimana and others were said to have distributed arms to the Interahamwe in order to attack the Tutsi who had sought refuge in the surrounding hills. On or about the 13 and 14 May 1994, Muhimana, Kayishema, Ruzindana and others were alleged to have participated in an attack against Tutsis who had taken refuge in the hills of Gitwa and Muyira, causing 10’000 deaths.
At various different dates, Muhimana, the Interahamwe and other persons, reportedly sought out and murdered civilian Tutsi who had sought refuge in this region, in particular in April 1994 in the hills of Mutiti and Ngendombi and around 9 April 1994 in the hills of Nyarutovu as well as in May in the hills of Kabakobwa, Gitwa, Kanyinya and Ngendombi.
In this same region, on or about 22 June 1994, Muhimana was alleged to have participated in the killing of a Tutsi businessman called Assiel Kabanda.
Finally, on or about 28 June 1994, Muhimana and Ruzindana tricked civilian Tutsi, who had been wounded during the attacks, into coming out of their hiding-place by promising to provide them with medical supplies. As soon as the wounded had come out of hiding, Muhimana and Ruzindana were said to have brought up armed men and to have attacked these Tutsis killing more than 2000 of them and wounding around 1000 others.
Between 6 April and 30 June 1994, Muhimana was accused of having committed rape against several different women on several different occasions.
In the town of Gishyita, Muhimana was said to have raped Tutsi women on three occasions. Towards 7 April, he was reported to have brought two women to his home and to have raped them. Afterwards, he allegedly led them outside, naked, inviting the people to come and see what naked Tutsi women looked like. This being his aim, he ordered the Interahamwe to hold the women’s legs widespread and then to kill them, which they did in his presence. Around 14 April, Muhimana was alleged to have raped a Tutsi woman before offering her up to an Interahamwe militiaman named Gisambo to do likewise. This act took place in the home of Muhimana and in his presence. Following this, on order from Muhimana, she was murdered. Towards end April, Muhimana was reported to have raped a Tutsi woman on two separate occasions in the Gishyita communal offices.
On or about 22 April 1994, Muhimana was said to have allowed an armed civilian to detain a Tutsi woman in his house. This civilian was reported to have raped her on numerous occasions over the course of several weeks.
Towards the end of April 1994, on the Kabatwa hillside in the region of Bisesero, a Tutsi woman was reported to have been raped by an Interahamwe militiaman on orders from Muhimana, after which they allegedly murdered her by inserting a machete into her vagina. In May 1994, in a pub in Ngoma, Muhimana and others allegedly raped a Tutsi woman and reportedly physically assaulted three other women, one of which was a young girl of 9 years of age, before killing all of them. Towards the end of May 1994, on the Nyakiyabo hill, Muhimana and a Interahamwe militiaman named Gisambo, were said to have raped a Tutsi woman, who was then subsequently murdered on his orders. On or about June 1994, on the Gitwa hill, Muhimana and Interahamwe militiamen were said to have taken part in a collective rape of a woman, raping her until she was dead.
Towards mid-July 1994, in the face of the advancing FPR (Rwandan Patriotic Front, an opposition movement led by Paul Kagame, consisting mainly of Tutsi refugees), Muhimana fled Rwanda in the direction of the Democratic Republic of Congo.
On 8 November 1999, he was arrested in Tanzania on request of the Chief Prosecutor of the ICTY (International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda). On the same day, he was transferred to the United Nations prison quarters in Arusha, Tanzania.
Since being detained, Muhimana has converted to Islam and now calls himself Issa. 