Ranko Cesic
08.05.2016
facts

Ranko Cesic was born on 5 September 1964 in Bosnia Herzegovina. At the time of the alleged facts described below, Ranko Cesic was a member of the Territorial Defence Forces of the Bosnian Serbs in Brcko. On 15 May 1992, he joined the ranks of the Intervention Squad in the Reserve Corps of the Bosnian Serb police force based in Brcko. His exact role and grade in this Corps remain unknown.
Ranko Cesic was acknowledged as being the person who murdered Sakib Becirevic and four other men in the Partizan sports complex in Brcko, around 5 May 1992.
Ranko Cesic was also convicted for the murder of a prisoner in the Luka camp, known under the name of “Sejdo”. This murder was committed towards 11 May 1992.
Ranko Cesic was found guilty of the murder of a Muslim policeman, by name of Mirsad, who was being held at the Luka camp. This murder was committed towards 11 May 1992. Ranko Cesic first of all ordered the victim, who was being held in a hanger together with several other persons, to say goodbye to the other prisoners by shaking their hands. Ranko Cesic and other Serb policemen then took the victim from the hangar, gave him a beating and finally killed him.
On 11 May 1992, Cesic forced two Muslim prisoners in the Luka camp, both brothers, to practice at gunpoint, a fellatio on each other.
Ranko Cesic was also found guilty of the murder of Nihad Jasarevic, a Muslim prisoner in the Luka camp, where he and another Serb policeman bludgeoned him to death.
Finally, Ranko Cesic was found guilty of the murder of two other prisoners in the Luka camp. He admitted to the fact that on one of the days between 14 May and 6 June 1992, he led four prisoners out from the administration building, marched them along the road towards the principal hanger where he killed at least two of them with the help of two camp guards.
All of the acts described above took place within the context of the capture of the Brcko municipality by the Bosnian Serb forces, which began on 30 April 1992.
Ranko Cesic was arrested in Belgrade on 25 May 2002 by the Yugoslav Federal Republic authorities and was transferred to the prison quarters of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in The Hague on 17 June 2002. 