Aco Knezevic
26.04.2016
facts

Aco Knezevic was born in 1965
In 1999, he served in the army of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the First Battalion of the Podgorica Corps under the command of Predrag Strugar. According to press reports, this military unit was essentially made up of reservists coming from regions in the north of Montenegro where there was a high concentration of Montenegrins of Serb origin.
Montenegro, at that time, was allied with Serbia within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. As a result of an agreement reached between the authorities in Belgrade and Podgorica, it was the Yugoslav army that was put in charge of patrol and security of the borders between Montenegro and Kosovo during the conflict which broke out between Serbs and Kosovar Albanians during the period 1996 to 1999.
The battalion, in which Aco Knezevic was serving, was based in one of these border regions in the area around Hajle. In this mountainous and forested region there were four villages populated by Albanians, one of which was the village of Kaludjerski Laz, situated not far from the town of Rozage (Montenegro)
According to local press reports, in the month of April 1999, on the other side of the border in the region of Rugova (Kosovo), hostilities between the Kosovo Liberation Army (UCK) and expulsions of the Albanian population by the Serbian forces, were intensified. The OTAN bombing campaign against Serbian positions had just begun. As a result, many Albanians from the villages in the region attempted at the time to flee towards Montenegro.
Based on media reports, Kosovar civilians, attempting to escape to Montenegro, were killed as they tried to cross the border. Based on the indictment, Aco Knezevic was said to have taken part in a campaign, directed by Predrag Strugar, to assassinate civilians, and which led to the death of 23 people of Albanian origin between 18 April 1999 and 22 May 1999. Amongst these people were a boy of 13 years of age and an elderly man aged 70, neither of whom had taken part in the hostilities.
In particular, the press reported an event which has been engraved in local memories under the description of the “massacre of Kaludjerski Laz”. On 18 April 1999, 6 civilians who were attempting to flee from Kosovo were killed. Amongst these people were two old women and a child whose bodies were transferred by truck to the other side of the border, to Novo Selo (Kosovo) to be buried in a mass grave.
At the time the Yugoslav Army placed responsibility on the Serbian paramilitary forces and Predrag Strugar himself said that he was not aware of what had taken place at Kaludjerski Löaz and that he had been prevented from going to the site of the crime.
Starting in the month of April, 1999, the Jugoslav Army opened up investigations aimed at shedding light on the events which had taken place in Kaludjerski Laz, and an examining magistrate from the military was put in charge of leading an enquiry. 