Milan Lukic
25.02.2015
facts

Milan Lukic was born 6 September 1967 in Foca, Bosnia and Herzegovina. He lived for a period of time in Germany, Switzerland and Obrenovac, Serbia.
Lukic returned to Visegrad in 1992 and was said to have formed a group of Bosnian Serb paramilitaries referred to as the “White Eagles” and “Avengers,” .The indictment stated that this group worked with local police and military units to spread terror among the local Muslim population.
Višegrad is a small town in south-eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina, close to the Serbian border. It has a number of features which made it strategically important during the conflict, including the fact that the town is the site of an important hydroelectric dam and a vital road link to Serbia.
The indictment stated that on 6 April 1992 units from the Yugoslav People’s Army (“JNA”) began bombarding the town and its environs with artillery. The bombardment predominantly affected Muslim neighbourhoods and villages. In retaliation, according to the indictment, a small group of Bosnian Muslims took several Serbs hostage, seized control of the dam and threatened to blow it up. The crisis was diffused on 12 April 1992.
On 19 May 1992 the JNA officially withdrew from the town. Local Serb leaders then established the “Serbian Municipality of Višegrad” and took control of all municipal government offices. It was soon thereafter, that local Serbs, police and paramilitaries began one of the most notorious campaigns of ethnic cleansing of the whole conflict.
This campaign was reportedly designed to permanently rid the town of its Bosnian Muslim population. A large number of unarmed Muslim civilians from Višegrad were said to have been killed simply because of their ethnicity. Many of the Muslim men, women and children who were killed around the town and on the historic Ottoman bridge crossing the River Drina were dumped into the river. Serbian forces were reported to have systematically looted and destroyed Muslim homes and villages. Both of Višegrad’s mosques were completely destroyed.
The indictment further alleged that many of the Muslims who were not immediately killed were detained at various locations in the town, as well as at the former JNA military barracks at Uzamnica, five kilometres outside of Višegrad. Those detained in these barracks were kept in inhumane conditions, subjected to regular beatings and used for strenuous forced-labour projects.
In addition to other acts, Milan Lukic was alleged to have led seven Bosnian Muslim men to a site on the bank of the River Drina, near Višegrad, forcing them to line up along the bank, and shooting and killing five of them. He is also alleged to have entered the Varda sawmill and furniture factory in Višegrad, forcing seven Bosnian Muslim men to go to the bank of the River Drina, and shooting them repeatedly, killing all seven men.
On or around 7 June 1992, he reportedly shot and killed five Bosnian Muslim men on the bank of the River Drina. He was also accused of murdering approximately 70 Bosnian Muslim women, children and elderly men in a house on Pionirska Street in Višegrad by barricading the victims in one room of the house, setting the house on fire and then firing automatic weapons at those who tried to escape through the windows, killing some and injuring others. Lukic was thought to have murdered approximately 70 Bosnian Muslim women, children and elderly in a house in the village of Bikavac, near Višegrad, by forcing the victims into the house, barricading all the exits and throwing in several explosive devices.
Furthermore, Milan Lukic, together with Sredoje Lukic, was said to have been responsible for numerous rapes of Bosniak women being held as prisoners at Visegrad’s infamous Vilina Vlas spa hotel, the headquarters of Milan Lukic’s paramilitary group. “Some of the worst crimes of sexual slavery were allegedly committed in Visegrad by the Lukic cousins, who held women for days and weeks, repeatedly raping them.
Meanwhile, a verdict rendered by the High Court in Bijelo Polje, Montenegro, against Nebojsa Ranisavljevic, a former member of the ‘Avengers’, or ‘ White Eagles’, paramilitary group, alleged that a kidnapping leading to the death of 19 civilians (18 Bosniaks and 1 Croat) was organised by Lukic.
The High Court has established that on 27 February 1993 an armed group kidnapped passengers from the express train from Belgrade, Serbia, to Bar, Montenegro, in Stripci. According to trial witnesses, Lukic conducted what seemed to be a routine check and told passengers that those to leave the train would return afterwards. However, the kidnapped passengers were then transported in a truck to Musici village near Visegrad in Bosnia and Herzegovina, were ordered to hand over their personal belongings (such as money, watches, jewellery, and personal documents) and finally shot in a garage.
The verdict also stated that the Serbian Railway Company had reported a possible kidnapping to the Serbian Ministry of Interior and the JNA. Although investigations were carried out 18 years ago, the State Investigation and Protection Agency (SIPA) of Bosnia and Herzegovina arrested on 5 December 2014 the alleged accomplices Obrad and Novak Poluga, and Boban Indjic with 12 other suspects arrested in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Serbia. However, Lukic was not among them.
Also, between 1992 and 1993, Lukic allegedly participated in various murders, rapes and inhumane treatment of local non-Serbian civilians together with Predrag and Nenad Bajic, Sinisa Babic, Slobodan Dragic and Mladen Vrtunic, former members of the JNA in Humici, Vojici, and Pudin Han villages of Kljuc Municipality, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Lukic was arrested 5 August 2005 in Argentina, and transferred to the ICTY on 21 February 2006. 