Zoran Zigic
31.05.2016
facts

Zoran Zigic, alias “Ziga” was born on 20 September 1958 in the village of Balte in the municipality of Prijedor, Bosnia-Herzegovina. Prior to the conflict, he was a taxi driver. During the conflict, he was mobilised to serve as a reserve policeman and temporarily as a guard at the Keraterm camp.
According to the bill of indictment, it was alleged that between April and August 1992, Bosnian Serb authorities in the Prijedor municipality unlawfully segregated, detained and confined more than 6,000 Bosnian Muslims, Bosnian Croats and other non-Serbs from the Prijedor area in the Omarska, Keraterm and Trnopolje camps.
In Omarska camp the prisoners included men of military age and political, economic, social and intellectual leaders of the Bosnian Muslim and Bosnian Croat population. There were about 37 women detained in this camp. At the Keraterm camp, the majority of the prisoners were men of military age. At Trnopolje, the detainees were women, elderly persons, Muslim children and Bosnian Croat children.
According to the indictment, living conditions in Omarska and Keraterm were brutal and inhumane. Interrogations were conducted on a daily basis. The interrogations were regularly accompanied by beatings and torture. Furthermore, serious ill treatment, torture, murder, sexual violence and other forms of physical violence were the norm. Finally, the camp guards used all types of weapons and instruments to beat and otherwise physically abuse the prisoners. At a minimum, hundreds of prisoners, whose identities are known and unknown, did not survive the camps.
Furthermore, it was alleged that in the Trnopolje camp the detainees lived in abject and brutal living conditions. The camp personnel, as well as others authorised to enter the camp to inflict cruel bodily and mental ill treatment, were said to have killed, beaten and subjected prisoners of both sexes to physical and psychological violence.
According to the indictment, between 26 May and 30 August 1992, Zoran Zigic reportedly went to all three camps and in particular to the Omarska and Trnopolje camps in order to carry out brutal beatings, torture and/or to kill prisoners.
Zoran Zigic was arrested on 16 April 1998 by the SFOR (Stabilisation Force for Bosnia-Herzegovina) and transferred on the same day with Mlado Radic (see “Related Cases”) to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 