Sinan Morina
07.05.2016
facts

Sinan Morina was born on 26 September 1972 in the municipality of Opteruša, Kosovo. He is married and a father to five children. He completed eight years of basic education and, although he did not serve in the military, he joined the armed organisation known as the Kosovo Liberation Army, which he worked with in his native town.
Between 17 and 21 July 1998, Morina, along with other members of his unit, took part in the commissioning of various acts, which constitute war crimes, designed to forcibly remove the Serbian population from Kosovan territory. The aim was to bring the area under the Kosovo Liberation Army’s control.
During this time, Morina carried out an armed assault on ten houses lived in by Serbian civilians and ordered that the 17 people living there leave the place whilst he stole their belongings and subjected them to severe beatings. After having been confined, the men were separated from the group of women, children and elderly people. This last group were brought to various locations, until the 21 July 1998 when they were left in the hands of the Red Cross who brought them to Pristina and then to Serbian territory. Meanwhile, the group of men, eight in total, were subjected to brutal beatings by members of Morina’s group, until eventually they were killed and their bodies were left in a cave in the Kosovan town of Volujak.
After this assault, Morina, along with other members of his armed unit, burned the Serbian houses in Opteruša and burst into the Orthodox churches in San Salvador and San Nicolas, destroying all the orthodox symbols inside, such as crosses, images, pictures and religious furniture.
On 13 July 2005 the Officer of War Crimes Prosecutor of Serbia charged Sinan Morinafor the crimes against Serbian people and properties on Kosovan land, attributed to him and other members of his armed unit. He was charged both for his individual responsibility and within the framework of the group in which he acted, charging him with of attacks on people and properties protected by the IV Geneva Convention of 1949 and Additional Protocol II of 1977. 