Josef Baumann
21.04.2016
facts

The acts perpetrated by Josef Baumann among others are known as the “massacre of Marzabotto,” were carried out between September 29, 1944 and October 5, 1944. They are also named “the Monte Sole Massacre,” to encompass similar atrocities committed in the Marzabotto area and the Monte Sole hills in the Emilia-Romagna region of Italy, including the towns of Tagliadazza, Caparra, Castellano, Caviglia, Vado di Monzuno, and Grizzana. The Marzabotto massacre effectively constituted a part of a larger operation against the Stella Rossa partisan group operating in the region.
Following the Sant’Anna di Stazzema Massacre in early August, Field Marshal Albert Kesselring received information about Stella Rossa’s retaliatory activity in Marzabotto and therefore moved to halt their action and strike a blow against civilians aiding them. The Nazi and Wehrmacht leadership allegedly determined the ratio of retaliation of 50 Italians for every dead German; in the course of the Marzabotto operations this ratio was increased to 100 to one. The notorious SS Sturmbannführer Walter Reder lead the 16th SS Armoured Infantry Division in the Marzabotto operation, ordering the storming and burning of houses, schools and churches. Over 800 apartments were destroyed and the victims of Marzabotto, Grizzano and Vado di Monzuno were over 1,800.
After the war, Walter Reder was captured by American forces and extradited to Italy, where he was sentenced to life imprisonment by the Bologna military tribunal in on October 31, 1951. An unsuccessful appeal reconfirmed the sentence three years later, but in 1980 a military court in Bari reduced his sentence following diplomatic pressure from Germany and the Vatican. In January 1985, Reder was freed by intercession of the Austrian government, becoming a free man and dying of natural causes in 1991 having rescinded his apologetic and remorseful note during the trial in Bari.
The indignation of the survivors and relatives of the Marzabotto victims was only enhanced by the discovery of the so-called “Cabinet of Shame,” in 1994, that were found in the basement of the Military Attorney’s offices in Rome, containing nearly 700 files detailing uninvestigated war crimes committed by Nazi forces in 1943 and 1944. The judicial authorities in Italy now had the material to probe deeper into the events of Marzabotto and the Monte Sole region. 