Eugenio Guanabens Perello
28.04.2016
facts

Eugenio Guanabens Perello was born on 1 January 1926 in Barcelona (Spain). He is the son of Isamel and Catalina Perello. He is married and retired from the Army.
From 11 September 1976 to 9 December 1977, he was the director of the General Lemos Combat Support Services School. He was in charge of the area 470 – General Sarmiento – which corresponds to the Defence IV Area. In December 1977, he was promoted to “General de Brigada”. The General Lemos School served as a training institute for the future high-level and low-level employees of the Army.
Guanabens Perelló was accused of crimes against humanity committed at Campo de Mayo (the main clandestine detention centre in Buenos Aires during the dictatorship), including those committed against two political opponents: Mario Luis Peretti and Pablo Alberto Albarracin.
It has been argued that Mario Luis Peretti (case n° 130 of the cause n° 4012) was deprived of his liberty on 7 June 1977 in the locality of San Miguel, urban district General Sarmiento, Region of Buenos Aires, by an armed group which came under the control of the Argentinean Army. He would have been then transferred to the clandestine detention centre known as “La Casita”, located in the military garrison in Campo de Mayo until 13 July 1977, where he suffered torture and inhuman treatments. Peretti was then moved to the Police Station General Sarmiento n°2 – also known as Bella Vista – which came then under the effective control of the military forces and under the Defence IV Area command until 27 July 1977 (place which then has come under the control of other authorities which were not the jurisdiction of Perello anymore.) He was released the 17 November 1977.
The illegal detention of Pablo Alberto Albarracin (cas n°14 of the cause n°2043) would have occurred, according to the Prosecution, on 13 April 1977 in the General Lemos Combat Support Services School, inside the military garrison of Campo de Mayo, while Albarracin was doing his compulsory military service. He went missing since then.
Eugenio Guanabens Perello was indicted of illegal deprivation of liberty, twice aggravated by the use of violence and threats and for the duration of the detention (more than one month), and of infliction of torture aggravated to be meant as a political persecution.
In 2006, the Prosecutor asked for the detention of Eugenio Guanabens Perello, Luis Alberto Sarmiento, Lorenzo Montiel and Aldo Roberto Arenaz and indicted them for illegal deprivation of liberty and torture. 