Sladjan Cukaric
08.05.2016
facts 


Sladjan Cukaric was a police officer in Suva Reka in Kosovo. In the spring of 1999, the Yugoslav Army, Serbian Police and Serb Paramilitary forces allegedly initiated a broad campaign of violence against Albanian civilians in order to expel them from Kosovo and maintain political control of Belgrade. During this attack, war crimes were committed against civilians, predominantly ethnic Albanians and other non-Serb citizens.
During the morning of 26 March 1999, two buses containing special police forces, commanded by Radoslav Mitrovic, arrived in front of the Suva Reka police station. Mitrovic commanded the officers – Cukaric, Miroslav Petkovic, and Radovan Tanovic – to join the Special Forces in an attack against a house belonging to the Albanian Berisha family. As the special forces separated the men and women at the household of the Berisha family, Cukaric and his colleague Tanovic lined up and killed four unarmed men with Cukaric personally killing two elderly men who were lying wounded in the street according to one witness.
Cukaric and Petkovic were said to have shot at the men, women and children who attempted to flee the police.
After the attack on the Berisha house, approximately 50 Albanian civilians were taken to a nearby pizza restaurant. The group comprised of men, women and children. The policemen drank bottles of brandy and vodka, before another officer, Tanovic, broke a window with his rifle and threw a hand grenade inside of the building. Cukaric then began firing into the building “until no screams were heard.” Inside the pizzeria were 50 people, of which 48 were members of the Berisha family; 14 of these 48 were children, two were babies, one was a pregnant woman, another, a 100-year-old woman.
After the attack, the bodies were loaded onto military trucks to be buried. Siret and Violca Berisha survived this crime by jumping out of the truck, after they escaped death by not showing signs of life. The bodies were then transported and buried in a mass grave in Prizren, a police firing range. Other bodies, as an attempt to conceal the crime, were excavated and relocated to a mass grave in the Batajnica base near Belgrade.
Cukaric, along with seven other alleged perpetrators was indicted in April 2006 for committing war crimes against Albanian civilians in the village of Suva Reka on 26 March 1999, during the Kosovo War. 