Max Schneider
27.04.2016
facts

Max Schneider was born on 1 October 1925 in Berlin, Germany. During WWII he was sergeant in the 16th SS tank division “Reichsführer SS”.
In the summer of 1944, at the time of the facts alleged in the indictment, the German forces were in retreat, in Italy as almost everywhere else. Their forces had already pulled back as far as Tuscany.
On 12 August 1944, Max Schneider together with the units of the 16th SS Armoured Infantry Division under the leadership of the notorious SS Sturmbannführer Walter Reder made their way up to the remote mountain village of Sant’Anna di Stazzema. At the time, the village had a population of around 400 and was sheltering several hundred refugees.
Officially, the mission of the SS was to take action against the Italian guerrillas. It was known at the time that the policy of the German high command towards the armed resistance in Italy-la “Resistenza”-was particularly vicious. According to an official document, army officers were not to be subject to punishment for any brutal acts they might commit.
The inhabitants of Sant’Anna were forced to assemble in enclosed farmyards and in the village square. Thereafter, SS soldiers massacred anyone whom they came across, using machine guns, bayonets, hand grenades and flame-throwers. The victims were mainly women, children and old men (the younger men were not in the village at that time). The soldiers then burned the bodies and set fire to the buildings. The entire village was completely destroyed in less than four hours. The massacre resulted in 560 deaths, of which 116 were children. Sant’Anna di Stazzema was never rebuilt.
On 29 September 1944, the same units continued to carry out brutal crimes against the population in North of Italy. This time in the town of Marzobotto where around 800 people, mainly women, children and older men, were killed by the units, with a further 1,000 killed in surrounding villages. The victims included some 200 children, some only a few days old.
In 1994 nearly 700 files detailing uninvestigated war crimes committed by Nazi forces in 1943 and 1944 were found in the basement of the Military Attorney’s offices in Rome. This discovery allowed for the judicial authorities in Italy to investigate further the events of Marzabotto and the Monte Sole region, as the files named SS officials involved in the Marzabotto massacres previously unknown. 