José Raúl Cáceres González
25.04.2016
facts


José Raúl Cáceres González was part of the Naval Intelligence Department (Ancla Dos) and Second Lieutenant and Captain in the navy in Chile during the dictatorship ofAugusto Pinochet-Ugarte.
Regional Intelligence Centres (Centros de Inteligencia Regional, CIRE) were created across Chile in 1974 and, working in coordination with the secret police (Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional, DINA), the CIRE operated in places that the DINA did not. The CIRE were made up of various intelligence units from various branches of the armed, police and investigative forces. In the city of Concepción the CIRE operated a prisoner camp in the sports centre of the Talcahuano naval base from 1974 until mid-1975, when it was moved to the old premises of the El Morro fort, situated next to the “El Morro” sports stadium in Talcahuano, where it remained until 1982. Hundreds of political prisoners were abducted by CIRE agents and tortured in these prisoner camps. Almost all of the prisoners were militants from the Movement of the Revolutionary Left (Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria, MIR) who had organised a resistance against the military dictatorship that came about following the 1973 coup d’état.
One victim of the crimes committed at the CIRE prisons was Rudy Cárcamo Ruiz, a former member of GAP (Group of Personal Friends of Salvador Allende – Allende’s personal security group) and a MIR militant. On 16 October 1973, Cárcamo was arrested at his home in Lenin de Talcahuano, taken to Quiriquina Island and then to the Talcahuano Naval Base where he remained until 21 July 1974, when he was released without ever having been tried.
Later that same year, at 10pm on 27 November 1974 three members of the “Ancla Dos” group (comprised of navy intelligence agents who pursued leftist militants showed up at the house of Cárcamo’s mother- and father-in-law, posing as civilian police officers. They asked for Cárcamo and took him away, telling his in-laws that they were taking him in for questioning. Cárcamo has never been seen since. Investigations have found that he was taken directly to the Talcahuano Naval Base. Cárcamo was tortured in the locker rooms of the sports centre in Talcahuano. Statements from fellow detainees indicate that Cárcamo disappeared between 24 and 31 December 1974 but there are conflicting stories regarding his whereabouts. Some witnesses say that he died under torture at Talcahuano and that he was buried in the gardens of the Hualpén museum. Others suggest he was murdered and buried illegally in the Octavo region. However, one list disclosed by General Juan Manuel Guillermo Contreras Supelveda (former head of the National Intelligence Unit at DINA) indicates that he was thrown in the sea.
Known for his cruelty during his time at the fort Borgoño of Talcahuano in August 1973 during the repression of constitutionalist marines that had previously been impeaching the coup d’état, Cáceres González was considered one of the cruellest torturers within the Ancla Dos. The fort Borgoño of Talcahuano was another detention centre located in Concepción, which operated from 1973 to 1975.
In the case of the disappearance of Cácarmo Ruiz, Cáceres González was considered equally responsible to the other authors of the crime as they all received the same sentence.
In 2012, he was tried for aggravated abduction alongside four other former members of the Chilean navy: Hugo Nelson González D’Arcangeli (head of intelligence and commander of the navy), Victor Ernesto Donoso Barrera (lieutenant and assistant to the head of intelligence), Conrado Alfredo Sesnic Guerricabeitia (Police Captain) and Osvaldo Francisco Harnish Salazar (Inspector at Chile’s former Investigations Department). 