Former ECHR judge becomes TRIAL's new President
29.11.2011
A sole candidate for the TRIAL Presidency. But what a candidate!
Giorgio Malinverni, who recently retired from his post as Judge at the European Court of Human Rights, will in all likelihood become the next President of TRIAL.
Giorgio Malinverni, was born in 1941. He carried out his studies at the universities of Fribourg and Geneva.In 1980, he was appointed Professor at the University of Geneva where he taught constitutional law, international law and international human rights law. In 2006, he was elected as Judge of the European Court of Human Rights where he sat in this capacity from February 2007 until October 2011.
TRIAL, a NGO specialized in the fight against impunity for perpetrators of serious international crimes, is delighted that it will soon have at its head such a highly regarded personality.
According to Philip Grant, the Director of TRIAL, “Giorgio Malinverni will bring to TRIAL his wide knowledge of human rights issues which will further enhance its work in favour of the victims. In his role as judge, he was called upon to pass judgment on dozens of cases related to enforced disappearances or extrajudicial executions committed in Chechnya. We have here therefore a renowned international expert together with whom the entire TRIAL team is impatient to start working”.
For his part Giorgio Malinverni stated that “after having taught human rights as a university professor, and after officiating as a judge, the time has now come for me to take up a new role as a citizen. Working for TRIAL, I hope to promote the cause of justice on behalf of the victims in order that the law might contribute to putting an end to barbarity“.
The current President of TRIAL, François Membrez, will stay on as a member of the NGO’s Board, of which he is a member since TRIAL was founded in 2002. He will continue to officiate therein as Vice-President. The organization is therefore highly pleased to be able to continue to benefit from his wide experience 