Carlos Roberto Guillermo Bravo
02.05.2013
facts 

Carlos Roberto Guillermo Bravo was born in 1942, and was a Lieutenant in the Argentinian military regime at the time of the alleged crimes.
On 15 August 1972, during the dictatorship of General Alejandro Agustín, 25 political prisoners who were part of extreme left wing armed opposition groups succeeded in escaping from the Rawson Prison. Six members of the group managed to board an aeroplane towards Chile, however, the remaining 19 were surrounded and recaptured at the airport. The Lieutenant Commander, Luis Emilio Sosa, made a bargain with the prisoners, promising to guarantee the human rights of the political prisoners of Rawson prison, the group accepted and lay down their arms.
However, contrary to Sosa’s promise the 19 prisoners were returned, not to Rawson, but to the naval base of Amiral Zar, at Trelew. On 22 August, at 3 o’clock in the morning, five army officers: Luis Emilio Sosa, Ruben Paccagnini, Raúl Herrera, Emilio del Real and Carlos Bravo ordered the attendant to open the cell door, wake the prisoners and bring them out to the corridor. The group were then put in two lines, and the five naval officers shot the prisoners at close range. Three of the prisoners survived, and 16 were killed.
According to the military official report, the killings had been in response to another attempted prison escape. This account, however, has been challenged and the incident has since been recognised as an act of state terrorism intended to systematically repress political opposition to the military regime in Argentina.
Following the massacre at Trelaw naval base, the Navy kept Carlos Roberto Guillermo Bravo’s domicile a secret for 20 years. Bravo has subsequently gained American nationality and is currently the head of RGB Group Inc., a company that places workers in health care and in the security industry and has contracts with the US Department of Defence.
In February 2006, the Family of María Angélica Sabelli, one of the victims, filed a complaint against the Argentinian Navy at the Federal Tribunal of Rawson, and was soon followed by the families of other victims. 