Antonio Domingo Bussi
28.04.2016
facts

Antonio Domingo Bussi was born on 17 January 1926 in Victoria, Entre Ríos Province, Argentina. He graduated from the National Military College in 1947 as a second lieutenant in the Army’s Infantry Division. Bussi was promoted to captain in 1954 and was transferred to the Army’s Mountain Division in 1957. He then married Josefina Beatriz Bigoglio with whom he had four children. In 1969, Bussi was named the head of the 19th Mountain Infantry Regiment in Tucumán Province and then promoted to brigadier general of the Tenth Infantry Brigade of the city of Buenos Aires in 1975. Later that year, he became commander of Operativo Independencia, a military offensive ordered by President Isabel Perón to counter the People’s Revolutionary Army (ERP) insurgency in Tucumán.
The military coup in March 1976 resulted in Bussi’s appointment as Governor of Tucumán where he led a bloody campaign against the perceived guerrilla insurgency. During the campaign, a large number of forced disappearances occurred in Tucumán, a large percentage of which were students, professors and recent graduates of the local university on suspicion of aiding the ERP guerrillas. Doctors, trade unionists and politicians were also the subject of kidnappings, unlawful imprisonment and torture. Amongst the disappeared politicians was the Peron appointed Guillermo Vargas Aignasse. Bussi was rumoured to have operated a number of secret prisons in the area, was thought to have presided over these disappearances and to have personally taken part in their execution on multiple occasions.
In 1981, Bussi retired from active duty with the rank of general. Following restoration of democracy to Argentina in 1983, dozens of armed forces members were indicted for various human rights violations, including Bussi. The December 1986 “Full Stop Law,” passed as a result of military pressure on then-President Raúl Alfonsín, effectively froze prosecution and spared Bussi from trial on the charges of unlawful imprisonment, torture, murder and falsifying documents.
Bussi turned to politics and was elected Governor of the Tucumán province in 1995. In 1999, Bussi was elected to the Lower House of Congress but his certification to the post was rejected by Congress due to his role in the crimes against humanity that took place during his military tenure and evidence of ongoing embezzlement while serving as Governor. Bussi’s election as Mayor of the city of San Miguel de Tucumán was likewise blocked in 2003 and he was arrested later that year for his role in the 1976 disappearance of politician Vargas Aignasse. Although the Supreme Curt of Argentina would later overturn Congress’ blocking of Bussi, he was still held from taking office because of the pending criminal charges.
In 1983, Bussi was accused of five counts of crimes against humanity for the forced disappearance of Vargas Aignasse in 1976. Bussi’s arrest and prosecution on these charges commenced in 2003. 