Frank Wuterich
25.04.2016
facts

Frank Wuterich was born in 1980 in New London, Connecticut. In 1998 when he was 17 years old and in his senior year of high school he enlisted in the Marine Corps. Before being deployed in Iraq, Wuterich was based in Hawaii then in California at Camp Pendelton where he was an instructor of Marine Combat Training.
Deployed in Iraq as part of Operation Iraqi Freedom his battalion (3rd battalion of the 1st Marine Regiment) was redeployed for the third time in September 2005. For Sergeant Wuterich It was his first deployment in a theatre of operations.
Whilst in Iraq he was integrated into Kilo Company and placed under the command of Lieutenant colonel Chessani. The Company was based in a agricultural region on the Euphrates river 250 km North West of Baghdad. The Kilo Company was the target of numerous insurgent attacks; it had lost about 20 personnel by the time of the Haditha Massacre.
On the morning of the 19 November 2005, a bomb exploded on a convoy of marines, not far from the village of Haditha. Corporal Miguel Terrazas aged 20 died instantly. Two other soldiers were wounded. Presumably troubled, members of the unit are accused of having responded by firing on a taxi which was passing by. Its five occupants aged 18 to 25 years old were killed. The soldiers then travelled to the village of Haditha. They broke into several houses and killed in cold blood those they found inside. They spared no one: women, children, the elderly. 24 civilians were assassinated.
After the incident, a delegation of villagers went to the closest military base to demand justice. The marines are alleged to have offered certain families up to $2500 in exchange for their silence so as not to publicize the incident.
The next day, the US army gave its first version of the events. The press release of 20 November 2005 stated that a homemade bomb had killed an American soldier and 15 civilians and that the subsequent exchange of fire led to the death of eight Iraqi insurgents.
Despite the accusations of Iraqi witnesses, an inquest was not opened until January 2006. The Pentagon furthermore denied there was a case to be heard. In January 2006 a video circulated by an Iraqi student campaigning for human rights revealed the truth. The images of bodies in the morgue showed that they were not insurgents: the women and children were in pyjamas, an old man held the Koran in his hands. Moreover, the various villager’s testimonies in the video corroborated exactly the allegations of massacre. It was several months before the American president George W. Bush promised to establish the truth and pursue the possible culprits.
In March 2006, an article in Time Magazine revealed the incident to the public and confirmed that American soldiers had been engaged in a massacre. The article stated that the soldiers had tried to hide the truth with the help of their superiors. This public announcement forced the army to open two internal inquests, one of which would result in legal proceedings. According to leaks in the press, the investigators established that Wuterich was present in at least two houses in which the massacres took place.
The Killings of Haditha are potentially the worst war crimes that the American forces in Iraq have been accused of. The army and the US government have suffered fierce criticism for trying to present a false version of events.
In April 2006, the soldiers of Kilo Company were relieved of their duties and repatriated to California. The inquiry into the events of Haditha on 3 September 2007 led to a recommendation that Wuterich be prosecuted by court martial for manslaughter. 