Carlos Camilo Hernández Barahona
15.03.2012
facts

Carlos Camilo Hernández Barahona was born in El Salvador. He is a career military man. In 1989, he was a major and the interim assistant director of the Salvadorian military academy.
At dawn on 16 November 1989, Salvadorian military troops invaded the campus of the Universidad Centroamericana “José Simeón Cañas” (UCA) and brutally murdered six Jesuit priests, including the headmaster, as well as the university’s housekeeper and her daughter.
According to the indictment issued by the National Court of Spain, Carlos Hernández Barahona was present on the evening of 15 November 1989 when Colonel Guillermo Alfredo Benavides Moreno informed the officers of the military academy that he had received an order to kill the headmaster of the UCA. The Colonel is said to have placed Carlos Hernández Barahona in charge of the organization of this operation.
It is also alleged that Carlos Hernández Barahona organized and participated in the meeting during which the Colonel is to have ordered Lieutenant José Ricardo Espinoza Guerra to kill the headmaster. What is more, Carlos Hernández Barahona is accused of having given an AK-47 confiscated from the Frente Farabundo Martín de Liberación Nacional (FMLN, the socialist group against whom the army was fighting at the time) to the men set to carry out the murders. He is said to have told them to use the weapon to kill the priest and to leave FMLN propaganda at the scene of the crime to make it seem that it was this group who had committed the murder.
According to the report of the Salvadorian United Nations Truth Commission and to the indictment, Carlos Hernández Barahona also participated in the concealment of the crime by aiding with the destruction a suitcase containing pictures, documents and money confiscated at the UCA as well as by ordering the destruction of key military academy records.
Since 1989, Carlos Hernández Barahona has been promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel. He lives in El Salvador.
Carlos Hernández Barahona was sentenced to a three-year prison term for his role in the UCA massacre and in the concealment of this crime. However, he did not serve his sentence due to the amnesty law that was passed in 1992. 