Vlatko Kupreskic
09.01.2012
facts

latko Kupreskic was born on 1 January 1958 in Pirici, Bosnia-Herzegovina. He is married and the father of two children. He is the cousin of Zoran and Mirjan Kupreskic(see “related cases”). He was manager of a business before the war.
Vlatko Kupreskic, was enlisted in the HVO between 1992 and 1993. He was reportedly a police officer with the grade of inspector.
The HVO was the supreme executive, administrative and military body of the HZ H-B/HR-B (Croatian Community of the Herceg-Bosna Croatian Republic of Herceg-Bosna), created in 1991. This community, considered itself to be a separate distinct legal entity within the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
According to the indictment, modified on 9 February 1998, Vlatko Kupreskic, between October 1992 and April 1993, was reported to have persecuted the Muslim inhabitants of Ahmici-Santici and its surroundings on political, racial or religious grounds by planning, organising and carrying out an attack aimed at evacuating or “cleansing” the village and the surrounding region of all of the Bosnian Muslims.
The same indictment alleged that he had helped in the preparations for the April attack, against the civilian population of Ahmici-Santici. The HVO was said to have firstly bombarded Ahmici-Santici from a distance, with groups of soldiers subsequently going from house to house and, using incendiary tracer bullets and explosives, aggressing Bosnian Muslim civilians and laying hold of their belongings.
Before the attack on 16 April 1993 against the village of Ahmici, HVO soldiers, armed with automatic rifles were said to have assembled at the house of Vlatko Kupreskic in Ahmici. This same house was said to have been used as a deployment zone on the day of the attack. Vlatko Kupreskic and other soldiers of the HVO reportedly fired from his house on Muslim civilians who were trying to escape, killing at least one person and wounding another.
Vlatko Kupreskic was arrested by the SFOR on 18 December 1997 and transferred to The Hague on the same day. 