Ramiro Vanoy Murillo
21.04.2016
facts

Ramiro Vanoy Murillo was born on 31 March 1948 in Tacopí, Cundinamarca in Colombia.
Early in his adulthood, he was an emerald dealer in Muzo, Boyaca. In the 1980s, he was linked to the Medellín Cartel led by Pablo Escobar. A few years later, he left the criminal organisation and became an enemy of Escobar. After his death, Vanoy Murillo joined the drug trafficker Alejandro Bernal Madrigal (known under the alias Juvenal). In order to support his drug trafficking activities, he created a paramilitary Bloc, called “Mineros”, in the town of Tarazá, chosen for its strategic location leading to the Colombian coast (Gulf of Morrosquillo).
His modus operandi was similar to that of Pablo Escobar. He used both populist activities (through, for example, the building of playgrounds, clinics, paved roads, the organisation of soup kitchens, markets and free surgeries) and presumably, terrorist activities (he, for instance, allegedly ordered the killing of several peasants and trade unionists in the area, as well as the rape of several women) in order to acquire land in the region.
The massacres of Valdivia and Medellín, which he recently confessed, are also attributed to him. The massacre of Valdivia took place between 31 March and 1 April 1996. Back then, members of the Mineros Bloc slaughtered Juan Bautista Baena Muñoz, and tortured and killed Elkin Darío Madrigal and Hipólito González. According to Vanoy Murillo’s own statements, the slaughter was ordered by Diego Fernando Murillo Bejarano (known under the alias “Don Berna”). The aim was to obtain the liberation of Juan Pablo Upegui, who had been kidnapped on 29 January 1996. In his testimony, Vanoy Murillo also stated that members of the national Colombian security forces participated in the massacre.
The Medellín massacre took place on 28 February 2004, in the residential unit “Parques del Estadio”, where Fredy Hernán Berrío Torres, Oscar Peñaranda Ortiz, Rafael Arias Arias y Jesús Antonio Carvajal Mazo were killed. These men were assassinated for having offered basis of coca to a dealer known as Mao Molina instead of Vanoy Murillo.
In January 2006, the negotiating process between the United Self-Defence Forces of Colombia (AUC) and the Colombian government was completed, and established a legal framework (the Justice and Peace Law) for the reintegration of paramilitary groups. Vanoy Murillo, was, thus, demobilized, alongside the entire paramilitary Bloc, and was sent to the Itagui prison.
On 13 May 2008, the Colombian government extradited him to the United States along with 11 other members of paramilitary forces. The Colombian Supreme Court had previously authorized Vanoy Murillo’s extradition on 20 May 2007. According to the Colombian government, Vanoy Murillo and the other paramilitaries continued to commit crimes from the prisons they were incarcerated. Furthermore, before his extradition, Vanoy Murillo participated in several “free-version” hearings of the Justice and Peace process. During these hearings, he confessed committing various crimes.
In October 2009, the Southern Florida District Court found him guilty of drug trafficking and money laundering and sentenced him to 24 years in prison.
Since his extradition to the United States, Vanoy Murillo has participated in several “free-version” hearings, transmitted through telecommunication means. During most of these hearings, he denied having committed the alleged crimes and maintained that the men under his command did not attack civilians.
In December 2010, the public prosecutor accused him of the commission of: murder, enforced disappearance, qualified theft, torture and child recruitment, before a supervisory judge of the Justice and Peace unit. 