Eli Mejía Mendoza
09.05.2016
facts


Eli Mejia Mendoza was born in 1953. He was a member and Commander of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) for over 35 years. He is called “Martín Sombra”, or “el carcelero de las FARC”, the jailer of the FARC.
He is held responsible for the following crimes:
– 1 November 1998: the FARC attacked the Mitu police station, city localized in the Vaupès department. Reportedly, 43 persons died in this attack, including civilians, 47 were injured and 61 state officers were captured and sequestrated in the FARC ‘s jails.
– In 1999, Mejia Mendoza was reported to have taken part in the seizure of the Girasol military base located in the municipality of Mesetas in the Colombian department of Meta, during which two Colombian Army soldiers were killed and 17 were taken prisoner.
– He also held responsibility for holding the FARC’s most important hostages, Ingrid Betancourt, former presidential candidate and her campaign director, Clara Rojas. Three other hostages were captured by the FARC on 13 February 2003: three American security contractors (Keith Donald Stansell, Marc Goncalves and Thomas R. Howes), kidnapped when their plane crashed while flying over the Caquetá jungle on an anti-narcotics mission. After crash-landing, pilot Tommy Janis and Colombian army sergeant Luis Alcides Cruz were murdered.
These hostages were finally liberated by the Colombian Army on 2 July 2008 during a military operation entitled “Jaque” which was aimed at freeing certain of the FARC hostages. The military operation was conducted in breach of the international law of armed conflict, as the Colombian army misused the Red Cross emblem to simulate a fake humanitarian mission, in order to obtain the liberation of the hostages.
Mejia Mendoza is reportedly involved in the abduction of the child of Clara Rojas, born during the time she was held as hostage by the FARC.
Mejia Mendoza was arrested on the 26 February 2008 by the police in Saboya in the Boyaca department to the north of Bogota. 