Klaus Konrad
31.05.2016
facts

Klaus Konrad, born in December 1914, was one of three officers in charge of a unit belonging to the 274th grenadier regiment of the German army. In Tuscany, Italy, on 13 July 1944, this unit tried to free 19 German soldiers captured by partisans. During this operation, more than 17 elderly men, women and children were killed in the village of Pietramala near Arezzo, in a space of less than four hours. Shortly after these events, another 48 village dwellers, five of them partisans, were taken to a villa in the nearby village of San Polo, where they were interrogated and tortured in the wine cellar. Some of them were also raped. Klaus Konrad, in charge of logistics and the fight against the partisans, was alleged to have supervised the interrogations.
On 14 July, most of these victims were shot in the neck and buried. Dynamite was attached to some of the dead bodies and detonated in order to destroy evidence of torture.
Two days later, San Polo was liberated by Allied troops. Following the exhumation of the bodies, a British investigation report concluded that 16 of the victims must have been buried alive.
After the war, Klaus Konrad became a lawyer and a member of the German Social Democrat party (SPD). He was member of the local parliament of Schleswig-Holstein from 1962 to 1969 and, from 1969 to 1980, member of the federal parliament, where he was a spokesman on ecological issues for the SPD-faction. At one point, Konrad even became a legal advisor to Chancellor Willy Brandt. In recognition of his wartime service he had also been awarded a first class military distinction, the Bundesverdienstkreuz (Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany).
In 2004, Klaus Konrad resigned from all of his honorific posts in the SPD but remained a member of the party, but the SPD had some time after this suspended his membership. Konrad lived in Scharbeutz on the Baltic coast until he was over 90 years of age.
Konrad admitted to German television in 2004, that he had taken part in torture during the Second World War, without showing any particular remorse for these events.
The Italian procedure against Klaus Konrad began on 17 January 2006 at a military tribunal in La Spezia. 