Ali Al Yeseri
23.04.2016
facts

The Iraqi forces attacked Camp Ashraf in July 2009, killing 11 and wounding around 500 residents. The Iraqi authorities have also imposed severe restrictions on Ashraf including denial of free access to medical services which had resulted in permanent harm to several patients. In addition, helped by Iraqi forces, agents of a neighbor State were using 240 powerful loud speakers threatening the residents round the clock to mass killings and destruction of the Camp.
The unjust medical restrictions were part of the wider inhumane siege on Ashraf, which began in early 2009 after the protection of the camp was transferred to Iraqi forces. These restrictions are flagrant violations of international laws and conventions and are considered instances of crimes against humanity.
Ali Al Yeseri is accused of alleged continuance of and increased severity in the breaches of Geneva Convention IV according to investigations in pre-trial process. Allegedly, since February 2010 the whole population has been subjected to noise from powerful loudspeakers, assailing them all day and for much of the night with threats of mistreatment and death. These actions constitute mental torture. Severe restrictions were put on the supply of medicines, medical and health equipment, medical care, food, energy and fuel and educational materials, and a total denial of personal freedom of movement.
Imposition of limitations to the freedom of movement and inhumane pressures on patients who were compelled to exit Ashraf to be treated by specialists, not allowing patients to be accompanied by relatives, care takers, nurses or translators, meant that many patients are unable to be transferred to hospitals outside of Ashraf. As a result of such restrictions, the condition of many patients has deteriorated over the past one year and a half and they now face severe physical problems. The committee for suppression of Ashraf at the Iraqi Prime Minister’s Office has as such increased these limitations.
The National Central Investigative Court number 4 of Spain in a writ issued on March 17 summoned two Iraqi officials–Ali Al Yeseri and Sadq Mohammad Khazem–and two military officers–Lieutenant Colonel Nezar–for the alleged offences against international community in Camp Ashraf.
Ali Al-Yasseri of Maleki’s Office who is the head of the committee for suppression of Camp Ashraf is summoned by the Spanish Court for his crimes against international community. 