Manuel Antonio Callejas y Callejas - The Molina Theissen case
05.09.2016
Facts

Manuel Antonio Callejas y Callejas is a retired Guatemalan military official and was the head of military intelligence at the Quetzaltenango military base in 1981. In 1986 Callejas y Callejas was appointed Deputy Chief of Staff of Guatemalan National Defense, and then Presidential chief of staff the following year. He has long been accused of involvement in organized crime, corruption, and drug trafficking.
 During the Guatemalan civil war, the Molina Theissen family was actively opposed to military rule and was viewed as subversive by the security forces. Carlos Augusto Molina Palma – the father of the victims in the Molina Theissen case – was arrested and physically abused on numerous occasions between 1955 and 1960, and was exiled from Guatemala by the military regime. His teenage daughter, Emma Guadalupe Molina Theissen, was a member of the « Juventud Patriótica del Trabajo » (Patriotic Worker Youth), which was connected to the Guatemalan Labour Party. Military authorities arrested Emma and her boyfriend on 19 March 1976; Emma was raped and tortured while she was being detained, and her boyfriend was later murdered. On 27 September, 1981 Emma was again arrested, raped, and tortured by the military. She was illelgally detained for nine days, but she escaped from the Manuel Lisandro Barillas military base in Quetzaltenango on 5 October 1981.
On 6 October 1981, a day after Emma’s escape, three armed individuals dressed in civilian clothing came to the Molina Theissen family home in Guatemala City. Two of the individuals entered the home, beat Emma’s mother, and took her 14-year-old brother, Marco Antonio Molina Theissen, away in an official vehicle. Marco Antonio was never seen again. According to the Commission for Historical Clarification – Guatemala’s truth commission – the armed individuals were members of the military intelligence section and took Marco Antonio as retaliation for Emma’s escape and the family’s dissidence. 