Igor Mikola
25.04.2016
facts


Igor Mikola was born on 3 December 1971 in Vukovar, Croatia. During the Croatian Civil War, Mikola acted as part of a unit in the “Mercepovci” reserve police force. The force was named in honour of Tomislave Mercep for his actions during the defence of the city of Vukovar before it fell to Serbian forces, and also for his military operations in the cities of Gospic and Karlovac.
On 7 December 1991, Mikola, who was then a member of a unit in the “Mercepovci” reserve police force, along with other members Siniša Rimac, Munib Suljić, Nebojša Hodak and Suzana Živanović, invaded the home of the Serbian Zec family, in Zagreb. The father, Mihajlo Zec, mother, Marija Zec and their 12 year old daughter, Aleksandra Zec were all then killed.
The murders took place in the period when Croatia had proclaimed their independence from Belgrade and their new army was fighting against the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA) and against the Serbian rebels from Croatia that wanted them to remain in Yugoslavia.
Allegedly, the killers, including Mikola, suspected that Mihajlo Zec, a businessman, was helping the Serbian rebels, and so, they broke into his home intending to arrest him. Zec tried to flee and was executed by Siniša Rimac.
After killing Mihajlo Zec, the officials kidnapped Marija and Aleksandra and brought them to a forest in the Sljeme Mountains, near Zagreb, where the daughter was murdered in cold blood by Munib Suljić, who shot her in the head with a machine gun whilst the mother was killed by another member of the group. The bodies of Marija and Aleksandra were thrown into a landfill and the killers fled from the scene. The two other children of the Zec family, Gordana and Dusan, managed to hide near the house and survived the attack.
Also in 1991, Mikola participated in the murder of Aleksandar Sasa Antić, in conjunction with Munib Suljić, Sinisa Rimać, Miroslav Bajramović, Zvonimir Zakosek, Kresimir Prosinecki, Branko Sarić, Zoran Karlović and Stjepan Mandjarelo.
In November or December 1991, the group is alleged to have brought Antić to a tomb, dug in advance for her, in a meadow near the village of Janja Lipa. There, Munib Suljić shot at the victim, who, when continuing to show signs of life, was then shot by Mikola and Sinisa Rimać until she died.
In addition to this crime, Miroslav Bajramović y Stjepan Mandjarelo brought Miloš Ivošević, Radom Pajić and Marko Grujić, along with other unidentified people to Zagreb and handed them over to Branko Sarić in Pakračka Poljana, Croatia. On this occasion, Mikola took the car and money from victim, Ivošević and the three victims were then shot and killed.
Mikola was convicted for being accessory in the murder of Aleksandar Antić and for unlawful detention and extortion of victims Miloš Ivošević, Radom Pajić y Marko Grujić. After he was sentenced in September 2005, he fled to Peru, where he handed himself in to the police in July 2014, after he was involved in a shooting in Lima. 