Marc Ravalomanana
15.04.2016
facts 

Marc Ravalomanana was born on 12 December 1949 in the village of Imerinkasinina, 20 kilometers east of the capital Antananarivo. He completed his studies at a public primary school and then attended the Swedish missionary-run secondary school in Ambatomanga in the Itasy region. Ravalomanana became a businessman and presented himself as an independent candidate in the Antananarivo mayor elections in 1999. He won the elections and between 1999 and 2001 served as the mayor of the capital Antananarivo.
In the 2001 December presidential elections, Ravalomanana was elected President and held this function from 2002 to 2009. Andry Rajoelina, then mayor of Antananarivo and Ravalomanana’s political opponent, organized a series of rallies in January 2009 that took aim at the Ravalomanana administration and gave voice to growing popular resentment towards the President’s increasingly authoritarian policies. Rajoelina called a general strike and opposition protests began on 24 January 2009. On 26 January 2009, the anti-government protests turned increasingly violent and transformed into civil unrest. Demonstrators set fire to the Madagascar state-owned radio building, attacked a private television station owned by Ravalomanana and looted shops and businesses throughout the city.
On 31 January 2009, Rajoelina announced he was taking control of the government of the country due to the failure of Ravalomanana and the government to fulfil their responsibilities. He claimed a request would be put to parliament for Ravalomanana’s immediate resignation from the presidency.
On 7 February 2009, an opposition rally of 20,000 protesters marched towards the Presidential office. As the unarmed protesters tried to enter the Presidential Palace, the guards opened fire on them. Ravalomanna thus became the third president of Madagascar to allow his defence forces to shoot at the crowds. Supposedly, at least 30 people were killed and 86 injured. Two weeks of extreme tension followed between the two rival political camps in Antananarivo. Several rallies were broken up by the security forces killing and injuring the protesters. Ravalomanana allegdly applied force against them based on the constitutional grounds of being the supreme leader of the armed forces. As a result of the uprising, at least 130 people were killed in Madagascar.
On 16 March 2009, the army seized the Presidential Palace and Ravalomanana resigned the following day. He transferred the political power to a military council and fled to Swaziland. On 21 March 2009, Rajoelina declared himself president of the High Transitional Authority of Madagascar. Ravalomanana currently lives in exile in South Africa.
Since coming to power, Rajoelina has pursued legal action against Ravalomanana claiming that Ravalomanana should be prosecuted for allegedly using lethal force against unarmed opposition demonstrators. The same facts are under investigation for alleged crimes against humanity in South Africa. 