Safet Mujcinovic
15.04.2016
facts

Safet Mujcinovic was born in 1949 in Srebrenik, Bosnia and Herzegovina (Former Yugoslavia).
Mujcinovic was Police Station Commander at the Stupari Police Station in Ladanj Municipality and later Police Station Chief of Kladanj Police Station in Tuzla Municipality.
The Indictment alleges that from May 1992 to the second half of July 1993, during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the conflict between the Army of Republika Srpska and members of the RBiH Territorial Defense, members of the RBiH Territorial Defense and the Kladanj Public Security Station unlawfully detained Serb civilians in Stupari’s education workers’ buildings and in the former Stupari Local Office, as well as occasionally in buildings in the nearby villages of Olovici and Lupoglavo.
It is alleged that 109 Serb civilians between 7 and 80 years old were detained. Detentions began after the killings of five members of the RBiH Territorial Defense in Kladanj.
Detainees were told that they were being detained for their own safety, however, Mujcinovic announced that the detainees were being detained “because they [were] Serbs.” In his introductory statement, Bosnian Prosecutor Dragan Corlija stated that the evidence will show that Mujcinovic made the decision to detain the Serbs.
Detainees were allegedly guarded by police officers, could only leave their place of detention for one daily 15-minute walk, and lacked adequate food.
While detained, the Serb civilians were allegedly subjected to multiple war crimes, including unlawful detention, inhumane treatment, intentional infliction of serious bodily injuries, denial of the right to a fair trial or other legal proceedings, denial of medical help, and other inhumane acts and various forms of abuse.
Specific criminal acts allegedly include: torture, interrogation and threats with knives and guns, beatings with fists, boots, batons, rifle butts, scissors, a wooden hammer, and, on at least one occasion, bodily disfigurement (teeth pulled out). Allegedly, after being tortured, one civilian killed himself out of fear of being tortured again.
One witness alleges that in June 1992 Mujcinovic failed to provide medical care to her while she suffered from a painful kidney illness, stating that “I am not responsible for your natural death.”
Witnesses also allege that Mujcinovic interrogated detainees about weapons possession. One prosecution witness stated that Mujcinovic ordered the guards to shoot him if he attempted escape during questioning. Another witness stated that while Mujcinovic interrogated him about weapons possession, Mujcinovic ordered a soldier put a gun in his mouth to make him confess.
The defense has called into question the accuracy of these statements. Some witnesses testified at trial that Mujcinovic did not treat them improperly.
The Indictment against Mujcinovic charges him with the criminal offense of War Crimes against Civilians in violation of Article 173(1)(c)(e) of the Criminal Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in conjunction with Article 180(1)(2) of the same Code (individual and command criminal responsibility), alleging that Mujcinovic failed to prevent or punish his subordinates for these crimes while he was aware of, or could have been aware of, them. 