Justin Mugenzi
02.05.2016
facts

Justin Mugenzi was born in 1949 in Gahini, Rukara commune, Kibungo district (préfecture), Rwanda. He led a career as a business man and politician. He was a founding member of the Liberal Party and later became its President. He also led its radical faction called “Hutu Power”. He was Minister of Trade in the government of 8 July 1993 and was nominated Minister in the new composition of the broad-based transition government made public on 18 March 1994.
On 9 April 1994, he was appointed Minister of Trade & Industry in the Interim Government. He remained in this post until mid-July 1994. In this capacity, he was responsible for government policy on Trade & Industry. He exercised authority and control over all the institutions and staff members under his ministry. He furthermore attended Cabinet meetings where he was informed about the socio-political situation in the country and where he was apprised of government policy. He also participated in formulating the policies adopted and implemented by the Interim Government.
From late 1990 until July 1994, Mugenzi is said to have joined, and become wholly dedicated to the elaboration and execution of a plan to exterminate Tutsis. This plan consisted of, among other things, recourse to hatred and ethnic violence, the training of, and distribution of weapons to, militiamen as well as the preparation of lists of persons to be eliminated. In the execution of the plan, Mugenzi allegedly organized, ordered and participated in the massacres.
Between 9 April and mid-July 1994, Mugenzi and other members of the Interim Government, as well as some journalists, are said to have used the Radio station of Radio Télévision Libre des Milles Collines (RTLM) to incite, aid and abet the extermination of the Tutsi population and numerous moderate Hutu.
Between 11 April and 14 July 1994, Mugenzi and other Ministers allegedly travelled to several of the country’s districts, such as Butare, Kibuye and Gitarama, in order to supervise the implementation of the Government’s instructions and directives, particularly in matters of civil defence and security. During their many travels, they reportedly knew, or should have known, that massacres against the civilian Tutsi population were being committed. However, they never acted to stop the massacres, or to punish those responsible.
Furthermore, Mugenzi and other Ministers are said to have travelled, between 24 April and 14 July 1994, to a number of districts, including Butare, Gitarama, Gisenyi, Kibuye and Cyangugu, in order to incite and encourage the population to commit massacres by, for instance, congratulating the perpetrators.
Between April and July 1994, in several locations such as Gisenyi, Kigali and Murambi, Mugenzi is said to have given speeches which incited those present to kill Tutsis. Some of these diatribes were said to have been broadcast by RTLM.
Between 8 April and 14 July 1994, Ministers, district administrators (préfets), mayors, civil servants and soldiers of the army ordered, encouraged, committed and helped to commit massacres of Tutsis and moderate Hutus in several districts such as Butare, Kibuye, Kigali, Gitarama and Gisenyi. Mugenzi allegedly knew or should have known that his subordinates had committed, or were about to commit, such crimes, and did nothing to prevent them or punish the perpetrators. It is considered therefore that he failed in his duty to ensure the security of the population of Rwanda.
Between April and July 1994, the members of the Interim Government including Mugenzi, by virtue of their function, their speeches, orders, directives, acts and omissions, are said to have exercised control over the local authorities and militias, particularly over the Interahamwe (an extremist Hutu militia). From 6 April 1994, these authorities and militias, in concert with the army were said to have committed massacres against Tutsis and moderate Hutus throughout the whole country. The Interim Government, of which Mugenzi was a member, allegedly knew of these crimes.
Towards mid-July 1994, at a reunion held in Murambi, in the district of Gitarama, Mugenzi reportedly adopted an unambiguous position in favour of the massacres perpetrated by the Interahamwe in this district, and called for the dismissal of the district administrator and the mayors who opposed them.
Towards mid-July 1994, confronted with the advance of the FPR (Front Patriotique Rwandais, an opposition movement led by Paul Kagame, consisting mainly of Tutsi refugees), Mugenzi fled Rwanda.
Justin Mugenzi was arrested, on request of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), on 6 April 1999 in Cameroon. On 31 July 1999, he was transferred to the United Nations prison complex in Arusha, Tanzania. 