Georg Rauch
25.04.2016
facts


Georg Rauch was born on 27 July 1923 in Ittersbach, Germany. In 1944 he held the position of Second Lieutenant Deputy in the 16th SS tank division “Reichsführer SS”.
In the summer of 1944, at the time of the facts alleged in the indictment, the German forces were in retreat, in Italy as almost everywhere else. Their forces had already pulled back as far as Tuscany.
On 12 August 1944, shortly after 6am, four companies – amounting to approximately 300 soldiers of the SS – made their way up to the remote mountain village of Sant’Anna di Stazzema. At the time, the village had a population of around 400 and was sheltering several hundred refugees.
Officially, the mission of the SS was to take action against the Italian guerrillas. It was known at the time that the policy of the German high command towards the armed resistance in Italy – “la Resistenza” – was particularly vicious. According to an official document, army officers were not to be subject to punishment for any brutal acts they might commit.
The inhabitants of Sant’Anna were forced to assemble in enclosed farmyards and in the village square. Thereafter, SS soldiers, together with the Second-Lieutenants Alfred Schönenberg, Gerhard Sommer and Ludwig Sonntag massacred anyone whom they came across, using machine guns, bayonets, hand grenades and flame-throwers. The victims were mainly women, children and old men (the younger men were not in the village at that time). The soldiers then burned the bodies and set fire to the buildings. The entire village was completely destroyed in less than four hours. Insofar as Rauch was concerned, he had at least participated in the organization, and detailed planning of the massacre. The massacre resulted in 560 deaths, of which 116 were children. Sant’Anna di Stazzema was never rebuilt.
The trial against Georg Rauch, Alfred Schönenberg, Gerhard Sommer and Ludwig Sonntag and six other co-defendants began in April 2004 before the La Spezia Military Tribunal. 