Torture and arbitrary detention of Hom Bahadur Bagale in November 2002
12.02.2016
The case 
In December 2015 TRIAL submitted a communication to the Human Rights Committee on behalf of Mr. Hom Bahadur Bagale. The latter served in the Nepalese police from 13 February 1984 to 13 March 2006.
In November 2002, Mr. Bagale was arbitrarily arrested and detained by other policemen and subjected to torture and other forms of ill-treatment aimed at obtaining a confession of his alleged involvement in the theft of some gold from his superior. Mr. Bagale refused to confess and explained that he had no news whatsoever on the stolen gold. Hence, he was held in a custody room at Hanumandhoka Police Range, in Kathmandu, where he was subjected to repeated interrogations, torture and ill-treatment during several days, including slapping, beating with sticks, falanga, rolling sticks on his thighs, beating on his feet, being stripped naked, receiving electric shocks, being forced to urinate over an electric heater and having pins inserted in his fingers and toes. He was not provided any food or water, or any support or medical treatment, and the conditions of detention were inhumane. He repeatedly received death threats against him and his family.
When Mr. Bagale was freed, he submitted several complaints to Nepalese authorities, seeking to obtain redress and to see those responsible for the crimes committed against him duly identified, prosecuted, and sanctioned. His demarches were to no avail. However, his struggle for justice and reparation exposed him and his family to further harassment, threats, and reprisals.
In this context, in March 2006, Mr. Bagale was anew arbitrarily arrested and detained by policemen and subjected to similar forms of torture and ill-treatment. Although this time the Supreme Court of Nepal recognised that Mr. Bagale’s detention was unlawful, he did not receive any compensation for the harm suffered and those responsible for the crimes at stake still enjoy impunity. His attempts to obtain adequate and integral redress were frustrated and, as of today, Mr. Bagale lives in extremely precarious economic conditions and faces ongoing physical and psychological damages as a consequence of the torture he has been subjected to.
Mr. Bagale attempted to obtain justice before all available Nepalese authorities, but they proved ineffective. Accordingly, he decided to submit his complaint to the Human Rights Committee, requesting:
to find that he is a victim of a violation of Arts. 7 (prohibition of torture) and 10, para. 1 (right to humane conditions of detention), read alone and in conjunction with Art. 2, para. 3 (right to an effective remedy), of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, because of the torture, ill-treatment and inhumane conditions of detention he has been subjected to on different occasions and the subsequent failure by Nepalese authorities to carry out an ex officio, prompt, effective, independent, impartial and thorough investigation into his allegations, to prosecute and sanction those responsible, and to provide him integral reparation for the harm suffered. Mr. Bagale requests the Committee to declare that Art. 7 has been violated also in conjunction with Art. 2, para. 2 (obligation to adopt legislative measures), of the Covenant, due to the fact that Nepal failed to adopt effective legislation to prohibit torture and existing domestic legislation on this crime is not in line with international law.
to find that he is a victim of a violation of Art. 9, paras. 1, 2, 3 and 5 (right to personal liberty), read alone and in conjunction with Art. 2, para. 3, of the Covenant, because he was subjected on different occasions to arbitrary arrest and detention, and he was not informed, at the time of arrest, of the reasons for his arrest nor was he promptly informed of the charges against him. These violations have not been subjected to a thorough, independent, impartial and effective investigation by Nepalese authorities and those responsible have not been prosecuted and sanctioned, while he has not received an adequate compensation for the harm suffered.
to find that he is a victim of a violation of Art. 17 (right to privacy and family life), alone and in conjunction with Art. 2, para. 3, of the Covenant because he was subjected to arbitrary and unlawful interferences with his privacy, home, and family life, due to the arbitrary search conducted at his home and the ongoing harassment suffered by Mr. Bagale and his family.
to request Nepal to promptly and effectively investigate and prosecute and sanction those responsible for his arbitrary deprivation of liberty and torture; to ensure that he receives adequate compensation for the harm suffered and integral reparation, including restitution, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition.
The case is currently pending before the Human Rights Committee. 