Chuckie Taylor
12.04.2016
facts

Charles McArthur Emmanuel aka Chuckie Taylor was born in 1977 in Massachusetts. He is the son of Bernice Yolanda Emmanuel and Charles Taylor. His father returned to Liberia and her mother married Roy Belfast in 1983. Out of fear that Taylor would try to take her son, Bernice Emmanuel moved with him and Roy Belfast to Orlando, Florida. There, the couple changed his name to Roy McArthur Belfast Jr.
His father, Charles Taylor was President of Liberia between 1997 and 2003. He established the Anti-Terrorist Unit (ATU, also known as the Demon Forces), after winning the Liberian presidential election in 1997 and appointed his son to head the unit.
Under Chuckie Taylor’s direction, the ATU began recruiting men to fill its ranks, and installed them at a former training camp known as Gbatala Base.
In or about April 1999, to on or about 18 July 2003, while in Liberia, Chuckie Taylor, knowingly conspired with others to commit torture, with the specific intent to inflict severe physical pain and suffering upon other persons, within the conspirators’ custody and physical control. This was done to strengthen the power and authority of his father, Charles Taylor’s presidency, and to intimidate, neutralize, punish, weaken and eliminate actual and perceived opponents of and threats to his father’s administration, by means of torture.
Chuckie Taylor was accused of torture and crime of violence and possession of firearms.
Chuckie Taylor allegedly ordered members of the ATU to transport prisoners to the ATU base at Gbatala where they were placed in pits in the ground covered with iron bars and barbed wire. Various persons were tortured by receiving molten plastic on their skin, by burning their feet, genitals, and other flesh using molten candle wax or a lit cigarette and were severely and repeatedly beated including by striking them repeatedly with firearms and other objects. Taylor also aided and abetted others to sodomize and use electric shock on genitals and other body parts of one of the victims and to cut fingers and genitals of another victim with a knife. Furthermore, in or about April, 1999, Chuckie Taylor allegedly assembled Gbatala prisoners and ordered the immediate execution of one of them, specifying that soldiers should cut his neck instead of shooting him.
Chuckie Taylor was taken into U.S. custody on 30 March 2006 after attempting to enter the United States from Trinidad at Miami International Airport, a day after his father was surrendered to the Special Court for Sierra Leone. 