Dario Kordic
09.01.2012
facts

Dario Kordic was born on 14 December 1960 in Sarajevo. He studied political science at the University of Sarajevo following which he exercised the profession of journalist.Dario Kordic was an active member of the HDZ-BiH and held increasingly important positions of power, responsibility and influence within the Croatian administration in Bosnia. He was one of the high ranking political and military leaders of the HDZ-BiH (President), of the HZ H-B,of the HR H-B (Vice-President of both), and of the HVO.
The Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) was one of the principal political parties in Croatia. Amongst the avowed aims of the HDZ was the establishment of the right to secede of “the entire Croatian Nation to within its historical and natural boundaries”. The Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia-Herzegovina (HDZ-BiH) was one of the principal political parties of the Bosnian Croatians in Bosnia-Herzegovina, and amongst the avowed aims of the HDZ-BiH figured the statement on the right of the Croats to defend themselves and to secede. The Croatian Community of the Croatian Herceg–Bosnian Republic of Herceg-Bosnia (HZ H-B/HR H-B) proclaimed its existence in November 1991, defining itself as a separate or distinct entity within the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina. The Croatian Defence Council (HVO) became the executive, administrative and supreme military organ of the HZ H-B/HR H-B after its creation in April 1992.
Dario Kordic held a decisive sway over the objectives and the political and military operations of these structures. Despite the fact that he was not at the top of the political hierarchy, and that he was a civilian unused to the official command structure of the HVO, Dario Kordic made many political and strategic decisions; he negotiated cease fire agreements and, he issued orders of direct and indirect military significance. Thanks to the high ranking positions he held and due to the power and influence which he wielded, Dario Kordic played a key role in the planning, organisation, promotion and implementation of a politico-military campaign of persecution and “ethnic cleansing” against the Bosnian Muslims, especially in the Lasva valley (attack and massacres in Ahmici and other villages in the valley in April 1993), as well as in Zenica.
Dario Kordic surrendered on 6 October 1997. On the same day he was transferred to the ICTY and appeared before the tribunal for the first time on 8 October 1997. 