Nenad Ilic
15.04.2016
facts

Nenad Ilic was born on 16 August 1974. He joined the Unit for Special Operations [JSO, also known as Red Berets] of the State Security Service of Serbia in 1997.
Ilic joined a criminal group of JSO members, which had formed under former JSO commander Milorad Ulemek. Ulemek and members of the group have been involved in the murders of several Serbian politicians. Ilic was tried and sentenced in Belgrade for the 1999 assassination attempt on Serbian Renewal Movement leader Vuk Draskovic.
Acting upon Slobodan Milosevic’s incitement to murder, Milorad Ulemek ordered the criminal group of JSO members including Ilic to find and murder Vuk Draskovic in Budva in 2000, as well as to kidnap and kill former president of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Ivan Stambolic prior to the presidential election in September 2000.
On 15 June 2000 Ilic, along with Branko Bercek and Leonid Milivojevic, attempted to murder Draskovic in Budva. Ilic had traveled by car with Mile Lukovic and Milos Simovic to Budva, Montenegro, where they stayed in the home of a member of the Zemun clan of the Serbian Mafia. From there they kept Draskovic under surveillance. Ilic obtained an army vehicle, army uniforms, and ID cards from military personnel in the Zelenika barracks. He parked near Draskovic’s house with Bercek and Milivojevic. Around 23:45 Draskovic was sitting in his house and Bercek fired eight rounds from a silenced Beretta gun. Two of the rounds grazed Draskovic’s head. Ilic, Bercek, and Milivojevic put on the army uniforms and drove to the Tivat repair base, where army officials harboured them. On 17 June 2000 they traveled by boat to to the Kumbor military barracks, from where a helicopter provided by Milosevic and Nebojsa Pavkovic transported them to the Ladjevci airport. There they met Ulemek and the head of the Zemun clan, and were transported to Belgrade in a state security department vehicle. Ulemek paid them DEM 10’000.
On 25 August 2000 former president of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Ivan Stambolic, was kidnapped while out running in Belgrade’s Kosutnjak Park. Stambolic had been pressured to resign from the presidency by supporters of Milosevic in September 1987. His term in office officially ended 14 December 1987. He was also a potential candidate for the 2000 presidential election, and was expected to run against Milosevic. The kidnappers transported Stambolic in a white van and murdered him in the woods on Mount Fruska. Investigations into his disappearance did not begin until six days after his family reported him missing. Stambolic’s remains were not found until 27 March 2003 during the investigation of the assassination of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic.
On 5 September 2000 the Belgrade District Prosecutor opened a case file on Stambolic. In December 2000 it came before a judge and an investigation began.
In March 2003 the Serbian Government disbanded the JSO due to suspicions of JSO involvement in the assassination of Djindjic.
On 23 September 2003 the Special Prosecutor’s Office raised a joint indictment against Nenad Ilic and nine other defendants for the murder of Stambolic and the June 2000 assassination attempt on Draskovic. Ilic was charged with criminal conspiracy and joint commission of murder and attempted murder. 