Damir Sireta
19.04.2016
facts

Damir Sireta , a.k.a. « Sićo », was born on 9 October 1963 in Vukovar, city in the East of Croatia.
During the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina, he was a member of the Territorial Defense Forces of Vukovar, an autonomous military force with a decentralized organisation which was part of the armed forces of the former Federal Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia.
After a three-months siege, the Yugoslav People’s Army took the control of Vukovar on 19 November 1991. At least two hundred persons then surrendered their arms to the troups of the Yugoslav People’s Army and then took refuge in the hospital of Vukovar. The Yugoslav People’s Army transfered these individuals to a farm in Grabovo, 1km from Ovčara, outside of Vukovar, and then surrendered them to the Territorial Defense Forces.
Between the afternoon of 20 November 1991 and the morning of 21 November 1991, the Territorial Defense Forces executed these individuals, which were mainly soldiers of the Croatian armed forces, militias, voluntary units and individuals who escorted the armed forces without being part of them.
Damir Sireta is accused to have, together with the other members of the abovementioned unit, participated in this execution of over 200 Croation prisoners of war in Ovčara.
Having stayed in Vukovar until 1998, Damir Sireta then moved to Mysen, in Norway, with his family.
Criminal proceedings have been initiated against Damir Sireta in Croatia. In the framework of these proceedings, in 2000, he was condemned in abstentia to 12 years of imprisonment, for a murder he would have committed in Vukovar in 1991.
Damir Sireta was arrested in December 2006 in Norway. Croatia and Serbia both requested his extradition and Norway decided in Serbia’s favour. It is an important decision because it is the first time a Norwegian court authorized the extradition of a person accused of war crimes to a national regional court. Sireta was thus extradited to Serbia on 8 May 2008, to be judged for war crimes. 