Branislav Radnic
26.04.2016
facts

Branislav Radnic was born in 1966.
In 1999, he served in the army of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the First Battalion of the Podgorica Corps, under the command of Predrag Strugar. According to the media, this military unit consisted essentially of reservists from northern regions of Montenegro where inhabitants of the Serb ethnic group are concentrated.
Montenegro was, at the time, linked to Serbia within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Following an agreement between the Belgrade and Montenegro authorities, it was the task of the Yugoslav army to patrol and guard the borders between Montenegro and Kosovo during the conflict between the Serbs and Kosovo Albanians from 1996 to 1999.
The battalion in which Branislav Radnic served was established in one of the border zones, in the Hajle region. In this mountainous, forested region, there were four villages inhabited by Albanians. One of these villages was Kaludjerski Laz, which was situated close to the town of Rozage (Montenegro).
According to local media, during April 1999, fighting against the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) and the expulsion of Albanians by Serb forces intensified on the other side of the border in the Rugova region (Kosovo). NATOs bombing campaigns against the Serbs had only just begun. As a result, many Albanians from villages in the region were forced to flee to Montenegro.
According to the media, Kosovo civilians seeking refuge in Montenegro had been killed as they attempted to cross the border. According to the indictment, Branislav Radnic had taken part in a campaign to assassinate civilians led by Predrag Strugar, which resulted in the death of 23 civilians of Albanian ethnicity between 18 April 1999 and 22 May 1999. These people, including a boy of 13 years old and an elderly man of 70 years old, were civilians who had not been a part of the hostilities.
The media focused on an event that is widely remembered as the “Kaludjerski Laz Massacre”. On 18 April 1999, 6 civilians were killed when they fled Kosovo; amongst them were two elderly women and a child. Their corpses were taken across the border by lorry to Novo Selo (Kosovo) to be buried in a mass grave.
At the time, the Yugoslav army did not take responsibility for the Serbian paramilitaries. Predrag Strugar claimed that he was not up to date with what had happened in Kaludjerski Laz and that he had been prevented from going there.
In April 1999, the Yugoslav army launched an investigation to shed light on the events that took place in Kaludjerski Laz and a military judge was responsible for leading the enquiry. 