Hugo Alberto Guallama
18.04.2016
facts

Hugo Alberto Guallama was born on 3 August 1947 in La Plata, the capital city of the province of Buenos Aires.
A police officer, Guallama served as the driver for the Director of Investigations of the Police of Miguel Etchecolatz, Province of Buenos Aires, , during the dictatorship.
He participated in an attack on a house on 30th Street in La Plata and was identified as one of the suspects that could have gone to Clara Anahí’s house – a baby that was abducted and later killed – after the attack of November 24, 1976. He was also involved in the circuito camps.
Named after the former Chief Police of Buenos Aires, General Ramon Camps who operated them from April 1976 to December 1977, “circuito camps” were clandestine detention and repression centres in Buenos Aires. During the time of their operation, there were 214 cases of kidnaping with extortion, 120 cases of torture, 32 homicides, two rapes, two miscarriages caused by torture, 18 acts of theft, and the appropriation (for illegal adoption) of 10 minors. Each establishment had ‘functional relations’ with the rest, although they did not always follow a common pattern. Once kidnapped, victims were housed in the Investigation Squad (operations centre), then transferred to the Arana Detachment (which functioned as a torture and extermination centre), and finally taken to the 5th Precinct (a holding centre for detainees). This circuit functioned in nine districts of Greater Buenos Aires and the city of La Plata (capital of Buenos Aires province) and comprised at least 29 clandestine centres.
Guallamo faced trial on 12 September 2012 with 22 other coaccused, Rodolfo Aníbal Campos, Miguel Osvaldo Etchecolatz, Jaime Lamont Smart, Horacio Elizardo Luján, Norberto Cozzani, Carlos García, Luis Vicente Patrault, Bernabé Jesús Corrales, Fernando Svedas, Miguel Kearney, Raúl Orlando Machuca, Julio César Argüello, Víctor Sita, Domingo Almeida, Roberto Omar Grillo, Eros Amílcar Tarela, Jorge Antonio Bergés, Roberto Antonio Cabrera, Sergio Arturo Verduri, Daniel Jorge Lencinas, Pedro Antonio Ferriole y Santiago Antonini. The accused were tried for the kidnapping and torture of 280 persons, many of whom are still missing, and 37 homicides that were proven with the participation of the Argentine Forensic Anthropology Team. 