Yussuf Munyakazi
27.04.2016
facts

Yussuf John Munyakazi Birindiro was born in 1936 in the Rwamatamu community, in the province of Kibuye. He worked as a farmer in the Bugarama region in the province of Cyangugu. He led the National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development (NRMD) also known as the Interahamwe in the Bugarama region.
According to the indictment, Munyakazi was a regular participant from January till July 1994 in the Interahamew Bugurama and met with other influential members of the NRMD. As a result of these meetings, which took place in different locations in the province of Cyangugu, the planning, instigation and abetting of the elimination of Tutsis occurred. Munyakazi led the Interahamwe in the Cyangugu and Kibuye prefectures. The murder of Tutsis was instigated and these were prepared and organised at these meetings.
Munyakazi took part in a meeting in Bugurama on 28 January 1994 where he was supplied weapons, uniforms and shoes by Andre Ntaguera.
At a meeting on the 22 June 1994, in the home of Leonard Bamenyayundi, a plan was formulated to kill the Tutsis who had gathered in a refugee camp in Nyarushishi. The Interahamwe gave the commands for this to go ahead. The following day, Munyakazi along with people from the Interahamwe carried out this plan.
On the 11 and 13 April 1994 Munyakazi along with the Interahamwe Bugurama killed Tutsis who had sought refuge in a Cyangugu cathedral.
On the 16 April, Munyakazi along with the Interahamwe Bugurama brandishing firearms and traditional weapons attacked and murdered hundreds of Tutsis who had sought protection in the parish of Nyamasheke. The same approach was employed which resulted in hundreds of Tutsis being found dead on the 29 April 1994 in the Parish of Shangi (Gafunzo Province) and on the 30 April 1994 in the parish of Mibilzi (Cyimbogo Province).
Furthermore, Munyakazi along with the Interahamwe Bugurama, killed thousands of Tutsis who were seeking refuge in Bisesero.
Munyakazi fled to Zaire after the genocide and settled in Congo Brazzaville now renamed Democratic Republic of Congo. He lived in the region of Tschikapa in the south west of the Congo on the border with Angola. It is an area heavily populated by diamond smugglers. During his time there, he used the alias ‘Mzee Mandevu’ and claimed to be an Imam although there were no Muslims living in this area.
When the USA offered a reward of 5 million dollars for the capture of 14 Rwandans, suspected of committing genocide in the Congo, Munyakazi’s name was on the list 