Federico Antonio Minicucci
08.05.2016
facts


Federico Antonio Minicucci was born on 29 March 1932 in Buenos Aires. He is a former colonel in the Argentinian Army and former chief of the 3rd regiment of La Tablada.
The “Vesubio” was a clandestine detention centre in the city of La Tablada, La Matanza Partido, within the Greater Buenos Aires district in Argentina. It was established in 1975 before the coup d’état, when it was used by the “Triple A”, the Argentine Anti-Communist Alliance (Alianza Anticomunista Argentina), a far-right death squad that was founded in Argentina in 1973.
In 1976, the “Vesubio” was allegedly under the jurisdiction of the First Military Corps (I Cuerpo de Ejército) whose head was General Guillermo Suárez Mason. The Corps worked directly with the Centre for the Collection of Intelligence (Central de Reunión de Inteligencia – CRI) that operated in the hospital of the 3rd regiment in La Tablada. Minicucci was chief of this regiment during his time in the Argentinian Army.
The clandestine detention centre is believed to have been used to detain, interrogate and torture political enemies. Survivors such as Elena Alfaro and Ana Maria di Salvo later testified that electro-shocks and rape were, among others, used as methods of torture within the “Vesubio”. Of those disappeared for political reasons in Argentina during the military dictatorship, many are believed to have been executed in clandestine detention centres such as the “Vesubio”.
As chief of the regiment linked to the centre, Minicucci allegedly participated directly in the torture and illegal privation of liberty of at least 85 political prisoners at the “Vesubio”. Moreover, he is believed to have been responsible for 21 deaths that occurred at the centre.
The “Vesubio” stopped operating in 1978 when it was destroyed to prevent the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights from inspecting the location during a country visit. However, between 1976 and 1978, about 2500 people are believed to have been detained in the Vesubio detention centre.
For his role as co-author during the disappearance and torture of 204 people at the “Vesubio”, Minicucci was put on trial together with four co-defendants in 2010. 