Sanjiv Bhatt
15.04.2016
facts

Sanjiv Bhatt was born on 21 December 1963 in Mumbai, India. He did his initial schooling at Hill Grange High School in Mumbai. He then continued his education as St. Xavier’s High School and the Indian Institute of Technology in Mumbai, from where he holds a post-graduate degree. In 1988, Bhatt joined the Indian police and worked as a police officer in Gujarat. He later served as Deputy Inspector General posted at a training school in Junagadh district. He is known for filing an affidavit against Narendra Modi, the Chief Minister of the Government of Gujarat, for his alleged involvement in the 2002 riots in Gujarat. After this, the government withdrew Bhatt’s protection and several criminal cases were opened against Bhatt, who was suspended from his functions.
ALLEGED CUSTODIAL TORTURE OF VIJAYSINH BHATTI
In 1990, Bhatt was posted as additional superintendent of police in Jamnagar. When communal riots took place in Jam Jodhpur town in October 1990, around 150 persons were detained and a curfew was imposed in Jamnagar district in order to control the riots.
On 10 October 1990, Vijaysinh Bhatti was on his way back to Jamnagar from Chela village when he was arrested by the police for violation of the curfew. He claims Bhatt had taken him to the police headquarters, where he was allegedly forced to do some 200 sit-ups, besides being beaten with sticks. As a result, he fell ill when he was released the next day, was admitted to a hospital in Jamnagar, and later shifted to a hospital in Rajkot, where the doctors diagnosed him with kidney failure due to the blows. On 16 January 1991, Bhatti filed a complaint with a Jamnagar court, which ordered an inquiry and asked the police to submit a report by 7 February 1991, but there has been no development in this case until January 2012.
ALLEGED TORTURE OF NARAN SUDHA
Bhatt is also accused of involvement in a case of custodial torture in an incident that allegedly took place in 1998 in Porbandar district when Bhatt was the Superintendent of Police of Porbandar district.
Bhatt together with a constable, Vajubhai Chau, allegdly tortured a known history-sheeter Naran Sudha (also referred to as Naran Jadav), who was taken to Porbandar from Sabarmati Central Jail in Ahmedabad in 1998 in connection with investigations of an alleged terror conspiracy in Porbandar district. Sudha claims Bhatt heavily beat him and applied electric shocks to him, his minor son and brother while they were in police custody in order to extract a confession from him. On 6 July 1997, Sudha filed a complaint against Bhatt and Vajubhai Chau for causing him physical and mental torture in police custody. 