Carlos Guillermo Suárez Mason
09.05.2016
facts


Carlos Guillermo Suárez Mason was born on 24 January 1924 in Buenos Aires, Argentina. He enrolled at a military school and left it in 1944 as lieutenant. He was married to Angélica Alais and had four children.
In 1951, he took part in the failed coup d’Etat against the President, Domingo Perón, and had to go into exile in Uruguay. He returned to Argentina following the fall of Perón. In 1960 he was Deputy Commander in the 9th Calvary regiment. For a time, he was professor in the Army War College, then in 1967, he became colonel. In 1971, he was appointed, by Dictator Juan Carlos Ongania, as military assistant for the Argentinian embassy in Ecuador.
In 1972 he was promoted to General, leading the military intelligence unit. During the brief presidency of Maria Estela Martínez de Perón in 1976, he was very active in supressing left-wing organisations.
In 1976, during Jorge Rafael Videla’s dictatorship, Suárez Mason led the first regiment of the army, the most important one, as it included Buenos Aires and his province as well as a part of La Pampa province. It is alleged that there were more than 60 secret detention centres in his area. At this time he was also the direct superior of Ramón Camps, head of the police of this entire region and in charge of various detention centres. He was accused of forced disappearances and numerous cases of torture. Furthermore he managed regiment 601, the military intelligence body known for its kidnappings for ransom.
As General, Suárez Mason was accused of 43 murders and 24 illegal kidnapping, including several babies taken from their mothers who were prisoners. A declassified US government document reveals his conversation with an American Diplomat where he declared that he signed between 50 and 100 death sentences each day. For his defence, he argued that war is a game in which the most violent wins.
In 1980, he was appointed Chief of Staff of the military, and promoted the idea of a war with Chile over the sovereignty of islands in the Canal Beagle in Patagonia.
After the fall of Argentina during the Falklands War in 1982, and already having retired from the military, he was appointed as president of the YPF (Treasury Petroleum Fields, an official oil production Company) that was going to bankrupt.
After the reestablishment of democratic institutions at the end of 1983, numerous trials began against members of the military. Suarez Mason is summoned to face accusations for 635 crimes against humanity (tortures, murders, disappearances). Refusing to answer to the summons of the Court and the accusations of the Supreme Military Counsel, he was expelled from the Army. He escaped to California, United States. When Argentina requested his extradition, Suarez Mason was arrested in Foster City close to San Francisco, at the end of January 1987, but was only extradited in 1988. 