Isak Musliu
01.05.2016
facts

Isak Musliu was born on 31 October in Raèak (Reçak), in the Municipality of Stimje (Shtime) in the autonomous province of Kosovo.
At the beginning of 1998, after years of increasing violence and tension, armed conflict broke out in Kosovo between Serb Forces and the “Ushtria Çlirimtare e Kosovës“ (UÇK), known in English under the name of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA).
Just as with Serb civilians, Albanian civilians who were perceived by the KLA as either refusing to cooperate or as resisting the KLA by non military means (often described as “collaborators” by members of the KLA), were targeted for intimidation, imprisonment,, violence and murder.
According to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) indictment, at the time the acts were committed (May to August 1998), Isak Musliu was a member of the KLA and a commander in the military sector of Lapusnik (Llapushnik) and also of the Lapusnik prison camp where he occasionally held the role of warden.
These charges against Musliu were that:
a. He commanded, controlled, directed and otherwise exercised effective control over other KLA soldiers and guards at the Lapusnik prison camp.
b. He planned, instigated, ordered and personally participated in the enforcement of the detention of Serb civilians and perceived Albanian collaborators at the Lapusnik prison camp.
c. He planned, instigated, ordered and personally participated in the interrogation of Serb civilians and perceived Albanian collaborators at the Lapusnik prison camp.
d. He planned, instigated, ordered and personally participated in the brutal and inhumane treatment, physical and psychological assault, torture, and beatings of Serb civilians and perceived Albanian collaborators imprisoned at the Lapusnik prison camp.
e. He planned, instigated, ordered and personally participated in the murder of Serb civilians and perceived Albanian collaborators imprisoned at the Lapusnik prison camp.
f. He participated in efforts to keep the existence of the Lapusnik prison camp, and events that occurred there, secret by threatening prisoners not to observe or discuss events occurring in the camp.
g. He instigated, aided and abetted in these crimes by consistently failing to prevent, investigate or punish crimes committed by his subordinates against Serb civilians and perceived Albanian collaborators, as well as by the example of his own participation in such crimes.
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for ex-Yugoslavia (ICTY), issued an Indictment against Isak Muslui on 24 January 2003.
Musliu was apprehended by the KFOR on 17 February 2003 and transferred to the ICTY the next day. 