Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir
18.11.2015
facts 

Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir was born on 1 January 1944 in Hosh Bannaga in Sudan, 100 km northeast of Khartoum.
After completing his secondary education, Omar Hassan Al-Bashir was admitted as a pilot into the military academy. He graduated in 1967 and then served in the Air Force, before being transferred to the infantry brigade. In the early 1980s, he obtained two masters degrees, including one in Malaysia. He was also awarded a fellowship of the Sudanese Academy of Administrative Sciences in 1987.
Omar Hassan Al-Bashir was put in command of the 8th Brigade in 1988 and led the military operations against the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in the southern half of the country.
On 30 November 1989, Al-Bashir led a group of army officers in ousting the coalition government of Sadeq Al-Mahdi, which had been in office since 1986. He headed the transition government before being appointed president of the country on 16 October 1993.
Al Bashir is accused of masterminding and implementing a plan to destroy in substantial part the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa groups, on account of their ethnicity. Members of the three groups, historically influential in Darfur, were challenging the marginalization of the province; they engaged in a rebellion.
Since 2003, armed forces and the Militia/Janjaweed, allegedly on Al Bashir’s orders, have attacked and destroyed villages and subsequently pursued the survivors in the desert. Those who reached the camps for the displaced people were subjected to conditions calculated to bring about their destruction.
Al Bashir allegedly promoted and provided impunity to his subordinates in order to secure their willingness to commit genocide. He allegedly mobilised the entire state apparatus, including the armed forces, the intelligence services, the diplomatic and public information bureaucracies, and the justice system, to subject the 2.450.000 people living in camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs), most of them members of the target group, to conditions of life calculated to bring about their physical destruction. He is also accused of obstructing international assistance and of organizing well coordinated attacks on the IDP camps.
On 14 July 2008, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court presented evidence showing that Al Bashir committed the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes in Darfur. 