Vinko Pandurevic
04.05.2016
facts

Born on 25 June 1959 in Sokolac (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Vinko Pandurevic was an Infantry Captain in the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA) prior to being appointed Brigade Commander within the Bosnian Serb Army (VRS). According to the indictment, he was Commander of the “Zvornik Brigade” from 12 December 1992 through to November 1996, which was involved in the July 1995 attack on the Srebrenica “safe area” and the subsequent killing and execution of Bosnian Muslim men and boys.
The indictment alleged that in early July 1995 units of the Drina Corps of the Bosnian-Serb Army (“VRS”) shelled the Srebrenica “safe area” and attacked Dutch-manned United Nations observation posts located there. VRS forces subsequently entered Srebrenica. By 18 July 1995, those forces either expelled or killed most of the members of the Bosnian Muslim population of the Srebrenica enclave, thereby continuing an ethnic cleansing campaign begun in the spring of 1992.
During the VRS attack on the Srebrenica “safe area” and the subsequent killings and executions of Bosnian Muslim men, Vinko Pandurevic was a Lt. Colonel in command of the Zvornik Brigade. As a brigade commander, he was responsible for planning and directing the activities of all the subordinate formations of his brigade, in accordance with the directives received from his higher command at the Corps level.
The indictment alleged that between about 11 July 1995 and 1 November 1995, Vinko Pandurevic, intending to destroy a part of the Bosnian Muslim people as a national, ethnical or religious group, killed and caused serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group. He allegedly planned, instigated, ordered or otherwise aided and abetted in the planning, preparation or execution of the opportunistic killings and organised mass executions of thousands of captured Bosnian Muslim men and boys from the Srebrenica “safe area”.
The indictment linked Vinko Pandurevic to the following locations, where killings and executions occurred from 11 July 1995 until 18 July 1995: Potocari, Kravica, Bratunac, Tisca, Orahovac, Petkovci Dam, Cerska Valley, Pilica School, Branjevo Military Farm and the Cultural Centre of Pilica and Kozluk.
Following these events, Vinko Pandurevic and units under his command were said to have participated in various attempts to conceal and cover up the killings and executions, including by burying the victims’ bodies in isolated sites scattered throughout a wide area, and by exhuming bodies from initial mass graves and transferring them to so called secondary graves.
In the indictment the actions of Vinko Pandurevic were linked to those of GeneralRadislav Krstic and General Ratko Mladic.
In the several days following the attack on Srebrenica, the VRS forces captured, detained, summarily executed, and buried over 7’000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys from the Srebrenica enclave, and forcibly transferred the Bosnian Muslim women and children of Srebrenica out of the enclave. According to the indictment, Vinko Pandurevic committed, planned, instigated, ordered and otherwise aided and abetted in the planning, preparation and execution of the crimes as set out in the indictment.
Vinko Pandurevic voluntary surrendered on 23 March 2005 and was transferred on the same day to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 