Gonzalo Alberto Rocabado Mercado
28.04.2016
facts

Gonzalo Alberto Rocabado Mercado was Army Chief of Staff and Commander of the Bolivian Armed Forces at the time of the events. He was one of the senior officers of the Bolivian army who during the 2003 “Gas War” severely put down a popular revolt against the government of Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozado, alias Goni.
The “Gas War” is the name given to the social and political conflicts related to the 2003 campaign to stop the export of natural gas from Bolivia to Mexico and the United States via Chile. Bolivia’s subsoil is known to hold the greatest reserves of natural gas in South America after those of Venezuela.
This “Gas War” broke out in September 2003, and mobilized several organizations such as the Bolivian Farm Workers Federation, the Cocaleros (a major coca farmers union) led by the Quechua Indian Evo Morales, at the time deputy leader of the Movement Toward Socialism Party (MAS) and today President of Bolivia. These organizations were rapidly joined by other organizations amongst which were teachers, students and miners. Although the various reasons for dissent of these parties diverged at the outset, opposition to the export of natural gas via Chile very quickly became a rallying cause for all.
Reaching a climax in the autumn of 2003 when the capital, La Paz was brought to a complete standstill from 12 to 17th October, this conflict came to an end with the resignation of President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada.
During the space of a month, the clashes between demonstrators and the forces of law and order led to the death and injury of around 100 people, with the majority of casualties in the town of El Alto, where more than 80 people were killed during the last week of the conflict.
The main outcome of these demonstrations and the military repression which ensued, were the fall of the President Sanchez de Lozada (replaced by Vice-President Carlos Mesa), followed by the announcement of a referendum over the nationalization of Bolivian hydrocarbons (which the Yes vote won massively), and the subsequent accession to power, in 2005, of the Quechua Indian Evo Morales.
In November 2003, the office of the general Prosecutor, within the context of various political and criminal procedures, lodged criminal charges with the Supreme Court against ex-President Gonzalo Sanchez and his ministers for violations of constitutional guarantees and individual liberties. 