David Matthew Hicks
18.04.2016
facts

David Hicks was born in Adelaide, South Australia to Terry Hicks and Susan Hicks. At school he was considered to be a troublesome child and reportedly experimented with alcohol and drugs. When Hicks was 14 he was expelled from High School. Subsequently Hicks was employed at various jobs including skinning kangaroos, fishing for sharks and working at cattle stations in the Northern Territory, Queensland and South Australia. In 1992 Hicks worked in Borroloola as a rodeo rider and barman. During this time, he began studying the Qur’an. In Borroloola, Hicks fathered two children with Jodi Sparrow (daughter Bonnie and son Terry).
In 1999, Hicks travelled to Tirana, Albania to join the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), a paramilitary organization of ethnic Albanians fighting against Serbian forces in the Kosovo War, for two months, where he completed basic military training and engaged in hostilities. Upon his return to Australia Hicks converted to Islam after his application to join the Australian Army was rejected.
On 11 November 1999, Hicks travelled to Pakistan to study Islam and began training with Lashkar-e-Toiba in early 2000. In 2004, the U.S. Military Commission presented charges alleging that Hicks received military training at the Mosqua Aqsa camp in Pakistan, after which he travelled to a border region between Pakistan-controlled Kashmir and Indian-controlled Kashmir and participated in skirmishes against Indian forces. This allegation was confirmed by letters that Hicks sent to his family in 2000 describing his engagement in hostilities between Pakistan and India, as well as his military training in order “to be prepared for jihad”.
In January 2001, Hicks was provided with funding and a letter of introduction from Lashkar-e-Toiba to travel to Afghanistan and attend training at Al-Qaeda camps. Hicks allegedly “attended a number of al-Qaeda training courses at various camps around Afghanistan, learning guerilla warfare, weapons training, including landmines, kidnapping techniques and assassination methods.” He also allegedly participated “in an advanced course on surveillance, in which he conducted surveillance of the U.S. and British embassies in Kabul, Afghanistan.” By his own admission he met al-Qaeda founder Osama bin Laden on numerous occasions. In September 2001, Hicks arrived in the southern Afghan city of Kandahar where he reported to Saif al Adel, who was assigning individuals to locations, Hicks chose to join a group of al-Qaeda fighters defending the Kandahar airport.
Hicks was captured in Baghlan, Afghanistan in December 2001 by the Afghan Northern Alliance and sold for a $1,000 bounty to the U.S. military. Hicks was then transferred to Guantanamo Bay and designated as an enemy combatant. The initial charges against Hicks were brought only in 2004 under the Military Commission System. 