Carlos Antonio Carías López
24.04.2016
facts

Carlos Antonio Carías López was born on 10 March 1959 in the city of Guatemala. He is married and has four children. For 30 consecutive years, he worked for the Guatemalan army.
Between 1962 and 1996, Guatemala endured internal armed conflict that came to an end with the signing of a peace treaty on 29 December 1996, leaving 250,000 victims (deaths and disappearances) in its wake.
Following a coup in March 1982, Efrain Rios Montt came to power as head of the military junta. His scorched earth policy resulted in harsh repression involving massacres of the indigenous population and the destruction of 440 communities and local villages. Hundreds of thousands of victims were buried in mass graves.
Between 6 and 8 December 1982, a military operation was launched against the civilian population of the ‘Las Dos Erres’ development, located in the Petén area. This had been identified as a ‘red zone’ (meaning the local population’s sympathies lay with the guerrillas).
In December 1982, Carías López was a sub-lieutenant in the Army Reserve and commanding officer of the Las Cruces area of La Libertad, in Péten. In the months leading up to the massacre, he allegedly provided crucial data on the Las Cruces zone and the Dos Erres plot of land, with an aim to developing the military plan.
On 6 December 1982, the assault groups of the Kaibil patrol (Guatemalan special forces) unsettled the Dos Erres inhabitants using violence and mistreatment. They herded the men and elderly people into the local school, and assembled the women and young children there as well. They raped the women, including some young girls, pregnant and elderly women. Later, they interrogated and tortured the men. On 7 December 1982 at approximately 1pm, members of the patrol began to kill the civilian population of Dos Erres.
On 7 December 1983, Carías López ordered soldiers and a group of civilian self-defence patrols that were under his orders to keep watch over roads into Dos Erres. When members of the Las Cruces zone came to him asking what was happening in Dos Erres, he replied that cleaning was being carried out.
An estimated 200 people were killed during this massacre, held to be one of the most vicious of the decade in Guatemala.
In 1994, Guatemala’s Historical Clarification Commission was established. The aim was to investigate violations of human rights and acts of violence relating to the armed conflict.
On 14 June 1994, the Association of Families of Disappeared Detainees of Guatemala (FAMDEGUA) brought charges before the Péten tribunal for its actions. 