Juan Véliz Herrera
27.04.2016
facts

Juan Veliz Herrera is a former army general from Bolivia. He was commander of the Bolivian army during the second term of the former President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada (2002-2003).
During this period the so-called “Gas War” took place, the name given to the political and social conflict which arose in October 2003 as a means of protest against the export of Bolivian natural gas to Mexico and the United States via Chile. The conflict arose mainly as a result of the decision of Sánchez de Lozada’s government of to export through Chilean ports. The public response was to call for the government to halt exports of natural gas until a policy was implemented to ensure the supply of the domestic market at the same price as the export markets. They also called for a Constituent Assembly to create a new social contract for the establishment of a new “Consensus State”.
From its beginning in September 2003, many organisations were involved in the Gas War, including the Trade Union Confederation of Peasant Workers (CSUTCB), and the cocaleros (coca farmers) led by Evo Morales, the serving President of the country and a member of the Movement Toward Socialism (MAS) and Trabajadores Bolivianos (Bolivian Workers), one of the largest unions in Bolivia. These organisations were soon joined by groups of teachers, students, miners, etc. Although the initial grievances differed between these organizations, the prevention of the export of natural gas via Chile became a common demand.
The Gas War culminated in the autumn of 2003 with the blockade of La Paz, the administrative capital, which was completely paralyzed for five days (from 12 to 17 October). The conflict ended on 17 October 2003 with the fall of President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada, a period known as the “black October”.
After one month, the clashes between protesters and security forces had left hundreds dead and wounded. Most of these occurred in the city of El Alto where, during the final week of the conflict, 80 people were killed by gunfire from military helicopters following orders from President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada.
The mass protests and military repression ultimately led to the fall of President Sánchez de Lozada, who was replaced by his vice president, Carlos Mesa. They also triggered the call for a referendum for the nationalization of Bolivian hydrocarbons, in which the majority voted YES, and the rise to power of Evo Morales in 2005.
In November 2003, the Attorney General’s Office filed a claim with the Supreme Court requesting the Court to launch political and criminal proceedings against former President Sánchez de Lozada and his cabinet of former members of the Armed Forces, for the violation of constitutional guarantees and individual rights. 