Joni Marquez
30.01.2013
facts 

Joni Marquez was born around 1959 in East Timor. He is married and currently residing in Dili, Timor Leste. There is no information available on his childhood and adolescence.
East Timor, a former Portuguese colony was invaded by Indonesia in 1975. Indonesian forces were confronted with a continuous resistance from the East Timorese population during the occupation years. In 1999 Indonesia agreed to a United Nations organized popular consultation to determine the future status of the territory. In the meantime, however, the Indonesian army established and trained pro-Indonesian militias in East Timor who initiated in early 1999 an orchestrated campaign of violence. Nevertheless, on 30 August 1999 almost 80% of the East Timorese people voted for independence. Security was not restored until the Australian – led military operation (INTERFET) entered East Timor in late September 1999. Soon after the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) was created, and mandated to “exercise all legislative and executive authority, including the administration of justice.”
Marquez admitted in an interview that he hadn’t originally supported the annexation of East Timor by Indonesia in 1975, but in 1981 he abandoned the Timorese resistance movement Fretilin “out of fear” and joined the Indonesian military. He allegedly received a military training in Indonesia. In 1986 Marquez returned to Los Palos and was put in charge of the newly created Team Alfa Militia operating from the local Kopassus base in Los Palos. His role in the pro-Jakarta militia from 1991 to 1994 was to command around 80 men, but he was stripped of command after being accused of supplying Timorese independence fighters with ammunition, although he continued to serve in Team Alfa. Between April and September 1999 Team Alpha Militia under the command of Joni Marquez perpetrated systematic attacks directed against civilian population in in Los Palos Sub-District, Lautem District, which consisted in murder, torture, deportation and persecution of civilian population, including the members of clergy.
Joni Marquez was arrested in Com, Lautem district, following an indictment brought before the Special Panel for Serious Crimes of the Dili District Court in December 2000 against Joni Marquez and other members of Team Alfa Militia, including Joao da Costa, Paolo da Costa, Manuel da Costa, Amelio da Costa, Mautersa Monis, Gilberto Fernande, Alarico Fernande, Gonsalo dos Sant and Hilario da Silva (the so-called Los Palos case). 