Zeljko Lelek
26.04.2016
facts

Zeljko Lelek was born on 9 February 1962 in Goradze in south east Bosnia-Herzegovina. During the events, he held the position of police officer in the Visegrad municipality which is situated on the right bank of the river Drina in south west Bonia.
Proceedings against Zeljko Lelek came about as a result of the events which took place in 1992 in the Muslim majority municipality of Visegrad. Indeed, overall, the allegations were directed at the army, the police and Serb paramilitary formations which were reported to have deliberately attacked the Bosniak civilian population in this municipality.
More specifically, Zeljko Lelek was alleged to have committed murder, rape, and acts of torture against civilians between April and June 1992.
At the beginning of the month of May 1992, according to the indictment, Zeljko Lelek, Milan Lukic and Oliver Krsmanovic led five men to the banks of the “Drina River”. At this place they reportedly decapitated two of them, and shot dead the other three.
In addition, Lelek, together with four other individuals were said to have forced four Bosniaks into the river Drina where they then executed them.
Furthermore, it was also reported that during the month of May 1992, Lelek and other members of the police and the Serbian army illegally detained and physically and mentally abused Bosniak civilians in the Visegrad police station.
It was further alleged that Zeljko Lelek and a certain Vlatko Pecikoza drove two women to a bridge. Once there, Pecikoza is said to have thrown the baby belonging to one of the ladies, up in the air then stabbed the child to death. Lelek is then said to have executed both the ladies.
Finally, on order of Milan Lukic, Lelek and others reportedly raped on a daily basis a woman being held by them in captivity. They are also said to have tortured her physically by stubbing out cigarettes on her body, by stabbing her or by cutting her genital parts. It was also alleged that during the month of June, Lelek also abused and raped other women who were under illegal detention.
Lelek was arrested on 5 May 2006. 