Ilir Nazmi Kumbaro
05.05.2016
facts

Ilir Nazmi Kumbaro was the chief of the Tirana branch of the National Intelligence Service (ShIK, now ShISh) in Albania from 1993-1995. In this role, Kumbaro ordered the arrest and torture of Rezmi Hoxha in 1995.
In 1995, Remzi Hoxha, an ethnic Albanian Macedonian national and businessman, then living in Albania, disappeared. Hoxha had been abducted by the Albanian National Intelligence Service (ShIK) on 21 October 1995 from his office in Tirana. His abduction was preceded by the arrest of Abdurrahman Loshaj on 5 October 1995 and Zizo Kristopulli, a member of the Saranda Socialist Party leadership, on 18 October 1995. The abductions were rumoured to have been related to arms smuggling and Hoxha was suspected of plotting to kill then-Macedonian president Kiro Gligorov during a 1995 visit to Albania. These allegations were never confirmed by any court.
Hoxha was abducted, illegally detained and tortured by Kumbaro’s agents in a ShIK detention centre in Lezha (65 kilometres from Tirana) with Loshaj and Kristopulli, who were suspected of conspiring with Hoxha. The three were never formally charged of the alleged plot. Loshaj and Kristopulli were released after a week. According to the testimony of an acquaintance of Hoxha, he was last seen in the detention centre in very poor health conditions. Based on the testimonies of former members of the National Intelligence Service, Hoxha’s illegal detention and alleged torture caused his death, although his body has never been recovered. Upon Hoxha’s family’s request, the Court of Skopje announced Hoxha dead in July 2010.
In 1996, Kumbaro sought asylum in the United Kingdom under a false identity. Under the name Shaqa Shatri, he claimed to be a Kosovar refugee fleeing from Serbian persecution. He was granted indefinite leave to remain in the country and was issued a British passport. At the time of his arrest in 2008, Kumbaro lived in a council flat, claiming social security benefits as well as incapacity benefits, claiming to suffer from depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.
Kumbaro was reportedly caught while claiming incapacity benefit and registering with Ealing, Hammersmith and Hounslow Health Authority in the United Kingdom, using his real name instead of his alias by mistake.
Kumbaro was last seen in October 2011 reporting to Fulham police station as he failed to attend his final extradition hearing before the Westminster Magistrates’ Court on 1 December 2011. The Metropolitan Police believe that Kumbaro has remained in the United Kingdom and is hiding with friends. 