Morris Kallon
08.05.2016
facts

Morris Kallon, alias Bilai Karim, was born on 1 Januray 1964 in Bo in the district of Bo, Sierra Leona.
Kallon was alleged to have been a Commander in the RUF (Revolutionary United Front) as well as in the junta, made of the RUF and the AFRC (Armed Forces Revolutionary Council), after the latter came to power in a coup.
According to the indictment, between May 1996 and April 1998, Kallon was Deputy Area Commander, then Battlefield Inspector within the RUF between April 1998 and December 1999.
During the junta regime, he was a member of the junta governing body.
In early 2000, according to the indictment, he became the Battle Group Commander in the RUF, subordinate only to the RUF Battlefield Commander, Issa Hassan Sesay, the leader of the RUF, Foday Sankoh, and the leader of the AFRC, Johnny Paul Koroma.
From about June 2001 he became RUF Battlefield Commander.
It was alleged that Morris Kallon, personally or in concert with other leaders of the RUF and the AFRC, exercised control, authority and command over subordinates in the RUF, the Junta and the armed forces of the RUF/AFRC.
During the period covered by the indictment, the RUF and the AFRC, acting in concert with, or under the orders of Kallon, led a campaign of armed attacks throughout the territory of Sierra Leone, according to the bill of indictment. The principal targets of these attacks were civilians and humanitarian assistance personnel as well as United Nations peacekeepers. These attacks were carried out primarily to terrorize the civilian population, but were also used to punish the population for failing to provide sufficient support to the RUF/AFRC alliance.
The attacks included unlawful killings, physical and sexual violence against civilians and looting of property.
As part of the campaign of terror, the alliance is reported to have routinely captured and abducted women and girls to rape and use as sex slaves, to have carried off men and boys to use as forced labour and to have abducted children to enrol them by force in the conflict.
Morris Kallon was arrested and transferred to the Special Court for Sierra Leone (SCSL) on 10 March 2003. 