Manuel Andres Carevic Cubillos
09.05.2016
facts


Manuel Carevic Cubillos was born on 17 May 1943 in Valparaiso, Chile. He was a colonel in the Chilean Armed Forces. After the military coup d’état led by Augusto Pinochet on 11 September 1973, Carevic became a member of the Army’s Intelligence Service, DINA where he was the second-in-command of the Puren Brigade.
During his time at DINA, Carevic is alleged to have been involved in a number of crimes, described here:
ABDUCTION, TORTURE AND DISAPPEARANCE OF PEDRO POBLETE CÓRDOBA
Pedro Poblete Córdoba, member of the Revolutionary Left Movement (MIR), was arrested by DINA agents on 19 July 1974 in Santiago de Chile. He was held at ‘Londres 38’, where he was tortured, and with no contact to outside world. He was last seen alive at the end of August 1974. His name appeared in the Argentinian magazine ‘LEA’ in July 1975. The article reported the death of 59 individuals belonging to MIR.
ABDUCTION, TORTURE AND DISAPPEARANCE OF MIGUEL ANGEL ACUNA CASTILLO
Acuna Castillo, a 19-year old MIR member, was detained by DINA agents in July 1974. He was then held in ‘Londres 38’ where he was tortured during interrogation sessions. He was last seen alive some time in July or August 1974. 78 former DINA agents, including Carevic were charged with abduction and disappearance of Acuna Castillo.
ABDUCTION, TORTURE AND DISAPPEARANCE OF RODOLFO VALENTIN GONZALEZ PEREZ AND JOSÉ FLORES ARAYA
Along with Major Gerardo Urrich Gonzalez, Carevic is also allegedly responsible for the disappearance of the 19-year old FACH (Chilean Armed Forces) conscript Rodolfo Valentin Gonzalez Perez on 24 July 1974. After the coup, Gonzalez Perez was assigned to DINA to work at the military hospital. He was in charge of people detained by security forces. His crime, according to DINA, was looking after them and carrying correspondence to their families.
After his arrest, Gonzalez Perez was transferred to ‘Villa Grimaldi’ detention centre, where he was tortured for being a traitor. One day he was taken out from a precinct and his fate has been unknown since.
José Flores Araya was a 19-year old secondary-school student who was pulled out of the class at school on 23 August 1974 and accused of collecting money for the Chilean Communist Party. He also was held in ‘Villa Grimaldi’. Flores Ararya was recognized by one of his professors who had been detained there at the time and later became a prosecution witness. The professor testified that when Flores Araya had arrived to the centre he was already in bad shape. He had respiration problems and bore traces of torture. The witness testified that he had heard several days later that Flores Araya was released. It later surfaced that he had been disappeared.
Urrich Gonzalez and Carevic were indicted in August 1992 by Judge Virginia Bravo of the Third Criminal Court of Santiago for the abduction of young Gonzalez Perez and Flores Araya.
ABDUCTION, TORTURE AND DISAPPEARANCE OF MARÍA ANGÉLICA ANDREOLI BRAVO
María Angélica Andreoli Bravo, a member of the MIR, was arrested by DINA agents on 6 August 1974. She was detained in ‘Londres 38’ where she was blindfolded, tied and left without contact with the outside world. Subsequently, she was transferred to ‘Villa Grimaldi’. In both places she was tortured by agents attempting to obtain information about other MIR members. Andreoli Bravo was last seen in September 1974. Next year her name was mentioned in a Brazilian newspaper claiming that she died as a result of internal fighting within the MRI. Allegedly, this information was fabricated by DINA as part of Operation Colombo.
ABDUCTION, TORTURE AND DISAPPEARANCE OF BERNARDO CASTRO LOPEZ
On 14 September 1974, Castro Lopez, member of the Chilean Socialist Party, was arrested in his house. He was first questioned by police agents and later transferred to DINA centre ‘Venda Sexy’ for further interrogation. He was tortured and deprived of any contact with the outside world. Next, he was moved to ‘Cuatro Alamos’, another camp that only DINA agents could access. He was last seen alive by other detainees some time in October 1974. Again, his name was mentioned in a newspaper article published in 1975 reporting on death on Argentina of 59 people. It is alleged that this 59 persons were killed in internal fighting.
ABDUCTION AND DISAPPEARANCE OF SIBLINGS PEÑA SOLARI
On 9 December 1974, Mario Fernando Peña Solari, a member of the Revolutionary Left Movement (MIR), was arrested by DINA agents. Next day his sister, Nilda Patricia Peña Solari, pregnant at the time, was also detained. The investigation established that they were held for several days in DINA detention centres around the Chilean capital. They were last seen alive in one of the notorious detention called ‘Venda Sexy’. To date, their bodies have not been found.
OPERATION COLOMBO
Allegedly, Carevic was implicated in the Operation Colombo, part of the infamous Operation Condor.
Operation Colombo consisted of, in 1975 newspapers in Chile, Brazil and Argentina publishing several articles indicating that, in total, 119 Chilean nationals had been killed during fighting with security forces. The main purpose of the publication was to convince the Chilean population that these individuals were traitors and they went to neighbouring countries to fight for their cause. In fact, the information was fabricated by DINA. All of the victims had already been disappeared months earlier.
On 26 May 2008 a judge indicted 98 former state agents for their role in the Operation Colombo. The proceedings were carried out on behalf of 42 victims. Among arrested were both military and civil members of DINA, including Carevic. 