Héctor Humberto Gamen
12.04.2016
facts

Héctor Humberto Gamén was born on 21 April 1925 in Chivilcoy, Buenos Aires, Argentina. In 1948 he joined the Argentinian Army and between 1974 and 1975, he was Argentine Military Attaché in Bolivia with rank of Coronel. On December 1975, he was named Second Commandant and Chief of Staff of Command X Infantry Brigade of La Plata, a position he held until December 1977, when he was named Commander of the IX Infantry Brigade of Comodoro Rivadavia and was promoted to General.
On 26 March 1976, two days after a military junta headed by Jorge Rafael Videla seized power through a military coup, the Tactical Operations Center (COT) was created as an agency conduction of the operations of the Brigade X. Considering that COT offices were distant from the area of operations, the Central Intelligence Meeting (CRI) was created as an advance command post in La Tablada, La Matanza district. Héctor Magén, as Chief of Staff of Command X Brigade, coordinated and controlled the COT and the CRI.
During the dictatorship (1976-1983), the Argentinean military resolved to eradicate what the junta called “subversive thoughts”, as well as “terrorists”, namely “anyone who disseminated ideas contrary to Western Christian civilization”. During the course of the following years, the military murdered or forcibly disappeared between 10,000 and 30,000 people.
Several hundred clandestine detention centres (CCD) were set up throughout the country and shared common characteristics, including operation in secret places, under the direct control of the military authorities responsible for the area, and the subjugation of the people staying there to degrading practices, such as physical and psychological torture systematically, the Septation (be bandaged day and night and isolated from the rest of the population), the absolute prohibition of speaking or writing, the assigning of a letter and a number in place of the name, accommodation in small cells called “pipes”, poor food and drink, and the complete loss of identity, among others. One such secret detention center was known as “El Vesubio” and was located inside the CRI of La Tablada.
“El Vesubio” operated between 1975 and 1978 in an area of the Federal Penitentiary Service and it is believed that began operations a year before the coup, and according to reports and testimonies collected, about 2,500 detainees passed through there. This clandestine center was a “Chupadero”, a term used by repressors to describe places of detention where the victims were staying immediately after the kidnapping. From there the fate of the victims was decided: clandestine transfers to other centers, release or murder.
On “El Vesubio” CCD torture sessions were conducted by different procedures: application of electrical current, punches, whiplashes, cigarette burns, submarine and dry submarine, and simulated executions, among others. Often, prisoners were not only tortured but were forced to witness the torture of family, friends or colleagues who were also held there. The torture sessions occurred periodically, every two or three days, as a way of “softening” and constant intimidation, as well as a method of extracting information. Rape and sexual abuse of women prisoners by guards and torturers were common practice, which were not exempt even pregnant prisoners. Many victims of “El Vesubio” were killed in forged confrontations: were transferred from the secret center to be shot and then their bodies left in alleged shootouts scenarios.
On 1983, a group of survivors reported the existence of “El Vesubio” CCD. The same year several visual inspections were performed. Subsequently the cause froze when passing the “Due Obedience law” (1986) and the “Full Stop law” (1987). 