Momcilo Bajraktarevic
26.04.2016
facts

Momcilo Bajraktarevic was born in 1954 in Berane in the north of Montenegro.
In 1999 he served as Commander of the Third Company of the First Battalion of the Podgorica Corps of the Army of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which was under the command of Predrag Strugar. According to press reports this military unit was made up essentially of reservists coming from regions to the north of Montenegro where there was a concentration of Montenegrins of Serbian origin.
At the time, Montenegro was tied to Serbia within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Following an agreement concluded between the authorities in Belgrade and Montenegro, it was the Yugoslav army that was put in charge of patrolling and providing security over the frontier separating Montenegro from Kosovo during the conflict which pitted Serbs against Albanians from Kosovo in the period between 1996 and 1999.
The battalion, in which Momcilo Bajraktarevic served, was stationed in one of these border areas in the region of Hajle. In this mountainous and forested region there were four villages inhabited by Albanians, one of which was the village of Kaludjerski Laz, which lay a short distance from the town of Rozaje in Montenegro.
According to local press reports in April 1999, intense fighting against the Kosovo Liberation Army (UCK) and the expulsion of the local Albanian population by Serb forces took place on the other side of the border in the Rugovo region of Kosovo. The bombing campaign by NATO against Serbian positions had only just begun at that time. As a consequence, numerous Albanians from the villages in the region attempted to flee to Montenegro.
According to the Prosecutor of Montenegro, the Third Company, commanded by Momcilo Bajraktarevic and under the orders of Predrag Strugar, was responsible for an event engraved in people’s minds under the designation of “the massacre of Kaludjerski Laz”. On 18 April 1999, in the village of Kaludjerski Laz Serbian soldiers were reported to have killed 6 civilians, including two old women and a child, who escaped from Kosovo, and to have then transferred their bodies by truck to the other side of the border to be buried in a mass grave in Novo Selo, in Kosovo.
The Yugoslav army at the time assigned responsibility for this event to Serbian paramilitary forces and Momcilo Bajraktarevic himself stated that it was the responsibility of the Serbian paramilitary forces which were in the village of Kaludjerski Laz at the time.
As early as the month of April 1999, the Yugoslav army ordered investigations aimed at shedding light on the events in Kaludjerski Laz and a military examining judge was given the task of leading the enquiry. 