Awad Ismail Suleiman
15.04.2016
facts

Awad Ismail Suleiman was an Egyptian police sergeant in Alexandria.
Khaled Said was a 28-year-old businessman. On 6 June 2010 he had been at an Internet café near his home in the Sidi Gaber district of Alexandria, Egypt. Allegedly, Said had uploaded a video showing Sidi Gaber police officers sharing drugs confiscated in a bust. Two plainclothes policemen, Police Sergeant Awad Ismail Suleiman and Warrant Officer Mahmoud Salah, entered the Internet café and arrested Khaled Said. The cause for the arrest remains unclear. Some accounts alleged that the policemen asked Said for money, which he refused to give. Others alleged that Said refused to show the policemen his ID card when they requested to see it. Still others alleged that Said was wanted for theft and weapons possession, or that he was targeted for exposing corruption.
Suleiman and Salah beat Said. They dragged him out of the Internet café, banging his head on the floor, and then beat him in public on the street. Several witnesses tried to stop the policemen, but were unsuccessful. Witnesses alleged that the policemen put Said’s body in their police truck and drove away. They returned several minutes later, leaving his body in the street where they had beaten him. Photographs taken of the deceased Said showed his face covered in bruises and his nose, jaw and teeth broken.
In the aftermath of the incident, Sidi Gaber police allegedly deleted photos and videos from witnesses’ phones. Others, who may have testified, were threatened or bribed. Said’s mother reported that police were stationed outside of their building and even temporarily detained Said’s brother.
Said’s family filed a complaint with the Alexandria Public Prosecutor’s Office.
The initial official autopsy found that Said had died from asphyxiation on a plastic bag of marijuana that Said had supposedly swallowed when Suleiman and Salah approached him in the Internet café. Witnesses have contested this version of events, alleging that Said had been dragged outside and beaten to death by the policemen. On 15 June 2010 the Prosecutor General ordered a new autopsy to be supervised by independent forensic experts.
On 23 June 2010 the Prosecutor General announced that the results of the second autopsy confirmed asphyxiation as the cause of death of Said. It also confirmed that Said had been beaten. Said’s family, however, obtained a report prepared by doctors attributing the cause of death to the beating Said suffered.
The trial against Suleiman and Salah began on 27 July 2010 in Alexandria Criminal Court. They were charged with unlawful arrest and excessive use of force. Lawyers for Said’s family sought charges of murder, for which reason the court was adjourned until 25 September 2010. 