Annemette Hommel
15.03.2012
facts

Annemette Hommel was born in 1968; according to the Danish media, she has a university degree in political science and worked at times for the foreign ministry. She has been an officer for 15 years, and was described by the Copenhagen daily “EkstraBladet” as one of the best-qualified members of the Danish military with special competencies. According to the paper, she had gained herself a reputation during interrogation trainings for being an extreme hardliner, well renowned for her ability to get prisoners to crack down during interrogations and reveal more than simply their name, rank, and date of birth. In January she allegedly volunteered for service at the Danish prisoners camp “Camp Eden”, near Basra, Iraq.
Denmark, one of the United States’ closest allies, deployed around 530 soldiers in Iraq, most of them stationed in the southern seaport city of Basra, which is under British authority. Denmark’s mandate expired on 1 February 2006.
In March, April and June 2004, Hommel allegedly forced prisoners to kneel in painful positions during interrogations. Moreover, she is alleged of having deprived prisoners of water, forbidding them to go to the toilet, and of insulting them. In one case, Hommel allegedly threatened a prisoner with the words: “We may kill you.”
The public learned about these offences when a civil interpreter informed the Danish army leadership about the incidents at Camp Eden. Several soldiers are said to have corroborated his allegations.
At first, the leadership of the Danish battalion stationed at Camp Eden (consisting of 496 soldiers) did not react to these reports. Subsequently, defence minister Søren Gade relieved the commander of the battalion, Colonel Henrik Flach, and three other leading officers of their posts and ordered them home. Only a few days laterAnnemette Hommel, the first named suspect, was recalled home. Hommel denied all allegations and accused the interpreter of being unfit to work with the army.
In early August 2004, Annemette Hommel and four other members of the Danish military police were indicted on accounts of war crimes for using inhumane and degrading treatment against Iraqi prisoners of war. 