Krsto Savic
17.04.2016
facts

Krsto Savic was born on 10 October 1959 in the village of Slato, Nevesinje Municipality in Bosnia and Herzegovina. His military service was completed in Karlovac in four months. Savic then pursued a degree in political science. He was once convicted of manslaughter in a case unrelated to his service as chief of the Security Services Centre in Trebinje, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Savic served as the chief of the Security Services Centre (CSB) in Trebinje with command and control over the Ministry of the Interior force. Savic was also Minister of the Interior of the Serb Autonomous Region of Herzegovina and a member of the Staff of the Ministry of the Interior of the Serb Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
From June 1992 to the end of the year, during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosniak and Croat civilians suffered persecution in the municipalities of Nevesinje, Kalinovik, Gacko and Bileca at the hands of army, police and paramilitary units of the Serb Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. These members of the Nevesinje, Kalinovik, Gacko and Bileca Public Security Stations (SJBs) were operating as part of the Trebinje CSB, which was under Savic’s command.
It was alleged that, in early May 1992, 280 civilians fleeing attack by the Serb armed force were captured by the Kalinovik SJB. The men were separated and detained at the Miladin Radojevic Elementary School before being transported to Bileca camp. They were later brought back to Kalinovik and handed over to the Foca Penal-Correctional Facility. The majority of these men is alleged to have been killed or disappeared.
Between May 1992 and March 1993 the Kalinovik SJB detained civilians at the detention centre of the Kalinovik SJB. Some of the detainees were used as drivers to detect mines. In addition to inhumane living conditions, detainees at the Miladin Radojevic Elementary School were exposed to physical and mental abuse by policemen and soldiers. Detained women were raped. Many detainees disappeared.
In June 1992 allegedly all able-bodied Bosniak men in the Gacko municipality were arrested by the Gacko SJB. More than 150 men were detained in camps with inhumane conditions and subjected to physical abuse. Some were killed and some disappeared. At the end of June 1992 they were transported to the camp in the BIleca barracks.
Between the end of June 1992 and the end of the year, allegedly all able-bodied Bosniak men in the Bileca municipality were arrested by the Bileca SJB. Savic approved the detention of these men in the barracks in Bileca and at Dacki dom, where they were allegedly tortured by Bileca SJB policemen, denied food and held in inhuman conditions. Around 5 October 1992, approximately half of the detainees were deported to Montenegro.
Between June 1992 and March 1993 the Kalinovik SJB persecuted the Bosniak civilian population in the Kalinovik municipality and parts of the civilian populations of Gacko, Trnovo, Foca and Nevesinje municipalities.
On 16 June 1992 Savic was in charge of the Nevesinje SJB attack on the Bosniak civilian population in the Nevesinje municipality. At one house, Nevesinje SJB policeman Milko Mucibabic ordered everyone to leave the house. Redzo Trebovic and his wife emerged. Savic fired a Scorpion pistol at Trebovic’s legs and he fell. Savic allegedly did not allow anyone to approach for some time, before allowing Trebovic to be brought to the Health Centre in Nevesinje where he was pronounced dead. His body has never been found. The police set the house on fire. In addition, during the attack, many civilians were unlawfully arrested. Savic ordered the men and women detained and separated. The women were subjected to inhumane conditions, physical and mental abuse. The men were subjected to physical abuse, including beatings.
On 16 June 1992 members of the Nevesinje SJB attacked Canje, a village allegedly without legitimate military targets or armed inhabitants. Nine Bosniak civilians were killed. All survivors were detained in Nevesinje. The men were subjected to physical abuse before being transported to Bileca camp.
Between 19 and 24 June 1992 civilians were unlawfully detained at the Nevesinje SJB before being handed over to unidentified paramilitary members. One man was beaten at Boracko Lake and buried in the Borisavac pit.
Around 23 and 24 June 1992, members of the Nevesinje SJB called for the Bosniaks in Nevesinje to gather in front of the old municipality building. They were transported to Busak, the region between the front lines, where they were exposed to the line of fire and land mines. Some were killed and many were wounded.
Around 24 June 1992, all of the inhabitants of the Sarica hamlet were captured by paramilitary members and detained at the Nevesinje SJB. Two days later they were transported to Bileca camp.
Around 24 June 1992, Savic allegedly interrogated a civilian detained in the Nevesinje SJB building, threatening and poking him with a bayonet.
Around 25 June 1992 the Kalinovik SJB arrested all Bosniak men in Kalinovik, Mjehovina, Jelasca and Vihovici. The men were detained in the Miladin Radojevic Elementary School until around 7 July 1992, when they were transported to the Barutni Magacin camp, which was under the control of the army. On 5 August 1992 all of the men were transported to Ratine and executed by firing squad.
In late June 1992 several civilians detained at the Nevesinje SJB were handed over to unidentified paramilitary members, who took them to Boracko Lake. Some of the bodies were later found in the Borisavac pit. One woman was allegedly subjected to sexual slavery.
In late June and early July 1992 some other detained civilians were transported to the line of disengagement in Stolac, placing their lives at risk crossing the line.
In early July 1992, approximately 200 Bosniak civilians from Gacko and Nevesinje municipalities were captured by members of the Kalinovik police force and detained in the Miladin Radojevic Elementary School.
On 1 August 1992 members of the Kalinovik SJB attacked the Bosniak civilian population of Jelasca. They set houses on fire and the Serb army supplemented the attack with artillery support. Women and children were captured and detained in the Miladin Radojevic Elementary School.
In late summer 1992 the leadership of the Kalinovik SJB and members of the police set fire to the Bosniak villages of Socani, Daganj, Bojici, Hotovlje, Luko, and Kutine.
On 6 September 2007 Savic was arrested. The Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina ordered him to be held in custody due to the grounded suspicion that Savic had committed crimes against humanity, as well as evidence indicating a risk of flight and of interference with criminal proceedings. 