Gratien Kabiligi
31.05.2016
facts

Gratien Kabiligi was born on 18 December 1951 in the Kamembe commune of the Cyangugu prefecture. In his early career, he held the position of Chief of military operations at the General Staff headquarters of the Rwandan armed forces. From being a Lieutenant-Colonel in 1988, he was subsequently promoted to Colonel before being appointed Brigadier General on 16 April 1994.
In his role as Staff Commander of Military Operations of the Rwandan Armed Forces, Kabiligi had under his command units from the sectors of Byumba, Ruhengeri, Mutara and Kigali as well as elite units such as the Presidential Guard, the Para-Commando Battalion and the Reconnaissance Battalion over all of which he exercised his authority.
Already from 1990, Kabiligi was said to have started working on a plan whose intent was to exterminate the Tutsi civilian population and to eliminate members of the opposition and thus hold on to power. According to the indictment, this plan included, amongst other elements, resorting to hatred and ethnic violence, training in and distribution of arms to the militia, as well as the drafting of lists of people to be eliminated. In executing this plan, Kabiligi and his fellow conspirators were alleged to have organised, ordered and participated in massacres perpetrated against the Tutsi population and moderate Hutus.
On 4 December 1991, President Habyarimana set up a military commission with the brief to reply to the question: “What needs to be done to defeat the enemy on each of the military, media and political fronts?” Kabiligi was a member of this commission, of which Théoneste Bagosora (see “related cases”) was appointed President The report of this commission was nothing less than a call to hatred. Its definition of the enemy was “Tutsis of the interior, Hutus dissatisfied with the regime and foreigners married to Tutsi women…”. It was to be broadcast widely to the armed forces throughout the country. This document and the use made of it by high ranking officers was said to have helped, encouraged and promoted hatred and ethnic violence.
On several occasions, Kabiligi was said to have stated publicly that the extermination of the Tutsis would be the inevitable outcome of any resumption of hostilities on the part of the FPR (Rwandan Patriotic Front) or of the application of the Arusha Agreements. In March 1994, he reportedlymentioned several times in front of Belgian Army officers the possibility of eliminating the FPR and the Tutsis in a short period of time. Moreover, during the genocide, he reportedly expressed his satisfaction concerning the crimes perpetrated by the Interahamwe militiamen against the Tutsi civilian population.
From 7 April until end July 1994, soldiers (with the help of the Interahamwe), some of whom were subordinate to Gratien Kabiligi, carried out killings of members of the Tutsi population and moderate Hutus, working from pre-established lists.
A certain number of the soldiers, militiamen and gendarmes who had participated in the massacre of the Tutsi population and in the murder of numerous political opponents did so in following orders and directives which were allegedly handed down by Kabiligi.
During the massacres, Gratien Kabiligi reportedly encouraged and supported the militiamen who had murdered Tutsi civilians and allegedly ordered his men to make use of the Interahamwe militiamen at the barricades.
Moreover, in mid-April 1994, Kabiligi was said to have ordered the murder of a Tutsi soldier of the Rwandan Armed Forces (FAR) and certain members of his family.
By issuing orders and by his actions, Kabiligi exercised de facto authority over the FAR and the militia. From 6 April onwards, the latter committed massacres against the Tutsi population and the moderate Hutus who were killed throughout the Rwandan territory to the full knowledge of Kabiligi.
From May to June 1994, soldiers under the orders of Kabiligi, carried out identity checks and noted the names of people known to be Tutsis who had taken refuge in a house located opposite Saint Andrew’s college in Kigali. On 8 June1994 these same soldiers surrounded this house, forced the occupants outside and shot them to death.
From April to July 1994, Kabiligi allegedly participated in daily meetings with other army general staff officers and unit leaders. During these meetings, he was reportedly informed about the massacres being perpetrated against the Tutsi civilian population but did nothing to put a stop to them. Kabiligi and Aloys Ntabakuze were said to have refused to intervene to control and appeal to the population so long as a cease fire had not been ordered.
Kabiligi (together with other political, civil and military authorities in the country) was allegedly one of the masterminds behind the strategy which had been developed to exterminate the Tutsis.
Kabiligi was arrested on 18 July 1997 in Nairobi, Kenya. 