Milenko Trifunovic
04.05.2016
facts

Milenko Trifunovic was born on 7 January 1968 in the municipality of Srebrenica. He was a commander of the 3rd “Skelani“ Platoon, part of the 2nd Special Police Sekovici Squad.
The indictment alleged that, on 12 and 13 July 1995, Milenko Trifunovic and his ten co-accused were deployed along the Bratunac-Milici road between the villages of Kravica and Sandici, in the municipality of Bratunac, which included a section of the road near the Kravica Farming Cooperative warehouse.
According to the indictment, the accused secured and controlled the said road in accordance with a plan to forcibly transfer around 25,000 Bosniak women, children and elderly persons from the protected area of Srebrenica. According to the charges, on 13 July 1995 they conducted security operations in the form of reconnaissance and attacks using tanks and other weaponry against a column of Bosniaks in the area of Kamenica, thereby forcing the Bosniak men to surrender.
On the same day, Milenko Trifunovic and his co-defendants allegedly conducted patrols on the road and set up ambushes to intercept the column of Bosniaks and capture those men trying to reach the territory under the control of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina (BiH). According to the indictment, the accused detained several thousand captured men in and around Sandici, in the municipality of Bratunac. A number of these men were allegedly handed over to Bosnian Serb army soldiers who put them on trucks and transported them in an unknown direction. As of today, the fate and whereabouts of these men are still unknown.
The remaining men were transported to different locations including the Kravica Farming Cooperative warehouse where more than one thousand Bosniak male prisoners were detained. In the early evening hours, these men were allegedly executed.
The indictment stated that Milenko Trifunovic took part in the massacre by firing his machine gun at the prisoners.
Milenko Trifunovic was arrested in June 2005. 