Guillermo Humberto Salinas Torres
09.05.2016
facts


Guillermo Humberto Salinas Torres was the head of the “Mulchen” Brigade of the National Intelligence Directorate (DINA, in Spanish) in Santiago, Chile in 1976 and during the dictatorship of Pinochet.
Within the process of the systematic repression and the elimination of opposition members against the military regime of the Chilean dictatorship, in 14 July 1976, Carmelo Soria Espinoza, a Spanish national and member of the diplomatic personnel of the United Nations, was kidnapped by officers of the DINA while he was travelling to his house in Santiago de Chile. Two members of the DINA, dressed in uniform, feigning that Soria had committed a traffic infraction, stopped him and took him to a house that then served as a clandestine examinations and torture centre. At 6pm in the evening, both DINA members came to the house where he was tortured for several hours, suffering factures in his ribs, with the purpose of obtaining information regarding his relation to the Chilean Communist Party and his reasons for being in Chile.  Furthermore, in order to kill him and make his death look like a traffic accident, the DINA officers injected or made Soria drink the content of half a bottle of ‘’pisco’’, a liquor. Several members of the DINA took part in the interrogation to Soria, including Salinas, who killed Soria by manual choking with the help of two other DINA officers who, as of today, remain unidentified. To cover the death, on 15 July 1976, the DINA officers transported Soria’s vehicle to a canal and dumped the car with the body inside, leaving half a bottle of ‘’pisco’’ in the car.
The Supreme National Court of Chile dismissed the Soria case on 23 August 1996. The investigation was closed owing to amnesty laws then in place in Chile that made impossible the effective prosecution of the crime.
On 29 October 2012, the Spanish National High Court prosecuted Salinas, together with other six members of the DINA, for an alleged crime of genocide, murder and illegal detention, ordering the search, arrest and imprisonment of the referred defendants, and issuing the corresponding international arrest warrants for the purpose of a subsequent extradition. 