Rasim Delic
03.05.2016
facts

Rasim Delic was born on 4 February 1949 in Celic in the Republic of Bosnia Herzegovina. From the outset he took up a military career in the Yugoslav People’s Army.
On 8 June 1993, the Presidency of Bosnia Herzegovina appointed Delic Chief of Staff of the Army of Bosnia-Herzegovina..(ABiH)
On the very same day, according to the Indictment, 200 Bosnian Croat civilians and soldiers were arrested by forces of the Bosnian army following fighting in or around the village of Maline. An order was given to them to march in the direction of Mehurici, a village situated a few kilometres from Maline. Just as they were approaching the village of Poljanice, not far from Mehurici, a group of around 10 Mujahedin and Bosnian Muslim soldiers , ordered the prisoners to halt. Approximately 35 to 40 men were taken out of the formation and given the order to go back in the direction of Maline.
Shortly afterwards, this group was joined by another, smaller, group which had also been captured in Maline. Following this, they were given the order to stand in line, close to the village of Bikosi . The Mujahedin then opened up fire shooting indiscriminately at the group and finishing of any survivors with a bullet to the head.
According to the indictment, Rasim Delic was said to have been informed about these murders but did not undertake the necessary and reasonable measures to punish the perpetrators of this crime.
According to the indictment, on 21 July 1995, two soldiers from the Bosnian Serb forces (VRS) were captured and subsequently beheaded by members of the Bosnian army. Other soldiers, taken prisoner on the same day, were said to have been severely beaten over several days and then taken to the Kamenica camp. A third soldier was reported to have been decapitated there on 24 July 1995. The other prisoners were said to have been given the order to kiss the head, which was then put on display in the room where they were being held.
The prisoners in the Kamenica camp were reportedly beaten and tortured, on occasion by means of electrical shocks.
According to the indictment, on 11 September 1995, around 60 soldiers from the VRS were taken prisoner by the Bosnian army, at the same time as several civilians including three women. This group was transferred to the camp in Kamenica.
The 60 soldiers taken prisoner disappeared thereafter and are presumed to be dead.
As for the three women the indictment states that they were subjected to acts of violence, and sexual assault in particular to rape. They were released on 15 November 1995.
Another group of 10 soldiers from the VRS was also taken to the Kamenica camp on or around 17 September 1995. They were all subjected to cruel treatment there during a period of about 12 days.
According to the indictment, Rasim Delic was aware that the Mujahedin members of the Bosnian army had a distinct tendency to commit crimes especially against captured enemy combatants and civilians and that the Kamenica camp was being used as a place in which these crimes could be perpetrated. Reportedly, however, he took no measures whatsoever to stop these acts taking place.
An indictment against Rasim Delic was drawn up on 15 February 2005 by the Prosecutor of the ICTY (International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia) and confirmed the following day by a judge.
Rasim Delic surrendered to the ICTY on 28 February 2005. 