Ratko Bundalo
24.02.2012
facts

Ratko Bundalo was born on 30 September 1944 in Kriškovci, a village situated in the Laktaši province of Bosnia and Herzegovina. A Bosnian Serb, he was a colonel in the Serb Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina army (VRS).
According to the indictment, Ratko Bundalo was accused of crimes against the Bosnian civilian population in the Kalinovik Municipality in present-day Bosnia and Herzegovina. These crimes took place between April 1992 and March 1993 in the context of systematic and wide-spread attacks jointly led by the Serb Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina Army (VRS), the police and paramilitary units. Ratko Bundaloand the co accused Neđo Zejaja and Dorđislav Aškraba allegedly committed murders, torture, rape and kidnapping of civilians.  They were also suspected of having been involved in acts of mass destruction to public and private property, and inhuman acts against the Bosnian Muslim civilian population of Kalinovik.
At the beginning of May 1992, Ratko Bundalo was said to have participated in the capturing of 280 civilians fleeing from the VRS in Jeleč, a village in the Foča Municipality.  Using force, the men had then been separated from the women and children, and detained in the Miladin Radojević primary school. Ratko Bundalo took part in transporting these detainees to a correctional institution where most of them disappeared, or were killed.
As commander of the Kalinovik Brigade, Ratko Bundalo also participated in planning and organizing operations in the Kalinovik camp of Baruini Magacin. The majority of the male Bosnian civilian population of Kalinovik and surrounding villages were illegally detained here. As commander of the camp between 7 July 1992 and 5 August 1992,Ratko Bundalo was directly involved in the atrocities committed against the camp detainees. The Bosnian civilians were detained in inhuman conditions, with no access to medical care and insufficient food. Some civilians were forced to the frontline, others were physically abused or killed.
Ratko Bundalo was arrested on 31 August 2007. 