José Octavio Zara Holger
26.04.2016
facts

José Octavio Zara Holger was born on 6 February 1943 in Chillan, in Chile. He was a Non-Commissioned Officer in the land forces and assistant Chief of Staff in the Chilean National Intelligence Directorate (DINA). According to the report from the Special Commission on Imprisonment and Torture presented to President Lagos on 11 November 2004, DINA was the principle organization to blame for crimes committed during the dictatorship, notably for the systematic use of torture.
Furthermore, it participated in Operation Condor, the name given to a secret and concerted plan of action against guerilla forces and of assassination of political opponents, which was conducted conjointly by the secret services of Chile, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil Paraguay, and Uruguay in the middle of the 1970’s. Its first target was the Revolutionary Coordinating Junta (JCR), established in August 1973 by extreme left wing organizations from four South American countries: Argentina (ERP), Chile (MIR), Uruguay (Tupamaros) and Bolivia (ELN).
Operation Condor also set out to attack exiled former members of the Allende government: Orlando Letelier, former Minister of Foreign Affairs, Carlos Prats, Commander in Chief of the Chilean Army who preceded Pinochet in this position, Bernardo Leighton, former Vice-President. Some 79 persons are thought to have been victims of Operation Condor whose operations attained their high point in 1976-1977 and continued on into 1987. Its operations principally involved the governments of Argentina and Chile.
On 30 September 1974, General Carlos Prats and his wife Sofia Cuthbert were assassinated in Buenos Aires by DINA agents.
Moreover, between 1973 and 1975, there were several enforced disappearances of French citizens in Latin America, namely of Etienne Pesle, an advisor to Salvador Allende, Georges Klein, Jean-Yves Claudet Fernandez, Marcel Amiel Baquet and Alfonso Chanfreau.
The day following the arrest of Augusto Pinochet in London on 16 October 1998, and at the request of the Spanish judge Baltasar Garzon, the families of Georges Klein, Etienne Pesle, Alfonso Chanfreau and Jean-Yves Claudet, four Franco-Chilean citizens, who had been arrested and subsequently disappeared during the Chilean dictatorship, filed official complaints in France between October and November 1998.
France issued an International warrant of arrest to examine witnesses in order to find grounds to indict the guilty parties. The Chilean judicial authorities replied favorably to the rogatory letter sent in 2001 from Judge Roger Le Loire who was inquiring into the disappearance of French nationals in that country. 