Josef Franz Leo Schwammberger
28.04.2016
facts

Josef Franz Leo Schwammberger was born on 14 February 1912 in Brixen, Austrian-Hungarian County of Tyrol (now South Tyrol in Northern Italy). Schwammberger joined the National Socialist Party (NSP) when it was still an illegal organization in 1933.
Between the years of 1941-1944 he became a member of the Schutzstaffel, the Nazi military protection unit and subsequently in southern Poland as an SS officer in Cracow and Przemysl and as the commandant of the Rozwadow and Mielec camp. During these years Schwammberger was accused of being responsible for the killings of 5,000 Jews in concentration camps. He was also personally accused of some killings and other sadistic acts, including throwing people into fires and setting his dog on prisoners.
On 19 July 1945, Schwammberger was arrested in Innsbruck, Austria, in the French occupation zone and during his detention he supposedly admitted killing 35 Jews in a written statement. According to survivors he had had actually killed hundreds of others and had stolen jewellery and gold from imprisoned and murdered Jews. This version is supported by the fact that at the time of Schwammberger’s arrest, a variety of ornamental objects valued at 50,000 Reichmarkt were found at his home. Because the objects were monogrammed, it is assumed that they had been taken from prisoners of war.
In January 1948, Schwammberger managed to escape from a train taking him to U.S. military authorities in Austria where he was to be tried and thanks to the assistance of the Odessa organization of former SS members, he is believed to have come to Argentina in 1950.
In 1963, the famous holocaust survivor Simon Wiesenthal turned to the court in Innsbruck, which had jurisdiction in the case, to find out that the important evidence confiscated from Schwammberger’s home had been auctioned off by the court. From an informant, Wiesenthal found out that Schwammberger had entered Argentina with an Italian passport in 1949 and that he had been granted citizenship there in 1965. Wiesenthal passed this information on to the Stuttgart office of prosecution responsible for Nazi crimes committed in Galicia and Germany which requested his extradition from Argentina. When this information became known, Schwammberger managed to escape again and disappeared until 1987 when the German Ambassador in Buenos Aires received an anonymous tip on his whereabouts. The same year, Schwammbereger could finally be arrested by the Argentinean authorities. 