Joselito Binayug
15.04.2016
facts

Joselito Binayug is a former Philippino policemen who served at four police stations in Manila during the last seven years (Sta. Cruz, Malate, Ermita and Moriones). Most recently, he held the position of the commander of the Asuncion Police Community Precinct in Tondo, which is under the supervision of Police Station 2 in Moriones.
Binayug is accused of having been involved in the alleged torture and disappearance of Darius Evangelista, who was arrested on 5 March 2010 by police officers belonging to Police Station 2 and 11 of the Manilla Police District. Evangelista was arrested on suspicion of theft and brought to Police Station 11. According to former detainees, Evangelista was first detained in a room at the police station but was subsequently taken to the office of the police commander from where he returned badly injured. None has seen Evangelista since the incident and he is officially still missing. Evangelista’s family filed a criminal complaint for allegations of torture against nine suspects, among which was Binayug.
On 17 August 2011, a video was aired on national television showing the incident at the Asuncion police station: a policeman whipping and cursing a naked man lying on the ground, supposedly Evangelista, and pulling on a thread tied to the man’s genitals while other policemen watched the scene. Shortly after the video was aired on television, a special unit called the Task Force Asuncion, was formed to investigate allegations of torture. It confirmed that Binayug was the policeman in the video and Binayug was consequently dismissed from police service on 14 January 2011.
From June 2011, Binayug served as a part-time instructor at the privately run Philippine College of Criminology-Manila Law College (PCCR-MLC), where he has been teaching Crime Detection Investigation.
On 13 September 2011, the Criminal Investigation and Detection Group of the Philippine National Police together with the Department of Justice filed criminal charges against Binayug and six others for alleged torture and subsequent death of Darius Evangelista while in police custody in March 2010. 