Jay Bybee
28.11.2012
facts

Jay Bybee was born 27 October 1953 in Oakland California. He graduated from Brigham Young University en 1977 and received a law degree from the same university in 1980.
He worked at the Department of Justice from 1984 to 1989 and later became legal counsel to President George H.W. Bush from 1989 to 1991. Bybee became the director of the Office of Legal Counsel at the Department of Justice in 2001.
According the complaint, Bybee helped to write the memorandum dated 9 January 2002 that concluded that the Geneva Conventions did not apply to the conflicts against al Qaeda and the Taliban. Based on this document, President George W. Bush decided not to extend the protection of the Conventions to al Qaeda detainees. Bybee is alleged to have communicated the same legal opinion to Alberto Gonzales, White House counsel, and William Haynes, General Counsel of the United States Department of Defence, in a memorandum dated 22 January 2002.
A few months later, on 13 March 2002, Bybee signed another memorandum declaring that neither the Geneva Conventions nor the Convention against Torture prohibited the President from transferring to other countries those detained in the wars against al Qaeda and the Taliban. According to Bybee, the CAT would not be implicated except if it could be proved that the American Government transferred a detainee with the intention that he be tortured.
On 1 August 2002 a memorandum, signed by Bybee but written by John Yoo, an assistant at the Office of Legal Counsel, with the help of David Addington, legal counsel to Vice President Dick Cheney, was transmitted to Alberto Gonzales. This document defined torture in a very restricted manner, as necessitating severe pain “equivalent in intensity to the pain accompanying serious physical injury, such as organ failure, impairment of bodily function, or even death.” Significant psychological harm of significant duration could also amount to torture according to the memorandum but only if it was a result of the few mentioned ill treatments. The memorandum remarked that under this new definition it would thus be possible for a detainee to be subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment that would nonetheless not amount to torture so that an interrogator would not be subject to prosecution for his actions.
On the same day, a second memorandum, also signed by Bybee and written by Yoo with help from Addington, was sent to John Rizzo, a high-ranking lawyer at the Central Intelligence Agency, and passed along to William Haynes. This document described in details the interrogation methods that could be used on al Qaeda detainees by the CIA. This memorandum finally became public on 16 April 2009.
In March 2003 Jay Bybee became a judge on the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals.
On 17 March 2009 the Association for the Dignity of Detainees, a Spanish non-profit dedicated to the protection of human rights, lodged a complaint before the National Court of Spain against Bybee, Gonzales, Addington, Haynes, Yoo, Bybee and Douglas Feith, the Under Secretary of Defence for Policy. 