Santiago Enrique Martín Rivas
15.04.2016
facts

Santiago Enrique Martín Rivas is a former member of the Peruvian Army, in which he became a captain. While in the military he acted as head of a special operations group, known as the Colina Group, assigned to the Army Intelligence Directorate. This group was responsible for tracking down and capturing members of terrorist groups, particularly the terrorist group “Sendero Luminoso”. The Colina Group acted like a death squad between the late 80s and early 90s, during which time it is alleged that they committed serious crimes against humanity.
The most well-known incident is the massacre in Peruvian town, “Barrios Altos”, which happened on 3 November 1991 in the city of Lima, when the Colina Group entered a site and assassinated 14 people, including an 8 year old child. They allegedly confused them with terrorists from the terrorist group “Sendero Luminoso”. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights declared the Peruvian state internationally responsible for this in 2001.
Other incidents that the Colina group were involved in were:

disappearances in the city of Chimbote, in the province of Santa, Peru, on 2 May 1992 when, allegedly under the hand of Martín Rivas, ten farmers were kidnapped and disappeared;
the massacre of La Cantuta, a Peruvian university, on 18 July 1992, in which Martin Rivas allegedly planed the death of nine students and a teacher;
in March 1997 the assassination of intelligence agent Mariella Barreto, who had been romantically involved with Martín Rivas and had been a member of the Army
another incident involved twenty members of the Colina Group who have been charged with the killing of the six farmers in the town of Pativilca in 1992. Following orders of General Hermoza, in the early morning of 29 January 1992 around 20 members of the Colina Group death squad allegedly drove from Lima to Pativilca, where they searched for and forcibly removed six men from their homes. The victims, who were allegedly tortured with a blow torch and murdered, included a school teacher, farmers, and an 18-year-old mechanical engeneering student. Their bodies were left in a nearby cane field. 