Ivan Ramírez Quintero
25.04.2016
facts

Ivan Ramírez Quintero is a Colombian army officer. He held high military positions in the country until his retirement in 2000. In November 1985, when the Colombian guerrilla the 19th of April Movement (M-19) carried out the Palace of Justice siege, Ramirez worked as colonel of the Intelligence and Counter-Intelligence Command Service of the Army.
On 6 November 1985 a guerrilla command of the M- 19 Movement invaded the Palace of Justice in Bogota and take more than 300 civilians hostages (among magistrates, judicial officials, employees and visitors of the palace) in the building. The National Police and the Colombian Army reacted with a recovery operation of the building which lasted a whole day.
During the military’s recovery of the Palace of Justice more than 100 people were killed, including magistrates, guards, agents of the security forces and guerrillas. Some of the survivors, among whom were the manager and nine employees of the cafeteria, and a member of the guerrilla were evacuated alive from the Palace, nevertheless they remain missing until today. According to the testimony of two police officers at the time, the civilians were transferred to military installations, where they were interrogated, subjected to torture and subsequently executed. Finally, the bodies of these civilians were buried in communal graves located in southern Bogota.
In 2000 the body of Ana Rosa Castiblanco, cafeteria worker, who had disappeared after the siege, was found in a communal grave in the south cemetery of Bogota.
In November 2005, the Supreme Court of Justice created a Truth Commission to investigate the events that took place 20 years ago, on 6 and 7 November 1985.
Although there is no evidence to prove that Ramirez Quintero was a direct participant in the alleged torture and murder of these 11 people, he gave orders without which it would have been impossible to advance that operation. This process necessarily require a superior order which could only be given by Ramirez Quintero as commander of COICI.
Quintero Ramirez had already been investigated for alleged violations of human rights.
The former colonel is facing charges in Colombia for enforced disappearance aggravated but only for the disappearance of the M-19 guerrilla, Irma Franco. 