Mario Benjamín Menéndez
14.04.2016
facts 

Mario Benjamín Menéndez was born in Chañar Ladeado (in the Santa Fe province) or Buenos Aires, Argentina on 3 April 1939.
Menéndez was a colonel in the Monte V Infantry Brigade and was involved in the “Operativo Independencia”. The operation, a counter-insurgency campaign, was launched under Isabel Martinez de Peron’s presidency, against Marxist guerrilla fighters from the People’s Revolutionary Party (Ejército Revolucionario del Pueblo, ERP) in the Tucumán Province. First under the command of Adel Adgardo Vilas in 1975 before being taken over by Antonio Domingo Bussi, the “Operativo Independencia” was in force to repress the insurgency – officials dressed as civilians kidnapped insurgency fighters and secretly held them captive. Menéndez was Chief of Staff at the Tactical Command Post in the town of Famaillá. He will have been in charge at the country’s first clandestine detention centre, which was named the “Escuelita de Famaillá”. There, over 1500 people were detained and tortured between February and December 1975. In total, 656 people disappeared in Tucumán between 1974 and 1979. The majority of those who disappeared were teachers, artists, members of religious orders, workers and trade union leaders that were suspected of having provided goods or information to the guerrilla groups. “Operativo Independencia” ended with the coup d’état in March 1976 that brought the military dictatorship to power.
Following investigations by the Tucumán prosecutor’s unit for human rights, public prosecutors Pablo Camuña and Patricio Rovira carried out further investigations into Menéndez and they accused him of involvement in the “Independencia” operation. According to the prosecutors, the operation “consisted of mass intervention by armed and security forces in a plan to eliminate systematically political opponents using terror through state systems and social control”.
Menéndez was also Head of the Joint Command of the Falkland Islands during the war between Argentina and the UK, which lasted from April 1982 until 14 June 1982. During this period Menéndez decided to hand over his troops even though the head of the military junta, Leopoldo Galtieri, had ordered Menéndez to launch counter-attacks on British forces using all his soldiers. After the Falklands War, Menéndez and other officials and sub-officials from the Argentine army were accused of abusing and killing their own troops in Pradera del Ganso (on the Falkand Islands). However, no trial was ever brought against them for these crimes. 