Momir Nikolic
03.05.2016
facts

Momir Nikolic was born on 20 February 1955 in Bratunac, Bosnia-Herzegovina.
From November 1992 until the end of the war, he held the post of Deputy Commander and Chief of Intelligence and Security of the Bratunac Brigade of the Bosnian Serb Forces (VRS).
The allegations related to all of the crimes committed against the Muslims fleeing the Srebrenica enclave after the attack and power grab by the Serbs in July 1995.
Beginning on 12 July 1995 in Potocari the women, children and elderly were separated from the men, put on board buses and forcibly transferred to the territory under Muslim control. This forced transfer was accompanied by humiliation and acts of terror of extreme cruelty.
The male prisoners were led away to Potocari to be executed. In the same way, the men who had fled Srebrenica in the “column” were taken prisoner and held until they, in turn, were executed. More than 7000 men in total were killed in various hamlets between Bratunac and Zvornik.
From all reports, it appeared that Momir Nikolic had played a major role in the perpetration of these crimes.
Momir Nikolic was at the Fontana Hotel for the three meetings during which the fate of the Muslim population was decided. He reportedly did not raise the slightest objection on learning that it was planned to deport the Muslim women and children to Muslim territory and to separate, imprison and finally kill the Muslim men. Indeed, rather than opposing this plan, Momir Nikolic was said to have given recommendations for potential sites where the men could be imprisoned and executed. On 12 July 1995,Momir Nikolic, was to be found in Potocari where he was able to see with his own eyes that the men had been separated from their families. Despite presenting himself as the coordinator of various units operating in Potocari, he allegedly did nothing to put an end to the ill treatment, humiliation and separations, nor to the executions.
Momir Nikolic returned to Potocari on 13 July 1995 and, in his own words, said that “everything is going well”; and the deportations and separations continued unabated. On the same day Momir Nikolic was witness to the formations of prisoners marching towards their places of execution and was also present when three persons involved in the executions spoke openly about the massacre.
The way in which the operation was to be carried out had been gone over in detail in order to facilitate the smooth running of the overall project. Momir Nikolic was said to have become involved early on in setting up the project in order to ensure that its objectives were accomplished.
Furthermore, in October 1995, Momir Nikolic reportedly coordinated the operation which consisted of exhuming the bodies of the Muslims in order to have them reburied elsewhere. The unrelenting support which he provided thereby ensured the disappearance of conclusive evidence. Still today, many families are unaware as to where their loved ones have disappeared.
Momir Nikolic was arrested by the SFOR on 1 April 2002 before being transferred to the ICTY (International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia). 