Jamil Hassan
22.03.2019
Facts

Jamil Hassan was born in 1953 in Homs, Syria. Adviser of the President Bashar al-Assad, he became in 2009 the Chief of the Syrian Air Force Intelligence Directorate. Under his direct supervision, hundreds of detainees were allegedly subjected to torture, inhumane treatment, and extrajudicial killings.
The Syrian Air Force Intelligence Directorate, headed by Hassan, is regarded as the most powerful and brutal of Syria’s four intelligence services. From 2011, the Directorate is said to have carried out  a policy of repression and surveillance of the opponents of Bashar al-Assad’s government. Arbitrary detention, torture, persecution and sexual violence, including threats, humiliation and rape, have allegedly been widely used. The inhumane conditions of detention, involving extreme hunger and an almost complete lack of medical care in the detention centres, allegedly resulted in critical medical states and deaths of detainees.
In 2013, Mazen Dabbagh and his son Patrick, two Franco-Syrian, are said to have been arrested by officers who declared belonging to the Syrian Air Force Intelligence Directorate. They have been missing since.
Furthermore, war crimes and crimes against humanity were allegedly committed in the detention centres controlled by the Syrian Intelligence Services, in particular in the sections 253, 215 and 227 of the Syrian Military Intelligence Direction. High-ranking officials, including Hassan, are suspected – as hierarchical superiors – to be indirect perpetrators or accomplices of illegal arrests, detentions, tortures, sexual violence and other inhumane acts committed in the detention centres of these branches between May 2011 and July 2015.
The crimes alleged were unveiled by a former employer of the Syrian Military Police code named Caesar. He has handled over more than 53 000 photographs taken between May 2011 and August 2013 showing more than 6000 corpses of detainees with visible marks of torture and inhumane treatment. Thanks to these photographs, victims have been identified, like Abdulmuemen Alhai Hamdo, who disappeared on 17 February 2013. In 2015, the eldest child of Abdulmuemen Alhai Hamdo recognised the corpse of his father on several photos. 