Milic Martinovic
09.01.2013
facts

Milic Martinovic, an ethnic Serb, was born around 1977 in the town of Pec, in the Kosovo Autonomous Province of the former Yugoslavia. There is no information about his childhood and adolescence available. He is married and has two children and was until his arrest residing in Gothenburg, Sweden.
According to the Swedish Immigration Service, Martinovic admitted his participation in the war in Kosovo and was seeking asylum in Sweden in April 2007, but his application was rejected in November 2009. He appealed the decision.
According to the present allegations, Martinovic participated in expulsion of ethnic Albanians in the suburbs Kapesnica and Zatra on 25 and 26 March 1999.
According to the present allegations, Martinovic participated in expulsion of ethnic Albanians in the suburbs Kapesnica and Zatra on 25 and 26 March 1999. Moreover, Martinovic allegedly was a member of the serb paramilitary group called “the Jackals”. This group participated in the ethnic cleansing of Albanian people in the city of Pec and the village of Cuska, in the West of Kosovo, on 14 May 1999. Martinovic allegedly kept watch while his colleagues killed civilians. He allegedly forced civilians to give him gold and precious objects by threatening them with his gun and shooting on the ground. They allegedly burnt houses and mistreated civilians. Forty-one people died in the massacre of Cuska. The prosecutor did not say if Martinovic had directly participated in the killings but said that “by his presence on the place of the facts, armed and in uniform, he participated in the maintenance of the violent atmosphere necessary for committing the massacre”.
Allegedly, Martinovic was a also member of Serb paramilitary group “Jackals” that participated in the ethnic cleansing of Albanians in the town of Pec and the village of Cuska in Western Kosovo in May 1999. In the Cuska massacre there 41 people were killed. Among the Serb perpetrators were Srecko Popovic and Nebojsa Minic.
On 9 April 2010 Martinovic was arrested in Gothenburg and brought before the Stockholm District Court on suspicion of crimes against humanity with aggravating circumstances, murder, attempted murder and aggravated arson for his participation in the Cuska massacre. He denied the charges. 