Nikola Kovacevic
08.12.2011
facts

Nikola Kovacevic was born on 19 April 1968 in Bosnia-Herzegovina, in the village of Kruhari close to Sanski Most. He holds dual nationality from Serbia and from Bosnia Herzegovina. On completing his secondary school studies, he became a metal worker/welder.
On 3 November 2006, the Bosnia-Herzegovina War Crimes Court found Kovacevic guilty of having participated in a systematic and generalised attack against the Muslim and Croatian population in Sanski Most. Initially, he is said to have acted as a member of a unit of the SOS (Serb Defence Forces), then subsequently as a member of the special unit of the Serbian Territorial Defence of Sanski Most. The systematic attack began in April 1992, by the abduction of intellectuals, police officers and politicians. The Serb forces then entered various locations which were populated mainly by Croatians and Muslims. After being separated from the women and children, the men were isolated in several public buildings. During their detention, they were subjected to systematic, unwarranted psychological and physical torture. The violence reached its culminating point during the night time interrogations (with insults, beatings with various different objects, mutilation of different parts of the body and other kinds of cruel and inhumane treatment).
With the co-operation of other members of the army and the Serbian police, Kovacevic is then said to have gone ahead with the evacuation of a large number of these detainees, sending them to the Manjaca internment camp. With respect to this act, the War Crimes Court accused him of transporting these persons in inhumane conditions. These civilians were severely beaten, some dying as a result. In one of the trucks used, close to a third of the occupants died from suffocation due to the effects of the heat and the overcrowded conditions.
Nikola Kovacevic was originally called Kajtez Danilusko, a name he changed in 1996, in all probability to avoid arrest by the judicial authorities. When the criminal proceedings were opened up, he was living in the municipality of Sabac in Serbia. He was unemployed at the time. 