Anastase Nzirasanaho
05.05.2016
facts

Anastase Nzirasanaho is from Rwanda and is thought to have been born in the 1950s. He trained as an agricultural engineer, specialising in agronomy. He served as Director of Coffee Company in Rwanda before serving as a senator in the Rwandan Parliament Upper Chamber for eight years, from 2003 to 2011.
Regarding his role in the genocide against the Tutsi population, Nzirasanaho was accused of aiding in the murder of Theoneste Garafanga, a leader, alongside Nzirasanaho, of the Social Democratic Party (PSD). This political party formed the opposition to former President Juvenal Habyarimana’s government. The PSD however had been designated by Habyariyamana to form part of the broad based transitional government he wished to install. Garafanga had been named representative of the PSD in this proposed transitional government leading many members of the PSD to regard him as a spy.
Following Habyarimana’s death that sparked the 1994 Rwandan genocide, it is alleged that Nzirasanaho aided the Interahamwe militia, responsible for the genocide, by providing them with Garafanga’s location, resulting in his murder. Nzirasanaho however refuted the accusations of murder by stating he was a confidant of Garafanga.
Nzirasanaho was further accused of possession and supply of weapons used by the Interahamwe in killing Tutsis in his native Mataba district, in the former Ruhengeri prefecture of northern Rwanda during the genocide against the Tutsi population. It was alleged that the Tutsi in Mataba had put up stiff resistance until the Interahamwe militia received a gun from Nzirasanaho. They then regained courage and murdered seven men. In his defence, however, Nzirasanaho stated that he had only given a ride in his car to an armed man without knowing he would then be involved in the massacres.
In 2008, charges were brought against Nzirasanaho for his alleged complicity in the 1994 Rwandan genocide. The Rwandan senate lifted parliamentary immunity over Nzirasanaho in order to allow him to face the charges. He also at this time served as a member of the National Commission for Unirty and Reconciliation and as a member of the Senate Committees on Human Rights and the Fights against Genocide. 