Veselko Raguz
23.04.2016
facts

Veselko Raguz, alias Veso, was born on 6 July 1965 in Stolac (Bosnia and Herzegovina) where he currently resides. A citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia, he was the Commander of the Fourth Battalion of the “Knez Domagoj” Brigade of the Croatian Defence Council (HVO) during the conflict in ex-Yugoslavia (from 1991 to 1995).
Raguz is accused of having, during the time period from the beginning of July until the end of August 1993, participated along with other members of the Fourth Battalion of the Brigade and attached units from other brigades (Neum Brigade and HVO MP), in unlawful arrest of all Bosniak male civilians who were in Stolac. The men were thrown into trucks and driven to places where they were allegedly detained unlawfully, i.e. in a hospital building in Stolac, and at prison camps “Dretelj” and “Gabela”. The women and children were expelled from their homes and driven by trucks near Blagaj and then forced to cross to the area controlled by the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Army on foot.
Furthermore, Raguz is accused of having, along with members of the Fourth Battalion of the Brigade, participated in the unlawful arrest and incarceration of some 1,500 Bosniak civilians including women and children. In the “Branko Sotra” primary school they were subjected to intolerable living conditions without sufficient food, water and room to stay. Finally, they were after some time moved to other prison locations, after which they were forcibly taken to area near Blagaj and expelled to the territory controlled by the BiH Army.
Raguz is accused of having, in Masline, surrounded, captured, interrogated and physically abused civilians. He is also accused of having transported them to premises of the hospital and took them away to prison camps “Dretelj”, “Gabela” and “Heliodrom”.
The indictment also alleges that, at the beginning of August 1993, Veselko and Ivo Raguz, his co-accused, together participated in the interrogation and physical abuse of incarcerated Bosniak civilians, that they kicked them while wearing combat boots and punched them in the head, body and legs.
Veselko is charged, with Ivo Raguz, to have committed the criminal offense of War Crimes against Civilians under Article 173(1) c) d) and e) in conjunction with Article 180(1) and (2) and Article 20 of the Criminal Code of BiH. 