Moustapha Tlass
27.04.2016
facts

Moustapha Tlass is a former Syrian politician and military member, born in 1932 at al-Rasten, near Homs. Tlass joined the Baas party in 1947. He entered military school in 1952, where he met Hafez el-Assad. They were both based in Cairo between 1958 and 1961, during the United Arab Republic (union between Syria and Egypt). Tlass rose the military hierarchy in the wake of el-Assad. El-Assad appointed him Chief of Staff in 1970 after the turmoil of the Six Day War. El-Asaad took full control of the country through his last coup d’état in 1970. In 1972, Tlass was appointed Minister for Defence.
In his capacity as Minister for Defence, he is allegedly co-responsible for numerous war crimes, including the massacre of Hama in 1982. Following the insurgency of the Muslim brotherhood which began on 2 February 1982 in the town of Hama and resulted in the death of 300 baas soldiers, several thousand of soldiers from the Special Forces and from Defence brigades laid siege on the town, shelled it with heavy artillery (air strikes, tank and mortar fire), and finally launched an assault. Once in Hama, soldiers allegedly committed exactions against the civilian population, notably rape, torture, arrests, arbitrary detentions and summary executions. The Defence brigades commanded by Rif’at al-Assad, brother of President Hafez al-Assad, allegedly arrested numerous civilians from Hama, accused of co-operating with the Muslim brotherhood. It is alleged that these civilians were also torture. Between the 4th and 6th of February, it is estimated that around 2,000 people were killed.
The state of siege lasted 27 days in total. According to Amnesty International there were 15,000 deaths in total, the majority of which were civilians. The Syrian Human Rights Council mentioned 40,000 deaths, as well as numerous forced disappearances and injured people. The regions of Baroudi, Kilani, Hamidiya and Khadr were razed to the ground. Countless mosques, churches and archaeological sites were destroyed and pillaged, including the Qasr el-Azm museum.
On 12 March 2012, as Moustapha Tlass was present in the French territory, the Syrian Freedom Association, “l’Association syrienne pour la liberté”, lodged a criminal complaint against him in Paris for war crimes. 