José Osvaldo Quiroga Mendoza
27.04.2016
facts

José Osvaldo Quiroga Mendoza was a high officer of the Bolivian Army. He commanded the air force. He was one of the members of the Bolivian army who repressed with violence the gas war, a popular conflict against the government of Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada.
The “Gas War” is the name given to the political and social conflicts that emerged in October 2003 to protest against the exportation of Bolivian natural gas towards Mexico and the United States, via Chile. Indeed, the Bolivian gas reserves are the second-largest in South America after Venezuela.
Starting in September 2003, this “Gas War” involved many organizations such as the Trade Union Confederation of Agricultural Workers, the cocaleros (coca farmers) led by the Quechua Indian Evo Morales, the actual President and then a member of the Movement For Socialism as well as the Bolivian Workers, one of Bolivia’s largest union. Soon, these organizations were joined by groups of teachers, students, miners, etc.. Although the grounds of protest initially differed between these organisations, preventing the export of natural gas via Chile became, very quickly, a common demand.
Culminating in the fall of 2003 with the blockade of La Paz- the administrative capital was completely paralyzed for 5 days (12 to 17 October) – this conflict ended on 17 October 2003, with the fall of President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada.
Over one month, this conflict allegedly caused hundreds of deaths and wounded, as a result of clashes between protesters and security forces. The majority happened in the city of El Alto, where more than 80 victims were killed during the last week of the conflict. They were hit by gunfire shots from military helicopters and ordered directly by President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada himself.
The main result of these protests and the military crackdown that ensued, was the fall of President Sanchez de Lozada, who was replaced by his Vice President Carlos Mesa. It also sparked off the convening of a referendum on the nationalisation of Bolivian hydrocarbons- where the YES overwhelmingly prevailed- followed by the accession to power of the Quechua Indian Evo Morales, in 2005.
In November 2003, the Attorney General’s Office filed an application with the Supreme Court of Justice requesting political and criminal proceedings to be taken against the former president and his cabinet for the violation of constitutional guarantees and individual rights. 