Ali Hamza Ahmad Sulayman al Bahlul
08.05.2016
facts


Ali Hamza Ahmad Sulayman al Bahlul was born in Yemen in 1971.
As alleged by the Pentagon, al Bahlul travelled from Yemen to Afghanistan in 1999 to join and to support Osama bin Laden in his cause. He was said to have supported Bin Laden in the knowledge of the latter’s 1996 “Declaration of Jihad against the Americans” and the 1998 fatwa endorsed by bin Laden calling for the “killing of Americans and their allies, both military and civilian”.
In 1999, upon arriving in Afghanistan, al Bahlul allegedly met Saif al Adel, the head of the al Qaeda Security Committee. Based upon arrangements made by Saif al Adel, al Bahlul was said to have participated in military training for two months at the al Qaeda-sponsored Aynak camp in Afghanistan.
After completing his training at Aynak camp, al Bahlul allegedly met with and pledged absolute allegiance to Osama bin Laden, affirming his willingness to perform any act requested by bin Laden and to protect him from all harm.
He was further said to have lived, in late 1999, at an al Qaeda-sponsored guesthouse in Kandahar and to have performed duties in support of al Qaeda.
From late 1999 to December 2001, he was reportedly assigned by Osama bin Laden personally to work in the al Qaeda media office. In this capacity, al Bahlul was said to have created several instructional und motivational recruiting video tapes on behalf of this organisation.
Osama bin Laden was said to have personally given al Bahlul the task of creating a video glorifying, among other things, the attack on die USS COLE. Al Bahlul allegedly created this “USS COLE” video to recruit, motivate and “awaken the Islamic Umma to revolt against America”.
In the weeks immediately following the attacks of 11 September 2001 al Bahlul was allegedly put in charge of obtaining media reports concerning the attacks and of gathering data concerning the economic damage caused by these attacks.
In 2001, al Bahlul was reported to have served as an armed bodyguard for Osama bin Laden while travelling with him.
It is unclear where, when and by whom al Bahlul was arrested. He is currently being held by the United States at Guantanamo Bay. 