Enforced Disappearance of Amrit Kandel in October 2003
12.02.2016
The Case 
Arrest and enforced disappearance in October 2003
On 10th October 2003, Amrit Kandel was arbitrarily arrested in Kathmandu by a dozen of soldiers. Without being informed of the reasons for his arrest nor produced a warrant, Amrit Kandel was forced into a van and brought to the Maharajgunj military barracks, then headquarter of the Bhairabnath Battalion of the Royal Nepal Army. He was not given any possibility to contact either his family or a legal representative.
As witnessed by his brother Ramhari Kandel, who was also detained at Maharajgunj at that time, Amrit Kandel was held in cruel, inhuman and degrading conditions of detention: he was kept in a small tent where he used to cry and scream out of desperation, he did not receive adequate food or drinking water and had limited access to sanitation. Moreover, he was continuously blindfolded. He was never given the possibility to communicate with people outside the barracks. His body was constantly swollen, covered in bruises and abrasions, indication of the treatments inflicted during interrogations. Following his release on 10th December 2003 neither Ramhari Kandel nor any other member of his family has ever seen Amrit Kandel again. His fate and whereabouts remain unknown to date.
The denunciation of the crimes and the impunity of their authors
Since 2003, Tikanath Kandel, Amrit Kandel’s father, has undertaken all possible effort to find him. Besides engaging in countless advocacy activities and informal meetings with public authorities, Tikanath Kandel registered a formal complaint at the National Human Rights Commission and lodged two petitions for habeas corpus with the Supreme Court of Nepal.
Amrit Kandel’s fate and whereabouts remain unknown and neither investigation nor criminal prosecution has been initiated against his perpetrators. His relatives’ hopes in the Nepalese legal system have faded and the Human Rights Committee now represents their only chance to obtain truth, justice and redress.
The victim seized the UN Human Rights Committee (HRC)
In April 2014 TRIAL submitted a communication to the Human Rights Committee on behalf of Amrit Kandel and his family.
Tikanath and Ramhari Kandel request the Human Rights Committee:
To acknowledge that Amrit Kandel is a victim of an ongoing violation of Arts. 6 (right to life), 7 (prohibition of torture), 9 (right to liberty), 10 (right to humane treatment in detention) and 16 (right to recognition as a person before the law), read alone and in conjunction with Art. 2, para. 3 (right to an effective remedy), of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, because of his arbitrary detention, torture and enforced disappearance and the subsequent failure by Nepalese authorities to carry out an ex officio, prompt, effective, independent, impartial and thorough investigation into his case, and to judge and sanction the perpetrators

To establish find that Nepal has violated Art. 7, alone and in conjunction with Art. 2, para. 3, of the Covenant in respect of both Tikanath and Ramhari Kandel due to the anguish and stress generated by the enforced disappearance of Amrit Kandel and the attitude of indifference shown by domestic authorities
To request Nepal, pursuant to Art. 2, para. 3 of the Covenant, to ensure an immediate, thorough and diligent investigation into the enforced disappearance of Amrit Kandel and, in the event of his death, the localization, exhumation, identification and restitution of his remains to the family
To request Nepal, pursuant to Art. 2, para. 3 of the Covenant, to bring the perpetrators of Amrit Kandel’s arbitrary detention, torture and enforced disappearance before the competent ordinary authorities for prosecution, judgment and sanction, and to publicly disseminate the results of this measure
To request Nepal, pursuant to Art. 2, para. 3 of the Covenant, to ensure that measures of reparation (covering both material and moral damages) adopted in favour of the authors include actions aiming at providing restitution, rehabilitation, satisfaction (including restoration of dignity and reputation) and guarantees of non-repetition.
The case is currently pending before the Human Rights Committee. 