Charles Graner
25.04.2016
facts

Charles A. Graner was born in 1968 in the USA.
In 1986, he attended the University of the Verne in California before joining the Marines in 1988. During the First Gulf War in 1991, he served in the 2nd Company of the Military Police based in Iraq. On returning to civilian life, he became a prison warden in Pennsylvania. In 2002, he joined the United States reserve army and on 5 May 2003, he was again called up to serve in Iraq with the 372nd Military Police Company, based at Abu Ghraib. Thanks to his former civilian position, he was appointed warden in this prison.
During the course of 2003, rumours and reports filtered out of ill treatment, torture and war crimes being committed by USA army personnel against Iraqi prisoners being held at Abu Ghraib. In January 2004, Sergeant Joseph Darby, a member of the American forces military police, alerted the US Commander about these abuses and sent photographs to the officer in charge of internal affairs based at Abu Ghraib. These photographs showed naked Iraqi prisoners being forced to simulate sex acts or being beaten. At the end of January 2004, the Commander of the coalition forces occupying Iraq, General Ricardo Sanchez, ordered General Antonio Taguba to lead an inquiry into the events in question. The outcome of this inquiry, which was conducted at the same time as two others, was presented to the military leaders on 4 April 2004.
The Taguba report (see “related links”) concluded that American soldiers had committed dishonourable acts which represented serious violations of international regulations. The report stated that between October and December 2003, numerous cases of “sadistic abuse” were carried out against Iraqi prisoners held at Abu Ghraib. In acting in this fashion, the prison guards had made up their own rules, more or less with the explicit approval of their superiors.
This report cited numerous examples of abuses against prisoners including physical violence, sexual aggression, cases of torture, using army dogs to terrorize prisoners, threat of rape and murder.
The report named seven suspects: Ivan Frederick II and Javal Davis, Megan Ambuhl,Sabrina Harman, Jeremy Sivits, Lynndie England (see “related cases”) and Charles Graner.
Graner appeared on several photographs depicting scenes of ill-treatment or prisoners being tortured.
On 14 May 2004, Charles Graner was indicted by the USA military judiciary. 