Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali
17.04.2016
facts

Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali was born on 3 September 1936 in Hamman Sousse, Tunisia. Ben Ali married for the first time in 1964 to Naïma Kefi. They had three girls together then divorced in 1988. Ben Ali married a second time in 1992 to Leïla Trabelsi. They also had three children together.
Ben Ali carried out his studies in an all-boys school in Sousse. There he became involved with the Néo-Destour Party. Later, thanks to Hédi Baccouche, Tunisian politician and member of the right-wing Destourian Socialist Party in the 1960s, he joined the Tunisian Army in 1956. He graduated from the Saint-Cyr special military school, then from the Châlons-sur-Marne Artillery school. He then began his military career. In January 1978 in response to/as a consequence of the events of 26 January 1978, known as ‘Jeudi Noir’ ‘Black Thursday’, during which violent incidents happened following a strike protest largely contesting government policy, notably acts of violence and violation of individual freedoms, Ben Ali was appointed head of General Security by then Prime Minister Hédi Nouira. Ben Ali was then appointed Tunisian ambassador in Poland. He was called back to Tunisia because of the 1984 January riots and was appointed head of National Security. On 28 April 1986 he became Minister of Home Affairs. In 1987 he was appointed State Minister for the Interior and on 2 October 1987 he became Prime Minister. On 7 November 1987 Ben Ali invoked Article 578 of the 1959 Tunisian Constitution so that a medical report certified that President Habib Bourguiba was incapable of carrying out his duties. On these grounds Habib Bourguiba was removed from office, Ben Ali succeeded him as President and became Supreme Head of the Armed Forces. He carried out five consecutive presidential mandates and during his third mandate he amended the Tunisian Constitution and, by doing so, limited the number of presidential terms possible. During his reign in power certain non-governmental organisations reported a weakening of democracy.
THE JASMINE REVOLUTION
The Jasmine Revolution, the name given to the Tunisian Revolution, was part of the Arab Spring. The Jasmine Revolution was a protest against social and regional inequalities, nepotism and, therefore, corruption. The first act of this initially non-violent revolution was the self-sacrifice of a Tunisian merchant, Mouhamed Bouazizi, one of the goods handlers known by the authorities, sacrificed by burning. This act of despair denounced the measures taken by the Tunisian government. Following this immolation, both those who were close to Bouazizi and those who did not know him gathered together to protest. Quickly the protest reached the centre of Tunisia, ending in December 2010, having affected the whole country.
From 17 December 2010 until President Ben Ali fled on 14 January 2011 many popular protest movements and gatherings had taken place. Overall nearly 300 people lost their lives throughout the suppression of the protests. Among the fatal incidents it is worth mentioning the Thala and Kasserine murders and the Ouardanine incidents.
Ben Ali’s fall from government and his decision to flee go hand in hand. Several lawsuits were going to open against President Ban Ali but also against some of his government ministers and senior administrative officials. On 26 January 2011 the Tunisian Ministry of Justice produced an international arrest warrant to find the former Tunisian president and his wife. 