Gojko Klickovic
08.04.2013
facts

Gojko Kličkovíc was born on 25 March 1955 in Bosanska Krupa. After completing primary and secondary school in his town of birth, he studied sociology at the University of Sarajevo, subsequently completing a PhD in legal and economic studies in Osijek (Croatia) and Belgrade. During the conflict in the Former Yugoslavia he served in a number of roles within the Serbian Democratic Party in Bosanska Krupa. He is married with two children.
According to the Indictment, from the beginning of April 1992 to 31 December 1992, Gojko Kličkovíc, in his role as a member of the Serbian Democratic Party Secretariat of Serb Municipality of Bosanska Krupa, President and Vice-President of the Executive Board of the Assembly of the Serb Municipality of Bosanska Krupa and Commander of the Crisis Committee of Serb Municipality of Bosanska Krupa, participated in a joint criminal enterprise to link Serb-populated areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the aim of creating a separate Bosnian Serb state. The Accused was allegedly aware that the permanent removal of non-Serbs, and the crimes that form part of the indictment, were natural and foreseeable consequences of the execution of such plans.
The Indictment reads that between 21 April and 4 May 1992, at least fifty Bosnian Muslims, including both civilians and combatants, were detained in a primary school in Jasenica. Additionally, it reads that from 1 May 1992, until 21 August 1992, at least seventy-nine persons were detained at the Petar Kocic School, the detainees in both facilities receiving inadequate food and living in unhygienic conditions. Detainees were also allegedly made to perform forced labour on a regular basis, intentionally exposed to life-threatening conditions, raped and beaten on several occasions by Serb soldiers, some detainees dying as a result of these beatings. The detainees also appeared before the so-called Provisional Military Court where they were questioned without being informed about the reasons for their detention or questioning.
The indictment further reads that, during May 1992, the civilian Muslim population of the settlements of Arapusa, Velika, Jasenica, Veliki Dubovik, Zalin, Potkallnje, Zalug and the town of Bosanska Krupa were forcibly transferred to Bihac.
Gojko Kličkovíc was arrested in Belgrade on 22 June 2006 as a result of an Interpol arrest warrant. He was extradited to Bosnia and Herzegovina on 20 June 2007 and is charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes. 