Grave and multiple violations of the rights of Ismail Al Khazmi
13.09.2014
The case 
In November 2008, a joint individual communication against Libya was lodged by TRIAL and the organisation Al-Karama for Human Rights before the United Nations Human Rights Committee on behalf of Ibrahim Aboubakr Al Khazmi, acting in the name of his son, Ismail Al Khazmi.
Ismail Al Khazmi was arbitrarily arrested by officials of the State Internal Security Agency on 17 June 2006, at his workplace. He was taken away to an unknown destination. His brother was arrested the same night at the family home.
Despite various appeals by the family, the authorities (who acknowledged the detention of Mubarek, the younger brother) would neither acknowledge Ismail’s detention, nor give any other information about his fate.
Witnesses saw Ismail in Asseka prison, in Tripoli, where he was detained without being brought before a judicial officer or given the opportunity to challenge his detention. He was also denied all contact with his family or a lawyer.
Former co-prisoners reported that he was repeatedly tortured. On 29 June 2006, after having been tortured for several days, Ismail Al Khazmi was again severely beaten in his cell and suspended from the ceiling. Afterwards, he was taken away to an unknown location, unconscious but still breathing.
On 1 May 2007, Ibrahim Aboubakr Al Khazmi was informed of the death of his son. No information was given to him on the date and circumstances of this event, and his demand for an autopsy was rejected by the authorities. He then contacted a lawyer who initiated proceedings against those responsible for Ismail’s death, but the official in charge of the Ministry of Interior blocked the investigation. He finally addressed himself to the Secretary of the People’s General Committee of Justice, but to no avail.
Given the high level of political interference in the Libyan judiciary, in addition to the fact that the executive has shown to be hostile to an investigation in this particular case, it can be considered that it is not possible to obtain an effective judicial remedy regarding the grave violations inflicted to Ismail Al Khazmi. Moreover, in Libya, the justified fear of reprisal on the part of political detainees and their families renders any remedies de facto unavailable in such cases.
Ismail Al Khazmi’s father requests the Committee to recognise that Libya has violated:

the rights of Ismail Al Khazmi to life; to be free from torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment/punishment; to liberty and security of the person; to be treated with humanity and dignity during detention; to recognition as a person before the law; and to an effective remedy (articles 6(1), 7, 9, 10(1), 16, and 2(3) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights);
his own rights to an effective remedy and to be free from torture or ill-treatment (articles 2(3) and 7). 