BiH: two enforced disappearances cases still waiting to be solved
11.02.2010
The Advocacy Center – TRIAL (ACT) submitted this week an application to the European Court of Human Rights concerning the enforced disappearance of Mr. Emir Hodžić occurred in May 1992. Last month, ACT submitted a communication to the Human Rights Committee concerning the enforced disappearance of Mr. Ibrahim Durić occurred in May 1992.
Since its creation, ACT submitted nine cases to the European Court of Human Rights and five cases to the United Nations Human Rights Committee in relationthe conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 
The Hodžić case
Mr. Emir Hodžić, reservist member of the local police, was captured by the Serb army while the the take over of Kozarac. He was seen for the last time on 26 May 1992 together with a group of colleagues, who later on were all captured and executed by members of the army of the Republika Srpska. His fate and whereabouts remain unknown since then.
Almost 18 years after the events no ex officio, prompt, impartial, thorough and independent investigation has been undertaken by BiH authorities to locate Mr. Emir Hodžić or his mortal remains or to identify, prosecute and sanction those responsible.
Familly members of Mr. Emir Hodžić live in a lacerating situation of uncertainty, in spite of numerous attempts to establish the truth regarding the circumstances of the enforced disappearance of their relative, their fate and whereabouts and the progress and results of the investigation.

Read more on Hodžić case

 
The Durić case
On 14 May 1992, returning with a friend (Mr. Zelimir Vidović) from Sarajevo’s Hospital to take a neighbour who had been heavily wounded in a shelling, Mr. Ibrahim Durić was stopped and interrogated at a check point held by members of the army of the Republika Srpska (VRS). That was the last time that Mr. Ibrahim Durić was seen alive. His fate and whereabouts remain unknown since then.
More than 18 years after the events, no ex officio, prompt, impartial, thorough and independent investigation has been undertaken by BiH authorities in order to locate Mr. Ibrahim Durić or his mortal remains or to identify, prosecute and sanction those responsible.
Familly members of Mr. Ibrahim Durić live in a lacerating situation of uncertainty, in spite of numerous attempts to establish the truth regarding the circumstances of the enforced disappearance of their relative, their fate and whereabouts and the progress and results of the investigation.

Read more on Durić case 