Nebojsa Pavkovic
08.05.2016
facts

Army General Nebojsa Pavkovic was born on 10 April 1946 in the village of Senjski Rudnik, in the territory of today’s Serbia and Montenegro.
He began his military career in the Yugoslav Peoples Army (JNA) on 20 July 1970. Nebojsa Pavkovic exercised several functions in the army: he was, notably, Commander of the 16th Infantry Brigade in 1988 and 1989, and between 1989 and 1993 held several posts in the Federal Secretariat for National Defence. In 1994, General Nebojsa Pavkovic was posted to the Pristina corps of the Armed Forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (VJ) stationed in Pristina, Kosovo, where he filled several staff functions before taking over command of the corps on 9 January 1998.
The original indictment alleged that Nebojsa Pavkovic, as well as Vladimir Lazarevic Vlastimir Djordjevic and Sreten Lukic (see “related cases”), planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted in preparing certain crimes. According to the indictment Pavkovic was part of a joint criminal enterprise which had the aim, in addition to other objectives, to expel a major part of the Kosovo Albanian civilians from the province in which they were living in order to maintain this province under Serb control. This joint criminal enterprise reportedly came into being, at the latest, in October 1998 and continued until 20 June 1999.
According to the indictment, armed forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) and of Serbia, in a deliberate and widespread or systematic manner, forcibly expelled and internally displaced hundreds of thousands of Kosovo Albanians from their homes across the entire province of Kosovo. In order to facilitate these expulsions and deportations, forces of the FRY and Serbia were said to have deliberately created a climate of fear and oppression by the use of force or by threatening to do so or by engaging in violent acts. Throughout Kosovo, according to the indictment, FRY and Serbian forces were alleged to have undertaken a widespread or systematic campaign of destruction of property belonging to Kosovo Albanian civilians. These coordinated actions made the towns, villages and entire regions uninhabitable for the Kosovo Albanians. Numerous Kosovo Albanians who had not been directly expelled by force from their community were said to have fled due to the climate of terror which had been created in the region by the widespread and systematic campaign of physical aggression, harassment, sexual violence, illegal arrest, murder, bombing and pillaging.
In his position as Commander of the 3rd Army, Nebojsa Pavkovic had under his orders all of the units of the 3rd Army of the VJ and others attached to it. He had overall responsibility for the operations conducted by these units, and was also responsible for the activities of the staff headquarters of the 3rd Army. In addition, Nebojsa Pavkovic would also have had authority over units of the Serbian Interior Ministry, reporting to the 3rd Army of the VJ or which were in action, in cooperation or coordination with the latter as well as over Territorial Army units, Civil Defence units, and other armed groups.
Nebojsa Pavkovic was arrested and transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on 25 April 2005. 