Taha Yassin Ramadan
20.04.2016
facts

Taha Yassin Ramadan, also known as Taha al-Jazrawi, was born in 1938 in Mosul, in Iraq.
He was one of the few surviving plotters from the 1968 coup that brought the Baath party to power. He rose through the ranks of the Baath Party and joined the regime’s powerful Revolution Command Council after the coup.
He held numerous senior posts during the party’s 35years long rule. He was a member of Saddam Hussein’s inner circle and was known as one of his “enforcers”. He also led the People’s Army, a large paramilitary force at the service of the regime, disbanded in March 1991, when he became Vice-President of Iraq, office that he held until the fall of Saddam Hussein in April 2003.
Taha Yassin Ramadan was allegedly responsible, together with Saddam Hussein and six other senior officials (Barzan Ibrahim Al-Tikriti, Awad Hamed Al-Bandar, Abdullah Kadem Rouaid, Ali Daeem Ali, Mohammed Azzam al-Ali, Mezhar Abdullah Rouaid), for having ordered and overseen the Dujail massacre. The slaughter was realised in retaliation for the attack on the presidential motorcade on 8 July 1982, while Saddam was visiting the village of Al Dujail to meet with tribal leaders. Dujail was a stronghold of the Shiite Dawa Party, which carried out terrorist attacks in Iraq to protest against the war with Shiite Iran. The Dawa party also wanted to assassinate Saddam Hussein to avenge the execution of one of its founders. When Saddam Hussein’s motorcade entered the city, the Dawa members opened fire. A four-hour battle ensued. Saddam Hussein was saved by soldiers and army helicopters.
In the months following the failed assassination attempt, almost 800 Shiite people from the city were arrested and held in detention, many were subject to torture and 148 confessed to having taken part in the attack. 143 Dujail residents were sentenced to death by the Revolutionary Court; more than 40 detainees died during interrogation or while in detention from torture, malnutrition, lack of access to medical care and poor hygienic conditions. At least 96 were executed on 23 March 1985. Other 400 detainees, mostly family members of the 148 who had admitted involvement, were sent into exile to a remote part of southern Iraq. The remaining were released and sent back to Dujail, where the houses, farms and properties of many of them had been demolished.
Following the fall of Saddam’s government, Taha Yassin Ramadan was placed on the U.S. list of most-wanted Iraqis. On 19 August 2003, he was captured in Mosul by fighters of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) and handed over to US forces. 