Rodolfo Anibal Campos
18.04.2016
facts

Rodolfo Anibal Campos was born on 9 July 1928 in Capital Federal. A retired colonel, Campos was deputy head of the police in Cordoba from 1976 to 1979. He was involved in the “circuito camps”.
Named after the former Chief Police of Buenos Aires, General Ramon Camps, who operated them from April 1976 to December 1977, the “circuito camps” were clandestine detention and repression centres located in Buenos Aires. During the time when they were operating, there were 214 cases of kidnaping with extortion, 120 cases of torture, 32 homicides, two rapes, two miscarriages caused by torture, 18 acts of theft, and the appropriation (for illegal adoption) of 10 minors. Each establishment had ‘functional relations’ with the rest, although they did not always follow the same pattern. Once been kidnapped, victims were housed in the Investigation Squad (operations centre), then transferred to the Arana Detachment (which functioned as a torture and extermination centre), and finally taken to the 5th Precinct (a holding centre for detainees). This circuit functioned in nine districts of Greater Buenos Aires and the city of La Plata (capital of Buenos Aires province) and comprised at least 29 clandestine centres.
Campos held one of the highest rungs on the chain of command of the criminal organization first in commissioner then as deputy head of the police of Buenos Aires and finally when he took over the police force on 14 December 1977. He had the whole force structure under his command as a chief of police.
Campos faced trial on 12 September 2012 with 22 other co-accused: Jaime Lamont Smart, Miguel Osvaldo Etchecolatz, Hugo Alberto Guallama, Horacio Elizardo Luján, Norberto Cozzani, Carlos García, Luis Vicente Patrault, Bernabé Jesús Corrales, Fernando Svedas, Miguel Kearney, Raúl Orlando Machuca, Julio César Argüello, Víctor Sita, Domingo Almeida, Roberto Omar Grillo, Eros Amílcar Tarela, Jorge Antonio Bergés, Roberto Antonio Cabrera, Sergio Arturo Verduri, Daniel Jorge Lencinas, Pedro Antonio Ferriole y Santiago Antonini. The accused were tried for the kidnapping and torture of 280 persons, many of whom are still missing, and 37 homicides that were proven with the participation of the Argentine Forensic Anthropology Team. 