Honorio Carlos Ruiz Martínez
14.04.2016
facts 

Honorio Carlos Ruiz Martinez was born on 15 July 1948 in Buenos Aires. Not much is known about him until 1970, at which time he was engaged as a “supplementary agent” in the SIDE (Army Secret Service), becoming a civilian agent in 1972, and then discharged in 1975. A few months later, in October, he asked to be reinstated into the SIDE and as a result joined the “Anibal Gordon Group” the founder of Triple A (AAA= Alliance Anti-communist, Argentinean) a right wing extremist group.
In 1975, Otto Palatino, the Director of SIDE, opened up a secret detention center baptized “O.T. 18”, which was none other than the “Automotores Garage” located at 3519, Avenue Flores between the streets Lamarca and St. Nicolas in the Floresta district of Buenos Aires. It was here that the Gordon Group operated.
Following the military coup d’état in 1976, the Orletti garage, including the Gordon Group, became subject to the authority of the SIDE.
Orletti became a clandestine detention center set up to take in prisoners linked to Operation Condor, a coordinated venture amongst the secret services of the military dictatorships of the South American Cone. In addition to Argentinean prisoners, Orletti became the prison for foreigners captured in Argentina: mainly Uruguayans, but also Chileans, Cubans Bolivians… Ruiz Martinez was part of the group of torturers.
At the end of the dictatorship, he continued to work for the SIDE. It is not known until when, but possibly until 1978.
In March 2005, he robbed the Bank Nación in the Place de Mai, and fled towards the Andes. He was identified thanks to surveillance cameras, traced to his sister living in El Bolson (Province of Rio Negro) and captured in 2006.
On 6 September 2006, he was placed in preventive detention being implicated in the “Orletti” dossier together with five other former SIDE agents. The preparatory inquiry lasted until September 2008 then in June 2010, he was ultimately included amongst the persons indicted for crimes against humanity committed in the secret detention center. 