Osman Šego
27.04.2016
facts

Osman Šego was born on 13 May 1966 in Oborci in the Municipality of Donji Vakuf and took up residence in Bugojno in present day Bosnia-Herzegovina.
He is of Bosnian nationality, and worked as a technician, a specialist in the treatment of wood. He is married with a young child.
On 26 July 1993, captured Croatian civilians were transferred from their detention spot in the garage of a private house in the center of the village of Donjici to the Marxist Center in the convent in Bugojno. Šego went to the Marxist Center in his role as a military police officer together with other military policemen of the 307th Brigade of the Army of BiH. One of the policemen called on Vlatko Kapetanović and Ivica Keškic, two of the Croatian prisoners, to leave the room where they were being held. On leaving the room, Šego, together with other members of the same brigade began to inflict physical and mental punishment on them by punching and kicking them and by trouncing them with various implements. As a result of this Ivica Keškic fell to the ground in the corridor with open wounds all over his body whilst others continued to beat Vlatko Kapetanović, pushing him through a door behind the Center. Other members of the Brigade pulled Mario Glišic out of the cellar and through the back door which led out onto the courtyard, where Šego began to punch and kick him together with other policemen from the Brigade. Mario Glišic as a result fell to the ground where he remained motionless as a result of the wounds inflicted all over his body.
Following this, other Brigade members placed Vlatko Kapetanović in the trunk of a Mercedes car and drove him to the surroundings of the village of Guvno-situated close to Bugojno-where they pulled him out of the trunk with his hands already tied behind his back and a member of the Brigade gave out an order to shoot him. Šego shot him at point blank range and Vlatko Kapetanović fell flat on the ground. He remained lying there but when he showed signs of life another military policeman fired on him with his shotgun thus conclusively ensuring he was dead.
On 30 July 1993, other military policemen of the BiH Army liberated a group of prisoners being detained in the Center in order for them to collect the bodies of dead Bosniaks, dig their graves and bury them in the village of Vrbanja in the municipality of Bugojno. Armed with a rifle, Šego went to the Marxist Center with other Brigade members, where they selected a group of these prisoners and led them to Vrbanja where Sego and the others, following orders they had received, forced the prisoners to collect the dead bodies, dig their graves and bury the dead as they oversaw this operation.
On 15 October 2010, the War Crimes Department of the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia-Herzegovina issued an Indictment, which was confirmed on 7 March 2011 and amended on 23 May 2011. On this date, Šego was charged with having committed War Crimes against Civilians. 