Zahid Hossain Khokon
08.05.2016
facts


Zahid Hossain Khokon, also known as Khokon Razakar, was born on 11 January 1942 in Nagarkanda, a village under Nagarkanda Upazila, in Faridpur, Bangladesh. Khokon was a local Jamaat-e-Islami leader in Nagarkanda during the Bangladesh Liberation War and became chief of Nagarkanda Razakar Bahini, an auxiliary force supporting the Pakistani army.
On 21 April, 1971, Khokon took arms training in order to become a Razakar.
In May, 1971 Khokon, along with his elder brother, Zafor Khokon, formed a Razakar Bahini in their local area. After the death of his elder brother in a combat with freedom fighters, Zahid Khokon took absolute leadership, becoming commander of the local Razakar Bahini. Khokon was directly involved in the commission of crimes against humanity and genocide, committed in the district of Nagarkanda, Faridpur.
During the Bangladesh Liberation War, Khokon maintained close and active association with the Pakistani occupation army.
On 27 April 1971 Khokon and his accomplices went to the village of Bangram where they plundered and set fire to the houses of two villagers. They also took seventeen innocent locals to the police station and detained and tortured them there for two days.
Khokon was also involved in several war crimes which left at least 50 people dead, and eight others seriously injured; two women were also raped. In addition Khokon was directly involved in the deportation of seven people and in the forced conversion to Islam of nine Hindus, and in setting fire to numerous houses and two temples.
In the aftermath of the Liberation War, Khokon joined the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) giving up Jamaat-e-Islami politics. He became the senior vice-president of BNP of Nagarkanda Thana unit and elected Mayor of Nagarkanda Pourashava. The government removed him from office after his trial started in 2013.
The trial against Khokon began on 23 June 2013 when the Chief Prosecutor submitted formal charges under section 9(1) of the International Crimes (Tribunals) Act of 1973 before the International Crimes Tribunal – 1. 