Donald H. Rumsfeld
01.05.2016
facts

Donald H. Rumsfeld was born on 9 July 1932. He was a former pilot in the US Navy and already served as Minister of Defence in the administration of President Ford. He has also held positions as White House Chief of Personnel, United States Ambassador to NATO, Member of the American Congress and Chief Executive in two companies listed in “Fortune 500”.
Rumsfeld was Chief of the Defence Department in the government of President George W. Bush from 20 January 2001 until 8 November 2006, when he stepped down following heavy Republican Party losses in congressional elections.
In 2002 and 2003, Rumsfeld decided to authorize the use of various techniques for interrogating prisoners at the Guantanamo prison camp. Amongst others, these methods included covering the head with a sack, being stripped naked, being terrorised by dogs, unforeseen changes to routine and sleep deprivation, exposure to hot and cold as well as aggressive sensory exposure (including to loud music and blinding light).
Rumsfeld subsequently asked General Major Miller to adapt similar practices in the interrogation of prisoners in Iraq in order to extract, more quickly, “useful” intelligence. Use of these techniques had to be “militarily necessary” and to be accompanied by “adequate medical supervision”. Rumsfeld’s personal authorisation was required in certain cases.
In addition, Rumsfeld is suspected of having given orders to members of the military forces in Iraq not to mention the presence of one of the detainees on the list of prisoners in order to prevent the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) from enquiring about the conditions of his detention. Some prisoners were allegedly held in at least a dozen secret detention centres, in order to avoid the supervision of the ICRC.
Rumsfeld is also known to have asked William J. Hayes, a Defence Department Counsellor, to set up a working group with the task of studying the interrogation methods in question. This task force played an important role in putting into a different perspective the definition of torture such as it is generally interpreted under international law. This definition allowed Rumsfeld to argue in favour of adopting techniques considered to be unacceptable from both the point of view set out in the military manuals or as generally accepted under international law. 