John Yoo
21.04.2016
facts

John Yoo was born in 1967 in Seoul in Korea. He immigrated to the United States with his family when he was young. He graduated from Harvard University in 1989 and obtained a law degree from Yale University in 1992. He served as counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee before becoming a law professor. He served in the Department of Justice’s Office of Legal Counsel at the time of the facts.
According to the complaint Yoo wrote the memorandums of 9 and 22 January 2002 that concluded that the Geneva Conventions did not apply to the conflicts against al Qaeda and the Taliban. Based on these documents, President George W. Bush decided not to extend the protection of the Conventions to detainees. The latter memorandum was communicated to Alberto Gonzales, White House counsel, and William Haynes, General Counsel of the United States Department of Defence.
Yoo is also said to have helped write the memorandum dated 13 March 2002 signed by Jay Bybee, his superior and the head of the Office of Legal Counsel, that concluded that neither the Geneva Conventions nor the Convention against Torture prohibited the President from transferring those detained during the conflicts against al Qaeda and the Taliban to third countries.
On 1 August 2002 another memorandum, also signed by Bybee but written by Yoo with the help of David Addington, legal counsel to Vice President Dick Cheney, was transmitted to Alberto Gonzales. This document defined torture in a very restricted manner, as necessitating severe pain “equivalent in intensity to the pain accompanying serious physical injury, such as organ failure, impairment of bodily function, or even death.” Significant psychological harm of significant duration could also amount to torture according to the memorandum but only if it was a result of the few mentioned ill treatments. The memorandum remarked that under this new definition it would thus be possible for a detainee to be subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment that would nonetheless not amount to torture so that an interrogator would not be subject to prosecution for his actions.
On the same day, a second memorandum, also signed by Bybee and written by Yoo under orders from Addington, was sent to John Rizzo, a high-ranking lawyer at the Central Intelligence Agency, and passed along to William Haynes. This document described in details the interrogation methods that could be used on al Qaeda detainees by the CIA. This memorandum finally became public on 16 April 2009.
Yoo solidified his legal opinions in a memorandum he sent to Haynes on 14 March 2003. Under his analysis neither federal domestic laws nor international law protected those detained by the United States abroad. Furthermore, according to Yoo, the President could authorise interrogation techniques incompatible with the Convention against Torture.
Yoo returned to teach law at the University of Berkeley after leaving the Department of Justice.
On 17 March 2009 the Association for the Dignity of Detainees, a Spanish non-profit dedicated to the protection of human rights, lodged a complaint before the National Court of Spain against Yoo, Haynes, Gonzales, Bybee, Addington and Douglas Feith, the Under Secretary of Defence for Policy at the Department of Defence. 