Grégoire Ndahimana
25.04.2016
facts

Grégoire Ndahimana was born in 1952 in the small town of Kivuma, Rwanda. At the time of the events in question, he was the mayor of this town.
Following the assassination of the Rwandan President on 6 April 1994, attacks began to take place against the Tutsis in Kivumu commune, as elsewhere throughout Rwanda. In order to escape from these attacks the Tutsis sought refuge in public buildings and churches, including the church in Nyange. Within the context of this situation, starting on 10 April 1994, the mayor of Kivumu, Grégoire Ndahimana and the communal police began to assemble, these refugees from different sectors of the commune and to transport them to the parish of Nyange.
On or about this same date, it was reported that several important meetings were held in the administrative centre of Nyange parish. Athanase Seromba, Fulgence Kayishema, Gaspard Kanyarukiga and Grégoire Ndahimana were all allegedly present at these meetings. In the course of their discussions, it was decided to give the order to the gendarmes from Kibuye prefecture to gather all the Tutsi citizens from Kivuma commune inside the church in Nyange.
By 15 April, attacks against those people assembled in the church had already begun and were intensified. Later that same day, Athanase Seromba, Grégoire Ndahimanaand Fulgence Kayishema ordered that the church be completely destroyed thereby causing the death of around 2’000 Tutsis inside the church.
According to the indictment, between 6 April 1994 and 20 April 1994, Grégoire Ndahiman allegedly organised these massacres, accompanied by Athanase Seromba,Fulgence Kayishema, Télesphore Ndungutse, Judge Joseph Habiyambere and the deputy Mayor Vedaste Mupende.
This indictment on genocide charges and crimes against humanity was issued on 2 August 2001 by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
Ndahimana had remained at large until August 11, 2009, when he was captured in a village in Congo’s North Kivu province and, on 20 September 2009, was transferred from DRC to custody of the ICTR in Arusha, Tanzania. 