Stanislas Mbanenande
27.04.2016
facts

Stanislas Mbanenande was born on 26 August 1958 in Kibuye, Rwanda and belonged to the Hutu ethnic group. As an adult, Mbanenande was educated in civil engineering and worked as a lecturer in the universities in the prefecture Butare. In the beginning of the genocide on 6 April 1994, Mbanenande was in Kibuye where he functioned as an informal leader for young Hutus, many of them who sympathised with the extremists. During the genocide Mbanenande possessed a fireman and as there were mainly persons in leader position who owned firearms, it strengthened his position as a leader among the young Hutus. Mbanenande is accused of having committed and participating in killings, attempted killings and enforced disappeances with intent to destroy, in whole or in part the ethnic group Tutsi during the period between 6 April and 30 June 1994. He is accused of committed abovementioned acts in the following cases:
Mbanenande is accused of having participated in the killings between April 12 and 16, when over a hundred persons had fled up to the mountain Ruhiro in the South part of Kibuye. Most of them were Tutsis and were unarmed and they were attacked by several paramilitary groups leading to the death of hundreds of victims. Mbanenande is accused of having committed this attack and of killing several victims by shooting them or beating them to death. Two of the alleged victims were an elderly man and woman. Mbanenande is further accused of participating in the killings of several victims outside the school Nyamishaba by shooting into a crowd of people with an automatic weapon.
On 17 April 1994, Mbanenande has allegedly participated in the killings and atrocities around the Catholic Church and the hotel Saint Jean in Kibuye. Most of the people were unarmed and had sought protection in this area after advice form the authorities. The people were forced by armed groups to stay in the area and during the day several hundred of militias, police and civilians went to attack against the people and killed the majority of those seeking protection. The aggressors used firearms; grenades, machetes and other weapons and those who hid in the church were forced out by smoke and were killed outside. The aggressors used burning car tyres to force people out of the church and teargas. Many of those who tried to flee drowned when trying to swim in the Kivu Lake. Mbanenande is accused of participating in organizing the attack as well as having shot into the group of fleeing people with an automatic weapon with the intention to kill as many as possible.
On 18 April 1994, Mbanenande is accused of having participating in the massacre in the Gatwaro Stadium in Kibuye where thousands of people, mainly Tutsis, had gathered for protection. The victims were surrounded by military, paramilitary, and armed groups and attacked with weapons, machetes, grenades and other weapons and several victims dies or were seriously harmed. On 19 April the people inside the stadium were stopped by the military when they tried to flee so those who survived the previous day and who did not managed to flee, were killed on 19 April instead.
Mbanenande is also accused of patrolling around Kibuye with the intention to find and kill Tutsis between 20 April and 30 June 1994. Mbanenande has allegedly, during this time, killed seven men and one woman by shooting them or beating them to death. At one instance Mbanenande is accused of killing a man by repeatedly hitting the man’s head with a stone and a block of concrete. In addition, he allegedly threw a grenade against a crowd which killed several people. At another instance, Mbanenande has allegedly, together with other perpetrators, forced a man out of a house by using burning car tyres and using teargas and after them man came out, Mbanenande has together with others allegedly tortured and killed the man.
Mbanenande is further accused of having participated in attacks against ten thousands of people who had fled to the massif in Bisesero south of Kibuye between 9 April and 30 June 1994. Mbanenande is accused of having participated in the actual killings as well as of organising groups of young Hutus with the intention letting them participate in the killing of Tutsis.
After the genocide, Mbanenande fled to Sweden where he claimed refuge and he was later granted Swedish citizenship.
In 2009, a Gacaca court sentenced Mbanenande to life in absentia on four counts related to his role in the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi. Following the Gacaca sentence, Interpol issued a warrant for Mbanenande’s arrest and he was arrested by Swedish police on 22 December 2011. He has remained in custody since 26 December 2011. Following Mbanenande’s arrest, police and prosecution officials from Sweden came to Rwanda to discuss the case with John Bosco Siboyintore, the head of the Genocide Fugitives Tracking Unit in the National Prosecution Authority.
Mbanenande was indicted by the Stockholm District court on 5 November 2012 on the counts of genocide and jus gentium including the crimes of murder, attempted murder and abduction.
Mbanenande pleads not guilty. 