Carlos Eliseo Pichilingue Guevara
12.04.2016
facts

Carlos Eliseo Pichilingue Guevara was born on 3 July 1957 in Huaral, Perú. He is a retired military member and was an Army Chief of Staff.
Carlos Pichilingue Guevara was part of the analysis team, which was formed in 1991 and consisted of members of the SIE (Army Intelligence Service), the SIN (National Intelligence Service) and the Navy of Peru. This group, called Colina group, was allegedly a secret operational command for “special operations”. It was part of the State’s policy on the fight against terrorism. This group was a military organisation, hierarchical, which aimed at extrajudicial elimination of allegedly members of terrorist cells. Pichilingue was the chief administrative.
On 3 November 1991, members of the Colina group allegedly entered in a party celebrated in a building in Barrios Altos in order to eliminate the terrorist elements. The members of the group threatened the participants and shot against all of them. As a result, fifteen people were killed and four were seriously injured.
On 2 May 1992, a group between fifteen and twenty five armed people, most of them in military uniforms, entered the locality El Santa. Jesús Manfredo Noriega Ríos, Carlos Martin Tarazona More, Jorge Luis Tarazona More, Roberto Barrientos Velásquez, Carlos Alberto Barrientos Velásquez, Gilmar Ramiro León Velásquez, Dennis Atilio Castillo Chávez, Federico Coquis Vásquez and Pedro Pablo López Gonzáles were abducted. Their whereabouts are still uncertain.
On 23 June 1992, the head of the “Colina” group, Martin Rivas, along with a group of operational agents, including Pichilingue, went to Pedro Yauri’s home. Yauri was abducted and brought to the Huacho beach. There, he was interrogated about addresses of people linked to terrorist organisations. Given his refusal to make a statement, the agent Ortiz Mantas, by command of Martin Rivas, shot him on the head, which caused his death. Then his body was buried in a grave he was obliged to dig. Yauri had a radio programme in “Radio Universal” called -Punto Final- which was critical to Alberto Fujimori’s government.
On 7 April 1995, the Provincial Prosecutor’s Office in Lima lodged a complaint about the facts occurred in Barrios Altos. On 18 April 1995 a criminal procedure was opened by the Specialised Criminal Court No. 16 of Lima. The facts occurred to Yauri and in El Santa were also investigated in this procedure. 