Gustav Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach
02.05.2016
facts

Gustav Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach was born on 7 August 1870 in The Hague, Netherlands. Son of a diplomat, he studied law before taking up a post in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
In 1906, he married Bertha Krupp, the sole heiress of the Krupp Company, and became Managing Director of this business in 1909.
In 1931, he became president of the Employer’s Union of German Industry (Reichsverband der Deutschen Industrie). His own company became very profitable with the coming to power of the Nazis in 1933 and Hitler’s policy of rearmament. Gustav Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach ultimately became more and more involved in the Nazi regime. This resulted in his appointment as Chief Administrator of Mines with responsibility for the production of iron and metal, within the Ministry for the Economy.
When the war broke out, the Krupp Company was geared to full production in order to satisfy the need for arms of the German war effort. Indeed, throughout the war, more than 100’000 labourers were put into forced labour by Krupp. In addition to this, Gustav Krupp became a member of the NSDAP, the Nazi party, in 1940.
In 1943, Krupp resigned from his position of President of the Board of Directors of the company.
In 1944, Krupp had a road accident in addition to which his overall health deteriorated following several heart attacks.
Gustav Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach was accused of having used his position and his personal influence in order to facilitate the accession to power of the Nazi conspirators and the consolidation of their power in Germany, according to the count of indictment No 1. Under counts No 1 and 2, Krupp was also accused of promoting preparations for war, of participating in economic and military planning and in preparing the Nazi plot aimed at pursuing wars of aggression. Under count No 3 he was also accused of having authorised, directed and taken part in acts constituting war crimes, and according to count No 4, in crimes against humanity, in particular concerning the arbitrary employment and exploitation of human beings as manpower in undertaking wars of aggression. 