Roberto Saldaña Vásquez
04.04.2016
facts

Roberto Saldaña Vasquez was a colonel in the Peruvian army (las Fuerzas Armadas).
During the internal armed conflict in Peru (1980-2000), the Peruvian army had its headquarters in the military base “Los Cabitos”, where Saldaña Vasquez was the administrative chief.
Los Cabitos was the operational centre of the political-military command of Ayacucho, during the internal armed conflict in Peru.
Created in 2001, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission has investigated the violence in Peru during the internal conflict.
According to the Commission, “Los Cabitos” was the main centre for imprisonment, torture, disappearances and extrajudicial killings by the security forces, especially during 1983, 1984 and 1985.
In its 2003 final report, the Commission stated that “Los Cabitos” had a rigid hierarchy because of its military status. The command situated there, including Saldaña Vasquez, was in charge of the planning and execution of military operations conducted in the area.
Allegedly, Saldaña Vasquez and other “Los Cabitos” superiors, exercised political and military control in Ayacucho, which allowed them to take advantage of the situation of public emergency in Peru, and consequently commit human rights violations and extrajudicial killings in the military base. It is alleged that they had the necessary control over the acts of human rights violations that were happening in the base itself.
Most arrests in 1983 were selective and violent by nature. They allegedly consisted of breaking into peoples’ homes in Huamanga, during the night or early in the morning, as it was convenient due to the curfew imposed from 18:00 to 06:00. Others were randomly arrested on the streets, including minors, teenagers, men and women. The arrests were conducted in order to capture suspected terrorists. However, at the time, everyone was considered to be a suspected terrorist. It is alleged that the policy was to torture the suspects and observe their behavior; those who broke easily were not considered terrorists.
Saldaña Vasquez – along with other high-ranking military officers – is suspected of committing crimes against humanity, arbitrary arrest, illegal detention, harassment, aggravated kidnapping, humiliating treatment, forced disappearance and torture as aggravated form of abuse of authority during his time serving at Los Cabitos.
The Commission recommended the Public Prosecutor to open an investigation into “Los Cabitos” centre andto charge the suspects with torture and enforced disappearance committed against 54 people in 1983. Saldaña Vasquez is one of the seven main suspects in the case of “Los Cabitos”, because of his role as an administrative chief of the base. 