David Addington
20.04.2016
facts

David Addington was born on 22 January 1957 in Washington, DC. He graduated from Georgetown University in 1978 and received a law degree from Duke University in 1981.
From 1981 until 1984, he was legal counsel at the Central Intelligence Agency. He then worked as legal counsel to President Ronald Reagan and to Secretary of Defence Dick Cheney. He was legal counsel at the Defence Department before returning to work for Dick Cheney in 2001 when he became Vice President. His relationship with Dick Cheney has made Addington into the “most powerful man you have never heard about” according to U.S. News & World Report.
According to the complaint, Addington knew about the memorandum dated 13 March 2002 and signed by Jay Bybee, the Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel, that concluded that neither the Geneva Conventions nor the Convention against Torture prohibited the President from transferring to other countries those detained in the wars against al Qaeda and the Taliban.
Addington is also accused of having helped John Yoo, one of Bybee’s assistants, to write the memorandums dated 1 August 2002 to Alberto Gonzales, White House counsel, and John Rizzo, a high-ranking lawyer at the CIA. The first document defined torture very narrowly while the second authorised certain interrogation techniques to be used by the CIA on al Qaeda detainees. The latter memorandum was not made public until 16 April 2009.
On 25 September 2002, Addington, Gonzales, William Haynes, General Counsel of the United States Department of Defence, and Rizzo went to Guantánamo Bay. According to Diane Beaver, an army lawyer posted at Guantánamo, the visitors authorised “whatever needed to be done” when it came to interrogating detainees.
In October 2005 Addington became Dick Cheney’s chief of staff.
On 17 March 2009 the Association for the Dignity of Detainees, a Spanish non-profit dedicated to the protection of human rights, lodged a complaint before the National Court of Spain against Addington, Gonzales, Haynes, Yoo, Bybee and Douglas Feith, the Under Secretary of Defence for Policy. 