Milan Bulic
17.04.2016
facts

Milan Bulic, also known as “Bulidža”, has been accused of having encouraged and participated in acts of mistreatment of prisoners of war in the the Ovcara farm, located in the municipality of Vukovar, a Croatian- Serb community in the northeast of Croatia, which at the time formed part of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
THE OVCARA MASSACRE
Also known at the ‘Vukovar massacre’, the massacre constitutes one of the first atrocities of the Balkan wars that marked the 1990s.
During the fighting in November 1991, the then Serb-controlled Yugoslav Army (JNA) advanced against the newly independent Croatia, taking control of a disputed east Croatian territory and capturing several hundreds of combatants and civilians.
On 18 November, as the battle of Vukovar was coming to an end, Serb forces seized the city hospital. As a result, a number of troops, both voluntary and militia forces which were affiliated to the Croatian armed forces, laid down their arms and surrendered to the JNA forces, which were in fact the Vukovar Territorial Forces (TO).
These forces then released most detainees and regrouped the remainder into wounded combatants, civilians and hospital staff and forcibly transferred them by bus to a farm in Ovcara. This site served as a transit camp for Croatian prisoners held by the Serbs from October until December 2011.
During the afternoon of 20 November until the early morning of 21 November 1991, members of the TO Vukovar and the Volunteers of Leva Supoderica Unit, both Serb militia components of the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA), had reportedly killed, abused, beaten and tortured prisoners of war in this farm. The accused positioned themselves in two lines and forced the prisoners to run through them into the warehouse, while kicking them and hitting them with wooden and metal bars, rifle butts and crutches, thus inflicting serious injuries upon them. Most of the prisoners managed to continue into the warehouse, and while some prisoners died from the wounds, the rest were killed with firearms. In total, around 263 men and one woman, most of whom were Croats, including both prisoners of war and civilians (194 of which have been identified), died and were buried in mass graves on this site.
BULIC’S ROLE
Milan Bulic was a member of the Vukovar Territorial Forces (TO). He was accused of beating prisoners before they were summarily executed and dumped in a mass grave in the Ovcara farm in November 1991. Bulic also aided and abetted members of the Volunteer Unit of the JNA to hit the prisoners.
In June 1991, Bulic left Vukovar with his family and headed to Borovo Selo. In late September, he decided to return and joined the TD unit in Velepromet, the concentration camp of Vukovar which was under the command of Ljube Stojanovic. He was responsible of guarding and protecting the site. About four or five days after the defeat of Vukovar, he left the unit to return to Petrova Gora, where he claims to have been responsible for transporting the corpses and cleaning the buildings.
A few days following the liberation of Vukovar, which took place on 18 November 1991, he had heard that people had been arrested. Upon learning that they were being taken to the Ovcara farm, he decided to go there himself. When he arrived, he saw five or six buses, being guarded by the army, which supposedly carried the combatants and the hospital staff. In the surroundings of the buildings, there where prisoners and TD members. After an hour or two, someone announced that the prisoners were to be taken to Motrovica in order to be exchanged.
Instead, the accused stood in two lines and had the prisoners walk between them, while beating them as they proceeded into the warehouse. Bulic and about 10 others would then fetch the prisoners, under the command of major Sljivancanin, confiscating weapons and knives, before leading them into the warehouse where they were allegedly beaten, mistreated and subsequently executed by the same group of people.
Once the task was completed, Bulic went into the warehouse for around fifteen to twenty minutes. He claims to have seen a JNA officer drawing up and list of the prisoners, but no one hitting the prisoners and denied all the above-mentioned criminal charges.
The Chamber of War Crimes of the Belgrade District court sentenced Bulic at first instance on 30 January 2006 to eight years for committing war crimes, including the abuse of prisoners of war in the Croatian camp at Ovcara. The Supreme Court of Serbia subsequently reduced the sentence to a two-year imprisonment for health reasons. 