Telmo Ricardo Hurtado
14.04.2016
facts

Telmo Ricardo Hurtado Hurtado, was born in a military family on 12 July 1961. Known as “the “butcher of the Andes”, he was a member of the Peruvian army until 1999. He was the lieutenant and head of the ‘Lince 7’ battalion. He was decorated four times and promoted to major.
On 14 August 1985, an army patrol from the ‘Lince’ company of Huamanga –commanded by Telmo Hurtado, the sub-lieutenant at that time, killed 62 people including women, children and the elderly. The victims were inhabitants of the Accomarca district, Vilcashuamán province, Ayacucho. The massacre was carried out as part of the “Huancayo Operational Plan” and was organised by the Ayacucho’s political-military command as a terrorist cleansing operation within a red zone.
During the morning on 14 August 1985, the patrols Lince 6 and Lince 7 raided the Huancayo village and violently entered each of the villagers’ houses, and informed them that an assembly was going to take place in the Lloccllapampa area.
The villagers who attended were divided by the army in two groups. The men were allegedly savagely beaten and the women were raped. Afterwards, they were locked in Cipriano Gamboa’s home.
After being locked in the homes, allegedly, the soldiers accused the villagers of terrorism –and indiscriminately targeted the elderly, women and children. With people inside, the soldiers burned the houses and destroyed them with grenades.
This incident was brought to light due to the complaints lodged by relatives and witnesses of the massacred. However, despite the complaints, the high officers of the Peru’s army denied the extrajudicial executions.
On 12 October 1985, the Senate Commission of Inquiry issued its final reports. The majority concluded that “the facts of Pucayacu and Accomarca fall within the counterinsurgent policy that originated from the former regime, sometimes in violation of human rights” and that “the direct perpetrators of the facts are just a cog in the machine and a study of whether they acted by virtue of verbal orders or they have been trained like that is needed.”
Hurtado sought protection from Amnesty Laws that entered into force during Alberto Fujimori dictatorship. In 2002, when the Amnesty Laws were nullified, Hurtado fled to the United States. 