Juan Manuel Guillermo Contreras Sepulveda
16.10.2015
facts

Juan Manuel Guillermo Contreras was born on 4 May 1929, son of a middle-class military family.
In 1974, following the overthrow of the democratically elected government of Salvadore Allende by the Augusto Pinochet military junta on 11 September 1973, General Manuel Contreras was appointed chief of the Army’s Intelligence Service (DINA) set up by the junta on 15 June 1974 with the assignment to crush any opposition.
He held this post up until 1998, a period during which the greatest number of crimes were committed under the military dictatorship of Pinochet. As head of DINA, Contreras was in charge of the detention centres and directed the break up and suppression of left-wing groups by the use of torture, abductions and summary executions.
As a result of this, more than a thousand people disappeared without trace. DINA held the major blame for the crimes committed during the dictatorship, particularly for its systematic use of torture according to the report of the Special Commission on imprisonment and torture transmitted to President Lagos on 11 November 2004. Being the head of DINA, the name of Contreras appeared in numerous inquiries conducted by Chilean judges into cases of human rights violations. For several years, these cases could not be brought to a close due to the application by the courts of the 18 April 1978 amnesty law decree which granted global amnesty for acts committed during the period from 11 September 1973 to 10 March 1978.
DINA and its head, Contreras, were also considered to be responsible for crimes committed abroad in the context of the “Condor” operation. This operation was part of a coordinated effort at the international level against political opponents of the SouthAmerican dictators. Its first target was theJunta for Revolutionary Coordination (JCR) which was set up in August 1973 by extreme left-wing organisations in four South American countries namely Argentina (ERP), Chile (MIR), Uruguay (Tupamaros) and Bolivia (ELN). Operation Condor also targeted several former members of the Allende government in exile: Orlando Letelier, the former Minister for Foreign Affairs, Carlos Prats, General in Chief of the Armed Forces who preceded Pinochet in this position and Bernardo Leighton, the former Vice-President.
It is estimated that overall, the operation “Condor” left 50,000 murdered, 30,000 disappeared (and presumed dead) and 400,000 incarcerated.
Contreras was arrested on 22 September 1991 and subsequently put on trial for various cases committed whilst he was chief of the DINA. 