Alberto Gonzales
21.04.2016
facts

Alberto Gonzales was born on 4 August 1955 in Texas. He joined the United States air force in 1973 and continued his academic studies at the air force academy two years later. He eventually received a B.A. in political science from Rice University in 1979 and a law degree from Harvard University in 1982.
He worked at a law firm before becoming legal counsel to the new Governor of Texas, George W. Bush in 1994. In the next few years, Bush named Gonzales Secretary of State of Texas and later nominated him to the Texas Supreme Court. In 2001 Gonzales followed Bush to Washington when the new President named him White House Counsel.
It is in this capacity that Gonzales promulgated the memorandum dated 25 January 2002 that dismissed the Geneva Conventions as “quaint” and supported the legal opinion of Jay Bybee and John Yoo, the director of the Office of Legal Counsel at the Department of Justice and his assistant, that the President had the authority to decide that the Conventions could not be applied to al Qaeda and Taliban detainees.
On 1 August 2002 Gonzales received a memorandum signed by Bybee but written by Yoo with the help of David Addington, legal counsel to Vice President Dick Cheney, that defined torture in a very restricted manner, as requiring severe pain “equivalent in intensity to the pain accompanying serious physical injury, such as organ failure, impairment of bodily function, or even death.” Significant psychological harm of significant duration could also amount to torture according to the memorandum but only if it was a result of the few mentioned ill treatments. The memorandum remarked that under this new definition it would thus be possible for a detainee to be subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment that would nonetheless not amount to torture so that an interrogator would not be subject to prosecution for his actions.
On September 25 2002 Gonzales, Addington, William Haynes, General Counsel of the United States Department of Defence, and John Rizzo, a high-ranking lawyer at the Central Intelligence Agency, went to Guantánamo Bay. According to Diane Beaver, an army lawyer posted at Guantánamo, the visitors authorised “whatever needed to be done” when it came to interrogating detainees.
Gonzales became Attorney General on 14 February 2005. He was forced to resign on 27 August 2007 as a result of multiple controversies.
On 17 March 2009 the Association for the Dignity of Detainees, a Spanish non-profit dedicated to the protection of human rights, lodged a complaint before the National Court of Spain against Gonzales, Addington, Haynes, Yoo, Bybee and Douglas Feith, the Under Secretary of Defence for Policy. 