Melson Bacos
06.07.2016
Facts

Melson J. Bacos was born in 1985 in Chicago after his parents immigrated to the United States from the Philippines. His family moved to Franklin, Massachusetts in 1991.
After graduating from high school in Franklin, he joined the United States (US) Navy in 2003. He was Navy Petty Officier 3rd Class when the alleged facts occurred. He was first deployed in Iraq in July 2004, and returned to the US in April 2005. He was redeployed in Iraq in January 2006 where he was assigned to the 3rd Battalion, 5th Regiment’s Kilo Company.
On 26 April 2006, Bacos, together with seven other members of the 3rd Battalion, 5th Regiment’s Kilo Company were on patrol near Hamdania, searching for Saleh Gowad, an insurgent who was alleged to have repeatedly planted bombs. The other US Marines were Sergeant Lawrence Hutchins, Marine Corporal Trent Thomas, Lance Corporal Jerry Shumate Jr., Lance Corporal Robert Pennington, Corporal Marshall Magincalda, Private First Class John Jodka and the caporal Tyler Jackson.
The US marines abducted an Iraqi civilian, Hashim Ibrahim Awad, a 52 year old father of 11 children, that they believed to be Saleh Gowad. They seized him and bound his hands before forcing him to walk through the scene of an ambush that had occurred previously between the U.S. military and the Iraqi insurgents. There they forcefully pushed him into a crater that had been left by an explosive device. The marines then retreated and some allegedly shot at him whilst he was bound at the bottom of the hole while others fired into the air with a Kalashnikov to make it seem that a “battle royal” was taking place.
Once the man died, the Marines scattered the bullet casings from the Kalashnikov around his body and placed the weapon at his side. Before leaving, the Marines also untied his feet and legs. Their alleged objective was to make it look as though Hashim Awad had been caught trying to install a roadside IED, and that his death had resulted from a regular skirmish. The following day, local police found the body and asked neighbours to identify it.
On 1 May 2006, Iraqis from Hamdania brought the death of Awad to the attention of the US marine leadership in Iraq. On 24 May 2006, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service was requested by the US marine leadership in Iraq to proceed with a criminal investigation into the events that took place in Hamdania on 26 April 2006.
Bacos was returned from Iraq in May 2006 and was placed in confinement at Camp Pendleton, California, pending his court-martial. 