Alija Osmic
17.04.2016
facts

Alija Osmic was born on 24 September 1967 in Bugojno, Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although an engineering technician by profession, he completed his military service training in 1986-1987 in Stip, Macedonia. He then went on to serve as a member of the Military Police with the 307th Brigade of the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The events that led to the conviction of Osmic occurred between 1993 and 1994, a period when Bosnia and Herzegovina was at war with an armed conflict occurring between the Croat Defence Council (HVO) and the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is held that as a member of the Military Police, Osmic and others caused great suffering to prisoners of war, many of whom had surrendered, and held them in basements and garages of various buildings, and privately-owned houses, in the Donjici and Vrbanja settlements in the Bugojno area. These locations included the Marxist Centre-Cloister, the Iskra Stadium Detention Centre and the BH Banka premises. The unlawful acts Osmic and others perpetrated against the prisoners of war during this period included unlawful detention and imprisonment, torture, murder, forced labour and other inhumane treatment. The form of perpetration of Osmic’s participation encompassed direct commission and aiding and abetting in the acts.
It is believed that Osmic and others captured and imprisoned detainees of Croat ethnicity and physically and mentally abused them including on several occasions taking them out to be further abused by civilians of Bosniak ethnicity. Physical abuse included kicking and hitting the prisoners with blunt objects all over their bodies. Additionally, it is alleged that the forced labour consisted of collecting bodies, digging graves and burying bodies in the Vrbanja settlement and Bugojno Municipality. The prisoners were also forced to clean the town and perform other acts of manual labour. Moreover, some of the prisoners who were held in the various buildings disappeared after being removed for further examination by the Military Police. This usually meant the prisoners were subjected to further torture or to performing more labour which resulted in their death.
For his involvement in these abuses contrary to International Humanitarian Law, charges were brought against Osmic in October 2009 pursuant to the Criminal Procedure Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina. While initially sentenced to 11 years imprisonment, the appeal decision, held due to incomprehensibility of the indictment, saw Osmic’s sentence reduced to three years imprisonment. 