Gerardo Ernesto Godoy Garcí­a
23.04.2016
facts

Gerardo Ernesto Godoy García was a colonel in the Chilean intelligence service during the dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet.
On 11 September 1973, Augusto Pinochet led a coup d’état against the Popular Unity government of Salvador Allende. Allende had been resisting at the presidential palace, La Moneda; the palace was later bombed and Allende committed suicide. Pinochet’s dictatorship, which lasted until 1990, is marked by forced disappearances, extrajudicial executions and systematic forced exiles. It was a repressive regime that was aimed at eliminating political opposition, considered to be “enemies of the nation”.
A lieutenant in the police at the time of the coup d’état of General Pinochet, Gerardo Ernesto Godoy García became commander of the National Intelligence Directorate. Amongst other duties, he worked for the secret torture field located at number 38 London Street.
Godoy García would be found guilty, together with other commanders of the Chilean army, of acts of “arrest, kidnapping, unlawful confinement with torture or of barbaric acts or of complicity” concerning the forced disappearances of four French people; (Georges Klein – President Allende’s advisor ; Etienne Pesle – responsible for the agricultural reform of the National Institute for Agricultural Development (INDAP) in Temuco; Alphonse Chanfreau, the kidnapping of whom, which took place at his home on 30 July 1974, Godoy García is accused of having directly participated – member of the revolutionary left party’s Revolutionary Left Movement (MIR), responsible for the city of Santiago; and Jean Yves Claudet, member of the MIR responsible for international relations.
There were no legal proceedings following the disappearance of Georges Klein, as well as those of several other victims of the Chilean dictatorship, until the arrest of General Augusto Pinochet on 16 October 1998 in London. This arrest was carried out in compliance with an international arrest warrant issued by the Spanish judge, Baltasar Garzón. The families of nine French victims sought justice from this country, which began legal proceedings against Godoy García and 18 Chileans. 