Zdravko Pasic
21.04.2016
facts

Zdravko Pasic was born on 25 March 1963 in village Broæanac, Slunj municipality (Republic of Croatia). He is a retired civil engineering worker. Pasic currently holds a Serbian citizenship and lives in Belgrade. Initially a police force member Zdravko Pasic, was soon removed from the position due to the lack of labour discipline and autocracy. Subsequently, he spent some time circulating within the military, whereupon he probably settled in a still unidentified paramilitary unit.
In the night between 22 and 23 December 1991 Zdravko Pasic engaged in an attack over a number of civilian persons who were not directly involved in the hostilities. In the aftermath of the attack, which took place in the Slunj municipality area (Croatia), one person was killed. At the time members of organised armed formations under the control of the SAO Krajina government authority, Zdravko Pasic and Milan Grubjesic drove in a black Mercedes passenger vehicle to the Slunj outpatient department, where they found Dr. Dragutin Krusic, ethnic Croat, and urged him to join them to Cetingrad, allegedly in order to provide medical care for a number of wounded persons. Acting upon the request, Dr. Krusic took his medical briefcase and joined the two in the aforementioned vehicle. Allegedly, that was just a pretext for Zdravko Pasic and the other accused to drive Krusic outside the town, in the direction of village Mali Vukoviæ. They stopped at the car park outside the guesthouse »Suzy«. As the victim left the car and walked several metres away towards the guesthouse, he was hit with a number of bullets discharged by Zdravko Pasic and the other accused. Zdravko Pasic, who fired from an automatic rifle, and the other accused, who used a 7.62mm gun, inflicted massive entrance/exit wounds on the victim, which resulted in his immediate death.
The accused, Zdravko Pasic, was indicted on 7 November 2007 by the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia. 