Dragoljub Ojdanic
31.05.2016
facts

Army Corps General Dragoljub Ojdanic was born on 1 June 1941 in the village of Ravni, near to Uzice in the territory of present day Serbia. His entire career was spent in the army. In 1985, Dragoljub Ojdanic graduated from the School of Army General Staff and of National Defence with a degree in Military Science. He was for a time Secretary of the Communist League for the 52nd Corps of the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA).
In 1982, Dragoljub Ojdanic was the Commander of the 37th Corps of the JNA, then of the VJ (Armed Forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia) stationed in Uzice in Serbia. Under his command, the Uzice Corps participated in the fighting in Eastern Bosnia during the War in the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina. His career progressed within the VJ and, on 24 November 1998, Slobodan Milosevic appointed him Chief of General Staff of the VJ. During the entire period covered by the indictment, Dragoljub Ojdanic held the post of Chief of General Staff of the VJ.
The accusation alleged that, following the commencement of a joint criminal enterprise, beginning on or about 1 January 1999 and continuing until 20 June 1999, Dragoljub Ojdanic, Slobodan Milosevic, Milan Milutinovic, Nikola Sainovic, Vlajko Stojiljkovic (see “related cases”) and others planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted in a deliberate and widespread or systematic campaign of terror and violence directed at Kosovo Albanian civilians living in Kosovo in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY). Forces of the FRY and Serbia, in a deliberate and widespread or systematic manner, forcibly expelled and internally displaced hundreds of thousands of Kosovo Albanians from their homes across the entire province of Kosovo. It is further alleged that forces of the FRY and Serbia committed widespread or systematic acts of brutality and violence and destruction of property against Kosovo Albanian civilians in order to perpetuate a climate of fear, create chaos and a pervading fear for life.
According to the indictment, around 800,000 Albanian civilians from Kosovo were deported from the region. In addition, Serbian forces were also said to have specifically perpetrated massacres in places such as Dakovica, Velika Krusa, Padaliste, Izbica, Vucitrn, the prison compound in Dubrava…
In his position as Chief of General Staff of the VJ, Dragoljub Ojdanic was responsible for giving orders and instructions to the VJ, would have established its rules and regulations, and would have commanded and led it in all respects in conformity with the decisions taken by the President of the FRY, as was his obligation to do so. It was alleged that Ojdanic made the decisions concerning the organisation, and command structure of the units and institutions of the VJ, and its development and training needs, whilst respecting the decisions taken by the President of the FRY. He also made decisions on recruitment planning, on appointments to vacant positions within the VJ, on the repartition of its new recruits, on the rules concerning training programmes within the VJ, on the educational and high level training programmes for both career officers as well as reserve officers and finally concerning other duties as foreseen by the law. By the same token, and in accordance with the terms of the defence law of the FRY, Dragoljub Ojdanic also held authority over units of the MUP (Serbian Defence Ministry), Territorial Army units, civil defence units, and other army groups which were subordinated to the VJ whenever there was imminent threat of war or actual state of war. Finally, Dragoljub Ojdanic appointed the president, judges, and prosecutors of the military tribunals as well as their respective assistants and secretaries.
Dragoljub Ojdanic was arrested and transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on 25 April 2002. 