Julio Héctor Simon
25.04.2016
facts


Julio Héctor Símon was born in Buenos Aires on 12 August 1940. As a young man, he joined the Navy as a volunteer, where he worked for a little more than four years. He joined the police in 1967 and finished with the Rank of Sergeant in the Federal Police. He is accused by survivors of the torture centres of being a cruel torturer. He caries a Nazi cross.
On 27 November 1978, the gang (death squad) led by Julio Simón detained José Poblete, Gertrudis Hlaczik and their eight-month old daughter, Claudia Victoria. José Poblete (23 years old) was a Chilean labourer. He lost both legs in a train accident in Chile and was confined to a wheelchair. He was the co-founder of the Peronist Disabled People’s Front and a member of the Christians for Liberation. Gertrudis Hlaczik (25 years old), a descendent of Germans, was a social educator. They were taken to the detention centre known as the Olimpo, which was run by the 1st Army Corps, located at the crossing of Falcon Street with Olivera in Buenos Aires.
On their third day of being held captive, the baby Claudia Victoria was given to Graciela Trotta, who may have been a nurse or another captive who was working as a nurse. A few days later, the baby was given to the doctor Lieutenant Colonel César Cáceres Monié, who then gave the child to the couple Ceferino Landa and Beatriz Moreira, who re-named her Mercedes Beatriz Landa. Claudia Victoria only recovered her true identity in 2000, thanks to the action of Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo. Her birth-parents were tortured: Poblete fell from his wheelchair and was forced to walk on the stumps of his legs. Both were tortured with electricity. At the end of 1979, they disappeared.
In 1984, at the end of the dictatorship, he went to Brazil where he worked as a security guard and bodyguard. He returned to Argentina where he sold information about the torture centres. The Justice Sector was interested in him for the disappearance of scores of people, but he was saved by the Law of Due Obedience.
His whereabouts were not known for many years. In the ‘90s, he appeared in television programmes (“Telenoche” and Mauro Viale’s programmes).
In 2000, the Justice Sector investigated him for the 1978 robbery of Claudia Victoria. In 2005, he was detained for the disappearance of the Poblete-Hlaczik couple (Case 1056/06) and for child abduction (Case 1207/06). 