Anto Furundzija
31.05.2016
facts

Anto Furundzija was born in July 1969 in Travnik (Bosnia-Herzegovina).
During the war, he was a local commander of a special police unit of the Croatian Defence Council (HVO), called the “Jokers”. The latter carried out operations from their headquarters (called the “Bungalow”), located in Nadioci, near Vitez (Lasva valley, Bosnia-Herzegovina).
The HVO was the supreme executive, administrative and military body of the HZ H-B/HR-B (Croatian Community of the Herceg-Bosna/Croatian Republic of Herceg-Bosna), created in 1991. This community, then republic, defined itself as a separate or distinct entity within the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
The paramilitary group the “Jokers” was a special anti-terrorist unit. Its members wore black shirts and had, apparently, earned a reputation as a “special operations force” due to the manner in which they disguised themselves and by their use of sophisticated weapons.
According to the modified indictment dated 2 June 1998, Ante Furundzija subjected a married civilian woman of Bosnian Muslim origin, to an interrogation at the headquarters of the “Jokers” in Nadioci (the “Bungalow”) on or about 15 May 1993. The latter was questioned in the nude in front of around forty soldiers with one of them threatening her with genital mutilation if she did not tell the truth.
This woman was then taken to another room and confronted with a Bosnian Croat who had assisted her family in the past. The man had been badly beaten beforehand. Whilst Anto Furundzija continued to interrogate his two victims, a soldier was beating the man on the toes with a truncheon. Then another member of the “Jokers” forced the woman to perform oral and vaginal sex acts with the other victim. Anto Furundzija was present during the whole incident and did nothing to stop or curtail the beatings or sexual violence.
This woman remained a prisoner of the “Jokers” until 15 August 1993 and was reportedly raped several times, and subjected to sexual and other cruel inhumane and degrading treatment. Nevertheless these subsequent acts were not part of the crimes with which the accused was charged
Anto Furundzija was arrested by the SFOR (NATO Stabilisation Force in Bosnia-Herzegovina) on 18 December 1997 and transferred on the same day to the ICTY (International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia). 