Miguel Ángel Furci
06.12.2013
facts 

Miguel Angel Furci worked in the clandestine detention centre known as “Automotores Orletti” as agent of the State Intelligence Service during the military dictatorship 1976 to 1983.
“Automotores Oreletti” was part of the jurisdiction of the First Army Corps and served as the base of the foreign intelligence services which worked in Argentina in the context of the Cóndor Plan, which was a military cooperation between dictatorships of the Southern Cone for the repression of government opponents.
Also known as “El Jardín” (The Garden), it is believed that around 200 people were detained in “Automotores Orletti”, many of them Uruguayan, Argentinean, Chilean, Bolivian, Cuban, Paraguayan, Brazilian, etc.
In 27 September 1976, Mariana Zaffaroni Islas, then 18 months old, and her parents, who were Uruguayan exiles, disappeared. Miguel Angel Furci and his wife Adriana Gonzáles de Furci, registered a Mariana Zaffaroni Islas as their daughter under the name Daniela Romina Furci.
In October 1976 began the first public condemnation of Mariana’s disappearance by the Argentinean newspapers Crónica and Buenos Aires Herald.
In June 1983, an anonymous denounced, agent of the State Intelligence Service (SIDE) on suspicion of having appropriated a girl with physical characteristics similar to those of the girl on the picture published in the newspaper “El Clarin”.
In January 1985, Argentinean Federal Judge Alberto Piotti, ordered blood tests to Mariana to prove their parentage. However, Miguel Angel Furci and his wife escaped justice by constantly changing address and identity.
In 1986, Furci was located again, but escaped to Paraguay.
In 1989, one of the biological grandmothers of Mariana contacted Furci privately, looking for a solution to the case, but they did not reach an agreement.
In 1991, the organization Abuelas de la Plaza de Mayo found out that Furci had retuned to Buenos Aires.
In 1992, San Isidro Federal Judge, Roberto Marquevich ordered the arrest of the Furci González. 