TRIAL recognized as one of the World’s Top NGOs!
25.01.2013
On 23 January 2013, the Global Journal issued its second annual ranking of the Top 100 NGOs worldwide. TRIAL confirms its presence in the ranking and strengthens its position in comparison to 2012.
The Global Journal is an independent media outlet based in Geneva and New York and dedicated to global governance and international politics. For the second consecutive year it releases the only international ranking of NGOs assigning them a position on the basis of their impact, innovation and sustainability.
Already last year TRIAL ranked among the world’s top 100 NGOs. In the 2013 edition, TRIAL not only confirms its presence among the world best NGOs, it also gained 10 places, reaching 83rd place.
According to the ranking, TRIAL stands fourth among the NGOs working in the “law and justice” sector worldwide.
This award represents a recognition of TRIAL’s thorough and innovative approach to international justice and the fight against impunity and the positive impact of TRIAL’s activities in helping victims of international crimes obtain justice and redress.
One example is TRIAL’s litigation capacities. Overall, the organization has defended more than 300 victims of grave human rights violations, initiated over 125 procedures at the international level, lodged a dozen criminal complaints before Swiss authorities and is increasingly offering legal support to victims in conflict countries.
From Algeria to Nepal, from Bosnia-Herzegovina to Burundi, and from Guatemala to Switzerland, in 2012 TRIAL has been more active than ever in submitting cases and reports to national and international courts and human rights bodies, obtaining positive rulings and decisions, and gaining media and political attention.
But 2013 has even more in store: new possibilities to defend victims’ rights and to ensure justice and accountability will be taken up. TRIAL will improve its investigative capacities to be able to handle more universal jurisdiction. New criminal complaints are about to be filed and a growing number of cases are being investigated, including several cases concerning corporations.
These activities would not be possible without the support of TRIAL’s donors, members and supporters. Supporting TRIAL means engaging with a high-impact and innovative organization fighting for justice and against impunity.
So a warm thank you from the whole TRIAL team!

Click here to have more information on the TOP 100 NGOs ranking 