Habib Ammar
19.04.2016
facts

Habib Ammar was born on 25 May 1938 in Soussa, Tunisia. After studying in military academies in France and the United States, Ammar began his career in the Tunisian public service.
Between 1984 and 1987, he was the Commander of the National Guard. Following his participation the 1987 coup d’état, under the command of the Prime Minister Ben Ali, he was appointed Minister of Interior. Ammar held this position until 1 November 1988. He then held several positions in the Tunisian public service such as ambassador in Vienna and Minister of Communications.
While at the Head of the National Guard, Ammar is alleged to have been one of the main instigators of the severe repression which took place in the Tunisian civil society at the end of the 1980s. The use of torture against opponents of the regime became widespread and systematic during this period. Under his office, the national directorate of special services, known as the “Research and Investigations” services, was created. These special services were allegedly responsible for the use of severe and brutal methods of torture against dissidents and demonstrators which, in some cases, led to death. Ammar is alleged to have closely followed various investigations carried out by these services and to have attended interrogations in several occasions. During his office as the Minister of Interior, the Ministry’s facilities were transformed into a detention and torture centre.
Witness accounts have brought to light the brutal and cruel methods of investigations and torture used by these specials services, such as the use of drubbing, feet hanging, rape, electric shocks and cigarette burning.
In September 2003, Ammar was appointed the Head of the World Summit on the Information Society’s (WSIS) Organizing Committee and took part in the WSIS preparatory work session held in Geneva. Having been notified of Ammar’s presence in Geneva, the NGOs TRIAL (Track Impunity Always) and OMCT (World Organization Against Torture) decided to lodge a criminal complaint against him. 