Janko Bobetko
31.05.2016
facts

Janko Bobetko was born on 10 January 1919 in Crnca, a village in the region of Sisak, Croatia. He completed his schooling in Sisak, following which he became a student at the Veterinary Faculty in Zagreb. Between 1941 and 1945, he served in the Partisan Resistance movement. After the war, he entered the Military Academy of the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA), from where he successfully graduated.
He then began his career in the JNA and in 1966, was appointed to the position of Chief of Staff and Second-in-Command of the 5th Military District (Croatia and Slovenia) of the JNA. He retired from the JNA in 1971.
After the Croatian Parliamentary elections in 1990, Bobetko declined to accept the post of Defence Minister, and enlisted in the Croatian War of Independence. On 10 April 1992, he was appointed Corps General of the Croatian Army, “Hrvatska Vojska” (HV), as well as Commander of the Southern Front line, by the President of the Republic of Croatia, Franjo Tudjman. This was the position he held during the Croatian military operation in the Medak Pocket in September 1993.
The operation in the Medak Pocket took place during the Croatian War of Independence which opposed the new Croatian government against the Serb minority which was backed both politically and militarily by Belgrade. On 19 December 1991, following Croatia’s Declaration of Independence on 25 June 1991, the Assembly of the Autonomous Region of Serbian Krajina, together with Serbs from other regions of Croatia, proclaimed their independence from Croatia and created the Republic of Serbian Krajina (“RSK”).
Between 1992 and 1993, the Croatian forces launched several military operations against the RSK. During one of these operations, on 9 September 1993, the Croatian forces, including the 9th Brigade, reportedly launched an attack on the Medak Pocket. With a surface area of five kilometres wide by six kilometres long, Medak is located within the territory of the RSK, south of the town of Gospic in the Croatian Republic. Prior to the attack it had around 400 Serbian inhabitants. During the operation, the Serbian forces were reported to have completely destroyed all of its villages, thereby depriving the Serbian population of their homes and livelihood.
According to the indictment, before, during and in the aftermath of the Croatian military operation in the Medak Pocket, from 9 September 1993 until on or about 17 September 1993, Janko Bobetko, acting individually and/or in concert with others, planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted in the planning, preparation or execution of persecutions of Serb civilians of the Medak Pocket on racial, political or religious grounds. Amongst the allegations of persecution can be cited as an illustrative example the unlawful killing and capture of protected persons, namely Serb civilians and wounded soldiers, the cruel and inhumane treatment which they were subjected to (notably by means of shooting, stabbing, cutting of fingers, severe beatings, burning with cigarettes, jumping on bodies, tying bodies to a car and dragging them along the road, mutilation and other forms of mistreatment), the terrorising of the Serb-civilian population in the Medak Pocket, and the systematic destruction and plunder of the personal property of this population. During this operation, at least 29 Serb civilians lost their lives. Others were severely wounded and for the most part the buildings in the villages in this zone were destroyed.
Due to his poor state of health, Janko Bobetko could never be transferred to The Hague. 