Milan Tepavac
09.05.2016
facts


Milan Tepavac was a Serb resident of the Croatian village of Lovas in 1991. It is alleged that he was a member of the territorial defence forces (TO) and the Croatian Serb paramilitary unit Dušan Silni, whose aim according to the indictment was to create «Great Serbia» and to ethnically cleanse parts of Croatia, including Lovas.
In cooperation with the Novi Sad army corps of the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA), the Dušan Silni launched a cannon attack on the village of Lovas at around 7.30am on 10 October 1991. According to the charges, the cannons aimed at civilian targets, although the members of the Dušan Silni allegedly knew that there were no military units in the village. Subsequently, the Dušan Silni allegedly launched an infantry attack on the village, killing 30 civilians in the streets of Lovas. During the occupation of the village between 10 and 18 October 1991, the Dušan Silni allegedly forced the Croat civilians to wear white bands on their sleeves, marked their houses and restricted their movement. The charges against the members of the Dušan Silni also include the arrest, torture and threatening of Croat civilians with death, forced labour, robbery and rape of female villagers.
On 18 October 1991, members of the JNA, of Croatia’s Territorial Defences (TO), and of the Dušan Silni forced 50 Croat civilians, who had been detained in Lovas, to march into a minefield on the outskirts of the village, located approximately 20 kilometers south-west of the town of Vukovar. On the way to the minefield, one detainee was shot dead by these forces. Upon reaching the minefield, the detainees were forced to enter the minefield and sweep their feet in front of them to clear the field of mines. At least one mine exploded, and the Serb forces opened fire on the detainees. 24 detainees were killed through mine explosions or gunfire, and 15 others were seriously injured.
For his alleged role in the attacks against civilians in Lovas between 10 and 18 October 1991, Milan Tepavac was arrested in Croatia on charges of war crimes and genocide in April 2007. 