Sergio Cevallos
08.05.2016
facts


Sergio Cevallos is a former police officer, member of the now defunct Operational Support Group (Grupo de Apoyo Operacional, GAO in Spanish), an elite Police unit created in 1994 to help and support the Intervention and Rescue Group (Grupo de Intevención y Rescate, GIR in Spanish), which shortly thereafter found itself at the spotlight of numerous accusations of human rights violations by various human rights organisations.
On 30 September 2009, Cevallos, as leader, along with 11 others, arrested Yorgi Hernan Cedeno Saltos and his stepchildren, Fabricio Colon, Javier Universy and Jenny Karina Pico, under the supposed charge of the assault and robbery of Ruminahui Bank. Empowered by their position as agents and without any judicial arrest warrant, they handcuffed the detainees, put them into two white and silver vans and drove off.
The detainees were taken to the “Security House of the GAO” (Casa de Seguridad del GAO) where they were separated, the three children placed in the apartment on the ground floor while Cedeno was alone on the second floor. Taking turns, the accused and his accomplices took turns to hit and torture the detained using various methods including waterboarding and forced intoxication. On the floor above, Cedeno’s stepchildren could hear the cries of Cedeno who was being subjected to waterboarding and which, it is assumed that due to his asthma, led to his asphyxiation and death.
After the death of Cedeno at around 19:00, his body and the remaining three adult detainees were transferred to the trunks of separate cars and driven off in a north-western direction.
As their captors were driving on an uneven road and in complete darkness, one of the brothers, Colon, took advantage of the circumstances and managed to escape the vehicle. The others were driven to a private house in Calderon. The body of Cedeno was dropped into Rio Blanco far from where the torture had taken place.
On 1 October 2009, Colon appeared semi-naked at a house at 19:00 and the police were alerted.
The other children were subsequently forced to consume large amounts of alcohol and abandoned in an uninhabited area of Santo Domingo de Carretas.
Investigations into the illegal detention and torture of the four individuals began following a complaint made by the sister of the detainees, Maria Pico Suarez. 