Corey Clagett
22.04.2016
facts

Corey Clagett joined the United States Army and, at 22 years old, was deployed to Iraq following the American invasion in Iraq. He participated in the Iraqi war as a Private First Class soldier of the 3rd Battalion, 187th Infantry Regiment of the 101st Airborne Division. Alongside his squad, he participated in “Operation Iron Triangle” with the objective of attacking a suspected Al-Qaeda terrorist unit operating near the Muthana chemical complex by Lake Thar Thar in Samarra, Iraq.
In the midst of the operation, it is alleged that Clagett and two fellow soldiers, under orders including “to kill all military-age males on mission” given by their superiors including Staff Sergeant (Sgt.) Raymond Girouard, shot and killed three Iraqi detainees during the raid on the suspected terrorist training unit. It was initially claimed by Clagett and his co-perpetrators that this was in self-defence; in order to stop the Iraqi detainees they had seized them in the attack from attempting to escape. However this was later retracted by the soldiers following a subsequent investigation into the Operation that disclosed the actual facts. Clagett and his colleagues thus stated that they had fabricated the story in order to make the killings more legitimate. It was additionally later conceded that the soldiers had knowingly, but out of fear, followed the unlawful order given to kill and participated in the ensuing conspiracy to cover up the murders. They claimed that Girouard had later inflicted injuries upon them in order to emulate a struggle that would have occurred had the detainees attempted to flee. He had thereafter instructed them to adhere to the fabricated story.
Charges were thus brought against Sgt. Girouard, Pfc. Clagett and two others; Specialists (Spc.) William B Hunsaker and Juston Graber for murder, attempted murder, conspiracy to commit murder and conspiracy to obstruct justice. Clagett was initially charged with a second obstruction charge and charges of disrespecting an officer and threatening but these were later dropped by Prosecutors. 