Enforced disappearance of Huso and Nedžad Zlatarac in June 1992
12.02.2016
The case 
On 4 May 1992, Huso Zlatarac was arrested in Svrake (BiH) by the Serb army together with Hasiba Zlatarac and their sons Nedžad and Alma (then 14 years old) and most of the inhabitants of the same village. They were all taken to the concentration camp known as Kasarna JNA in Semizovac. A few days later, Hasiba Zlatarac, together with her daughter Alma and other women and children, were freed. Huso Zlatarac and his son Nedžad were kept prisoners and transferred to different concentration camps, where they were subjected to torture and forced labour. Huso and Nedžad Zlatarac were last seen on 16 June 1992 in the concentration camp known as “Planjina kuca”, located in the municipality of Vogosca. Their fate and whereabouts remain unknown since then.
More than 17 years after the events, no ex officio, prompt, impartial, thorough and independent investigation has been undertaken by BiH authorities in order to locate Huso and Nedžad Zlatarac or their remains or to identify, prosecute and sanction those responsible. Mrs. Zlatarac has taken several steps to obtain information about her husband and son, through the police of Visoko and Vogosca, the State Commission for Tracing Missing Persons, the Sarajevo Cantonal Prosecutor’s Office, and the Red Cross Society of BiH. These initiatives have proved vain. Mrs. Čardaković has constantly supported her mother in the filing of complaints and in the searching activities in order to locate her father and brother. Both Hasiba Zlatarac and Alma Čardaković are active members of the Association of Families of Missing People from Vogosca.
On 23 February 2006, the Constitutional Court of BiH, seized by several families of victims of enforced disappearance from Vogosca, declared a violation by BiH of the right not to be subjected to torture and inhuman and degrading treatment and the right to respect for private and family life of the relatives of disappeared persons. Accordingly, the Court ordered the relevant domestic institutions to disclose all available information on the fate and whereabouts of the disappeared people, including Huso Zlatarac and Nedžad Zlatarac. On 16 November 2006, the Constitutional Court adopted another ruling, where it declared that the Council of Ministers of BiH, the government of the Republika Srpska, the government of the Federation of BiH and the government of the Brčko District of BiH failed to enforce its previous decision. Nevertheless, Hasiba Zlatarac and Alma Čardaković have not received any information about their loved ones from the mentioned institutions.
Consequently, Hasiba Zlatarac and Alma Čardaković request the Human Rights Committee:
to find that Huso Zlatarac and Nedžad Zlatarac are victims of a violation of Article 2.3 (right to a remedy) in conjunction with Articles 6 (right to life), 7 (prohibition of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment), 9 (right to liberty and security of person), 10 (right to be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person) and 16 (right to be recognized as a person before the law) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, due to the ongoing failure of BiH authorities to conduct a prompt, impartial, independent and thorough investigation on their arbitrary detention, ill-treatment and enforced disappearance, in order to establish their fate and whereabouts, as well as to identify those responsible for these crimes and to prosecute, judge and sanction them;
to find that they are victims of a violation by BiH of Article 2.3 (right to a remedy) in conjunction with Article 7 (prohibition of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment) of the Covenant, because of the severe mental distress and anguish caused by their loved ones’ enforced disappearance and the ongoing lack of information about the cause and circumstances of their loved ones’ disappearance as well as on the progress and results of the investigations carried out by BiH authorities;
to find that, in the case of Alma Čardaković, until 4 March 1996 (when she attained the majority), she is also victim of a violation by BiH of Article 24.1 (rights of the child) in conjunction with Articles 2.3 and 7 of the Covenant, because she was a minor when the events took place and, as such, she was entitled to the adoption of special measures of protection by the State that BiH failed to undertake;
to request BiH to order independent investigations as a matter of urgency with a view to locate Huso and Nedžad Zlatarac and, if necessary, exhume, identify, respect and return their mortal remains;
to request BiH to bring the perpetrators of the arbitrary arrest, ill-treatment and enforced disappearance of Huso and Nedžad Zlatarac before the competent civil authorities for prosecution, judgment and sanction without any further delay; and
to request BiH to ensure that Hasiba Zlatarac and Alma Čardaković obtain integral reparation and prompt, fair and adequate compensation for the harm suffered. 