Radoslav Knezevic
19.04.2016
facts

Radoslav Knezevic was born on 10 April 1970 in Prijedor. After completing secondary education in a mechanical engineering vocational school, he served the army in Belgrade and in Zemunik in 1989 and 1990. During the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, he was a member of the Serbian special police unit “Intervention Squad”. He is married and has two children.
In August 1992, while an armed conflict was taking place between Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (later Serbia and Montenegro) and Croatia on the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a widespread and systematic attack was launched by the Bosnian Serb military, paramilitary and police forces against the non-Serb civilian population of the municipality of Prijedor.
On 21 August 1992, a group of non-Serb prisoners, detained in the Trnopolje concentration camp, were informed that they would be “exchanged” and transported to Travnik. That same morning, several hundreds – perhaps over a thousand – civilian men, women and children gathered in the village of Tukovi. They had been told that a convoy would be organized that day to Travnik.
The two groups of vehicles from Tukovi and Trnopolje joined into one convoy at the town of Kozarac and proceeded in the direction of Travnik. After having driven for a while, the convey stopped in a wooden area where the military-aged non-Serb men were separated from the women, children and elderly. The group of non-Serb men were then driven to a location called Korecanske Stijene where there is a sheer rock face on one side of the road and a steep cliff on the other. Prisoners were ordered to leave the bus with their heads down and to kneel at the edge of the cliff. It is reported that the police then started firing at the men. Apart from twelve persons who survived the massacre, it is estimated that more than 200 men were killed.
Radoslav Knezevic was an active police officer until 2003, when he was decertified by the International Police Task Force (IPTF). He was then indicted and convicted for the killing of a Bosniak family in Prijedor in 1994. He is currently serving his emprisonment sentence in Banja Luka. 