Diego Fernando Murillo Bejarano
23.04.2016
facts

Diego Fernando Murillo Bejarano was born in Tulua, in the Valle region of Colombia, on 23 February 1963. When he was young, he joined a guerrilla movement known as the People’s Liberation Army (EPL).
For his part in the activities undertaken by the guerrilla group, Murillo Bejarano was accused of kidnapping a drug trafficker in the town of Medellin. In retaliation, the drug trafficker killed all members of the guerrilla group, except Murillo Bejarano, who was the only survivor. Murillo relocated to Itagüí where he worked with Fernando Kiko Galeano, an associate of Pablo Escobar, leader of the Medellin drug cartel. Murillo betrayed Escobar, by siding with the Galeano brothers and joined the “Pepes” group (persecuted by Pablo Escobar). He collaborated with the Colombian authorities in their fight against Pablo Escobar who died in 1993 following a state-led operation.
After the death of Pablo Escobar, Murillo joined a paramilitary movement and became the new self-proclaimed leader of the Medellin criminal gangs. As the leader of several criminal gangs in Medellin (including La Terraza), Murillo was involved in kidnappings (including that of former senator Piedad Córdoba), assassinations, drug trafficking, extortion of money and hold-ups.
In 2000, La Terraza rebelled against Murillo and murdered his brother. It is thought that the car bomb attacks at the Tesoro shopping centre and Lleras Park, in Medellin, were the result of this confrontation.
In 2001, aiming to control several areas of Medellin, Carlos Mauricio García (commander of the United Self-Defence Forces of Colombia (AUC), also known as Double Zero or Rodrigo, a paramilitary group of Medellin), gave a sector of control to the newly created Nutibara group led by Murillo. In 2002, with the support of the AUC, Murillo commanded 4000 men in the Medellin area, an area where the FARC and members of the National Liberation Army (ELN) were prevalent.
According to Verdad Abierta, “in just a few months, and coinciding with the violent eruption of Operation Orion in Community 13, they were destroyed”. In 2002 and 2003, faced with the Metro group, an ally, thousands of young people were left dead. According to an interview by the newspaper El Tiempo, Murillo controlled not only the Nutibara group, but also the Calima, half of the Liberators of the South and the Tolova Heros.
On 23 November 2003, as a result of the Santa Fe de Ralito agreement, Murillo was demobilised under the law of justice and peace. In 2005, Murillo was accused of assassinating MP Orlando Benítez. Following this accusation, Murillo fled, leaving behind the justice and peace hearings. 