Manuel Salvador Ospina Cifuentes
25.04.2016
facts


Manuel Salvador Ospina Cifuentes, alias ‘Móvil 5’, is a native to Amalfi in the region of Antioquia in Colombia. He is a former senior paramilitary leader of the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (‘AUC’), and was subsequently a member and alleged commander of the neo-paramilitary group ‘Clan Úsuga’ or ‘los Urabeños’ after the demobilization of the AUC in the 2000s.
Ospina Cifuentes is known for his proximity to the infamous Castaño brothers, Fidel Castaño being the founder of the AUC. According to Verdad Abierta, an online journalistic portal aimed at unravelling the truth behind the Colombian conflict, Ospina Cifuentes is one of the few survivors of the armed factions that carried out the first massacres in the region south of Cordoba and north of Urabá during the mid-1980s. As a result of the trust between Ospina Cifuentes and the Castaños, he had taken the role of ‘deed-holder’ of large areas of land in the region that had been usurped from the farmers or purchased using funds acquired through drug-trafficking. These areas were subsequently donated to the farmers in the early to mid-1990s, only to be forced to sell them back for very little in return some years later.
Ospina Cifuentes is alleged to have been involved in the Pueblo Bello massacre that took place on 14 January 1990, when some 40 people fell victim to a band of around 60 heavily-armed men, known as the ‘tangueros’. The band ransacked some of the houses in the town of Bello and an unspecified number of men were dragged out of their homes and the evangelical church, segregated in the main square of the town and forced to lie face down on the ground. Witnesses stated that, based on a list that the ‘tangueros’ brought with them, around 43 individuals were separated, gagged and bound, loaded on to trucks and driven off in the direction of San Pedro de Urabá.
Evidence indicates that the detainees were taken to the Santa Monica ranch in the Region of Cordoba where they were subjected to torture and cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment. Testimonies claim that some had their wrists cut, their eyes punctured and their ears and genitals severed. To date, only six of the 43 bodies have been identified. At the time, the ’tangueros’ stated that this was in response to the failure of the villagers to prevent the theft of cattle belonging to Fidel Castaño.
Following the disappearance of Fidel in the mid-1990s, Ospina Cifuentes created a close alliance to the third Castaño brother, Vicente.
After the internal split of the AUC and the new leader’s (Carlos Castaño) peace talks with the Colombian government, Ospina Cifuentes is also suspected of being the principal architect of the assassination of Carlos on 16 April 2004. This is believed to have taken place at Rancho Al Hombro, where 30 or so men surrounded and cornered Carlos Castaño and several of his bodyguards, with Ospina Cifuentes striking the fatal shot at the AUC leader.
On 26 May 1997, after a trial in absentia for the Pueblo Bello massacre, the Regional Court of Medellín sentenced Ospina Cifuentes at first instance to 30 years imprisonment. 