Elda Neyis Mosquera García
05.05.2016
facts 

Elda Neyis Mosquera García, alias Karina, was the former commander of the José María Córdoba bloc of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). Mosquera joined the FARC in 1980, at 12 years old. She held many positions throughout her time in the FARC. She was first based in the 5th Front of the FARC and in 1998 she became one of the commanders of the 47th Front. She has been accused of commissioning various crimes during her time in the FARC, for example: her assumed participation as commander of 38 enforced disappearances; four enforced displacements, which involved around 1’335 victims; 40 kidnappings; 8 counts of sexual violence; the illegal recruitment of 111 minors; and 12 related cases which resulted in 180 victims.
To date, Mosquera has confessed to participating in 2’180 crimes, which include: murders, kidnappings, illegal recruitment of minors and guerrilla takeovers. She confirmed that FARC policies included abortion and forced sterilisation and that these crimes were committed against both adults and minors. Mosquera began to play an important role in the guerrilla in 1997 while part of the 5th Front of the FARC. At this time, the military group displaced hundreds of people living in rural areas in response to Operation Genesis, an operation in which paramilitaries and members of the 17th armed brigade, under the command of General Rito Alejo Del Río, entered the area via the bank of the river Cacarica and killed the peasant-farmer Marino López Mena.
Mosquera, together with another guerrilla leader, Nelson Antonio Patiño Cuartas, participated in the displacement and subsequent murder of the farmer Ernesto de Jesús Tabares Márquez.
For three years while Mosquera was leader of the 47th Front of the FARC, the group managed to control a large area in the departments of Antioquia and Caldas. Throughout this time they carried out enforced disappearances, kidnappings and the recruitment of minors, and raided towns.
As a way of increasing the FARC’s income, when Mosquera took control of the 47th Front she imposed a ‘tax collection’ system on those who had a capital exceeding one million dollars. She began to collect the tax from the people but many coffee workers, livestock breeders, farmers and business owners in the area refused to pay; she ordered that those who refused be kidnapped to make them pay. She ordered many ransom kidnappings, of which almost all of the victims were business owners and livestock breeders.
To control these areas Mosquera carried out censuses or registrations of residency in order to find out who lived in the area and therefore have a better idea of who was moving in and out. Using this method meant that any minors who were caught in the region and were unable to justify their presence there, were considered by the FARC to be undercover agents or spies in the armed forces or paramilitary and were consequently made to disappear.
Mosqeura also lead an attack carried out by the FARC in 2002, in which 13 soldiers and four Colombian police officers from the Caldas department died.
On 18 May 2008, after the death of Iván Ríos, another guerrilla commander operating under Mosquera’s leadership, Mosquera handed herself in to the Administrative Department of Security. She then participated in the Colombian government’s peace and justice movement, a movement that promotes the demobilistation of the FARC and there confessed to multiple crimes. 