Pavle Strugar
08.05.2016
facts

Pavle Strugar was born on 13 July 1933 in Pec, in present-day Kosovo. He graduated from the Military Academy for Ground Forces of the Yugoslav Peoples’ Army (JNA), was promoted to Major General and was named Commander of the Military Academy for Ground Forces. In October 1991, when war broke out, he was named Commander of the Second Operational Group, which was formed by the JNA to conduct the military campaign against the Dubrovnik region of the Republic of Croatia.
On 25 April 1991, a referendum on independence was held in Croatia. On 8 October 1991, independence was declared. Nevertheless, from the end of the month of August, the JNA took up position in several towns and villages in Croatia, close to the border with Serbia, and set siege to Vukovar. Croatia retorted by laying siege to the barracks of the JNA. In parallel, it created its own national army under the banner of the Croatian National Guard (ZNA).
The ZNA forces were also present in the Dubrovnik region, a region at the extreme south-east of Croatia, hemmed in between Bosnia-Herzegovina and Montenegro.
Starting in September 1991, clashes took place between the ZNA and the JNA in the countryside around Dubrovnik.
Units of the JNA which by then were under Serb control were dispatched to Dubrovnik.
On 1 October 1991, a land, sea and air attack was launched against Dubrovnik and its surroundings by the JNA under the command of Pavle Strugar, Miodrag Jokic and Vladimir Kovacevic (see “related cases”).
It is alleged that between 1 October and 6 December 1991, the JNA forces killed and wounded numerous civilians in and around the town of Dubrovnik through unlawful bombardments. Furthermore, during the attacks against Dubrovnik between the 1 October and the 6 December 1991, the Old Town was said to have been hit by some 1000 mortar shells fired by the JNA forces. All of the Old Town of Dubrovnik had been classified as a World Cultural Heritage site by UNESCO. A study commissioned by the Institute for the Protection of Cultural Monuments, in collaboration with UNESCO, revealed that 563 (or 68.33%) of the 824 buildings in the Old Town had been damaged by mortar shells.
Pavle Strugar gave himself up on 21 February 2001. On the same day he was transferred to the ICTY (International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia). 