Savo Todovic
25.04.2016
facts

Savo Todović, a Serb from Croatia, was born on 11 December 1952 in the village of Rijeka in Celebići, in Croatia. Todović main residence was in Foča, in Bosnia and Herzegovina where he worked at the prison of Foča Kazneno-Popravni Dom (KP Dom) from 4 January 1974 to October 1994. He held the position of Deputy Commander of prison staff in the prison between April 1992 and August 1993.
From the beginning of April 1992, till mid-July 1992, the Serbian military gained control and had occupied the town of Foča, and the surrounding village, in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Serbian authority subsequently arrested all the Muslim men within the occupied territory and proceeded to separate the men from the women. This resulted in thousands of non-Serbs and Muslim men being illegally held at KP Dom, which according to the indictment, had all the characteristics of a detention camp. The majority of the 760 men detained at KP Dom were civilian Muslim men aged between 16 and 80, including the people who were mentally handicapped, disabled and seriously ill, who were never charged with any crime.
From April 1992 to August 1993, Savo Todović held the position of Deputy Commander of prison staff at KP Dom. He was second in command within the chain of command, and had similar powers and duties to the camp commander. Todović was in charge of managing the junior staff at KP Dom, and maintaining communication and the relationship between the military and political authorities outside of the camp. According to the indictment, Savo Todović was in charge of selecting detainees for killings, beatings, interrogations, forced labour, solitary confinement and exchanges with other detention facilities. Todović played a key role in establishing and maintaining the inhumane living conditions at KP Dom, and is implicated in the disappearance of detainees.
The indictment against Savo Todović alleges that at the beginning of July 1993, acting with other guards, Todović severely abused and beat a detainee with their bare hands and chains. Under his command, the detainees at KP Dom were forced to live in deplorable conditions and under constant fear. Any violations of the prison rules, attempted escapes or refusal to work were allegedly met by Todović with severe physical punishment. Detainees were kept in chains in their cells, except during meal times and whilst being subjected to forced labour and solitary confinement was used as to intimate and terrorise detainees.
Savo Todović was arrested and placed in custody at the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on 15 January 2005. 