Karlis Ozols
11.12.2012
facts 

Karlis Ozols was born in Riga, Latvia (then part of the Russian Empire), on 8 September 1912. He studied law at Riga University but became a professional chess player and played for Latvia in the 1936 Munich and 1937 Stockholm Chess Olympiads.
When the Nazi troops occupied Latvia in 1941, special troops were created consisting of local population who chose to join. These troops were under the supervision of Nazi SD – Heinrich Himmler’s Security Service. The so-called Arajs Kommando under command of Victors Arajs operated in Latvia. Victor Arajs was the Commander of the infamous Arajs Kommando, which operated in Latvia together with Karlis Ozols unit as a killing squad for the German authorities. In 1979, the German authorities captured Arajs in Hamburg and placed him on trial. He was convicted of mass murder and received a life sentence. The extent of the Arajs Kommando’s atrocities was amongst some of the worst in World War II. The German trial indictment noted that in only one period, between July and December 1941, 70,000 Jews in Latvia were murdered by the Kommando in ‘killing actions’. The members of the commando were sent to a German SD training school at Furstenberg, Germany. This school was mainly used to prepare men for mass murder.
Between March and June 1942, Ozols trained at Furstenberg with the Arajs Kommando. After his training, Ozols was posted to Minsk (the capital of Belorussia) on 24 July 1942 as a Lieutenant in charge of a Latvian SD Commando of about 100 men. The principal tasks of the Commando were to guard the SD installations, including the ghettos of Minsk and nearby ghettos and concentration camps, to assist in the transportation and guarding of Jews selected to be killed and to guard the killing pits in case someone survived the execution.
On the 28 July 1942 there was a mass killing of Jews in the Minsk ghetto and in the village Maley Trostenets near Minsk. Ozols allegedly personally killed civilians and commanded the Latvian SD guard that performed the executions. Those who were brought alive were shot (open air killings). Others were brought in sealed vans (gas-van killings) which were designed to gas the occupants to death using the vehicle’s exhaust fumes. Each van held 60 to 70 victims standing tightly pressed together.
The killings at Maley Trostenets were open air shootings of Jews into pits. The Jews were taken in batches (men first) from the collecting point to the ditch. Trucks then brought the Jews in batches to the ditch, where they were unloaded with the help of rifles and whips. They had to take off their clothes and submit to searches. Then they were shot either in front of the ditch or by the ‘sardine’ method in the ditch by the SD units commanded by Ozols.
On 8 – 9 February 1943 Ozols and his commando allegedly assisted the Germans to kill more than 2,000 Jews of the Slutzk ghetto, a village near Minsk, after transporting them to pits outside the town.
After the war, Ozols escaped the Russian forces and hid in German displaced persons camps where he forged International Refugee Organisation documents for him and his wife and child.
In 1949 Ozols travelled to Australia on the Mozzafari and was naturalised in Victoria on 17 October 1956. He settled in Melbourne as his fellow commander in the Arajs Kommand killing unit, Konrad Kalejs, and soon became a chess champion and Australian representative at international tournaments. He also worked with the Australian wing of an international group, Daugavas Vanagi (the Hawks of Daugavas, named after the main Latvian river). Made up of 1,200 members at its peak, the local Hawks are an organisation of former Latvian SS men in Australia.
During the investigation into the case of Victor Arajs in Hamburg in 1979, the West German Court convened in Melbourne in October 1979 to take the testimony under oath of Karlis Ozols, who said he knew nothing at all about atrocities against Jews and Gypsies. Nevertheless, the Court dismissed Ozols’s evidence on the grounds that he was a member of the Arajs Commando as early as 1941. 