Wouter Basson
26.04.2016
facts

Wouter Basson was born on the 6th of July in 1950 in South Africa. Cardiologist by profession, he served as head of biological and chemical program in the South African Secret Service, also known as “Project Coast” from 1981 to 1995.
Wouter Basson had worked for the medical team of the South African army. He was in particular responsible for gathering information on chemical and biological experiments in foreign countries. In 1981, he was appointed head of “Project Coast” while he worked as a doctor for the South African President Pieter Botha. The South African army then presented the project as a program that is primarily defensive.
Wouter Basson allegedly participated in the recruitment of over 200 scientists. He was also charged by the Civil Cooperation Bureau (“Civil Cooperation Bureau”) to develop chemical weapons to neutralize anti-apartheid activists. The objective of this project was to hinder the growth of the black population through chemical means. The research of Wouter Basson carried including the sterilization of black women and the growth of bacteria. In his capacity as a program manager for chemical and bacteriological South African Secret Service, Wouter Basson contributed to the development of a number of attacks and assassinations of anti-apartheid activists. The army provided such chemicals. Using this material, Wouter Basson developed objects and foods based on poison such as cigarettes containing anthrax, milk and whiskey containing toxic substances, and screwdrivers and umbrellas that were poisoned.
Wouter Basson retained his post under President Frederik de Klerk in 1990. He had been forced to cease production of chemical agents and focused on the production of non-agents banned by the government such as Ecstasy and Mandrax sold in the anti-media activities apartheid. The Wouter Basson’s activities became subject of internal administrative investigations in 1993. “Project Coast” has subsequently been dismantled and chemical stocks have disappeared from the South African army.
Wouter Basson had traveled to Libya several times between 1993 and 1995 and is suspected to have sold chemical and biological weapons. Despite his duties in the South African secret services under apartheid, Wouter Basson was still engaged in the Mandela government to contribute to the project “Transnet”. He worked on secret missions within the framework of this project and transport infrastructure.
Wouter Basson eventually rejoined the South African army as a surgeon. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission began to investigate the biological activities and chemical security units from 1996.Wouter Basson allegedly tried to leave South Africa in 1997. However, the CIA was pressuring the South African government and Basson was arrested in possession of large quantities of ecstasy and confidential documents in Pretoria by the narcotics division of the police in South Africa
Wouter Basson appeared before the Truth and Reconciliation on the 31th of July in 1998 but refused to seek amnesty. The trial of Wouter Basson began on the 4th of October in 1999 with sixty charges against him. 