Dragan Zelenovic
19.04.2016
facts

Dragan Zelenovic was born on 12 February 1961 in Foca, Bosnia-Herzegovina. He was initially a policeman in a military unit of the Bosnian-Serb Territorial Defence force, then from the summer of 1992 onwards within the Bosnian-Serb army.
The allegations in question date back to the summer of 1992, when the municipality of Foca fell into the hands of the Serbian forces. The population consisted of approximately 40’000 inhabitants, half of which were Muslims. The Serbian authorities separated men and women and illegally detained thousands of Muslims and Croats in various detention centres such as Buk Bijela, Foca high school or the Partizan Sports Hall. During the arrests, several civilians were allegedly brutalized or killed. Many women prisoners were subjected to humiliating and degrading treatment were severely beaten and became victims of sexual violence, notably of rape.
In addition to the detention centres mentioned above, several women were held in houses and apartments which doubled as brothels run by groups of soldiers, for the most part paramilitaries.
Dragan Zelenovic allegedly participated in the interrogations and the sexual violence to which the women in the Buk Bijela detention camp were subjected during the month of July 1992. Furthermore, allegedly participated in sexual assault including the collective rape of woman and girls held in the Foca high school during the month of July 1992, in sexual assault against women, including two girls of 15 and 16 years of age at the Partizan Sports Hall, as well as in the transfer of women from the sports centre to houses under Serb surveillance where they were victims of sexual violence from July to August 1992.
Dragan Zelenovic was arrested by the Russian authorities on 22 August 2005 in western Siberia where he had taken up a new life under a false identity. He was first extradited to Bosnia and, on 10 June 2006, transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 