Nedjo Samardzic
28.04.2016
facts

Nedjo Samardzic was born on 7 April 1968 in Bileca, municipality of the same name, in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Married and father of two children, he was a tradesman.
According to the Indictment, Nedjo Samardzic participated in the widespread and systematic attacks launched by the Serbian forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina against Bosnian civilians in the municipality of Foca, between April 1992 and the end of March 1993. He committed and helped commit killings, the forcible transfer of population, sexual violence, rape and other persecutions.
In June 1992, the accused, together with a group of soldiers went to Stovic (Foca municipality).Here they allegedly captured a woman and took her to a Miljevina hotel, where she was repeatedly raped and beaten over a period of 7 days.
In Foca, soldiers ran several detention facilities as brothels. The Indictment stated that between June and August 1992, Nedjo Samardzic, together with Radovan Stankovic and Brcic Nikola, detained and raped a number of women of Bosnian ethnicity, in a camp called ‘Karaman’s house’ in Miljevina. In addition to the sexual assaults and the degrading and insalubrious conditions, the women were subjected to forced labour.
It was further alleged that the accused was responsible for sex slavery and repeated rapes of numerous other Bosnian women and underage girls in various places. A 12 year-old girl was notably subjected to repeated rapes in a brothel in Miljevina. Between June and December 1992, several female patients were forcibly removed from Foca Hospital and raped by the accused and other soldiers, allegedly including Radovan Stankovic and Dragomir Kunarac (see `related cases`).
Nedjo Samardzic, together with his brother Zoran and other soldiers, was also tried for the beating of a group of Bosnian civilians that had been captured in the region of Miljevina in August 1992. These civilians were then taken to Sljivovice, where they were shot.
The Indictment further alleged that, in Miljevina and Rataje, Bosnian civilians from Foca municipality were searched and mistreated. They were then taken to the police station in Miljevina. From here, they disappeared without a trace.
In September 1992, it was alleged that Nedjo Samardzic, together with other members of the Serbian forces, transported a number of Miljevina inhabitants to the Partizan Sports Hall in Foca. The civilians, mainly women and children, were severely mistreated and robbed. Many women were then taken to apartments where they were raped, then forcibly transferred to Gorazde municipality.
Nedjo Samardzic was arrested on 19 October 2004. 