Pedro García Arredondo
27.04.2016
facts

Pedro García Arredondo becomes chief of the 6th commandment of the national police under the military government of Fernándo Romeo Lucas García. During this period, García Arredondo allegedly ordered various murders and enforced disappearances, especially directed against students, political opponents and unionists opposed to the regime of Lucas García. García Arredondo was allegedly linked to the clandestine group “los Chuchos”, involved in ethnic cleansing operations, extortion and abductions in the departments of Sout-East of Guatemala.
In October 1978, he allegedly participated in the murder of the secretary general of the College Students Association (AEU), Oliverio Castañeda de León.
In 1979, he allegedly planned the murder of the ex-mayor of Guatemala City, Manuel Colom Argueta, who was a political opponent,
On 31 January 1980, he allegedly participated in the burning of the Spanish embassy in Guatemala, in which 37 people died, of which 21 were indigenous unionists. Two days later, he allegedly participated in the murder of two students during a mass funeral organized to honor the victims of the burning.
The same year, he allegedly abducted, tortured and raped a 15 years old girl, Yolanda Aguilar Urízar, with the help of 15 other officers of the 6th commandment. He is allegedly responsible for the disappearance of 28 leaders of the National Center of Workers (CNT) in 1980.
In 1981, he allegedly ordered the enforced disappearance of six members of the Portillo family.
On 5 July 1981, he was allegedly involved in the murder of eight persons when the group of victims accidentally crossed the route of a caravan transporting the remains of the wife and daughter of the former chief of the 6th commandment, Manuel de Jesus Valiente Tellez, a rival of García Arredondo. The latter allegedly planned an ambush against the caravan. Eight persons were killed in the incident.
García Arredondo resigned in 1982, during the coup of general Efrain Rios Montt.
On 30 September 1999, Julio Alejandro Valdez filed a complaint against García Arredondo for the murder of Hector Manuel Valdez, Carlos Valdez and Oscar Valdez, his father and uncles, in the attack on the caravan on 5 July 1981.
In December 1999, the Rigoberta Menchú Foundation, as well as several families of victims of repression, filed a complaint against García Arredondo before the Spanish National Court, the highest judicial body of Spain, for torture and genocide. 