Dragomir Milosevic
20.04.2016
facts

Dragomir Milosevic was born on 4 February 1942, in the village of Murgas, Ub Municipality, Serbia. He was an officer in the JNA (Yugoslav People’s Army ) before the armed conflict, having served as Chief of Staff of the 4th Corps, 2nd Military District, and more specifically of the 49th Motorized Brigade at Lukavica, a suburb south west of Sarajevo.
Shortly after Bosnia and Herzegovina was internationally recognised as an independent state on 06 April 1992, armed hostilities broke out in Sarajevo. Armed forces supporting the SDS (Serbian Democratic Party) and elements of the JNA, including units of the 4th Corps of the 2nd Military District, occupied strategic positions in and around Sarajevo. The city was subsequently subjected to blockade and relentless bombardment and sniper attacks from these positions. On or around 20 May 1992, after a partial withdrawal of JNA forces from Bosnia, the 4th Corps of the 2nd Military District became the Sarajevo Romanija Corps, with its headquarters in the Lukavica Barracks. The Corps formed a significant part of the Bosnian Serb Army (VRS – “Vojska Republika Srpska”), placed under the ultimate command of Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic (see “related cases”).
The Commander of the Romanija Corps was General Stanislav Galic (see “related cases”). From around March 1993, Dragomir Milosevic served as Chief of Staff to Stanislav Galic whom he succeeded as Corps Commander of the Sarajevo Romanija Corps on or about 10 August 1994, which appointment he held for the duration of the armed conflict. Dragomir Milosevic had authority over 18 000 military personnel, formed into 10 brigades.
For forty-four months, the Sarajevo Romanija Corps implemented a military strategy which used shelling and sniping to kill, maim, wound and terrorise the civilian inhabitants of Sarajevo. From April 1995, large fragmentation bombs were used. The shelling and sniping killed and wounded thousands of civilians of both sexes and all ages, including children and the elderly.
The Sarajevo Romanija Corps directed shelling and sniping at civilians who were tending vegetable plots, queuing for bread, collecting water, attending funerals, shopping in markets, riding on trams, gathering wood, or simply walking with their children or friends. People were even injured and killed inside their own homes, being hit by bullets that came through the windows. The attacks on Sarajevo civilians were often unrelated to military actions and were designed to keep the inhabitants in a constant state of terror. The destruction of many buildings of historical, cultural and symbolic significance (e.g. the destruction of the national library in a fire) was part of the same strategy of terror.
Dragomir Milosevic, who had been in hiding since the end of the war, has surrendered to the Serb authorities and was transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on 3 December 2004. 