Radovan Stankovic
09.07.2014
facts

Radovan Stankovic (alias “Rasa”) was born on 10 March 1969 in the village of Trebica in the municipality of Foca, Bosnia-Herzegovina.
The Indictment alleged that on 8 April 1992, Serb forces launched a first military attack against the non-Serb population of the town of Foca. The take-over of the town was complete by 16 or 17 April 1992 and the surrounding villages continued to be under siege until mid-July 1992. Once towns and villages were securely in their control, Serb military, police, paramilitary and sometimes Serb villagers started ransacking or burning Muslim houses and apartments and rounding up and capturing Muslims. The Indictment added that Muslims were beaten or killed in the process.
The Indictment further alleged that Serb forces separated the non-Serb men from the women. The Foca Kazneno-Popravni Dom (“KP Dom”) was the primary detention facility for men in Foca. Muslim women, children and the elderly were detained in houses, apartments and motels in the town of Foca or in surrounding villages. There were also detainees held at short and long-term detention centres such as Buk Bijela, Foca High School and Partizan Sports Hall. It is alleged that that the women and girls had to live in intolerably unhygienic conditions and that they were mistreated in many ways including, for many of them, being raped repeatedly.
Furthermore, according to the Indictment, some of these women and girls were taken out of the larger detention centres to privately owned apartments. Here they were forced to cook, clean and serve the residents, who were Serb soldiers. These women and girls were also subjected to repeated sexual assaults.
Moreover, Radovan Stankovic was a soldier in the Miljevina Battalion reporting to the Foca Tactical Brigade. The Miljevina Battalion was commanded by Pero Elez during the period relevant to the Indictment.
Radovan Stankovic was arrested on 9 July 2002 by French and German soldiers of the KFOR (NATO Peacekeeping Force) in south eastern Bosnia. 