Henry Alfred Kissinger
27.04.2016
facts

Henry Alfred Kissinger was born in Fürth, Bavaria, Germany on 27 May 1923. In 1938, he moved with his family to the US in order to flee Nazi persecution.
He joined the US army in South Carolina and was granted the US citizenship. After the Second World War, Kissinger studied at Harvard University, and remained at the university as a faculty member in the Department of Government and at the Center for International Affairs.
Kissinger’s involvement in foreign policy began in 1955, when he became a consultant to the National Security Council’s Operations Coordinating Board. Under the presidencies of Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford, Kissinger served as the National Security Adviser (20 January 1969 –3 November 1975), and the Secretary of State (22 September 1973 – 20 January 1977).
He is suspected by several organisations of being responsible for, or accomplice to, grave and widespread crimes committed with his support or under his own initiative, notably in Cambodia, Laos, Latin America or Indonesia.
INDOCHINA
Kissinger started to get involved in Indochina as a foreign policy consultant to the White House. After being appointed as National Security Adviser, Kissinger assisted Nixon in implementing the Vietnamisation policy, aiming to gradually withdraw US troops while expanding the combat role of the enabling South Vietnamese army so that it could defend its government against the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam and North Vietnamese army.
Kissinger played a key role in Operation Menu, a covert US bombing campaign conducted in eastern Cambodia and Laos from 18 March 1969 to 26 May 1970, during the Vietnam War. The supposed targeted areas of the US were sanctuaries and Base Areas of the People’s Army of Vietnam (PAVN) and forces of the Viet Cong, which were utilised for resupply, training, and resting between campaigns across the border in South Vietnam. The number of Cambodian combatants and civilians killed by a series of the US bombing is estimated as 40,000 combatants.
One of the biggest US bombing campaigns against Vietnam is Operation Linebacker II, also known as Christmas bombings. Kissinger and North Vietnamese Politburo member Le Duc Tho met in Paris on 8 October 1972 to discuss mutually agreeable terms for a peace settlement. Kissinger then flew to Saign to discuss the terms with Nguyen Van Thieu, the South Vietnamese President, who completely castigated the agreement and proposed 129 textual changes to the document. Negotiations ensued, but when the North Vietnam did not come back to the negotiation table the deadline set by the US, the US started Linerbacker II, which was conducted from 18 to 29 December 1972. The campaign killed 1,624 civilians.
EAST TIMOR (1975)
In December 1975, President Gerard Ford and Kissinger stopped in Jakarta en route from China, and they gave green light to the invasion of East Timor by Indonesia. Indonesia started invasion started the day after they returned to the US.
Kissinger was well aware that Indonesian Army would be using American weapons whose exportation had not been authorised by the US Congress for purposes other than defence, and warned Suharto about it.
Indonesia occupied East Timor from December 1975 to October 1999. During this period East Timorese were subject to extrajudicial executions, torture, and starvation. According to the report prepared for the Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation in East Timor, established under the UN Transitional Administration in East Timor cited a minimum bound of 102,800 conflict-related deaths in the period 1974–1999, namely, approximately 18,600 killings and 84,200 ‘excess’ deaths from hunger and illness.
CHILE
In 1970, Salvador Allende, the Chilean Socialist Party presidential candidate, won a slight plurality of the vote in Chile’s presidential election and it was expected that he would be ratified by the Chilean congress as the president. This caused serious concern in Washington, D.C. due to Allende’s openly socialist and pro-Cuban politics. Nixon ordered Kissinger and Attorney General John Mitchell to take steps to prevent Allende from becoming president. In an Effort to prevent Allende from achieving the presidency, the US started promoting and encouraging the Chilean military to move against Allende. The US had directed money to anti-Allende elements, including possibly terrorist groups, during the period 1970–1973.
In this context, neutralising General Schneider became a key requisite for a military coup, because he was opposing military intervention to block Allende’s election. The first and second attempt to kidnap Schneider both failed. The final attempt took place on 22 October 1970. His official car was ambushed in Santiago. Schneider drew a gun in self defence, and was shot several times. He died two days after the attempt on 24 October 1970 in Santiago’s Military Hospital.
In September 1973 Chilean military officers staged a coup d’état, ousting the President Allende, and installing Augusto Pinochet as chairman of the newly formed military junta. The Chilean Directorate of National Intelligence brutally repressed and attempted to eliminate individuals opposed to Pinochet’s regime. Allegedly, the US funded, assisted, aided and abetted, acted jointly and conspired with known human rights violators. In particular, it was alleged that Kissinger purposefully acted outside the proper channels of Congressional oversight of covert operations to assist and establish contacts with known terrorists and authorised the CIA to assist the military regime.
On 10 September 2001, Schneider’s family brought a civil suit against Kissinger, the United States and Richard Helms (former Director of the CIA) in federal District Court in the District of Columbia.
On 13 November 2002, 11 victims who suffered grave human rights violations under Pinochet’s regime brought a civil suit against Kissinger in the same court. 