Eduardo Alfredo Ruffo
28.04.2016
facts

Eduardo Alfredo Ruffo was born on 14 February 1946 in Buenos Aires, Argentina. He is divorced. From 1973 until 1976, Ruffo was Lieutenant to Anibal Gordon in the extreme right wing para-political group, “Triple A” (Alliance Anti communist Argentina). After the 1976 coup d’état, he backed the dictatorship through his position as agent of the SIDE (State Intelligence Agency).
Notably, he participated in the Condor operation, whereby Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay, all three governed by dictatorial regimes, decided to coordinate their efforts in order to forcibly “disappear” political opponents, who were also frequently tortured beforehand. Within this context of persecution, violence was used systematically in order to “exterminate all communists” The Condor operation was conducted in three main areas: political surveillance of émigrés and refugees, secret counter insurgency activities and joint extermination activities aimed at groups or specific individuals. For the latter, special murder squads were trained (often in the USA and Europe) and carried out their operations both within and outside of national boundaries. Regime opponents were held in secret torture centers, including the notorious “Automotores Orletti”, a former mechanical workshop in Buenos Aires, rented by Ruffo on behalf of SIDE, and where more than 300 persons were tortured then assassinated.
Ruffo was charged with participating in the abduction and ill treatment or torture of 65 persons at Automotores Orletti between 11 May and 3 November 1976. Amongst these 65 victims (which included nationals of Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay, Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador and Peru), 18 are still missing to this day.
He was also charged with being a member of the “Gordon Group”, a group of individuals who assisted in the perpetration in numerous crimes committed by Anibal Gordon, which operated on a basis, parallel to and autonomous from that of Triple A. This group intervened in the perpetration of numerous illegal activities between 1981 and 1984, including the famous 24 hours sequestration of the journalist Guillermo Patricio Kelly on 24 August 1983.
In 1976, the Bolivian national Graciela Rutilo Artés went missing after being seen for the last time at Automotores Orletti. Her husband, Enrique Joaquin Lucas Lopez was assassinated in Bolivia under the Banzar dictatorship. Eduardo Ruffo then kidnapped their one year old daughter, Carla Rutilo Artés, registered her as his own daughter and subjected her to ill-treatment during a ten year period. Ruffo also abducted another child (Alejandro Ruffo) whose parents have still not been identified. On 26 February 1985, the lawyer for Mathilde Artés Company (the grandmother of Carla Rutilo Artés) lodged a complaint for ill treatment and illegal deprivation of liberty against Ruffo and other persons responsible for the Automotores Orletti center.
On 25 August in the same year, Ruffo was arrested and held for abduction and destruction of evidence of the civil status of a minor less than ten years old. 