William Samoei Ruto
19.04.2016
facts

William Kipchirchir Samoei Arap Ruto was born on 21 December 1966 in Sambut Village, Kenya. He belongs to the ethnic group of Kalenjin.. He has been Deputy President of Kenya since 4 March 2013.
Ruto received primary education in his native village and subsequently studied at the Kapsabet Boys High School. In 1990, he received a degree in Botany from the University of Nairobi. Ruto married Rachel Chebet, a teacher, in 1991, and they have six children.
In 1992, Ruto became Organising Secretary of Youth for “Kanu ’92”, a group that was formed to drum up support for President Daniel Arap Moi in the 1992 election.
In January 2006, Ruto sought the nomination of the Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) as its presidential candidate, but came in third in the party caucus behind the winner Raila Odinga.
In December 2006, Ruto, together with Henry Kiprono Kosgey and Joshua Arap Sang, allegedly established a network with the aim of committing crimes directed against supporters of the Party of National Unity (PNU). Their goals were to gain power in the Rift Valley Province and the Kenyan Government and to punish and expel from the Rift Valley those perceived to support the PNU. Ruto allegedly provided essential contributions to the implementation of the common plan by way of organising and coordinating the commission of widespread and systematic attacks.
During the period of violence following the presidential election of December 2007, members of the network organized by Ruto allegedly began attacking target locations including Turbo town, the greater Eldoret area (Huruma, Kimumu, Langas, and Yamumbi), Kapsabet town, and Nandi Hills town. They approached each location from all directions, allegedly burning down PNU supporters’ homes and businesses, killing and torturing civilians, and systematically driving them from their homes. On 1 January 2008, they allegedly burnt down a church in Kiambaa with more than 100 people inside the church. At least 17 people died.
According to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), the post-election attacks resulted in more than 1,100 people dead, 3,500 injured and up to 600,000 forcibly displaced. During 60 days of violence, there were hundreds of rapes, and over 100,000 properties were destroyed in six of Kenya’s eight provinces.
Following the violent political crisis over the results, Kibaki and Odinga agreed to form a power-sharing government. Ruto was appointed as Minister for Agriculture, even after a report produced by the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights accused Ruto of inciting, planning and financing ethnically motivated violent activity in the aftermath of the 2007 elections.
On 15 December 2010, the ICC Prosecutor requested the Pre-Trial Chamber II of the ICC to issue summonses to appear for Ruto, Kosgey and Sang. According to the Prosecutor, there were reasonable grounds to believe that they were individually criminally responsible for murder, torture, deportation or forcible transfer and persecution on political grounds as crimes against humanity. 