Moshe Ya'alon
25.04.2016
facts

Moshe Ya’alon (called “Bugis”, or “the butcher of Qana”) was born on 24 June 1950 in Kiryat Haim, near Haifa in northern Israel. He joined the Israeli Army in 1968 and served in the Parachute Regiment of the Nahal Brigade. In 1973, during the Yom Kippur War, he participated as a reservist as a paratrooper in the offensive on the Suez Canal. Following this, he returned to active duty and completed his officer training. His career continued in the Parachute Regiment until the Operation Litani in 1978 (invasion by Israel of a part of south Lebanon) during which he commanded a reconnaissance unit. He served in an elite unit between 1979 and 1982, and fought during Operation Peace for Galilee. He then took-up a command post in the Parachute Brigade, and was injured in Lebanon just before the end of his engagement.
In 1986, Ya’alon visited the UK in order to take a course at the Command and Staff College in Kimberley. Upon his return to Israel, he became commander of the elite unit in which he had previously served. In 1989, he obtained a diploma in political science from the University of Haifa, and in February 1990 was appointed Commander of the Parachute Brigade. In 1992, he became commander of the regions of Judea and Samaria and was promoted to the rank of Brigadier General. In June 1995, Ya’alon was named Commander of the Intelligence Service of the Army, and reached the rank of Lieutenant General. On 9 July 2002, he was appointed Chief of Staff of the Israeli Army and was therefore responsible for the fight against the second Intifada, which errupted in September 2000.
It is within this framework that Moshe Ya’alon took the controversial decision to intensify the politically-named “targeted killings”. One of the major Israeli targets was the Shehade Salah, the leader of the Azz ed-din al-Qassam brigades, considered to be the armed wing of Hamas. According to the Israelis, it would be the brain behind various attacks against civilians inside Israel. It would also design Qassam rockets, which would regularly strike Israeli cities located near the Gaza Strip.
Ya’alon is accused of ordering, on 22 July 2002, the Israeli F-16 bombing of the building of Saleh Shehade, the leader of the armed wing of Hamas in Gaza, in a very densely populated zone. Shehade was killed along with 14 others, including nine children. Additionally, nearly 150 people were injured.
Moshe Ya’alon’s statements to the press at that time are known. On 27 August 2002, he declared to the newspaper Haaretz that “the Palestinian threat presents cancerous attributes that must be treated. Some say that it is necessary to amputate, but for now I’m in the chemotherapy stage.”
In February 2005, Israeli Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz took the controversial decision not to renew Ya’alon’s term in office. This aggitated the tensions that had arisen between the two men, notably because of Ya’alon’s objections to the plan of disengagement from Gaza Strip. Finally, on 1 June 2005, Ya’alon retired from the Israeli Army after 37 years of service.
At the end of 2006, while he was in New Zealand for a fundraising event organized by the Jewish National Fund, a Auckland District Court judge issued against him a warrant for his arrest for having committed war crimes in the form of killing Shehade and the resultant damages. 