Sima Bogdanovic
25.04.2016
facts

Sima Bogdanovic, also known as Sima Chetnik, was born on 30 September 1949. He was from Ruma, Serbia. By occupation, Bogdanovic was an auto mechanic. He was married, with two children. He served in the army, and had the rank of a non-commissioned officer in the reserve.
After war broke out in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1992 which lasted until 1995, Bogdanovic fought for the Serbian party in the conflict, on the territory of the municipality of Zvornik.
Bogdanovic was the leader of a paramilitary group that was operational in Zvornik, known under the name of “Sima’s Chetniks”.
It is alleged that Bogdanovic, together with the members of his paramilitary group as well as numerous unidentified soldiers, committed a number of violations of international humanitarian law in the villages of Skocic, Setic, Malesic, Klisa, Petkovci and Drinjaca against the Roma population.
Bogdanovic and others allegedly attacked Skocic village on 11 July 1992, where it is suspected that they destroyed a mosque by explosives without any military necessity, searched the houses of villagers while looking to steal their money and valuables, as well as any weapons they might find, physically assaulted them (thus killing one of the civilians), ordering the men to perform humiliating acts to each other and physically and mentally torturing the villagers. Bogdanovic is suspected to have mutilated one of the male victims, thus inflicting heavy physical injury to a civilian. He is also suspected of publicly raping one woman in the village, while she was restrained.
Meanwhile, two women were allegedly raped by other members of the group, after which all the civilians were transported from Skocic to other villages.
Bogdanovic is suspected of ordering the separation of women from men, who were then taken away and killed by other members of the group.
Under Bogdanovic’s command, the group kept three women in a house in Malesic, where they had to serve them, and who were allegedly repeatedly raped.
By the end of 1992, the group transferred to other villages, and took the women with them, where they continued to treat them inhumanely.
Bogdanovic was arrested and put in custody on 2 February 2010 pursuant to the order rendered by the Chamber of the Court of Appeal in Belgrade. 