Augustin Bizimana
02.05.2016
facts

Augustin Bizimana was born in 1954 in Gituza commune, Byumba prefecture, Rwanda.
During the events in question, Bizimana held the office of Minister of Defence in the Interim Government. Prior to that, he held the same position in the third multi-party government formed on 18 July, 1993.
In this capacity, he was constantly informed of the socio-political situation in the country. He was responsible for controlling the possession of weapons and explosives by the civilian population. Furthermore Bizimana exercised authority over the entire Rwandan Armed Forces.
From late 1990 until July 1994, Bizimana was said to have participated in a plan with the intent to exterminate the civilian Tutsi population. The components of this plan, amongst other things, consisted of recourse to hatred and ethnic violence, the training of and distribution of weapons to militiamen as well as the preparation of lists of people to be eliminated. In the preparation of this plan he was reported to have organized, ordered and participated in the massacres.
From 1992 on, in order to facilitate the massacres, agents of the Intelligence Bureau (G-2) of the Rwandan Army established lists of Tutsi and moderate Hutu to be eliminated. During the time that Augustin Bizimana was Minister of Defence, these lists were regularly updated, according to the prosecution.
According to the indictment, from July 1993 to July 1994, Augustin Bizimana encouraged and facilitated the acquisition of weapons for militants of the MRND (National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development – the Presidential Party). On 7 January 1994, he participated in a meeting at the headquarters of the MRND, which was in opposition to the disarmament programme. On 25 May 1994, the Interim Government, of which Bizimana was a member, adopted a civilian self-defence programme. This programme was aimed, on the one hand, at legalising the distribution of arms to the militiamen and, on the other, at legitimising the massacres of the civilian population.
The indictment further stated that, between 9 April and 14 July 1994, several meetings of the Council of Ministers were held, during which directives and instructions were given to the prefects aimed at inciting, encouraging and assisting them to carry out the killings. In order to ensure that these orders were carried out, a Minister was assigned responsibility in each prefecture, for what was called “pacification”.
Between 11 April and 14 July 1994, Bizimana was said to have gone, in an official capacity, either alone or with others, to several prefectures with a view to supervising the implementation of the instructions handed down by the Government. During his many trips throughout the country, Bizimana would have crossed many roadblocks, around which many corpses were scattered. Moreover, Bizimana was reported to have been present at one roadblock where a member of his escort executed two Tutsi, without his intervening to prevent the crime being committed.
In addition, Bizimana was said to have known about the massacres perpetrated against the Tutsi personnel of the Kigali Hospital Centre. He would also have been informed of the situation at the school for nurses, where, on several occasions between April and June 1994, the military and the Interahamwe militiamen (an extreme Hutu militia force) forcibly abducted and raped students and Tutsi refugees.
Despite being aware that massacres were being committed against the civilian population, Augustin Bizimana, in his capacity as Minister of Defence with authority over the entire Rwandan Army, took no measures whatsoever to put a stop to them. On the contrary, the prosecutor concluded that Bizimana had refused to intervene to control the population so long as a cease fire agreement had not been ordered.
Augustin Bizimana has so far escaped arrest, after fleeing Rwanda in 1994 and is being sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) 