Milorad Trbic
04.05.2016
facts

Milorad Trbic was born on 22 February 1958 in the village of Ponijevo, in Zenica (Bosnia and Herzegovina). He performed regular service with the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) between 1977 and 1978. With the outbreak of war in Bosnia, he joined the Army of Republika Srpska (VRS). He was appointed to the position of Deputy Commander of the 3rd Battalion of the Zvornik Brigade. He was later transferred to the security organ of the Zvornik Brigade. In July 1995, he held the rank of reserve Captain. He continued to hold this position during the remainder of the period relevant to the indictment. He was an assistant to and reported directly to Lieutenant Drago Nikolic, Chief of Security of the Zvornik Brigade.
The indictment stated that, between about 11 July 1995 and 1 November 1995, “Milorad Trbic, and others, planned, instigated, ordered or otherwise aided and abetted in the planning, preparation or execution of a planned and organized mass execution of thousands of captured Bosnian Muslim men from the Srebrenica “safe area”.
The indictment also indicated that during this operation, Milorad Trbic participated on 14 July 1995, in the killing of 20 Bosnian Muslim males in front of the gymnasium of the Grbavci School in the village of Orahovac, where hundreds of Bosnian Muslim males had been detained. In the late evening hours of 13 July and during the day of 14 July 1995, working together with other individuals and units, personnel from the Military Police Company of the Bratunac Brigade, including the accused, transported from Bratunac to the Grbavci School, hundreds of Bosnian Muslim males who had surrendered or been captured from the column of men retreating from the Srebrenica enclave or who had been separated in Potocari.
In the early afternoon of 14 July 1995, VRS personnel from the Zvornik Brigade transported these Bosnian Muslim males from the school at Grbavci to a nearby field, where personnel, including members of the 4th Battalion of the Zvornik Brigade, ordered the prisoners off the trucks and summarily executed them with automatic weapons. Milorad Trbic assisted in loading the Muslim men onto the trucks, accompanied them to the execution sites and assisted in the executions. Approximately 1000 Bosnian Muslim males were killed. On 14 and 15 July 1995, members of the Zvornik Brigade Engineering Company used heavy equipment to bury the victims in mass graves at the execution site, while the executions continued.
Furthermore, on or about 14 July 1995, VRS military personnel, under the command ofRadislav Krstic, transported hundreds of Bosnian Muslim men from detention sites in Bratunac to the school at Petkovci. On 14 July 1995, VRS military personnel, under the command of Vinko Pandurevic allegedly summarily executed Bosnian Muslims in and around this school. On or about the evening of 14 July 1995 and the early morning hours of 15 July 1995, VRS military personnel, under the command Ratko Mladic,Radislav Krstic and Vinko Pandurevic, transported several hundred Bosnian Muslim men from the school at Petkovci to an area below the “Dam” near Petkovci. These people were unloaded from vehicles, led in small groups to an open area, and summarily executed by VRS military personnel.
Milorad Trbic was alleged to have been present at the Petkovci School and to have assisted in organising and supervising the detention and transportation of Muslim men to the execution site at the Petkovci Dam.
On or about 15 July 1995, VRS military personnel, under the command of Radislav Krstic, transported hundreds of Bosnian Muslim men to an isolated place near Kozluk and summarily executed them. Milorad Trbic allegedly was also present at the Kozluk execution site on 15 July 1995.
On 16 July 1995, Trbic, who was the duty officer in Zvornik Brigade Headquarters at the time, allegedly enabled, coordinated and performed communication between VRS officers who were “conducting the arrests, detentions, transportation, execution and burial of Bosniak men from Srebrenica who were capable of military service”.
He is also charged with having enabled and supervised the re-burial of the remains exhumed from primary mass graves in the period from 1 August to 1 November 1995.
Milorad Trbic voluntary surrendered on 7 April 2005 and was transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on the same day. 