Kazys Gimžauskas
27.04.2016
facts

Kazys Gimzauskas was born in 1909.
In 1931 he entered the Lithuanian State Security system. He was arrested in 1940 by the NKVD (predecessor of the KGB) and was detained for a year, during the Soviet occupation of Lithuania.
Following the invasion of Lithuania by Nazi Germany in 1941, a new government was established. This government appointed Kazys Gimzauskas as the head of the investigation department of State Security in Kaunas in July 1941.
From the autumn of 1941 to July 1944, Gimzauskas was responsible for two units of the Lithuanian police known as the Saugumas. The Saugumas had a role similar to that of the German Gestapo in their treatment of Jews in Lithuania. As components of Einsatzkommando 3 (Operational Detachment 3) responsible in particular for the physical destruction of the Jews of Lithuania, they played an important role in the implementation of Nazi racist policy in the country and actively participated in the elimination of the Jews.
It is alleged that Kazys Gimzauskas was responsible for the Saugamas’ interrogation and investigation division in Kaunas from July to October or November 1941, and that he was later the deputy head of Saugumas for Vilnius province until July 1944.
According to documents signed by him found in the Lithuanian archives, he had personally ordered the arrest, interrogation, imprisonment and hand-over to German police for execution of many Lithuanian civilians, including numerous Jews.
At the end of the war, Gimzauskas went to the United States where he was admitted in 1956 under the Refugee Relief Act of 1953. He settled in Florida and became a mechanic.
In the 1990’s, the U.S. authorities began to investigate those responsible for crimes committed during World War II who had found refuge on their territory. A denaturalization process was therefore brought against Gimzauskas. His U.S. citizenship was withdrawn on 1 November 1995, two years after he had returned to live in Lithuania.
In 1996, the Attorney General of Vilnius decided to launch proceedings against him for genocide. 