Radomir Duraskovic
26.04.2016
facts

Radomir Duraskovic was born in 1977.
In 1999, Duraskovic served in the army of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in the First Battalion of Podgorica, under the orders of Predrag Strugar. According to the press, the military unit was mostly composed of reservists from the northern regions of Montenegro, where Montenegrins of Serb ethnicity were concentrated.
Montenegro was then united with Serbia within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Following an agreement between Belgrade and the Montenegrin authorities, the Yugoslav Army was responsible for patrolling and securing the border between Montenegro and Kosovo during the conflict between Serbs and Kosovo Albanians from 1996 to 1999.
The battalion where Radomir Duraskovic served, was deployed to one of the above mentioned border areas in the region of Hajla. This mountainous forestry region comprised four villages inhabited by Albanians, including Kaludjerski Laz – a village near Rozage (Montenegro).
According to the local press, in April 1999, on the other side of the border in Rugova (Kosovo), fighting against the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), as well as the expulsion of the Albanian population by Serb forces, intensified. The NATO air strikes against Serb positions had then just begun. Consequently, many Albanians from the region were trying to flee to Montenegro.
As reported by media, Kosovo civilians seeking refuge in Montenegro were killed trying to cross the border. As stated in the indictment, Radomir Duraskovic took part of the civilian killing campaign led by Predrag Strugar, which resulted in the death of 23 Albanian civilians between 18 April 1999 and 22 May 1999. The victims, among them a 13 year old boy and a 70 year old man, were civilians who had not taken part in hostilities.
Press reported particularly on an event that is remembered as the “massacre of Kaludjerski Laz.” On 18 April 1999, six civilians, among them two old women and a child trying to flee Kosovo, were killed and their bodies transferred to the other side of the border in Novo Selo (Kosovo) in a truck where they were buried in a mass grave.
At the time, Yugoslav army had refused to take any responsibility for the acts of Serbian paramilitary. Predrag Strugar himself had said he was not aware of the events in Kaludjerski Laz as he had been prevented from reaching the premises.
Starting from April 1999, the Yugoslav Army started an investigation to shed light on the events of Kaludjerski Laz, and a military investigating judge was assigned to investigate the events in question. 