Sixto Navarrete
15.04.2016
facts

Sixto Navarrete is a former member of the Argentinian Police Force. He served as a sergeant major in the Police Force, in the province of Río Negro.
During the dictatorship in Argentina, he is alleged to have participated in anti-terrorist policy carried out between 24 March 1976 and 10 December 1983. Through use of the military regime at the time, he implemented a systematic plan of carrying out kidnappings and enforced disappearances of people throughout the country.
Under this policy, Víctor Manuel Lobos, Elfio Enrique Navarrete, Raúl Lucio Gerardo Pedernera, Néstor Rubén Castelli and Alberto Mario Marasco, all of whom were members of either the Argentinian Police Force or the Argentinian Army, along with Navarette, kidnapped and tortured two trade unionists in the city of Sierra Grande, in the province of Río Negro.
The victims were Daniel Orlando Ávalos, Secretary-General of the Atlantic branch of the Argentinian Building Workers Union “Union Obrera de la Construcción de la República Argentina” (UOCRA), and Carlos Apolinario Lima, an associate of the Sierra Grande branch of UOCRA. Both were detained in this city from 2 April 1976 and brought to Viedma, the capital city of Río Negro, in an army vehicle on 5 April the following year. There they were taken to a basement in the school for police cadets from Río Negro, where they were subjected to different types of abuse, such as threatened execution and strong physical violence. Ávalos was freed on 20 April 1976, and Lima was freed on 5 July the same year.
On 29 July 2011 the Oral Federal Tribunal of Roca declared Navarrete accountable for being an accessory to the crime of illegal deprivation of liberty, further aggravated by the use of violence and serious damage to the health of trade unionist, Carlos Apolinario Lima. This act was classified by the court as a crime against humanity and Navarrete was sentenced to seven years and six months in prison and sanctioned for the double the time of the sentence. 