Marcos Jacobo Levin
25.01.2016
facts 

During the reign of torture of the 1976-1983 dictatorship in Argentina, Levin was the owner of La Veloz del Norte, one of the largest transportation companies in the country. After the coups d’état of 24 March 1976, Levin helped by the local police harassed, wrongfully detained and tortured many of the company’s employees. At least 22 workers who were also activists of Unión Tranviarios Automotor (UTA) were arrested and torture.
One of the workers, Victor Manuel Cobos, was allegedly arrested on 22 January 1977 by Victor Bocos, the deputy chief of police and employee of Levin. He was brought in a police station in Salta, where he was hooded, detained in communicado, tortured and interrogated about the UTA activities and meetings. He was allegedly tortured under the direct order of Victor Bocos and Levin. He was detained until 19 April 1977.
Other drivers and employees from La Veloz del Norte were also arrested, tortured and detained for various day for their alleged involvement in the UTA. Hector Ruben Vrh was arrested and transferred to the same police station in Salta, where he was detained for four days. He was then threatened and tortured. Upon his release, he was dismissed from the company. Carlos Aponte Lidoro, another driver, presented himself to the same police station after he heard they have been looking for him at his home. He was imprisoned without explanation for 15 days and tortured like the others. While in detention, he saw Levin who allegedly forced him to sign a “confession”. He was subsequently transferred to the prison of Villa Las Rosas. Sonia King, stewardess, was affiliated with the UTA and participated in some of their meetings. She was arrested at her mother’s house and detained for three nights. After being released she went to talk with Levin, who allegedly replied that she had “betrayed” the company. She was then fired.
Victor Manuel Cobos lodged a complaint against Levin on 8 April 2015 for acts of torture. 