Radojko Repanovic
25.04.2016
facts

Radojko Repanovic was deputy of the police station in the village of Suva Reka in Serbia in 1998. In 1999, after the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) bombing of Yugoslavia during the Kosovo war, Repanovic became police chief under the orders of Radoslav Mitrovic, Commander of the 37th Detachment of the Special Police Unit of the Republic of Serbia.
In the spring of 1999 the Yugoslav Army, Serbian Police and Serb Paramilitary forces allegedly initiated a broad campaign of violence against Albanian civilians in order to expel them from Kosovo and thus maintain political control of Belgrade.
On 26 March 1999 Repanovic allegedly commanded his officers to round up and kill Albanian civilians in the village of Suva Reka.
According to the indictment and 100 witnesses that testified in the case, Repanovic’s soldiers, acting under the orders of Repanovic, rounded up members of the Berisha family in the village of Sva Reak, killed several elderly men with manchine-gun fire before forcing the rest of the family into a pizza restaurant called Calabraia and threw two hand-grenades at them.
Repanovic assigned another group under his control to load the killed civilian bodies onto a truck and drive them away from the spot. Those who showed any signs of life were shot in the head, and the bodies were then transported to a mass grave in Prizren.
The remains in the mass graves were found and exhumed in 2001 after the regime of former Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic ended. Autopsies showed that the victims had been executed.
Out of the 50 Albanian civilians killed on 26 March 1999, 48 were members of the same family; 14 of these 48 were children, two were babies, one was a pregnant woman, another, a 100-year-old woman. Siret and Violca Berisha survived this crime by jumping out of the truck.
Repanovic was taken in to custody on October 2005, by order of the Belgrade War Crimes Chamber Investigating Judge; by that time he was assistant to the commander of the Police Unit in Krusevac.
Repanovic, along with other members of the 37th Detachment of the Special Police Unit of the Republic of Serbia and other members of the Yugoslav Army, were indicted for having committed war crimes against 50 Albanian civilians in the village of Suva Reka, during the clashes between the Serbian Police and Yugoslav army, on one side and the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), on the other. 