Shumei Okawa
19.04.2016
facts

Shumei Okawa was born on 6, December 1886, in Sakata, Yamagata, Japan, into a family of doctors.
In 1911, he graduated from the Tokyo Imperial University where he had studied Vedic literature and classical Indian philosophy. However, instead of looking for a job, he continued to study at the university’s library. In 1916, he published an essay on “The origins and the present state of the nationalist movement in India”. Four years later, he was appointed professor at the University of Takushoku where he lectured on the history and politics of colonization.
In 1919, he expressed the idea that the reconstruction of Japanese society was necessary in order to fight communist aggression. That same year he was hired by the South Manchurian Railway Company, a Japanese company, to run the editorial section of the East Asian Economic Research Bureau (EAERB) in Tokyo. He held this position until the end of the war, when the Bureau was disbanded. In 1928, he became chairman of the board of directors of the Research Bureau.
During the same period, he continued to pursue his academic career, and, in 1926, he received his Ph. D. from the Tokyo Imperial University. He also published several works, one of which, in 1942, was an essay on “The Concept of Islam”.
Well known as a Japanese ultra-nationalist, Pan-Asian writer, and Islamic scholar, prior to 1928, he was said to have publicly advocated Japanese territorial expansion throughout the Asian continent by simple threat or, if necessary, by the use of military force. He was also reported to have advocated that Japan should seek to dominate Eastern Siberia and the South Sea islands, and to have predicted the outbreak of war. His work inspired many right-wing extremists groups in the 1930s. He himself personally created and participated in some of these organizations, amongst which was the Yuzansha Society.
Shumei Okawa was alleged to have been at the origin of the assault against Japanese officials in Manchuria in 1931, whose goal was to have the Chinese bear responsibility for it thereby setting off the hostilities in Manchuria.
Shumei Okawa was also alleged to have participated, in 1932, in two attempted coups against the Japanese government. Arrested on 15 June 1932, for his participation in an attempted coup of 15 May, he was released on bail on11 September, 1934. In 1935, the High Court sentenced him to five years imprisonment for his complicity in the attempt. He was paroled on October 1937 and returned to his job at the EAARB where he headed up the research efforts on China and East Asia.
He was said to have had a great influence during the war over the Japanese government’s domestic propaganda programme. In this respect, he was considered by the Allies to be the ideologist of the regime. With the advent of war in the Pacific he went into journalism. He was also reported as having tried to bring an end to the war with China, but his efforts were in vain.
On 12 December, 1945, Shumei Okawa was arrested by the Allies and transferred to the Sugamo prison as a class-A criminal. 