Petras Raslanas
27.04.2016
facts

Petras Raslanas was born in 1914 in Riga, Latvia. He joined the Soviet secret services in June 1940, at a time when the Baltic countries were occupied by the USSR.
Between 21 January and 1 July 1941, he was head of NKVD (a predecessor of the KGB) in Telšiai, a town in Lithuania. In this capacity he was one of the main organizers of the Rainiai Forest Massacre, along with Boris Mironov and Nachman Dushanski. The operation occurred on the night of the 24 – 25 June 1941, during which 70 Lithuanian political prisoners were cruelly tortured before being executed and buried in the forest. These people had been arrested as ‘enemies of the revolution’, or for having been found in possession of a Lithuanian flag, or literature unauthorized by the Communists. Among them were many young students, many of whom were allegedly boy scouts. When the bodies were found three days later, they had been so badly mutilated that only 27 out of the 73 were able to be identified.
In 1942, Petras Raslanas apparently wrote a letter to Antanas Sniečkus, the Secretary of the Lithuanian Communist Party’s central committee (the highest political authority of the time), providing details concerning the massacre. In this letter, he declared that he was convinced that not a single one of the victims had been innocent.
In April 1942, Petras Raslanas enrolled in the NKVD school, graduating in February 1943. He then returned to work for the NKVD in Lithuania, where he held many managerial positions within the Ministry of State Security. Between 1961 and 1969, he was head of the technical operations department. He ended his career in the NKVD as a colonel.
In the eighties, Petras Raslanas lived in Vilnius where he worked for the Soviet Minister for Religious Affairs of Lithuania.
In 1988, the first lawsuit was brought against Petras Raslanas for his role in the Rainiai massacre. The trial was subjected to numerous delays, notably due to the influence of Raslanas’ friends in high places, and did not result in a conviction.
Soon after Lithuania’s independence in 1990, he fled to Russia – in effect, he holds a Russian passport.
On 22 July 1996, the public organization Baltic Unity (BVO) requested that Petras Raslanas be extradited from Russia, and brought before the Lithuanian courts for his role in the Rainiai massacre. 