Rodrigo Tovar Pupo
23.04.2016
facts

Rodrigo Pupo Tovar was born in the city of Valledupar, Colombia (date unknown). He is the son of a retired officer of the Colombian Armed Forces. During his studies in Bogotá he met Salvatore Mancuso (see “Related cases”). After completing his studies he settled down in the Department of Cesar located in the north of Colombia, and dedicated himself to different businesses. His first and only employment was as Inspector of weights and measures under the mayoralty of Rodolfo Campo Soto.
According to a report in the magazine ‘Semana’, in 1996, Rodrigo Tovar got involved with the paramilitary organization Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia (AUC), after being recruited by a general from the 1st Division of the National Army who wanted to establish small groups in defence against the guerrillas. In 1996 Tovar met Carlos Castaño (see “Related cases”) and Salvatore Mancuso, both paramilitary leaders, in Córdoba, and as a result of this meeting was made Commander of the Bloque Norte of the Autodefensas.
The modus operandi of Tovar and the Bloque Norte was similar to that implemented by other Commanders of the Autodefensas: to spread terror in communities influenced by the guerrilla and assassinate those considered allies of the guerrilla groups. In addition to this, Tovar, as Commander of the Bloque Norte, was involved in drug trafficking.
The Villanueva massacre
On the night of 7 December 1998, the Bloque Norte of the AUC paramilitary group entered the municipality of Villanueva, in the La Guajira Department, firing in the air and throwing bengal lights. The paramilitaries stayed in the village from 2 to 4 o’clock in the morning. During the raid they killed José Aníbal Garcerón Mejía, a 16 years old student at the Roque de Alba college; Julio Contreras Rincones of 22 years, student of the same campus preparing to receive his degree on December 18th; the brothers Nefer Augusto and Alexander Enrique David López, 25 years old; Bartolomé Contreras Molina, 28; José Luis Rosado Quintero, Javier Enrique Olmedo Campo, Ramiro Campo Peñaloza, Jeison José Daniel Roja, José Dangond Quintero, Elis Fabián Montero and Erinón José Damián Rojas, and wounded Leonel and Alfredo López, Enrique and Petra Molina. The massacre was carried out in this village because of the influence of the Luciano Ariza Front of the ELN and Front 59 of FARC in the area.
The Nueva Venecia massacre
In November 2000 the Bloque Norte entered several municipalities in the Magdalena Department. During the raid in the region, the paramilitaries assassinated 39 people, according to the spontaneous declaration given by Edmundo Guillén Hernández, alias ‘Caballo.’ Guillén explained that between 50 and 60 paramilitaries carried out the massacre after setting out from the hamlet Las Piedras, in Pivijay, in small boats (known as chalupas), and arriving at Caño Clarin, where they started the massacre by killing several fishermen. Later they went to El Morro o Nueva Venecia, Buenavista and Bocas de Aracataca.
The Bahía Portete massacre
On 18 April 2004 around 150 paramilitaries of the Bloque Norte, under the command of Arnulfo Sánchez González, alias ‘Pablo’, and José María Barros Ipuana, alias ‘Chema Bala’, entered several ranches in Bahía Portete in Alta Guajira. According to Ventana Abierta they “went from ranch to ranch; killing and decapitating the old, burning children alive, stealing ‘las tumas’, or sacred stones for bartering, destroying the health centre and desecrating the cemetery. They left 12 dead indigenous Wayuu and took 33 others with them, who never returned.”
Tovar was among the main negotiators for the demobilization of the AUC during the dialogues in Santa Fé de Ralito (the negotiations for the demobilization of the AUC were held between the government and the AUC in the municipality of Santa Fé de Ralito, because of this the process is known as the Santa Fé de Ralito negotiations).
On 10 March 2006 Rodrigo Tovar was demobilized under the Ley de Justicia y Paz (Law for Justice and Peace), a mechanism created after the negotiations between the AUC and the Colombian government, becoming one of the last paramilitary commanders to demobilize. 