Goran Hadzic
27.04.2016
facts

Goran Hadzic is an ethnic Serb from Croatia, born on 7th September 1958 in the Municipality of Vinkovci, in Croatia.
He worked as a warehouseman in a factory in Pacetin, in the Municipality of Vukovar in Croatia.
Goran Hadzic became politically active in his youth as a member of the League of Communists, the political party in power at the time, led by Josip Broz Tito. Prior to 1990 he was the President of the Local Community of Pacetin. In the Spring of 1990 he was elected a councilman at the Municipal Council of Vukovar as a candidate of the League of Communists. Later that year he decided to leave his party to rejoin the ranks of the Serbian Democratic Party (Srpska Demokratska Stranka -SDS) which he became head of on the 10 June 1990. He then became the President of the Assembly of the Municipality of Vukovar until March 1991.
At the same time as his involvement in local politics, Goran Hadzic was the Vice-President of the Regional Committee of the Serbian Democratic Party covering the region of Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem. This Regional Committee of the SDS created the Serbian National Council (SNC) which covered the same area and consequently Goran Hadzic was one of its leaders.
On 25 June 1991, while Croatia declared its independence, the SNC was transformed into the government of the “Serbian Autonomous District /Sprska autonomna oblast/ Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem (“SAO SBWS”). The following day Goran Hadzic was appointed its President.
On 26 February 1992, Goran Hadzic was elected President of the “Republic of Serbian Krajina /Republika Srpska krajina/” (“RSK”). Goran HADZIC remained in this position until December 1993.
According to Goran’s indictment he has taken part in, as a leader of the President of the Serbian Autonomous District and then as President of the so-called “Republic of Serbian Krajina, in a plan to permanently and forcibly remove the majority of the Croat and other non-Serb population from approximately one-third of the territory of the Republic of Croatia in order to make it part of a new Serb-dominated.
Goran Hadzic has been accused of planning , inciting to commit, ordering, committing or in any other way helping and encouraging to plan, prepare or carry out persecutions, murders, inhuman treatments, expulsions or forced transfers against non Serbian civilians , throughout this period.
In particular he is accused of taking part in the massacre at Vukovar in 1991 where 250 civilians who were taking refuge in a hospital, where killed.
On 21st May 2004, Goran Hadzic was indicted by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former- Yugoslavia (ICTY) 