Kiki Syahnakri
02.05.2016
facts

Major General Kiki Syahnakri was born on 24 April 1947 in West Java. He has a military background and spent most of his career in East Timor.
The accusations of criminal responsibility against him go back to the events which took place in East Timor in 1999. Around 1400 people were killed in the months leading up to a referendum on independence for the region, organised by the United Nations on 30 August 1999, and during the days following this vote. In addition, more than 250’000 people were transferred by force or fled to West Timor or Indonesia. A large number of people were also victims of other violations of human rights, notably of torture and rape. These crimes were carried out by the militia with the support and coordination of members of the armed forces, the police and the Indonesian Civilian Authorities in order to influence the outcome of the referendum and to upset adoption of the results of the referendum.
At the time the events took place, Kiki Syahnakri was Operation Assistant at Army Central Command. In this role, he was said to be in charge of the coordination, in Jakarta, of military activities in East Timor. Reportedly, he met with the heads of the pro Indonesian militia on several occasions in order to orchestrate the campaign of destabilisation of the referendum process. Subsequently, he was appointed Administrator of martial law which was imposed in the region from 7 to 27 September, following the referendum. It was during this period that the most serious human rights abuses were committed in East Timor. Afterwards he was appointed Military Commander of Udanya, a region of East Timor to which numerous members of the pro Indonesian militia had made their escape.
On 6 November 2000, he was promoted to the post of Seniors Assistant at Army Central Command. He retired in May 2002.
On 22 February 2003, Kiki Syahnakri, and seven other highly placed military and civilian individuals, were indicted by “The Serious Crimes Unit”, a body set up by the United Nations Transitional Administration of East Timor (UNTAET). 