Jadranko Palija
25.04.2016
facts

Jadranko Palija was born on 6 January 1961 in Hrvatska Kostajnica, a town in the centre of Croatia and close to the border with Bosnia and Herzegovina. Palija was a highly skilled machinist of steam boilers and turbines and is married and has a child.
Originally Serbian, Palija joined the VIe Brigade de Krajina, a faction attached to the Serbian Republic army, in May 1992. War had just broken out between the self-proclaimed Serbian Republic and the central government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Palija lived in the Serbian Republic of Croatia (or Serbian Republic of Krajina) which had detached itself from the newly independent Croatia and aimed to join the Serbian Republic of Bosnia to extend and reinforce Serbian control of the region.
Between May 1992 to the end of the war in October 1995, Palija fought with the army of the Serb Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in Sanski Most. He is accused of taking part, and leading, systemic attacks against the Bosnian and Croatian civilian population who lived in the area of Bosanska Krajina.
On 31 May 1992 Jadranko Palija took part in an attack on the town of Begici with the army of Republika Srpska. The army entered the town, ordered that the men be separated from the women and children and whilst detaining them in a house, led the men away. On route to the river Palija personally killed four of the men. When the soldiers arrived at Vrhpolje bridge, the 14 men were forced to take their clothes off and to jump from the bridge whilst the soldiers fired at them, however, no one was killed during this incident.
In the summer of 1992, during a search of a house in Sanski Mot, Palija raped a Muslim woman and threatened her not to speak to anyone regarding what had happened.
From 1993 to the end of the war in 1995 Jadranko Palija was an agent of the military police of the same VIe Brigade de Krajina. Within this role, Palija is responsible for the intimidation and harassment and arbitrary arrest of Bosnian civilians within Sanski Most.
However, following investigations pursued by the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Jadranko Palija was arrested in the town of Brcko and remanded in custody on 27 October 2006. 