Ramon Isaza Arango
23.04.2016
facts

Ramón María Isaza Arango was born on 30 September 1940 in the town of Sonsón, in the Department of Antioquia, Colombia. When he was young he moved to Puerto Triunfo, located in Magdalena Medio, where in 1978 he formed his first paramilitary group, whose aim was to fight the guerrillas that were robbing the region’s animals and demanding return payments (in money) from the peasants. In 1977, after an attack against 20 Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas, Isaza and his men formed the group El Escopeteros and decided to charge the region’s ranchers for their services based on the promise that they would protect the ranches from the guerrilla groups.
Between 1978 and 1984, the group grew and started to carry out acts of “social cleansing” (selective killings of people), killing thieves, rapists, drug dealers, kidnappers and extortionists, according to Verdad Abierta (a Non-Governmental Organization dedicated to documenting and monitoring processes being carried out in Colombia against paramilitarism).
In 1983, as a result of rancher Gonzalo de Jesús Pérez’s kidnapping, the United Self-Defence Forces of Puerto Boyacá was born, and in 1984, the group Los Escopeteros, led by Isaza, joined them. Following the joining of these two groups, Isaza was named chief of the Peasant Self-Defence Forces of Antioquia.
In 1991, the Peasant Self-Defence Forces of Puerto Boyacá received an offer of alliance from the leader of the Medellín cartel, Pablo Escobar. Isaza refused to join together with the drug trafficker, even though it is believed that he was allied with the drug trafficker Rodríguez Gacha, alias El Mejicano, according to Verdad Abierta. On 20 July 1991, the commander of the Self-Defence Forces of Puerto Boyacá, Henry Pérez, was assassinated on Pablo Escobar’s order. In 1994, as a result of Pérez’s death and the ensuing power struggle, Isaza left the Self-Defence Forces of Puerto Boyacá and dedicated himself to strengthening the Peasant Self-Defence Forces of Magdalena Medio (ACMM).
When Carlos Castaña Gil (see related cases) invited Isaza to join with the Self-Defence Forces of Colombia (AUC), he accepted. A few years later, he left the AUC due to its connections with drug trafficking. The ACMM grew in size over the years, which lead to its decentralization on various levels. In the context of the armed conflict between the paramilitary movements (including the AUC and ACMM), guerrilla groups and the Colombia State, the ACMM is accused of having committed the crimes of forced displacement, murder, recruitment of minors, torture and enforced disappearance. The ACMM’s activities led to the death of thousands of persons, including the commission of numerous massacres:
MASSACRE IN LA ESPERANZA, CARMEN DE VIBORAL
Throughout 1996, the paramilitary group commanded by Isaza entered numerous times (21, 22 and 27 June; 7 and 9 July; and 27 December) into the rural district of La Esperanza, located in Carmen de Viboral, Department of Antioquia. In these raids, ACMM left a total of 26 peasants dead, 20 children orphaned and 16 people disappeared.
THE FALÁN MASSACRE
On 17 January 2003, ACMM members murdered 11 hunters in Armero Guayabal, Department of Tolima. Among the victims was Falán’s town councillor, Ignacio Melo.
According to the newspaper El Tiempo, the investigations into the ACMM “found that this organization participated in six massacres, in which 44 people died, in Mariquita, Falán, Armero Guayabal and Fresno between 1999 and 2004”. Additionally, an investigation carried out by the NGO Sembrar between 2000 and 2004, revealed that the ACMM committed 410 crimes in the north of Tolima, including cases of selective and collective killings, enforced disappearances and forced displacements.
In 2004, Isaza joined the Santa Fé de Ralito discussion table to negotiate the demobilization of the ACMM. On 7 February 2006, Isaza, together with the members of the ACMM, demobilized under the Justice and Peace Law in Puerto Triunfo, Department of Antioquia. 