Noura Bint Ibrahim Al-Khalifa
15.04.2016
facts 

Noura Bint Ibrahim Al-Khalifa was born in 1983. She is a member of the Bahrain royal family Al-Khalifa. She was born into the third tier of the royal family and is believed to be a cousin of Queen Sabika Bint Ibrahim Al-Khalifa. During Bahrain’s “Pearl Revolution” in 2011, she was working as a lieutenant police officer in Bahrain’s Drug Control Office in the capital Manama, but has since changed departments.
In February 2011, a series of peaceful demonstrations took place in Bahrain’s capital Manama. They were aimed at achieving greater political freedom and equality for the majority Shii population in the Sunni-led monarchy. The demonstrations later amounted to a sustained campaign of civil resistance calling for the end of King Hamad’s monarchy. Protesters camped for days at the Pearl Roundabout in Manama, which became the centre of the protests.
Clashes between protesters and the security forces occurred. The security police supposedly used force to disperse thousands of protesters, including batons, tear gas and birdshot. Doctors Zahra Al-Sammak, Kholoud Al-Durazi and several others assisted the injured demonstrators. The police responded by carrying out house raids and arrests. In March 2011, some 60 doctors, including Doctors Al-Sammak and Al-Durazi, were arrested on charges including attempting to bring down the government and taken to custody. Princess Al-Khalifa allegedly collaborated with another officer and played a role by personally torturing the two doctors after they were arrested for tending to injured demonstrators. As a result of the torture, the doctors gave forced confessions that resulted in them receiving prison sentences of up to five years. These were later quashed by a military court.
Al-Khalifa is also accused of torturing or assisting torture of a 21-year-old human rights activist Aayat Al-Qurmazi, who was arrested for public reading of inflammatory poetry criticizing the royal family. She claims that on the eighth day of her arrest she was blindfolded and brought to a room full of men who shouted abuse at her. A woman then allegedly grabbed her and slapped her hard in the face. Al-Qurmazi’s blindfold supposedly came off and she saw Al-Khalifa. Al-Qurmazi claims that Al-Khalifa then cursed her, spat on her, slapped her many times across the face and applied electric shocks to her face.
In June 2011, King Hamad established a commission of inquiry composed of international independent figures to assess the incidents that took place during the uprising. The report was released on 23 November 2011 and confirmed the Bahraini government’s use of systematic torture and other forms of physical and psychological abuse on detainees, as well as other human rights violations. Another report, established by Bahrain’s Forum on Human Rights added that two of the Bahraini King’s sons, Nasser Bin Hammad Al-Khalifa and Khalid Bin Hammad Al-Khalifa, as well as Khalifa Bin Ahmed Al-Khalifa directly took part in torturing activists.
Princess Al-Khalifa faces two separate trials for allegations of torture and physical assault. 