William Haynes
21.04.2016
facts

William Haynes was born on 30 March 1958 in Waco, Texas. He graduated from Davidson College and received a law degree from Harvard University. He was General Counsel to the United States Department of Defence at the time of the facts.
According to the complaint Haynes ordered the United States Central Command (CENTCOM) to be more aggressive towards those detained in Afghanistan. This order was allegedly communicated as early as December 2001.
Haynes is also said to have signed the memorandum dated 9 January 2002, prepared by Jay Bybee and John Yoo, the head of the Department of Justice’s Office of Legal Counsel and one of his assistants, that concluded that the Geneva Conventions did not apply to detainees held in the wars against al Qaeda and the Taliban. It is based on this document that President George W. Bush is to have made the decision that those detained in the War on Terror would not benefit from the protections of international humanitarian law. Haynes is also said to have known about the Bybee and Yoo memo dated 22 January 2002 that advocated the same results.
Several months later on 13 March 2002 Haynes received a memorandum signed from by Bybee declaring that neither the Geneva Conventions nor the Convention against Torture prohibited the President from transferring to other countries those detained in the wars against al Qaeda and the Taliban. According to Bybee, the CAT would not be implicated except if it could be proved that the American Government transferred a detainee with the intention that he be tortured.
On 25 September 2002 Haynes, Alberto Gonzales, White House Counsel, David Addington, legal counsel to Vice President Dick Cheney and John Rizzo, a high-ranking lawyer at the Central Intelligence Agency, went to Guantánamo Bay. According to Diane Beaver, an army lawyer posted at Guantánamo, the visitors authorised “whatever needed to be done” when it came to interrogating detainees.
In a memorandum dated 27 November 2002 address to Donald Rumsfeld, the Secretary of Defence, Haynes recommended to his boss that he authorise fifteen new coercive interrogation techniques. Three additional methods, including “waterboarding”, were not approved for general use but could be used on a case-by-case basis. According to the complaint Douglas Feith, the Under Secretary of Defence for Policy, helped Haynes write this document. Haynes is said to have based his memorandum on a document written by Bybee and Yoo on 1 August 2002 that defined torture in a very restrictive manner. Rumsfled accepted the recommendations found in Haynes’ memorandum on 2 December 2002.
Haynes received a memorandum from John Yoo dated 14 March 2003 in which the Office of Legal Counsel lawyer wrote that neither federal domestic law nor international law protected those detained by the United States abroad. Furthermore, according to Yoo, the President could authorise interrogation techniques incompatible with the Convention against Torture.
On 17 March 2009 the Association for the Dignity of Detainees, a Spanish non-profit dedicated to the protection of human rights, lodged a complaint before the National Court of Spain against Haynes, Gonzales, Yoo, Bybee, Addington and Douglas Feith. 