Sabrina Harman
25.04.2016
facts

Sabrina Harman was born on 4 January 1978 in Lorton, VA. After the 9/11 terrorist attacks she joined the 372nd military police unit as a reservist. Sabrina Harman was working as a deputy manager in a pizzeria in Alexandria, VA, when her unit was sent to Iraq and deployed in Abu Ghraib prison.
In late 2003, rumours started circulating that members of the US army had been mistreating and torturing Iraqi detainees in Abu Ghraib prison. In January 2004, Joseph Darby,a member of the US military police, informed the army leadership about these abuses and supplied the officer in charge with photographic material. The pictures documented scenes in which naked Iraqi detainees were being beaten and forced to simulate sexual acts.
At the end of January 2004, the commander-in-chief of the multinational troops in Iraq, General Ricardo Sanchez, instructed General Antonio Taguba to set up an inquiry into the affair. The findings of his investigation were handed over to the authorities in charge on 4 April 2004.
The Taguba report (see ‘links’) concluded that American soldiers carried out acts of humiliation which severely violated international law. It stated that numerous ‘sadistic abuses’ were inflicted upon detainees of Abu Ghraib between October and December 2003. The guards had set up their own rules, which were condoned more or less explicitly by their superiors.
The report cited numerous examples of maltreatment towards detainees, such as physical and sexual abuse, torture, intimidation by use of military dogs and the threat of rape and killing.
The report specifically named seven suspects: Ivan Frederick II, Javal Davis, Charles Graner, Jeremy Sivits, Lynndie England, Megan Ambuhl and Sabrina Harman.
Sabrina Harman was accused of taking a picture of Manadal al-Jamadi’s corpse; of jumping on a group of detainees who had been forced to lie in a pile; of writing the word ‘rapeist’ (sic) on the leg of a prisoner; of attaching wires to the hands of a prisoner while he was standing with his head covered, and threatening electrocution if he fell.
Sabrina Harman was indicted by the US army. 