Miroslav Kvocka
31.05.2016
facts

Miroslav Kvocka was born on 1 January 1957 in the village of Maricka in the municipality of Prijedor, Bosnia-Herzegovina. He was a police officer in this municipality. When the conflict broke out, he participated as commander in the operation of the Omarska camp. In June 1992, he held the position as the functional equivalent of the deputy commander of the guard service at this camp.
According to the bill of indictment, it was alleged that between April and August 1992, Bosnian Serb authorities in the Prijedor municipality unlawfully segregated, detained and confined more than 6,000 Bosnian Muslims, Bosnian Croats and other non-Serbs from the Prijedor area in the Omarska and Keraterm camps.
In Omarska camp the prisoners included military-aged males and political, economic, social and intellectual leaders of the Bosnian Muslim and Bosnian Croat population. There were about 37 women detained in this camp. At the Keraterm camp, the majority of the prisoners were military-aged males.
According to the indictment, living conditions in Omarska and Keraterm were brutal and inhumane. Interrogations were conducted on a daily basis. The interrogations were regularly accompanied by beatings and torture. Furthermore, serious ill treatment, torture, murder, sexual violence and other forms of physical violence were the norm. Finally, the camp guards used all types of weapons and instruments to beat and otherwise physically abuse the prisoners. At a minimum, hundreds of prisoners, whose identities are known and unknown, did not survive the camps.
As commander, Miroslav Kvocka was in a position of authority superior to everyone in the camp. As a deputy commander of the guard service, he was in a position of authority superior to everyone in the camp other than the camp commander. According to the indictment, Miroslav Kvocka instigated, ordered committed or otherwise aided and abetted in persecutions against Muslims, Bosnian Croats and other non-Serbs in the Prijidor region, on political, racial or religious grounds. Furthermore by his presence, he provided legitimacy in the eyes of the other participants over what was taking place in the camp. Finally, by his approval, his encouragement, his acquiescence and his support, he contributed to the creation and the maintenance of the difficult living conditions in the Omarska camp.
Miroslav Kvocka was arrested by the SFOR (Stabilisation Force for Bosnia-Herzegovina) on 8 April 1998 and transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on 14 April 1998. 