Dragoljub Prcac
31.05.2016
facts

Dragoljub Prcac was born on 18 July 1937 in the village of Omarska, Prijedor municipality, Bosnia-Herzegovina. He served as a policeman in Croatia and then was a Crime Technician for the Public Security Service in Prijedor municipality for several years prior to the conflict. He was the second Deputy Commander of the Omarska camp. In June 1992, he replaced Miroslav Kvocka (see “related cases”) as the Deputy Commander of the camp. As a deputy commander, he was in a position of authority superior to everyone in the camp other than the camp commander.
According to the bill of indictment, it was alleged that between April and August 1992, Bosnian Serb authorities in the Prijedor municipality unlawfully segregated, detained and confined more than 6,000 Bosnian Muslims, Bosnian Croats and other non-Serbs from the Prijedor area in the Omarska and Keraterm camps.
In Omarska camp the prisoners included military-aged males and political, economic, social and intellectual leaders of the Bosnian Muslim and Bosnian Croat population. There were about 37 women detained in thiscamp. At the Keraterm camp, the majority of the prisoners were military-aged males.
According to the indictment, living conditions in Omarska and Keraterm were brutal and inhumane. Interrogations were conducted on a daily basis. The interrogations were regularly accompanied by beatings and torture. Furthermore, serious ill treatment, torture, murder, sexual violence and other forms of physical violence were the norm. Finally, the camp guards used all types of weapons and instruments to beat and otherwise physically abuse the prisoners. At a minimum, hundreds of prisoners, whose identities are known and unknown, did not survive the camps.
In his role as deputy commander then as commander Dragoljub Prcac was in a position of hierarchical superior. By his acts and omissions he allegedly largely contributed to and facilitated the criminal conspiracy in the camp.
Dragoljub Prcac was arrested on 5 March 2000 by the SFOR (Stabilisation Force for Bosnia-Herzegovina) and transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on the same day. 