Hakim Al-Zamili
27.04.2016
facts

Hakim al-Zamili was deputy Health minister under the government of Prime Minister Ali al-Maliki. He is also a member of the radical Shiite movement lead by Moqtada al-Sadr. In November 2006, he escaped an assassination attempt that claimed the lives of his two body guards.
Hakim al-Zamili is suspected of:
– having embezzled funds for the benefit of the Mahdi Army (the most important Shiite Iraqi militia) loyal to Moqtada al-Sadr,
– having exercised his functions and made available the different services of the ministry for the benefit of the Shiite militia and the Mahdi Army, in particular in permitting the infiltration of death squadrons within the ministry.
Under his leadership and that of Hamid al-Shammari (cf. “ramifications”), death squadrons would have operated within ministerial facilities and their outbuildings. The hospitals would thus have been placed under the control of the Mahdi Army. These squadrons would have, amongst other things, used the ministerial privilege passes of the Health ministry to travel freely within Baghdad, used ambulances to transport arms, and would have been responsible for hundreds of kidnappings and murders of Iraqis, mainly Sunnis, between 2005 and 2007. These events would in particular have taken place in the 3 main hospitals of Baghdad (Al Yarmouk, Ibn al-Nafees and Al Nur) and would have been targeted at the Sunni patients being treated there and their friends and relatives, as well as the medical staff. In addition, Hakim al-Zamili is also suspected of having provided these groups with access to ministerial facilities and of having concealed their actions.
Finally, he is accused of being implicated in the death and disappearance of many Iraqi officials, in particular civil servants attached to his ministry, including some government officials who had denounced cases of corruption within his offices and the Director of the ministry of Diyala province, of Sunni faith, who disappeared from Baghdad in June 2006 after having been summoned to the ministry.
Al-Zamili was arrested on the 8th of February 2007 during a joint raid of the offices of his ministry by Iraqi and American troops. 