Omar Ahmed Khadr
12.05.2015
facts

Khadr was born on September 19, 1986 in Toronto, Canada. In 1990, Khadr and his family moved from Canada to Peshawar, Pakistan.
Khadr’s father, Ahmad Sa’id Khadr (hereinafter Ahmad Khadr) was a senior al Qaeda member and close associate of Osama bin Laden and numerous other senior members of al Qaeda. He has co-founded and worked for Health and Education Project International-Canada (HEPIC), an organization that provided funding to al Qaeda to support terrorist training camps in Afghanistan. In late 1994, Ahmad Khadr was arrested by Pakistani authorities for providing money to support the bombing of the Egyptian Embassy in Pakistan.
While Ahmad Khadr was incarcerated, Omar Khadr returned with his siblings to Canada to stay with their grandparents. Khadr attended school in Canada for one year while his father was imprisoned before returning to Pakistan in 1995.
In 1996, Khadr and his family moved from Pakistan to Jalalabad, Afghanistan.
From 1996 to 2001, the Khadr family traveled throughout Afghanistan and Pakistan, including yearly trips to Osama bin Laden’s compound in Jalalabad. During these travels Omar Khadr is said to have seen or personally met senior al Qaeda leaders, including Osama bin Laden, Doctor Ayman Al-Zawahiri, Muhammad Atef and Saif al Adel. They allegedly also visited various al Qaeda training camps and guest houses.
In summer 2002, Omar Khadr allegedly received approximately one month of private al Qaeda basic training consisting in the use of rocket propelled grenades, rifles, pistols, hand grenades and explosives. He is said to have conducted surveillance and reconnaissance against the U.S. military.
Khadr is also said to have received one month of land mine training and to have joined a group of al Qaeda operatives, to have converted land mines to improvised explosive devices and to have planted them in the ground where, based on previous surveillance, U.S. troops were expected to be traveling.
On July 27, 2002, Khadr and other Al Qaeda members allegedly engaged U.S. soldiers when the latter surrounded their compound. During the firefight, Khadr is said to have thrown a grenade killing First Class Sergeant Christopher Speer 