Pasko Ljubicic
31.05.2016
facts

Pasko Ljubicic was born on 15 November 1965 in Nezirovici in the Municipality of Busovaca, Bosnia-Herzegovina. Pasko Ljubicic served in the military police of the Croatian Defence Council (HVO).
The HVO was the supreme executive, administrative and military body of the HZ H-B/HR-B (Croatian Community of the Herceg-Bosna/Croatian Republic of Herceg-Bosna), created in 1991. This community, on its way to becoming a republic, defined itself as a separate or distinct entity within the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
In January 1993, Pasko Ljubicic became Commander of the 4th Battalion of the HVO Military Police a position he held until 1st July 1993 when he was replaced by Vladimir Santic (see “related cases”).
From January 1993, Pasko Ljubicic was the most senior officer in all of the units of the HVO military police in the operations zone of central Bosnia. In his position as Commander of the 4th Battalion of the HVO Military Police, he was responsible for both implementing and executing the decisions and orders handed down by senior commanders.
As such, Pasko Ljubicic, acting alone or together with other members of the 4th Battalion of the military police who were under his orders and also with other members of the HVO, is accused of planning, instigating, ordering, committing or otherwise aiding and abetting in the planning, preparation or execution of a crime against humanity by persecuting Bosnian Muslims for political, racial or religious reasons, in the towns and villages of the municipalities of Vitez and Busovaca.
The persecutions were reportedly carried out by means of systematic or generalised attacks against the towns and villages inhabited by the Bosnian Muslims notably in Ahmici, Santici, Nadioci and Pirici. The attacks were said to have been both preceded and followed by persecutions in the form of murder and inhumane and cruel treatment of Bosnian Muslim civilians.
Furthermore, these persecutions were perpetrated through the wanton, large scale destruction, and looting of Bosnian Muslim homes, of their businesses and buildings dedicated to religion or education and of the property and livestock belonging to civilians.
Finally, hundreds of Bosnian Muslim civilians were said to have been systematically held in detention centres controlled by the HVO. The men held in these detention centres were reportedly beaten and subjected to both physical and psychological abuse. In addition, it is also alleged that they were subjected to unlawful labour in particular through being forced to dig trenches on the front line. Other civilians were expelled from their homes and forcibly transferred to other regions of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Pasko Ljubicic surrendered voluntarily on 21 November 2001. He was transferred on the same day to the ICTY (International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia). 