Casimir Bizimungu
02.05.2016
facts

Casimir Bizimungu was born in 1951 in Nyamugari commune, Ruhengeri district (préfecture), Rwanda. He became a medical doctor and held the position of Director of Public Health, at Butare University Teaching Hospital. Between 1987 and 1993, he held on several occasions the portfolios of Minister of Foreign Affairs and that of Minister of Health.
From 9 April to mid-July 1994, he held the office of Minister of Health in the Interim Government. In this capacity, he was responsible for government health policy. He exercised authority and control over all the institutions and staff members under his ministry. He furthermore attended Cabinet meetings where he was informed about the socio-political situation in the country and where he was apprised of government policy. He also participated in formulating the policies adopted and implemented by the Interim Government.. Moreover, Bizimungu was a member of the central committee of the Mouvement Républicain National pour la Démocratie et le Développement (MRND), the government party.
From late 1990 until July 1994, Bizimungu is said to have joined, and become wholly dedicated to the elaboration and execution of a plan to exterminate Tutsis. This plan consisted of, among other things, recourse to hatred and ethnic violence, the training of, and distribution of weapons to, militiamen as well as the preparation of lists of persons to be eliminated. In the execution of the plan, Bizimungu allegedly organized, ordered and participated in the massacres.
Around 12 April 1994, the Minister of Finance is said to have gone to the Gitarama prefectural offices and demanded that all of the money in the safe be handed over to him. He reportedly stated that this money was destined to buy weapons for the Interahamwe (an extremist Hutu militia), in order to commit massacres, and that Casimir Bizimungu was mandated to travel abroad to negotiate the purchase of these weapons.
Between 11 April and 14 July 1994, Bizimungu and other Ministers allegedly travelled to several of the country’s districts, such as Butare, Kibuye and Gitarama, in order to supervise the implementation of the Government’s instructions and directives, particularly in matters of civil defense and security. As a result of their many travels, they allegedly knew, or should have known, that massacres against the civilian population of the Tutsis were being committed. However, on no occasion did they act to stop the massacres, or to punish those responsible.
Between 8 April and 14 July 1994, Ministers, district administrators (préfets), mayors, civil servants and soldiers of the army ordered, encouraged, committed and helped to commit massacres of Tutsis and moderate Hutus in several districts such as Butare, Kibuye, Kigali, Gitarama and Gisenyi. Bizimungu allegedly knew or should have known that his subordinates had committed, or were about to commit, such crimes, and did nothing to prevent them or punish the perpetrators. It is considered therefore that he failed in his duty to ensure the security of the population of Rwanda.
Between April and July 1994, the members of the Interim Government including Bizimungu, by virtue of their function, their speeches, orders, directives, acts and omissions, are said to have exercised control over the local authorities and militias, particularly over the Interahamwe (an extremist Hutu militia). From 6 April 1994, these authorities and militias, in concert with the army were said to have committed massacres against Tutsis and moderate Hutus throughout the whole country. The Interim Government, of which Bizimungui was a member, allegedly knew of these crimes.
From the time the massacres started in April 1994, the Centre Hospitalier de Kigali (CHK) had taken in numerous wounded Tutsi from various areas of the city. On several occasions, soldiers, whose duty it was to guard the hospital, selected Tutsi patients and killed them on the spot. A list of the hospital staff of Tutsi descent was drawn up and several people on the list were killed. The massacres at the CHK were allegedly reported to the Interim Government, particularly to Bizimungu, the Minister of Health, during the Ministerial Meetings. However, it was alleged that Bizimungu never took the necessary measures to prevent the crimes or to punish the perpetrators.
Towards the end of April 1994, numerous Tutsi went to the Butare university hospital to seek refuge or to receive treatment for their wounds. On several occasions, different departmental authorities demanded that the refugees and patients prove their identity. Those identified as Tutsis were either killed on the spot or taken away to be executed elsewhere. Bizimungu, as Minister of Health, allegedly never took the necessary measures to prevent these crimes or to punish the perpetrators.
Between April and June 1994, several people found refuge at the Kabgayi secondary school for nurses in Gitarama district, where students and staff were already located. On several occasions during this period, soldiers and Interahamwe militiamen abducted and raped female Tutsi students and refugees. Bizimungu was said to have taken none of the necessary measures to prevent these crimes or to punish the perpetrators.
Towards mid-July 1994, confronted with the advance of the FPR (Front Patriotique Rwandais, an opposition movement led by Paul Kagame, consisting mainly of Tutsi refugees), Bizimungu fled Rwanda.
Casimir Bizimungu was arrested, on request of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), on 11 February 1999 near his residence in the residential area of Hurlingham in Nairobi/ Kenya. On 23 February 1999 he was transferred to the United Nations prison complex in Arusha, Tanzania. 