Benjamin Sarmento
28.04.2016
facts

Benjamin Sarmento was born on 2 February 1960 in Holarua, Sub-district of Same, Manufahi District, East Timor.
East Timor, a former Portuguese colony was invaded by Indonesia in 1975. Indonesian forces were confronted with a continuous resistance from the East Timorese population during the occupation years.
In 1999 Indonesia agreed to a United Nations-organized popular consultation to determine the future status of the territory. In the meantime, however, the Indonesian army established and trained pro-Indonesian militias in East Timor who initiated in early 1999 an orchestrated campaign of violence.
Nevertheless, on 30 August 1999 almost 80% of the East Timorese people voted for independence. Security was not restored until the Australian – led military operation (INTERFET) entered East Timor in late September 1999. Soon after the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) was created, and mandated to “exercise all legislative and executive authority, including the administration of justice.”
One of the numerous militia groups which operated throughout East Timor and supported autonomy within Indonesia was the Ablai militia group (Aku Berjuang Lestarikan Amanat Integrasi, which literally means “I struggle for a perpetual integration mandate”). The Ablai militia group operated between April and October 1999 in the Manufahi District. It had about 2,000 members that were divided into groups operating in different villages. One of these groups was the Tim Sasurut Ablai militia group which operated from the Leubrema village under the leadership of Bernadino Da Costa, Benjamin Sarmento and Romeiro Tilman.
According to the indictment, between April 1999 and October 1999, the Tim Sasurat Ablai militia group perpetrated acts of violence, including intimidations, unlawful detentions, numerous murders, forcible deportations of around 15,000 villagers to West Timor and other acts of prosecution, against the civilian population in Manufahi District who were considered to be pro-independence.
Sarmento was arrested on 11 September 2000 and brought before the Special Panel for Serious Crimes of the Dili District Court. 