Petar Ciric
18.04.2016
facts

Petar Ćirić was born on 6 June 1968 in Vrbas, Republic of Serbia. He was a member of a militia unit called the Vukovar Territorial Defence force (TO), which was operating within the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA). He was charged with having taken part in the killing and physical injuring of prisoners of war in Ovčara in November 1991 after the fall of Vukovar.
On 20 November 1991, 400 people, mainly Croats, who had taken refuge in the Vukovar Hospital and who had previously surrendered their weapons to the JNA soldiers, were led away by soldiers of the JNA. They were transported to the JNA barracks and then handed over to the Vukovar TO force.
There they were humiliated and threatened before being transported to a farm near Ovčara where they were beaten up by members of the Vukovar TO. The captives were forced to run between two lines of soldiers. Standing on one of the lines, the accused, Petar Ćirić, beat and physically injured the captives as they passed.
Afterwards, after a list with their identification details had been made, the prisoners of war were divided into groups of 10 to 20 people, and then loaded on a tractor and transported in several trips to Grabovo, a site one kilometre away from Ovčara. According to the indictment, Ćirić was a member of a firing squad that was created at Grabovo. The captives were lined up and shot dead. After the massacre, the soldiers were reported to have buried the bodies of the victims at the same spot.
On his return from Grabovo to Ovčara, the accused engaged in the execution of the last remaining group of around ten prisoners, which took place in front of the hangar. The soldiers were alleged to have killed at least 264 Croats and other non-Serbs taken from the Vukovar Hospital, of whom one hundred and ninety-three have been positively identified. According to the indictment, among the victims were members of the Croatian armed forces, militias, voluntary units and persons escorting those armed forces albeit not directly belonging to them. 