Mario Cerkez
02.05.2016
facts

Mario Cerkez was born on 29 March 1959 in Rijeka, in the municipality of Vitez, Bosnia-Herzegovina. He is married and the father of three children. Before the conflict he worked as a car mechanic and as an employee in the SPS factory in Vitez.
Mario Cerkez was one of the founding members of the HVO (Croatian Defence Council) in Vitez in April 1992.
The HVO was the supreme executive, administrative and military body of the HZ H-B/HR-B (Croatian Community of the Herceg-Bosna/Croatian Republic of Herceg-Bosna), created in 1991. This community, and subsequently republic, defined itself as a separate or distinct entity within the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Within the HVO, Mario Cerkez exercised the function of Commander of the Vitez Brigade. In this position, he reported to Tihomir Blaskic (see “related cases”), who, at the time, was the HVO Commander for the Central Bosnia Operational Zone.
Mario Cerkez in his position exercised control in various ways over military matters: he negotiated cease fire agreements with the military representatives of the opposing side, members of the Muslim community; he negotiated with representatives of the United Nations; he ordered the deployment of troops and other units under his command and was in control of the conditions of detention and the treatment of civilian prisoners.
Mario Cerkez, therefore, had control over the arrest and detention of hundreds of Muslim civilians (around 2200) within the scope of his function as Commander of the HVO Brigade in Vitez. These prisoners were a source of pressure and blackmail against the ABH (Bosnian Muslim Army). These civilian prisoners were detained over long periods. They were subjected to inhumane treatment, compelled to do forced labour (digging trenches) and used as human shields. During their internment, certain of these prisoners were killed or murdered.
Mario Cerkez gave himself in on 6 October 1997. He was transferred to the ICTY (International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia) on the same day. 