Julio Coronel Carbajal D'Angelo
25.04.2016
facts

Julio Coronel Carbajal D’Angelo was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the Peruvian Army on 1 January 1975. In 1983 he was second-in-command of the second Infantry Division, whom he commanded to carry out military operations in the “Los Cabitos” barracks in Ayacucho.
According to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, created in July 2001 to investigate the domestic armed violence in Peru between 1980 and 2000 the barracks were the main centre of confinement, torture, disappearances and extra-judicial execution in Peru during the years 1983, 1984 and 1985.
Allegedly military personnel kidnapped victims by knocking on the doors of their houses in Huamango very early in the morning or very late at night, taking advantage of the fact that at this time there was a curfew in Peru. The victims were tortured and accused of being terrorists; however in the political context at this time everyone was considered a terrorist, except those who surrendered to torture easily.
It is alleged that, in the Los Cabitos Barracks, crimes of torture were committed, detainees were subjected to inhumane, cruel mistreatment, and humiliations such as: hanging from the ceiling beams, punches and kicks. They were beaten with hard objects, electrocuted on their genitals and beaten senseless. Female detainees were sexually abused while hanging from ceiling beams. They were immersed in cylinders of water or so-called “pools” while tied to tables, to simulate a drowning sensation. They were made to listen as the soldiers beat and insulted their close relatives (spouses, children); they put them in helicopters then suspended them by a cord threatening to drop them at any moment; they kept them cooped up, with their heads covered by bags or sacks, without food or eating only leftovers, with no place for them to go to the toilet. There were also sexual crimes against women and children.
Allegedly bags were puts over the heads of the victims by military personnel dressed as civilians; they asked them for their information then detained them in cubicles which were one metre square in size and had only a corrugated iron roof. In a search carried out in Los Cabitos, 81 bodies were found of those who had disappeared and were probably killed: men, women, children and babies. Furthermore they found bones and ashes in four ovens, where it is assumed that they cremated other victims.
On 28 August 2003 in the final report the Commission recommended they start a trial for the “Los Cabitos” case in which Carbajal D’Angelo is accused for his role as second-in-command of the second Infantry Division of the Peruvian Army, for being in charge of the barracks mentioned and for the forced disappearance and torture of 54 people. He is accused alongside other members of the barracks. 