Sadao Araki
27.04.2016
facts

Sadao Araki was born on 26 of May 1877 in Tokyo.
After his studies at the Academy of the Japanese Imperial Army, where he graduated in November 1897, he quickly moved up the military hierarchy and was promoted to be Second Lieutenant in June of 1898. He served in the first imperial regiment during the Russian-Japanese war between 1904-1905.
At the end of the war, he began his studies at the School for Military Personnel. After obtaining his degree, he was sent to St. Petersburg as a military attaché during the First World War, where after he served in Vladisvostock during the Japanese intervention against the Red Army. In the army he was considered as an expert of the Soviet Union and fanatically opposing communism.
Sadao Araki continued his progress in the military hierarchy. In 1931, being a Lieutenant-general, he was appointed Inspector-general of the military training.
In December 1931, Sadao Araki was appointed to be the Minister for war in the cabinet of Prime Minister Inukai. In office, he particularly supported research projects on biological and chemical warfare. He equally represented the politics of the Japanese army in Manchuria aimed to place the territory under Japanese control. He was in office until January, 1934. Then he became a member of the supreme Council of War.
In 1935, Sadao Araki was ennobled and received the title of ’baron’.
He retired from military in March, 1936.
From 1937 to 1939, he was Minister of education. This position enabled him to infuse his ideas of war into the national education system.
On the political scene, Sadao Araki was considered as the leader of the radical faction of the Japanese army. In 1924, he founded a secret society of the extreme right, Kokuhonsha, gathering numerous people of high positions in the executive power and the military. A few years later, he joined an extreme right wing political faction within the Japanese Army, called Kodaha. He stood for totalitarianism, militarism and Japanese expansionism.
In 1940, Sadao Araki was appointed state councilor.
At the end of the war, he was arrested and incarcerated to Sugamo prison to be put on trial before the International Military Tribunal for the Far-East. 