César Manriquez Bravo
07.06.2017
Facts

César Manriquez Bravo was a general in the Chilean Armed Forces and chief of the Metropolitan Intelligence Brigade (BIM) of the National Intelligence Directorate (DINA), the secret police force created by Augusto Pinochet after his rise to power in the 1973 military coup. Between 5 January 1981 and 5 January 1982, Manriquez was Undersecretary of War of the military regime. While holding these positions, he was allegedly involved in the enforced disappearance and extrajudicial killings of political opponents of the Pinochet regime. In particular, he is accused of being involved in the following events:
ESTADIO NACIONAL
Between 11 September and 7 November 1973, in the immediate aftermath of the coup d’état, the Chilean Army detained thousands of civilians in the Estadio Nacional stadium in Santiago de Chile, including approximately 1’000 students and staff of the State Technical University. In his capacity as commander of the detention center, Manriquez allegedly allegedly oversaw the torture and killing of many of the detainees, including prominent musician and activist Víctor Jara, who was executed in the stadium on 15 September 1973.
VILLA GRIMALDI
Villa Grimaldi, a private estate that was seized by the army following the coup, functioned as the primary detention facility of the Pinochet regime between 1974 and 1977. Nicknamed “Terranova Barracks” by government forces, the villa also served as headquarters for the BIM and its two sub-units, Caupolicán and Purén, which were tasked with the systematic repression of regime opponents in Santiago. In November 1974, Manriquez relinquished command of BIM operations and took over supervision of the detention facility, which allegedly included overseeing widespread interrogation, torture and killing of political prisoners by DINA agents.
THE “OPERACION COLOMBO”
In July 1975, the Argentinian magazine LEA and the Brazilian newspaper O Novo Dia published a list of 119 “militants” that had reportedly been killed. Most of the names belonged to members of the Revolutionary Left Movement (Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria (MIR)), political opponents of Pinochet and his government. The articles falsely claimed that those named had died in Argentina, either during infighting among the Left or in clashes with security forces in the lead up to the country’s 1976 military coup. This was later revealed to be an attempt to cover up the disappearance of 119 political dissidents, who had been kidnapped, tortured and killed by DINA operatives at various secret detention camps in Chile. The story was planted in foreign publications by the Pinochet government and reproduced by government-controlled Chilean newspapers.
Operation Colombo is considered the first episode of “Operacion Condor”, which was a secret collaboration, conducted in the mid-1970s, between the military dictatorships of Chile, Argentina and Brazil to eliminate regime opponents. Operacion Condor included assassination and intelligence-gathering, dubbed counter-terrorism, and is estimated to have left 50’000 murdered, 30’000 disappeared (and presumed dead) and 400’000 incarcerated. 