Milivoj Petkovic
04.05.2016
facts

Milivoj Petkovic was born on 11 October 1949 in Sibenik, Socialist Republic of Croatia. He graduated from the military academy of the Yugoslav National Army (“JNA”) and held the rank of lieutenant-colonel when he left the JNA on or about 25 July 1991 and joined the Croatian Army. On or about 14 April 1992, he was assigned to the command of the Croatian Army’s forward command centre in the town of Grude, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was or became the top command staff of the HVO armed forces. From April 1992 until 24 July 1993, he served as the overall commander of the HVO armed forces, as “Chief of the HVO Main Staff.” On or about 26 April 1994, he was again named the overall HVO commander, and he remained in this position until 5 August 1994.
According to the indictment, Milivoj Petkovic, on or before 18 November 1991 to April 1994 and thereafter, established and participated in a joint criminal enterprise to politically and militarily subjugate, permanently remove and ethnically cleanse Bosnian Muslims and other non-Croats who lived in areas on the territory of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina which were claimed to be part of the Croatian Community (and later Republic) of Herceg-Bosna, and to join these areas as part of a “Greater Croatia,” whether in the short-term or over time and whether as part of the Republic of Croatia or in close association with it, by force, fear or threat of force, persecution, imprisonment and detention, forcible transfer and deportation, appropriation and destruction of property and other means.
The same indictment alleged that, from May 1992 and thereafter, he participated in the ethnic cleansing of the town and municipality of Prozor, of the municipality of Gorjni Vakif, of the towns of Sovici and Doljani, and of the municipality of Mostar, by attacking the Bosnian Muslims, and by plundering, burning and destroying Bosnian Muslims’ homes and other properties, by arresting and detaining massively a huge number of them, by using against them cruel treatment, sexual violence, killings and other persecutions.
The HVO used the Heliodrom Camp, just south of Mostar town, as a detention centre where the Bosnian Muslims from Mostar were detained, between September 1992 and April 1994; the prison population averaged several thousand persons, with an estimated maximum of about 6,000 detainees held at any one time. Conditions at the Heliodrom concentration camp were inhumane. The Vojno and Ljubuski Camps, north of Mostar, were also used to hold Bosnian Muslims in detention. Detainees were often subjected to particularly severe mistreatment and used as forced labour, before being deported, between April 1993 and March 1994.
In the municipalities of Stolac and Capljina, during the year 1993, most of the Bosnian Muslim men were arrested and detained in harsh condition, some of them were killed. The HVO systematically removed Bosnian Muslim women, children and elderly from their homes and ultimately expelled them; their houses were destroyed.
From April to September 1993, the HVO used the Dretelj District Military Prison to hold arrested and captured Serbs and about 2700 Bosnian Muslim men. The detainees were subjected to beatings and cruel treatment; the HVO acts and practices resulted in the serious injury and occasional death of many Bosnian Muslim detainees. The Gabela District Military Prison was used in the same way, from 8 June 1993 to April 1994. During the principal time of its use, the HVO, at any one time, confined there about 1,200 Muslim men, including boys younger than age sixteen and men older than sixty, irrespective of their civilian or military status. Detainees were subjected to beatings and cruel treatment. The HVO acts and practices resulted in the death or serious injury of many Bosnian Muslim detainees. Many Bosnian Muslims detained at Gabela Prison were subsequently deported by the HVO authorities to other countries. In the municipality of Vares, the HVO used two schools as detention centres, where Bosnian Muslim men were detained in comparable conditions.
Milivoj Petkovic voluntarily surrendered to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on 5 April 2004. 