Milan Gvero
31.05.2016
facts

Milan Gvero was born in Mrkonjic-Grad, on 4 December 1937. After having studied in Banja Luka, he entered the military academy of Belgrade, where he received his masters degree thanks to his thesis on political sociology. He had never received any training in the strategies of war.
Officially, Assistant to the Commander in Chief of the Main Staff of the Bosnian Serb Army (VRS), for morale, legal, and religious affairs he was unofficially the spokesman for Ratko Mladic and his favourite chess partner. Promoted to the rank of Colonel, he was also the spokesman of the Federal Defence Secretariat.
In his official position, within the main staff of the VRS, Milan Gvero was one of seven assistant commanders who reported directly to the commander of the main staff, General Ratko Mladic. As such, Milan Gvero would have had knowledge of the project aimed at forcing the Muslim population out of the enclaves of Srebrenica and Zepa, and would have participated in the execution of this project, as stated in the indictment.
On 6 July 1995 or around this date, and according to the order given by general Zivanovic on 2 July 1995, units of the Drina corps bombarded Srebrenica and attacked lookouts held by the Dutch battalion of United Nations (Dutchbat) situated in the enclave. On 9 July 1995, President Radovan Karadzic modified the initial order and approved the taking of the Srebrenica enclave. The order was passed on by the general Zdravko Tolimir to the accused person, at the advanced post of command of the Drina corps. The attack launched by the Drina corps against the enclave of Srebrenica, notably its bombardment, and the attacks against the other lookouts of United Nations continued until 11 July 1995, date in which the forces of the brigade of Zvornik, the brigade of Bratunac, the 10th detachment of sabotage and the other units of the VRS entered Srebrenica. On 11 July 1995, NATO planes released bombs to try to stop the VRS. In spite of these efforts, Srebrenica fell to the hands of the VRS on 11 July 1995.
According to the indictment, Milan Gvero, together with other VRS and MUP officers named in the indictment, was a member of, and knowingly participated in, a joint criminal enterprise, the common purpose of which was, among other things, to forcibly transfer the women and children from the Srebrenica enclave to Kladanj on 12 and 13 July 1995 and to capture, detain, summarily execute by firing squad, bury, and rebury thousands of Bosnian Muslim men and boys aged 16 to 60 from the Srebrenica enclave between 12 July 1995 until 19 July 1995.
The joint criminal enterprise, in which Milan Gvero was a member and participant, was conceived and designed by General Ratko Mladic and others on 11 and 12 July 1995, and administered and carried out by members of the VRS and MUP forces through the attack on the Srebrenica enclave.
During the several days following the attack on Srebrenica, the Bosnian Serb Army and Ministry of the Interior forces captured, detained, summarily executed, and buried over 7,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys from the Srebrenica enclave, and forcibly transferred the Bosnian Muslim women and children of Srebrenica out of the town.
Milan Gvero voluntary surrendered on 24 February 2005 to the ICTY (International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia). 