Milan Devcic
05.05.2016
facts 

Milan Devcic was born in Lovas, Vukovar municipality in the Republic of Croatia on 23 January 1962. He trained as a police officer.
On 10 October 1991, two days after Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia, Devcic and other members of a newly-constituted group of Croatian Serb volunteers, ‘’Dusan Silni’’, or “Dusan the Powerful”, launched an attack on Lovas, even though they knew that the village had not been protected and there were no Croat troops present. The indiscriminate attack resulted in 21 civilians killed and many residential buildings destroyed.
After seizing the village, the group set up a new local government. Devcic became a police commander. The new authorities issued discriminatory measures against non-Serb population of Lovas. Croat civilians were forced to wear white armbands and their houses were also marked with white sheets. The village was under curfew and the population was denied freedom of movement. Subsequently, the marked houses were looted and then set on fire.
Moreover, the group arrested, interrogated and tortured civilian persons in improvised detention facilities. Devcic allegedly interrogated them personally and beat, physically injured and threatened to kill or displace them. He also did nothing when his subordinates were committing illegal acts against detainees. Allegedly, he even instigated and encouraged members of his group to do the same. As a result, 27 people were killed.
On 17 October 1991 all male inhabitants of Lovas aged between 18 and 65 were ordered to gather in a specific place in the village. They were detained overnight. The next morning 20 were released and around 50 men were ordered to do assigned field work outside the village. When they were walking to the place under a military escort, one of the civilians was killed because he was unable to keep pace due to injuries he had sustained the previous night. Subsequently, they encountered a mine field. Several of the mines were set off, killing some of the men. Simultaneously, the guards opened fire on the civilians. The incident resulted in twenty deaths.
Devcic was detained on 29 May 2007. He was accused of arbitrary arrest, torture and the murder of Croatian civilians. 