German Americo Montenegro
26.04.2016
facts

German Americo Montenegro was born on 25 May 1931 in Mercedes, Buenos Aires. He is the son of German Arturo and Francisca Santos Gelves. He holds the “Libreta de Enrolamiento” N° 4.901.964 (National ID Card).
He is an educated and married man, living in Mercedes, Buenos Aires. In 2010, he was a retired police officer.
Montenegro was brought before the N°1 Oral Tribunal of San Martin in Buenos Aires as the police officer in charge of the police station General Sarmiento n°2 – so called Bella Vista – in the region of Buenos Aires during the months of June and July 1977. This police station he was heading was under the command of the Military Institute based in the “Campo de Mayo”.
Montenegro had to face charges relating to Mario Luis Perreti (case N°2023) who was deprived of his liberty on 7 June 1977 in the locality of San Miguel – urban district General Sarmiento, region of Buenos Aires – by an armed group controlled by the National Army. After being held in the secret centre of detention so called “La Casita” in the Campo de Mayo, Perreti was on 13 July 1977 transferred to the Bella Vista police station which Montenegro was heading. However, on 27 July 1977, Montenegro was not in command of the police station anymore since it then successively fell under the jurisdiction of the Federal Security, the Detention Institute of the Federal Capital, and finally the Tactical Department of the Federal Security. Perreti was eventually free on 17 November 1977.
It was argued by the Prosecutor that Montenegro was criminally responsible for the detention of Mario Luis Perreti in the Bella Vista police station from 13 July to 27 July 1977. They accused him of being a direct responsible, as the head of the Bella Vista police station, of the illegal deprivation of liberty of Perreti. It consisted in receiving and holding Perreti with no respect for the legal provisions. They also specified that Montenegro followed informal orders from the Military Institute Command, through the General Lemos School.
As for the former disappeared detainees association (hereafter “the Association”), they requested the tribunal for joining the cases of Eugenio Guanabens Perello, Reynaldo Bignone and Montenegro as far as Mario Luis Perreti is concerned. Indeed, they claimed that the three of them were participating in a general plan of genocide through this detention. Therefore, the Association accused Montenegro, together with Perello and Bignone, of being indirectly responsible of the illegal deprivation of liberty of Perreti, aggravated by the use of violence, threats and torture, and its duration.
Accordingly, Montenegro was ordered to appear in Court on 2 November 2009. 