Abraham Lancerio Gómez
14.04.2016
facts

Abraham Lancerio Gomez was born in 1963. He was an officer in the Guatemalan National Police, serving in the Special Operations Brigade during the 1980s.
At that time Guatemala was governed by military regimes which were responsible for thousands of deaths and which subjected the civilian population to severe repression. On 23 March 1982, General Efrain Rios Montt came to power by a coup d’état against the then President General Fernando Romeo Lucas Garcia, in order to prevent the accession to power of the newly elected President Angel Anibal Guevara. During this period an increasing militarization of the country led to increased massacres of civilians by the military.
On 8 August 1983, General Oscar Mejia Victores, at the time the Defense Minister of General Rios Montt, overthrew the latter and assumed the function of de facto President. Although repression against the civilian population continued under his government, General Mejia allowed a controlled return to democracy in Guatemala beginning with elections on 1 April 1984 of a Constituent Assembly to draft a Constitution, then democratic elections to form a new government which came into power in 1986.
However, before all of this was fully realized and still under the government of General Mejia Victores, Abraham Lancerio Gomez was implicated, together with Hector Roderico Ramirez Rios, also an officer in the National Police Special Operations Brigade, in the detention and forced disappearance of the Guatemalan activist, Edgar Fernando Garcia.
Edgar Fernando Garcia was a student leader and a union activist in the 1980s in Guatemala City. He went missing on 18 February 1984, at age 27, after having been detained by agents of the National Police Special Operations Brigade. The arrest of Garcia was recorded in a confidential document of the Guatemalan military intelligence, known as “the Military Journal “which was made public in 1999 and according to which his arrest was motivated by his participation in union and student associations qualified as being “in opposition or insurgent” within the context of the internal armed conflict in Guatemala, which occurred over a period of 36 years between 1960 and 1996. In 2012, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights condemned the Guatemalan State for these facts.
In 2009, Abraham Lancerio Gomez was arrested and charged together with Hector Roderico Ramirez Rios for their responsibility in the abduction and forced disappearance of Edgar Fernando Garcia. 