Mohammad Noer Muis
02.05.2016
facts

Colonel Mohammad Noer Muis was born in 1953, probably in Aceh. He has a military background and exercised his profession in various Indonesian provinces as well as in Iraq in the United Nations Peacekeeping Force. He was Military Commander of East Timor from 13 August 1999 till 30 March 2000.
The accusations of criminal responsibility against him go back to the events which took place in East Timor in 1999. Around 1400 people were killed in the months leading up to a referendum on independence for the region, organised by the United Nations on 30 August 1999, and during the days following this vote. In addition, more than 250’000 people were transferred by force or fled to West Timor or Indonesia. A large number of people were also victims of other violations of human rights, notably of torture and rape. These crimes were carried out by the militia with the support and coordination of members of the armed forces, the police and the Indonesian Civilian Authorities in order to influence the outcome of the referendum and to upset adoption of the results of the referendum.
The direct responsibility of Mohammad Noer Muis was also called into question in certain specific instances. In particular, it was reported that troops under his command committed a massacre in the Dili diocesan buildings on 5 September 1999.Moreover he refused to come to the assistance of 5000 people in refuge there who were attacked on the following day at the residence of Bishop Belo. He was also said to have given support to the attack against the church in Suai on 6 September 1999, which resulted in the loss of 26 lives (and even up to 60 deaths, according to certain reports).
Following these events, Mohammad Noer Muis was promoted to the rank of Brigadier General.
On 22 February 2003, Mohammad Noer Muis, and seven other highly placed military and civilian individuals, were indicted by “The Serious Crimes Unit”, a body set up by the United Nations Transitional Administration of East Timor (UNTAET) Colonel Mohammad Noer Muis was born in 1953, probably in Aceh. He has a military background and exercised his profession in various Indonesian provinces as well as in Iraq in the United Nations Peacekeeping Force. He was Military Commander of East Timor from 13 August 1999 till 30 March 2000.
The accusations of criminal responsibility against him go back to the events which took place in East Timor in 1999.Around 1400 people were killed in the months leading up to a referendum on independence for the region, organised by the United Nations on 30 August 1999, and during the days following this vote . In addition, more than 250’000 people were transferred by force or fled to West Timor or Indonesia. A large number of people were also victims of other violations of human rights, notably of torture and rape. These crimes were carried out by the militia with the support and coordination of members of the armed forces, the police and the Indonesian Civilian Authorities in order to influence the outcome of the referendum and to upset adoption of the results of the referendum.
The direct responsibility of Mohammad Noer Muis was also called into question in certain specific instances. In particular, it was reported that troops under his command committed a massacre in the Dili diocesan buildings on 5 September 1999.Moreover he refused to come to the assistance of 5000 people in refuge there who were attacked on the following day at the residence of Bishop Belo. He was also said to have given support to the attack against the church in Suai on 6 September 1999, which resulted in the loss of 26 lives (and even up to 60 deaths, according to certain reports).
Following these events, Mohammad Noer Muis was promoted to the rank of Brigadier General.
On 22 February 2003, Mohammad Noer Muis, and seven other highly placed military and civilian individuals, were indicted by “The Serious Crimes Unit”, a body set up by the United Nations Transitional Administration of East Timor (UNTAET). 