Drazen Mikulic
17.04.2016
facts

Drazen Mikulic was born on 19 April 1972 in Tihaljina, Ljubuski Municipality. During the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the armed conflict between the Croatian Defense Council and the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mikulic served as a member of the Croatian Defense Council’s military police at the Dretelj prison in Capljina Municipality from early July 1993 to late August 1993.
The Indictment against Mikulic alleged that while he was stationed at the Dretelj prison, he physically and mentally abused civilian detainees and forced civilian detainees to beat each other.
During Mikulic’s trial, Enver Grabovic, a Bosniak detainee at Dretelj, testified that Mikulic and another soldier beat him for more than half an hour. After the beating, Grabovica said that Mikulic bent down, drank the blood dripping from Enver’s nose, and said “I [drank] the blood of a Balija” (a derogatory term used against Bosniaks). After that, Mikulic allegedly put Grabovica against a wall and opened fire above his head.
In a statement made in July 2006 to members of the State Investigation and Protection Agency, Protected Witness SH1 said that a man presented himslef to the Dretelj detainees and told them that they would be slaughtered with a knife. During questioning by the trial judge, SH1 said that he was 90% sure that that man was Mikulic, based on references from prisoners and guards at Dretelj, although he did not actually see Mikulic.
Witness Ahmet Isakovic, another Dretelj detainee, testified that he once heard a man tell some detainees “My name is Drazen Mikulic. You’ll see what is going to happen to you.” Isakovic further testified that the guards encouraged two detainees, Emir Repak and a man named Trebinjac, to fight each other, which resulted in Repak’s death. However, Isakovic could not identify Mikulic as one of the guards. Mustafa Repak, Emir Repak’s father, also testified about his son’s death during the trial, although he was not present at Dretelj and only learned of Mikulic’s alleged involvement immediately before his testimony from Ahmet Isakovic.
The Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina confirmed the Indictment against Mikulic on 24 August 2011. Mikulic plead not guilty on 20 September 2011. Mikulic’s trial before Section I for War Crimes in the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina began on 8 November 2011. He was sentenced 14 September 2012. 