Aleksandar Vasiljevic
22.04.2016
facts

Aleksandar Vasiljevic was born on the 8 July 1938 in the village of Vitkovac, Kraljevo municipality, Serbia.
Vasiljevic completed military school with the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA) and entered into service in 1961. Between the 15 June 1991 and the 8 May 1992 he held the position of chief of the JNA Security Service. On March 8 1992 Vasiljevic retired from active military service in the JNA. In April 1999 Vasiljevic resumed military service with the Army of Yugoslavia and eventually retired from military service in 2001.
Between October 1991 and May 1992, 19 Croatian prisoners of war and civilians died from abuse in the JNA prison camps of Begejici, Stajicevo, Sremska Mitrovica and Nis in Serbia and the Stara Gradiska prison camp in Croatia. A large number of inmates reportedly suffered serious and life-threatening injuries with permanent consequences. Further systematic rape of female prisoners occurred in the camps. Allegedly the prisoners had no access to food, water or other basic necessities. The camps were closed in May 1992 after the JNA retreated from Croatia.
In his position as Chief of Security Vasiljevic was in charge of appointing commanders and officers in the JNA prison camps. He was presumably aware of the breaches of International Humanitarian Law and International War Law in the camps committed by the officers but undertook no actions to stop such behaviour or to punish the perpetrators of such crimes.
In the course of the indictment of Slobodan Milosevic for war crimes in Croatia, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) issued a list of suspects who allegedly committed joint criminal enterprise with Milosevic in Croatia between 1991 and 1992. Vasiljevic was part of the list of the ICTY. However the ICTY decided to restrict the indictment to Milosevic alone and never issued indictments against any of the suspects mentioned in its list. Despite the investigations against him, Vasiljevic acted as an important witness in the trial against Milosevic as well as several other trials in front of the ICTY, during which he usually states the positive intentions of the JNA and during which he has denied responsibility of the JNA for crimes that occurred in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia.
On 11 April 2011 the Osijek Municipal Court, Croatia issued indictments against Vasiljevic and his subordinate Lieutenant Colonel Miroslav Zivanovic for war crimes. Subsequently Croatia requested that Serbia extradite the indictees. 