Manuel Antonio Noriega
26.04.2016
facts

Manuel Antonio Noriega was born in Panama on 11 February 1934, and received a military education at the Chorrillos Military School in Peru. After his military career, Noriega took de facto power in the country in 1983, until 20 December 1989.
From the end of the 1950s until the 1980s Noriega collaborated with CIA. In parallel, he managed to establish himself as a key actor in the Medellín Cartel’s drug trade.
In 1983 Noriega assumed the position of Commander of the National Guard, which he transformed into the National Defence Forces of Panama. From then on, Noriega harshly persecuted his opponents and manipulated electoral results.
During this time, Hugo Spadafora, an open critic of Manuel Noriega who lived in exile, accused Noriega of having links to drug trafficking and announced his intentions of returning to Panama to oppose him. Spadafora was captured in a bus by a death squad at the Costa Rican border. Later, his decapitated head was found wrapped in United States Postal Services bag with signs of extreme torture. His family and other groups asked for the murder to be investigated. The then-President of Panama, Nicolás Ardito Barletta, promised he would appoint an investigative commission, but he was forced to resign by Panama Defence Forces.
Colonel Roberto Díaz Herrera, second-in-command of the armed forces, was forced to retire in 1986 by direct order of Noriega. Díaz Herrera made public statements in June 1987 accusing General Noriega of electoral fraud in 1984, political assassinations and complicity in the death of General Omar Torrijos Herrera in 1981. The statements led to strong popular protests and the establishment of a movement called the “Cruzada Civilista Nacional”.
In February 1988, Noriega was charged with drug trafficking in the state of Florida, United States, and the then-President Eric Arturo del Valle attempted to remove him from his position as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces. However, the National Assembly opposed Noriega’s dismissal and instead deposed President del Valle, who later was forced to flee to the United States. Del Valle was replaced by Manuel Solís Palma, a Noriega’s ally and former Minister of Education.
As a result of Noriega’s purges of political opponents and his clear connections with drug traffickers, the United States initiated an open blockade of Panama, which exacerbated the already precarious economic situation of the country. During this time, the United States unsuccessfully attempted to negotiate the conditions for Noriega’s retirement from power.
The 1989 elections were marred by grave accusations of manipulation. In May, the electoral results were cancelled by Noriega’s order, and in September the constitution was suspended with Noriega taking control of the country as Head of a war cabinet. In this position, he declared Panama to be in a state of war with the United States.
On 20 December 1989, the United States Army invaded Panama and captured Noriega, who was brought before American courts to face his previous drug trafficking charges. 