Jia Qinglin
12.04.2016
facts

Jia Qinglin was born in March 1940 in Botou, Cangzhou, Hebei Province in China. He is the fourth ranking member of the Politburo Standing Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Chairman of the People’s Political Consultative Conference. Earlier he had served as the CPC Party Chief in the country’s southern Fujian province, and also as mayor of Beijing.
In 1962, Qinglin received a degree from the Hebei University of Technology in electric motor and appliance design and manufacture and later worked as a technician and chief of the Product Management Bureau in the Machine-Building Industry Ministry.
In 1985 he was elected member of the Standing Committee of the CPC Fujian Provincial Committee and subsequently served as a head of the Organization Department of the CPC Fujian Provincial Committee and later was promoted to the governor of Fujian Province.
Between 1996 and 2002 Jia served as Deputy Secretary of the CPC Beijing Municipal Committee, and mayor of Beijing.
On 30 October 1999, the National People’s Congress of China enacted an anti-cult law (Article 300, Criminal Act), effective retroactively, to remove a thousand religious sects in the country, including the Falun Gong, a spiritual discipline based on Buddhism consisting on moral teachings, meditation and exercises.
On 20 November 2001, practitioners of Falun Gong organized a peaceful demonstration in Tiananmen Square in Beijing. Many demonstrators were arrested, held without charges and without access to their families or legal advice. The demonstrators were violently interrogated, and allegedly beaten and deprived of sleep, to force them to reveal the names of other practitioners of Falun Gong and renounce their beliefs. Some inmates were allegedly sexually abused or tortured by the use of electric shocks and other prisoners were allowed to beat detained practitioners in exchange for a pardon or reduced sentences. These events took place under the supervision of the Mayor of Beijing, Qi Liu and Jia Qinglin, who at the time was serving as general secretary of Municipal Committee of Chinese Communist Party in Beijing and is believed to be involved in the crackdown on Falun Gong.
In November 2002 Jia became the fourth-ranking member in Politburo Standing Committee (PSC) of the Communist Party of China. Jias’s successful political career is often attributed to his good relations with his patron Jiang Zemin.
In March 2003, Qinglin was elected chairman of the 10th National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference.
On 2 September 2004, members of the Falun Gong movement filed a complaint for genocide against Jia Qinglin, while he paid a visit to Madrid in his role as chairman of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference. The plaintiffs expected Qinglin to be arrested while he was in the capital of Spain, but the National Court rejected the complaint. 