Mario Acoj Morales
15.04.2016
facts

Mario Acoj Morales, born in 1957, was a member of the Civil Defence Patrols (Patrullas de Autodefensa Civil, PAC), created in 1982 by the former dictator Efraín Ríos Montt, aimed at maintaining control over rural areas of Guatemala.
In 1982, the military maintained a strong presence in the town of Rabinal and soldiers often came to the village of Plan de Sánchez to ask about male residents, and to intimidate members of the local population, particularly those who did not participate in the PAC.
On 18 July 1982, it is alleged that two grenades fell to the east and west of Plan de Sánchez. Around 60 men in military uniforms and armed with assault rifles, arrived in Plan de Sánchez between 2:00 and 3:00 p.m. Soldiers monitored points of entry into the community, while others rounded up the population. Approximately 20 girls between 12 and 20 years of age were separated from older women, children and men and taken to a house where they were raped and then killed. The rest of the population was taken into another house and at around 5:00 p.m., soldiers threw two hand grenades into that house, and then sprayed it with bullets. Small children were hit or kicked to death. Shots were reportedly heard in another location, where four bodies were later found. The soldiers then set fire to the house before leaving the community some hours later.
It is alleged that the next morning, local PAC members and survivors who were not present or had fled the day before were then ordered to bury the bodies, or the community would be bombed. It has been reported that soldiers returned every few days to pillage the houses and threaten survivors.
In 1992 ten survivors of the ‘Plan de Sanchez’ massacre lodged a complaint in Guatemala for the damages suffered in the event. After evidence of the massacre was found in some mass graves in the region, in 1996 the Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office in Guatemala released a report indicating the responsibility of Guatemalan State agents for the events in Plan de Sanchez. 