Gabriel Orlando Vera Navarrete
20.03.2017
Facts

Gabriel Orlando Vera Navarrete was born on 9 May 1958 in Chiclayo, Peru. He joined the Peruvian Army as a technician and served until 2001. In January 1993, he was transferred to the Army Intelligence Directorate (DINTE). He joined a military unit, known as “Grupo Colina” or “Colina Detachment”, an anti-communist death squad active from 1990 until 1994.
As part of the Colina group, Vera Navarrete is accused of having participated in the following events:
1) On 3 November 1991, in the Barrios Altos neighbourhood, six armed individuals attacked a civilian building. They ordered the victims to lie on the floor before firing at them, killing 15 persons, including an eight-year-old boy, and seriously wounding four other persons. One of the injured was permanently disabled. The Colina group was accused of being responsible for these killings.
2) On 24 June 1992, a group of men, dressed in military clothes busted into the house of the Peruvian journalist Pedro Yauri Bustamante, who was advocating for the release of the Ventocilla family, after four members thereof had been kidnapped on 25 May 1992. The journalist was tied up, blindfolded, and kidnapped. He never returned.
3) On 18 July 1992, members of the DINTE and the Colina Group broke into the dormitories of the Enrique Guzmán y Valle National University, better known as La Cantuta. The militaries forced students to leave the dorm and to lie belly-down on the floor. They finally selected and detained nine of them. The soldiers then broke into Professor Hugo Muñoz Sánchez’s home and arrested him as well. The nine students and the professor were later allegedly tortured and executed outside Lima; their bodies were buried in three unmarked graves in Cieneguilla.
In July 1993, investigators found four clandestine graves in Cieneguilla. The graves contained skeletal human remains. The investigators could identify three of the disappeared students as well as the Professor Hugo Muñoz Sánchez. 