Geoffrey D. Miller
27.07.2016
FACTS

Geoffrey D. Miller was born on 8 October 1949 in Gallipolis, Ohio. He holds a Bachelor in History from Ohio State University and a Master of Science in Education Administration from the University of Southern California. Miller joined the US Army in 1972 and was deployed to Germany and Korea before returning to the United States and rising to the rank of Major General.
In November 2002, Miller received command of Joint Task Force Guantanamo (JTF-GTMO), the Cuba-based US detention facilities known as Guantanamo Bay. Once in charge, he streamlined the interrogation process by combining the military police and intelligence units into a single task force. On 2 December 2002, US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld authorised the use of so-called “enhanced interrogation techniques” on the high-value Guantanamo detainee Mohammed al Qahtani. Miller allegedly carried out these techniques against Qahtani himself, as well as being tasked with implementing and overseeing their use against other detainees.
From August to September 2003, Miller visited Abu Ghraib and other US military prisons in Iraq to advise on the interrogation of detainees. In May 2004, a month after the Abu Ghraib prisoner abuse had come to light, he was appointed deputy commanding general for detainee operations for the Multinational Forces in Iraq, and left Guantanamo. He was later accused by some, including his predecessor Janis Karpinski, of encouraging abusive tactics at Abu Ghraib, such as using attack dogs to intimidate detainees. Miller left his position as commanding general for detainee operations in November 2004.
In 2006, he appeared in a number of court-martial cases relating to Abu Ghraib, but invoked his right not to give potentially incriminating testimony under the Fifth Amendment to the US Constitution and Article 31 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. After allegedly being threatened with delayed retirement unless he agreed to testify by the US Senate Armed Services Committee, Miller testified in May 2006 that he had instructed the use of dogs only to maintain custody and control, not for the interrogation of detainees.
He retired from the US army on 31 July 2006, receiving a Distinguished Service Medal for his “innovative” service. Since 2006, Miller has been named in a number of legal complaints for his alleged role in the use of torture in Guantanamo Bay and Abu Ghraib. 