Ljube Boskoski
02.05.2016
facts

Ljube Boskoski was born on 24 October 1960 in the town of Tetovo in the Republic of Macedonia, then a part of the Federal Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia.
From May 2001 until November 2002, Ljube Boskoski held the position of Interior Minister of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM). He was at that time an influential member of the political party in power, namely the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organisation – Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (“VMRO-DPMNE”).
Between Friday 10 August 2001 and Sunday 12 August 2001, a land offensive was launched by the army and the Macedonian police against Albanian civilians and their private property in the village of Ljuboten. During this attack, which was not justified by any pressing military requirements, several Albanian civilians were arrested, placed in detention, subjected to cruel and inhumane treatment and murdered. Several hundred private dwellings and other private holdings were either partially or totally destroyed (cf. Annex A of the Indictment).
In his capacity as Minister of the Interior, Ljube Boskoski had de jure and de facto command and control over the members of the police forces which took part in the alleged crimes.
He was reportedly aware of the crimes which had been committed since he himself was able to ascertain the damage done to the property and the cruel treatment inflicted on the people held in detention on Sunday 12 August 2001. Furthermore, he was reported to have had meetings with those who had participated in the attack and to have requested reports from the police.
He neither opened up investigations into the alleged facts, nor did he prosecute or punish those identified as being responsible for the incriminating offences.
Ljube Boskoski was charged on 22 December 2004 together with Johan Tarculovski with three counts of violations of the laws and customs of war.
After being detained in Croatia from August 2004, he was transferred to the prison quarters of the ICTY (International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia) on 24 March 2005. 