Ephrem Setako
08.05.2016
facts

Ephrem Setako was born in May 1949 in Ruhengeri Prefecture.
At the time of the described events, he was colonel of the Rwandan armed forces (FAR). As such, he led, amongst others, members of the Rwandan army, the presidential guard, the Interahamwe and Amahindure militias. Because of this rank and status in the Army, Ephrem Setako was regarded as a high commander holding effective control over the members of the military.
He is said to have repeatedly expressed his intention to destroy in whole or in part the group of the Tutsis.
He allegedly incited, ordered, aided or encouraged the commission of murder of the Tutsi civilian population.
He is furthermore considered responsible for the training and recruitment of the Amahundure militia, which consequently went from the count of 80 to 600 young members.
Between January and July 1994, he is said to have regularly met with the Interhamwe and influential people, such as politicians, businessmen and members of the local and regional administration of the Nkuli and Mukingo municipalities, to incite the murder of Tutsis.
Amongst other things, between 14 and 31 March 1994, Ephrem Setako is said to have given the Interhamwe members the order to raise road blocks with the purpose of blocking the flight of civilian Tutsi and Hutus that were opposing the National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development (MTND, the presidential party).
He is also said to have delivered different weapons to the militias (rifles, machetes, revolvers, ammunitions and grenades), for example between 1 January and 31 March and on 7 April 1994.
After the death of President Juvénal Habyarimana (6 April 1994), Ephrem Setako allegedly decided, during a meeting in Busogo, that all the Tutsis should be killed as an act of revenge. Thereafter, hundred of Tustis were captured and killed by the Interahamwe. The houses of Tutsis, their land and cattle were plundered, while goods bearing economic value (particularly cattle, houses and trees) were systematically destroyed.
He is also said to have taken part in a meeting where the attack on the municipality of Busogo, where hundreds of Tutsis had sought refuge, was planned.
Furthermore, he is said to have directly ordered the killing of several civilian Tustsi, for example between 1 and 10 February, on the 7 and 8 April 1994. On 8 April 1994, he is also said to have ordered the execution of a Hutu who protested against the murder of his Tutsi wife.
Between 14 and 18 April 1994, he allegedly set in motion the planning of the attack on the Industrial Tribunal of Ruhengeri, where many civilian Tutsis, mainly women, children and elderly people had sought refuge.
Ephrem Setako was arrested in Amsterdam on 25 February 2004. 