Jean-Marie Vianney Mudahinyuka
27.04.2016
facts

Jean-Marie Vianney Mudahinyuka was born on 1 January 1960 in Rwanda. He has admitted that he was a member of the National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development (MRND), the ruling Hutu political party at the time of the genocide, and serving as a leader for the Interahamwe, the MNRD’s youth militia. However, he claims that he withdrew from the MNRD when the genocide of Tutsis began and he has denied any involvement in the genocide.
In 2000, Mudahinyuka migrated to the U.S and entered irregularly under the name of Thierry Rugamba. In addition to changing his name, Mudahinyuka also assumed Burundian nationality and claimed that he was a victim of the 1994 Rwandan genocide. He settled in Bolingbrook, Illinois, where he started working at an African grocery shop.
In 2004, Mudahinyuka was identified by six witnesses as a supposed perpetrator of the atrocities he said he was fleeing described as one of the most zealous supporters of the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi. Mudahinyuka has long been wanted in Kigali, Rwanda on charges of genocide and war crimes. One Illinois witness notified authorities after recognizing the man as someone who committed murder and rape in Rwanda. Special agents with Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s (ICE) Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) conducted an extensive investigation that revealed that Mudahinyuka was a member of a Hutu militia that had committed crimes against humanity.
He was arrested at his house in Romeoville in May 2004 on federal immigration fraud charges, where he allegedly assaulted a Homeland Security agent and attempted to seize his weapon, according to Immigrations and Customs Enforcement.
According to the investigation of the ICTR prosecutor, on 7 April 1994, at Nyamirambo Stadium, Mudahinyuka and accompliced organised political rallies where they called on participants to kill Tutsis and also distributed weapons including machetes and grenades,. It adds that on 17 April 1994, acting under his orders, Mudahinyuka’s bodyguards conducted a house-to-house search in Nyamirambo, rounded up 62 people who were escorted to the stadium and massacred under his supervision. On his Interpol fact file, Mudahinyuka is said to have attacked a family in Mumena Cell, Nyamirambo, on 22 June 1994, and personally killed all its members and on 24 June, he commanded an attack on a school that led to the murder of 600 Tutsis.
Described as “dangerous and violent” on Interpol Red Notice, Mudahinyuka was wanted by the National Public Prosecution Authority (NPPA) in Rwanda and has been on an Interpol Wanted List since November 2009, for crimes against humanity and genocide.
After serving 51 months in prison for immigration fraud and assaulting a customs officer, Mudahinyuka was transferred to ICE custody to be deported. He appealed the deportation all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court, which denied his appeal on 4 November 2010. 