Vladimir Seks
21.04.2016
facts

Vladimir Šeks was born on 1 January 1943 in Osijek (Croatia). He graduated from the Law Faculty in Zagreb in 1966 and practiced law from 1972 to 1981.
In 1981, Šeks was arrested for “anti-state actions” against communist Yugoslavia, and served 13 months in prison.
Vladimir Šeks has been a member of the Croatian Parliament since the country’s independence in 1991, State Prosecutor of the Republic of Croatia from April to August 1992, Deputy Prime Minister from 1992 to 1995 and President of the Parliament from December 2003 to January 2008.
Since January 2008 he is the Vice Speaker of the Parliament and a member of the Croatian Democratic Union (Hrvatska Demokratska Zajednica, HDZ), the main center-right political party in Croatia. Vladimir Šeks was also one of the main drafters of the Croatian Constitution.
During the trial against Branimir Glavaš (general in the Croatian army) and other five co-defendants, for crimes committed against Croatian Serb civilians in Osijek in 1991, witnesses testified that Vladimir Šeks too held a position of command in Osijek.
According to witness Josip Boljkovac, in addition to their formal role, Vladimir Šeks and Branimir Glavaš were unofficial leaders in the town of Osijek. Boljkovac also testified that “During 1991, Osijek was outside the control of the then leadership of the Republic of Croatia and that it was impossible to do anything in the city without Vladimir Seks and the first defendant Branimir Glavas, who were in charge”.
Šeks, called as witness at the trial, recalled that one night found a group of men outside the Regional Crisis Headquarters, and he saw a man lying on the ground, probably dead. He asked what had happened and one of the soldiers told him that the person was a terrorist who jumped over the fence. Šeks reported that to Glavaš and the Colonel Franjo Pejiæ confirmed the event.
From those testimonies it appears that Seks may not have taken any steps with respect to members of the armed forces under his command, or other persons under his control, to prevent and eventually suppress or to report to competent authorities breaches of the Geneva Conventions and of Protocol I.
On 8 May 2009, the Zagreb County Court found Glavaš responsible for having failed to prevent his subordinates from detaining, ill-treating and killing Croatian Serb civilians, and for having directly participated in some of the crimes in his capacity as local military leader in 1991 in Osijek. The same verdict established that, on 29 July 1991, Vladimir Šeks was appointed President of the Regional Crisis Headquarters for the Eastern Slavonija Region. In this capacity Šeks had supreme military and political powers in Slavonija, and was informed about the events that took place in Osijek. Šeks performed this duty until September 1991.
While the Zagreb County Court reports episodes of torture of civilians, Vladimir Šeks has always denied to be involved in or to be aware of acts of torture or other abuses committed on civilians by military personnel.
No investigations have been conducted so far against Šeks. 