Adolf Eichmann
26.04.2016
facts

Adolf Eichmann was born on 19 March 1906 in Solingen, Germany. His family moved to Austria in 1914.
Eichmann joined the Austrian Nazi Party in 1932 and the Austrian Legion in 1933, in exile in Germany. In 1934, he became a member of the SD (Himmler’s security service) and was – together with others – put in charge of the “Jewish Question”. He was appointed head of the “Office for Jewish Emigration” in August 1938. Eichmann was transferred to the Gestapo in 1939 and occupied himself with various aspects of the “Final Solution” during the following six years.
In 1942, Eichmann took part in the Wannsee Conference in the course of which the logistics required for the realisation of the Final Solution were decided upon. During the following period, Eichmann showed an incredible bureaucratic zeal in his work, particularly where the deportation of Jews from the regions occupied by the German Reich was concerned.
Adolf Eichmann was accused of having caused the death of millions of Jews or having inflicted serious physical and mental harm on them, in the territories of the States occupied by the Axis forces, between August 1941 and May 1945.
He was further accused of being responsible, during the same period, of killings, extermination, slavery, famine and deportation of the Jewish population. From December 1939 to May 1945, Eichmann organised the deportation of Jews from various regions occupied by the German Reich.
Eichmann was also accused of war crimes. These crimes consisted of persecution, expulsion and killings that were committed during World War II against Jews belonging to the population of the occupied countries or other Axis states.
Finally, regarding the period from 1940 until the end of the war, Eichmann was accused of having been an active member of three Nazi organizations that were declared criminal by the International Military Tribunal in Nuremberg.
Adolf Eichmann was arrested in Argentina on 11 May 1960 by the Mossad (Israeli secret service) and transferred by force to Israel to be judged by a court. 