Ricardo José Medina Blanco
27.04.2016
facts

Ricardo José Medina Blanco was born on 1 August 1948. He joined the police on 30 March 1966. In 1974, he became a Captain in the metropolitan guard (now the Infantry guard). In 1975, he went to United States to have classes about methods of instruction, and then he went back to Uruguay where worked, as from July 1976, at the National Directorate of Information and Intelligence. He was in charge of the custody of secret detention centers.
Medina participated in the Condor Plan, by which Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay, all governed by dictatorial regimes, had decided to coordinate their efforts in order to eliminate political opponents, regularly subjecting them to torture. In that context of persecutions, violence was used in a systematical way to exterminate the “communist world”. The Condor Plan operated in three major ways: the activities of political monitoring of dissident political refugees and people in exile, secret counter-insurrectional actions and joint actions of extermination directed against specific groups or individuals, for which special teams of killers operating in and outside the borders were formed (also in Europe and the United States). The opponents were placed in clandestine detention centers, among which was the “Automotores Orletti” in Buenos Aires (Argentina).
On 2 July 2003, the Uruguayan Peace Commission accused Medina of having participated in the enforced disappearance of María Claudia García Iruretagoyena Casinelli de Gelman, a young 19 years old Uruguayan girl, daughter-in-law of the poet Juan Gelman. According to the Commission, she was abducted with her family on 24 August 1976 in Buenos Aires, and transferred to the center Automotores Orletti when she was seven months pregnant. Her family was released some days later but María Claudia García was transferred to Uruguay in October 1976. There, she was detained at the Defense Information Services (SID), apart from other detainees. At the end of October or the beginning of November, she was transferred to the military hospital, where she gave birth to a girl, María Macarena. At the end of December 1976, María Macarena was given to a policeman, who registered her as being his own daughter, and María Claudia García was killed. Medina was working at the SID at that moment and was suspected by the Peace Commission to have himself given the baby away and killed María Claudia García.
In the nineties, Medina went to live in San Jose, Costa Rica, where he was accused of falsification of Brazilian money in 1995.
On 19 June 2002, with the help of the Center of Legal and Social Studies, the families of Juan Gelman and María Claudia García brought a complaint against Medina and six other militaries: Jose Gavazzo, José Ricardo Arab Fernández, Gilberto Valentin Vázquez Bisio, Jorge Alberto Silveira Quesada, Luis Alfredo Maurente Mata and José Felipe Sande Lima. They accuse them of enforced disappearance or, failing that, aggravated killing. They also accuse them of abduction of minor and suppression of the identity of María Macarena. 