Aribert Ferdinand Heim
23.04.2016
facts

Aribert Heim was born on 28 June 1914 in the town of Bad Radkersburg in Austria. His father was a police officer and his mother was a housewife. He went to university in Graz, graduating with a degree in medecine. Heim joined the local Nazi party in 1935, and volunteered for the Waffen-SS in 1940, rising to the rank of Hauptsturmführer (Captain). In October 1941, he was assigned to the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp in Austria, where he worked as a doctor.
During his time spent working at Mauthausen, Dr. Heim was said to have carried out grotesque experiments on the prisoners, including amputating organs from healthy inmates without anaesthesia and leaving them to die on the operating table, and injecting different poisons directly into the hearts of prisoners to induce death whilst using a stopwatch to see which killed them fastest.
In one particular case he was accused of the murder of an 18-year-old Jewish man who was seeking treatment for an infected foot. The young man was a football player in peak physical condition. Dr Heim was allegedly so fascinated by the young man’s physical state that he cut out part of his kidney, castrated him and cut off his head. It is believed that he then boiled the head to remove the skin so that he could study the man’s perfect teeth.
On 18 January 1946, Josef Kohl, a former fellow inmate of Dr Heim’s at Mauthausen prison, gave evidence to United States war crimes investigators. A transcript of the interview shows that he gave the following testimony;
“Dr. Heim had a habit of looking into inmates’ mouths to determine whether their teeth were in impeccable condition. If this were the case, he would kill the prisoner with an injection, cut his head off, leave it to cook in the crematorium for hours, until all the flesh was stripped from the naked skull, and prepare the skull for himself and his friends as a decoration for their desks.”
On 15 March 1945, Heim was captured by US soldiers and sent to a camp for prisoners of war. He was detained there for more than two years by the US military, before eventually being released without trial. It is believed that he was able to avoid immediate prosecution as a result of the suspicious omission of his time at Mauthausen from his American-held file in Germany.
Following his release, Heim went to live with his wife and two sons in the German spa town of Baden-Baden, where he had a medical practice as a gynecologist.
In 1950, Karl Lotter, a non-Jewish political prisoner who worked at the hospital at Mauthausen, applied for Heim’s indictment, but was unsuccessful.
In 1962, Heim was informed that the German police had issued a warrant for his arrest and investigators were waiting for him at his residence, so he fled Baden-Baden. According to his son Rüdiger Heim, he drove through France, Spain, Morocco, and Libya before eventually moving to Egypt. Whilst living in Egypt, Heim converted to Islam and adopted the name of Tarek Hussein Farid, in order to conceal his identity.
In 1979, Heim was indicted in absentia by the Baden-Baden state court on hundreds of counts of murder. 