Mirko Vracevic
12.04.2016
facts 

Mirko Vračević was born in Donji Smrtići, Bosnia and Herzegovina, on 15 March 1945. During the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mirko Vračević was member of the First Bijelo Polje Battalion of the Second Brigade of the Croat Defence Council (HVO) and a guard at the Vojno prison facility.
The events which became the focus of legal proceedings against Mirko Vračević took place between July 1993 and March 1994 in the village of Vojno, Mostar Municipality in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The indictment alleges that in the period between July 1993 and March 1994, in the course of an armed conflict taking place between the Croatian Defence Council (HVO) and the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the accused, Marko Radić, Dragan Šunjić, Damir Brekalo and Mirko Vračević as officers and members of the Bijelo Polje Battalion of the Second Brigade of the HVO, committed crimes against humanity in the village of Vojno, Municipality of Mostar.
More specifically, the indictment alleges that the accused participated in an attack against Bosnian Muslim civilians during which 76 Bosnian Muslim women, children and elderly were unlawfully arrested and detained in inhumane conditions in the village of Vojno. The indictment further states that Bosnian Muslim men from the Heliodrom camp who were taken for forced labour were unlawfully detained in the prison facility in the village of Vojno. According to the Prosecution, the detainees were held in degrading and inhumane conditions and subject to physical and psychological maltreatment, including torture, daily beatings by guards and soldiers. This allegedly resulted to the death of 16 prisoners.
According to the indictment, during the period from July 1993 until 1994, Mirko Vračević (a.k.a. Srbin), as member of the Bijelo Polje Battalion of the Second Brigade of the HVO and as a guard in the Vojno prison facility, aided and committed physical, mental and sexual abuse of civilians detained in the Vojno prison facility. These crimes included unlawful detention, force labour, murder, rape and sexual assault, torture and inhumane acts on both women and men detained in the facilities of the village of Vojno.
Mirko Vračević was arrested on 19 December 2006. 