Lynndie R. England
18.04.2016
facts

Lynndie R. England was born on 8 November 1982 in Ashland, KY, USA. She entered the US army in 2001 as a reservist while still at school. On completion of her studies she worked as a cashier in a large store. In 2003, Lynndie England was sent to Iraq as a member of the 372nd Military Police Company, deployed in Abu Ghraib.
In late 2003, rumours started circulating that members of the US army had been mistreating and torturing Iraqi detainees in Abu Ghraib prison. In January 2004, Joseph Darby, a member of the US military police, informed the army leadership about these abuses and supplied the officer in charge with photographic material. The pictures documented scenes in which naked Iraqi detainees were being beaten and forced to simulate sexual acts.
At the end of January 2004 the Commander-in-Chief of the multinational troops in Iraq, General Ricardo Sanchez, instructed General Antonio Taguba to set up an inquiry into the affair. The findings of his investigation were handed over to the authorities in charge on 4 April 2004.
The Taguba report (see ‘links’) concluded that American soldiers carried out acts of humiliation which severely violated international law. It stated that numerous ‘sadistic abuses’ were inflicted upon detainees of Abu Ghraib between October and December 2003. The guards had reportedly set up their own rules, which were condoned more or less explicitly by their superiors.
The report cited numerous examples of maltreatment of detainees, such as physical and sexual abuse, torture, intimidation through the use of military dogs and threats of rape and murder.
The report specifically named seven suspects: Ivan Frederick II, Javal Davis, Charles Graner, Sabrina Harman, Megan Ambuhl, Jeremy Sivits and Lynndie England.
Numerous photographs of Lynndie England showed her posing in front of detainees who were mostly stripped naked and in positions that simulate sexual acts.
Lynndie England was indicted in May 2004 by the US army. 