Bernard Munyagishari
02.05.2016
facts

Bernard Munyagishari was born in 1959 in the commune of Rubavu, the prefecture of Gisenyi, Rwanda. He started his career as a school teacher. In 1929, he was offered a position in the town of Gisenyi with Sonarwa, an insurance company, by way of thanks for his active participation in the local organisation of the National Republican Movement for Democracy and Development (Mouvement républicain national pour la démocratie et le développement, MRND). From 1992 to 1994, he was General Secretary of the MRND for the town of Gisenyi and President of the Interahamwe (meaning “those in the fight together”, a militia movement which constituted the official youth wing of the MRND) for the same town.
Between 6April and 17 July 1994, throughout the territory of Rwanda, the military, militia and armed civilians attacked members of the Tutsi with the intention to destroy in whole or in part this population. Hundreds of thousands of Tutsis were killed during these massacres. Today, it is fully recognised that this genocide was prepared in advance at meetings, in which, according to the indictment, Bernard Munyagishari participated.
According to the indictment and due to his rank in both the MRND and the Interahamwe, Bernard Munyagishari exercised effective control and authority over the Interahamwe militia and the Impuzamugambi (meaning “those with the same goal”) in Gisenyi and its surroundings.
Also, according to the indictment, at the beginning of 1994, Bernard Munyagishari received a list of Tutsis to be killed in in the town of Gisenyi and its surroundings. After the death of President Habyarimana on 6 April 1994, it was Bernard Munyagishari who organised a search of those houses of Tutsis to be killed. In addition, from 7 April until 17 July 1994, he supervised roadblocks in Gisenyi and its surroundings and ordered the Interahamwe to kill Tutsis and incited civilian Hutus to do the same. He himself is said to have executed a number of Tutsis in the shamefully renowned place called the “Red Commune” Also, during this whole period, Bernard Munyagishari is said to have created a special group of young Interahamwe, called the Ntarumikwa, with a mission to rape and kill Tutsi women and young girls.
On 8 September 2005, Bernard Munyagishari was indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). 