Moussa Tiégboro Camara
27.04.2016
facts

Lieutenant colonel Moussa Tiegboro Camara is a former member of the military junta of CNDD (National Council for Democracy and Development), a group that took power by coup d’Etat after the death of the Guinean President of the Republic, general Lansana Conté, on 22 December 2008.
On 28 September 2009, the politicians, meeting within the “Forces Vives de Guinée” with the civil society and the syndicalist, called for a peaceful protest in Conakry stadium, against the potential application for presidency of captain Moussa Dadis Camara, who was then chief of the military junta of the CNDD. This protest, to which dozens of thousands of people were participating, was violently repressed by the security forces.
Around 11.30 am, hundreds of members of the Guinean security forces entered the Conakry stadium and opened fire on the protesters. Besides the 157 killed and hundreds of injured people, dozens of women were subjected to particularly brutal forms of sexual violence, according to the estimates of the UN. The following days, the security forces concealed the number of deaths, cleaned the stadium and burned all evidence. The national commission of inquiry put into place by captain Moussa Dadis Camara minimized the figures given by the UN, saying there were around 50 deaths. Many abuses, such as murders, rapes and sacking, were still committed by the security forces in the following days. Many political opponents were arbitrarily detained in army or police camps, where many were subjected to torture.
According to Human Rights Watch, the fact that the protest was peaceful and the organization shown by the security forces during the attack (simultaneous arrival of different units at the stadium, deployment in strategic positions around the stadium in order to prevent the protestors from fleeing away, the lack of non-lethal arms to dissipate the crowd or the presence of officers) prove that the event was premeditated and organized. Human Rights Watch affirms that the murders, rapes and other abuses committed by security forces, as they were widespread and systematic on 28 September 2009 and on the following days, constitute a crime against humanity.
A commission of enquiry set up by United Nations agrees with this conclusion in a report elaborated on the basis of meetings with 687 people (victims, security forces, members of the bar, persons in charge of hospitals and Guinean officials) and handed out on 16 December 2009 to the Security Council. This report blames Moussa Dadis Camara, Aboubacar Chérif « Toumba » Diakité and Moussa Tiégboro Camara, all considered as having an « individual criminal responsibility » in the massacres having taken place on 28 September 2009 and the following days in Conakry. According to this commission of inquiry, the police of Moussa Tiégboro Camara are allegedly responsible of murders, sexual violence, torture and arbitrary arrests and detentions, as well as forced disappearances during and after the attack of the stadium. Moussa Tiégboro Camara had command and effective control over his subordinates and knew, or should have known, that they were committing or had committed those acts. He did not prevent them from acting and did not investigate on the facts.
On 14 October 2009, the prosecutor of the International criminal court (ICC), Luis Moreno-Ocampo, confirmed that the situation in Guinea was under preliminary investigations by his office.
On 8 February 2010, the prosecutor General of Conakry’s Court of Appeal appointed three judges to proceedings against “Aboubakar Diakité alias Toumba and all the others” in order to establish the individual responsibilities in the events of 28 September 2009.
Moussa Tiegboro Camara was eventually indicted by a Guinean tribunal on 1 February 2012 for his alleged role in the serious violations of human rights perpetrated on 28 September 2009 in Conakry stadium. 