Sredoje Lukic
28.04.2016
facts

Sredoje Lukić, a Bosnian Serb, was born on 5 April 1961 in Rujiste, a village in the municipality of Višegrad in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He worked as a police officer in Višegrad.
When the war broke out, he was integrated into a local paramilitary group made up of Bosnian Serbs and led by his cousin, Milan Lukic. The group, whose members were known as “Beli Orlovi” (White Eagles) or “Osvetnici” (“The Avengers”), allegedly participated, in collaboration with local police and military units, in a large-scale ethnic cleansing campaign aimed at eradicating the Muslim population in the region.
Višegrad is a small town in south-eastern Bosnia near the Serbian border. The Muslim population constituted two-thirds of the total population of Višegrad before the war. During the conflict which pitted Bosnia against Serbia from 1992 to 1995, the city represented a significant strategic stake. This was due to its location on a major route linking Belgrade to Sarajevo and to the local hydro-electric dam which, in addition to supplying electricity to the region, helps regulates the level of the Drina River which demarcates a large part of the Bosnian-Serbian border.
As soon as the conflict erupted in April 1992, the city was overrun by the Yugoslav People’s Army. The Army was formally withdrawn on 19 May of that year and the Serbs of the region seized power, forming “the Serbian town of Višegrad.” From then on, there followed an extensive campaign of ethnic cleansing against Muslims, who at the time represented the majority of the town’s population.
According to the indictment, during this campaign from 1992 to 1994, many Muslim civilians in the region were killed, interned or displaced. Many houses were looted and destroyed, as well as the two mosques in the city.
Sredoje Lukić was accused of taking part in this campaign between 7 June 1992 and 10 December 1994, along with his cousin Milan Lukić and other members of his paramilitary group. They were accused of committing acts of persecution against non-Serb civilians in Bosnia, and particularly against Muslims.
Lukić was accused of taking part in the torching of a building on 14 June 1992, during which about 70 Muslims, including women, children and elderly people, died. The victims’ property and valuables were stolen and the victims were locked in a room which was allegedly set alight using incendiary weapons. It was also alleged that Lukić fired on those who tried to escape through the windows, killing almost the entire group.
A virtually identical scenario was repeated a few weeks later in Bikana, a village near Višegrad. Lukić and others allegedly used force against a group of an estimated 70 Bosnian Muslims in a house in the village. It was alleged that they blocked entrances before they ignited the house and there were no survivors.
Lukić also allegedly regularly took part in acts of violence against prisoners in a detention camp located in the Uzamnica barracks in Višegrad.
Finally, according to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Lukić and others allegedly abducted women, whom they reportedly subjected to repeated rape and torture, at various places including the Vilina Vlas hotel, the headquarters of the paramilitary organization of his cousin Milan Lukic.
After having fled to Russia, Sredoje Lukić turned himself in voluntarily to the ICTY on 16 September 2005. 