Juston Graber
15.04.2016
facts

Juston Graber joined the United States Army two weeks after his graduation from Riverside High School in Buffalo, New York. He had been an honors student.
On 9 May 2006 the Third Brigade Combat Team of the 101st Airborne Division of the United States Army carried out an air assault on an alleged al-Qaeda training camp on an island in the Thar Thar Canal. Specialist Juston R. Graber and the other members of the squad were ordered to secure a house. In doing so, one elderly man was killed and three men of military age were detained. The detainees’ hands were fastened together with zip ties. While the detainees were being processed, Specialist William Hunsaker stated that they should kill the detainees. The squad convened for a meeting and Staff Sergeant Raymond Girouard tasked Hunsaker and Private First Class Corey Clagett with guarding the detainees in the courtyard of the house. According to Hunsaker and Clagett, Girouard ordered them to murder the detainees.
Following the meeting, Graber left with Girouard, Sergeant Leonel Lemus, and Private First Class Mason. Graber returned to the helicopter for a body bag.
Hunsaker and Clagett cut the zip ties binding the detainees and ordered them to run. Hunsaker and Clagett fired at the three men as they ran. Two of the men were killed immediately and the third was wounded mortally. Graber reported that he had heard the shots fired and returned to the house. The third man was still alive when a medic assessed his condition, determining that there was nothing that could be done to save his life. Girouard allegedly stated, “Put [the man] out of his misery”. Graber shot the third man with his M4 rifle. He killed the man with his second shot, which was aimed at point-blank range at the man’s head. Graber stated that he believed he had done “the right thing” since the man had been vomiting blood.
In response to concerns voiced by other soldiers, Lieutenant General Peter Chiarelli ordered a criminal investigation into the deaths of the three detainees on 17 May 2006. On 16 June 2006 the United States Army’s Criminal Investigation Command began the investigation.
On 21 June 2006 the United States Army charged Graber with premeditated murder, attempted premeditated murder, conspiracy to commit premeditated murder, and making a false official statement. He was confined to Contingency Operating Base Speicher in Iraq pending his hearing. 