Ismaïl Enver Pacha
25.04.2016
facts

Ismail Enver was born to a wealthy family in Istanbul on 22 November 1881. After completing military studies in Germany, he rose rapidly in the Ottoman army upon his return, becoming a Pasha at the age of 32.
On 23 January 1913, the Committee of Union and Progress (CUP) organised a coup d’état and introduced a military dictatorship headed, within a few months, by Enver Pasha, Djemal Pasha and Talat Pasha (see “related cases”). While Enver’s portfolio was only that of War Minister, it was he who, in reality, was the main leader of the regime up until the end of the First World War.
Enver Pasha is considered to be one of those principally responsible for the Armenian Genocide.
The massacre of the Armenians by the Turks during the First World War is considered to be the first genocide of the 20th century. It began on 24 April 1915 in Istanbul, the capital of the Ottoman Empire, with the assassination of 600 renowned Armenians by order of the Government.
By the end of the summer of 1915, two thirds of the Turkish-Armenians, amounting to around 1.2 million people had perished under generally appalling conditions.
Turkish nationalists had seized power a few years earlier in Istanbul. After the entry of their country into the Great War, the Russians invaded Anatolia. The Turks, being forced to retreat were infuriated and multiplied the violent attacks against the Turkish-Armenians, who were guilty, in their eyes, of being favourably disposed towards the Christian invaders.
The town of Van rose up and proclaimed an autonomous Armenian government. The nationalists seized on this as a pretext to accomplish their aim of total elimination of the Armenians. The Interior Minister, Talat Pasha ordained the assassination of the Armenians in Istanbul followed by the Armenians in the army. Following on this, it was the turn of the various Armenian communities to the east of the country.
The following is the text of a telegram from the Interior Minister: “The Government has decided to destroy all of the Armenians living in Turkey. An end must be put to their existence, no matter what criminal measures be taken to do so. No account should be taken of age or gender. Scruples of conscience have no place here”.
In November 1918, Enver Pasha fled to Germany on board the Lorelei, accompanied by Djemal Pasha and Talat Pasha. 