Hugo Nelson González D’Arcangeli
12.04.2016
facts

Hugo Nelson González D’Arcangeli was the head of the Naval Intelligence Department (Ancla Dos) and Commander of the navy in Chile during the dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet-Ugarte. Pinochet took power following a coup d’état against Salvador Allende’s political party Unidad Popular on 11 September 1973. The dictatorship lasted until 1990 and was characterised by enforced disappearances, extrajudicial killings and systematic forced exiles. The regime was repressive and its ultimate objective was to eliminate political opponents, who were considered to be “enemies of the state”.
Regional Intelligence Centres (CIRE) were created across the country in 1974 and, working in coordination with DINA (the secret police), the CIRE operated in places that DINA did not. The CIRE were made up of various intelligence units from various branches of the armed, police and investigative forces. In the city of Concepción the CIRE had a prisoner camp in the sports centre of the Talcahuano naval base from its creation in 1974 until mid-1975, when it was moved to the old premises at Fuerte El Morro. It remained there until 1982. Hundreds of political prisoners were abducted and tortured in these prisoner camps by CIRE agents. Almost all of the prisoners were militants from the Movement of the Revolutionary Left (Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria, MIR) who had organised a resistance against the military dictatorship that came about following the 1973 coup d’état.
Rudy Cárcamo Ruiz was a former member of GAP (Group of Personal Friends of Salvador Allende – Allende’s personal security group) and a MIR militant. On 16 October 1973, Cárcamo was arrested at his home in Lenin de Talcahuano, taken to Quiriquina Island and then to the Talcahuano Naval Base where he remained until 21 July 1974, when he was released without ever having been tried.
At 10pm on 27 November 1974 three members of the “Ancla Dos” group (comprised of navy intelligence agents who pursued leftist militants) showed up at the house of Cárcamo’s mother- and father-in-law, posing as civilian police officers. They asked for Cárcamo and took him away, telling his in-laws that they were taking him in for questioning. Cárcamo has never been seen since. Investigations have found that he was taken directly to the Talcahuano Naval Base, which Hugo Nelson González D’Arcangeli was in charge of. Cárcamo was tortured in the locker rooms of the sports centre in Talcahuano. Statements from fellow detainees indicate that Cárcamo disappeared between 24 and 31 December 1974 but there are conflicting stories regarding his whereabouts. Some witnesses say that he died under torture at Talcahuano and that he was buried in the gardens of the Hualpén museum. Others suggest he was murdered and buried illegally in the Octavo region. However, one list disclosed by General Juan Manuel Guillermo Contreras Supelveda (former head of the National Intelligence Unit at DINA) indicates that he was thrown in the sea.
D’Arcangeli was tried alongside four other former members of the Chilean navy: Victor Ernesto Donoso Barrera (lieutenant and assistant to the head of intelligence), Conrado Alfredo Sesnic Guerricabeitia (Police Captain), Osvaldo Francisco Harnish Salazar (Inspector at Chile’s former Investigations Department) and José Raúl Cáceres González (Second Lieutenant in the navy). 