Zeljko Stojnic
28.04.2016
facts

Zeljko Stojnic was born on 12 October 1970. During the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, he was a member of the Serbian Police Force and Intervention Police Force Unit in Prijedor.
In August 1992, while an armed conflict was taking place between Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (later Serbia and Montenegro) and Croatia on the territory of in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a widespread and systematic attack was launched by the Bosnian Serb military, paramilitary and police forces against the non-Serb civilian population of the municipality of Prijedor.
On 21 August 1992, a group of non-Serb prisoners, detained in the Trnopolje concentration camp, were informed that they would be “exchanged” and transported to Travnik. That same morning, several hundreds – perhaps over a thousand – civilian men, women and children gathered in the village of Tukovi. They had been told that a convoy would be organized that day to Travnik.
The two groups of vehicles from Tukovi and Trnopolje joined into one convoy at the town of Kozarac and proceeded in the direction of Travnik. After having driven for a while, the convey stopped in a wooden area where the military-aged non-Serb men were separated from the women, children and elderly. The group of non-Serb men were then driven to a location called Korecanske Stijene where there is a sheer rock face on one side of the road and a steep cliff on the other. Prisoners were ordered to leave the bus with their heads down and to kneel at the edge of the cliff. It is reported that the police then started firing at the men. Apart from twelve persons who survived the massacre, it is estimated that more than 200 men were killed.
Zeljko Stojnic is accused of having participated in these events.
On 27 May 2008, Zeljko Stojnic was arrested along with Dusan Jankovic (see “related cases”), Damir Ivankovic and Zoran Babic by the Bosnian State Protection and Investigation Agency (SIPA) on charges of crimes against humanity. Ivankovic and Babic were subsequently released 