Gordan Djuric
27.04.2016
facts

Gordan Djuric was born on 15 May 1968. During the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, he was a member of the Serbian special police unit “Intervention Squad”.
In August 1992, during the armed conflict taking place between Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (later Serbia and Montenegro) and Croatia on the territory of in Bosnia and Herzegovina, widespread and systematic attacks were launched by the Bosnian Serb military, paramilitary and police forces against the non-Serb civilian population of the municipality of Prijedor.
On 21 August 1992, a group of non-Serb prisoners being detained in the Trnopolje concentration camp were informed that they would be “exchanged” for Serb prisoners and transported to Travnik. That same morning, several hundred – perhaps over a thousand – civilian men, women and children had been assembled in the village of Tukovi and were told that they would be transferred to Travnik later that day.
The two groups of vehicles from Tukovi and Trnopolje joined up as one convoy at the town of Kozarac and proceeded in the direction of Travnik. After continuing on its way for a certain time, the convoy stopped in a wooded area where the military-aged non-Serb men were separated from the women, children and the elderly. The group of non-Serb men was then driven to a location called Korecanske Stijene where there is a sheer rock face on one side of the road and a steep cliff on the other. The prisoners were ordered to leave the bus with their heads down and to kneel at the edge of the cliff. Allegedly, the police then started firing at the men. Apart from twelve persons who survived the massacre, it is estimated that more than 200 men were murdered.
Gordan Djuric was accused of having participated in these events.
The indictment specified that, at some point, Gordan Djuric was ordered to go towards Travnik “in order to stand guard”, an order which he obeyed.
On 14 October 2008, Gordan Djuric was arrested by the Bosnian State Protection and Investigation Agency (SIPA) on charges of crimes against humanity. 