Stjepan Grandic
25.04.2016
facts


Stjepan Grandic was a military commander in the Croatian Army during the Croatian war of independence, which lasted from 1991 to 1995.
At the beginning of the Croatian war of independence, in summer 1991, the Gospic area in modern central Croatia was the scene of fighting between Croatian and Serb forces. Gospic was officially controlled by the Croatian authorities but was under heavy bombardment of Serb artillery.
In October 1991 lists were prepared naming all of the Serb civilians in Gospic and Karlobag. On 17 October 1991, Tihomir Oreskovic, as Secretary of Lika Crisis Headquarters, along with 118th Infantry Brigade Lieutenant Colonel Mirko Norac, ordered the arrest, detention, and killing of the Serb civilians on the lists prepared earlier that month. At this time the Gospic police, the military police stationed in Gospic, and the 118th Infantry Brigade of the Croatian National Guard were under the control of the Lika Crisis Headquarters.
During October 1991, Grandic was commander in the barracks of Perusic, where some of the listed Serb civilians were held prisoners before the ordered killings. Grandic himself was not present during the meeting with Oreskovic and Norac but was subordinate to their orders. Consequently Grandic ordered his soldiers to prepare the barrack to accommodate a group of Serbian prisoners from Gospic, allegedly for the exchange with Croatian prisoners of war. However, after a long night during which the Serbs from Gospic were brought to the barracks in Perusic, Grandic selected about ten soldiers and ordered them to board the bus that was waiting in front of the barracks. At the same time, about ten military policemen, under the command of Milan Miki Karic, loaded 24 Serb prisoners on a truck. Most of these prisoners were elderly women but reportedly the group also included a mother with her 15-year-old daughter. The convoy headed for Lipova Glavica, for the purported exchange of prisoners. When arriving in Lipova Glavica, Grandic, however, ordered the soldiers to shoot the prisoners with the aid of the masked military policemen.
This shooting is part of the so-called Gospic massacre occurring in the last two weeks of October 1991 in the towns of Karlobag, Pazariste and Lipova Glavica in the Gospic area. In total Croatian courts confirm the murder of 50 civilians and 123 disappeared persons in the Gospic area between 1991 and 1995.
The indictment was issued by the Rijeka County State Attorney’s Office on 5 March 2001 against Grandic, Oreskovic, Norac, Karic, and Ivica Rozic. 