Kreso Lucic
25.04.2016
facts

Kreso Lucic was born on 19 March 1969 in Kresevo, a municipality in Bosnia-Herzegovina within the region of Central Bosnia.
He is a citizen of both Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia. He lives with his wife and three children in Siroki Brijeg in the region of western Herzegovina. He is currently unemployed.
During the conflict in Bosnia-Herzegovina which broke out around April 1992, Kreso Lucic was promoted to the position of Commander of the HVO Military Police, in effect the Croatian Defense Council which was created in April 1992 and considered to be the first fighting force to confront the Serbian troops in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
The period between April and end September 1993, was striking for the generalized and systematic attack led by the HVO forces against the Bosniak civilian populations in the territory of the municipalities of Kresevo, Kiseljak, Busovaca and Vitez, all of which lie within the central Bosnian region.
More particularly, during the months of June and July 1993, commander Lucic reportedly ordered his men to arrest and detain Bosniak civilians from Kresevo and other surrounding villages (Rakova Noga, Crnici, Bjelovici, Bukve and Ramici). Those being detained were then imprisoned in Kresevo, either in the Ivo Lola Ribar primary school or in the so called Sunje camp. The conditions under which these persons were detained have been described as inhuman, since they were without sufficient drinking water, food or the necessary medical care. In addition each day they were obliged to work under forced labor conditions which even the women and children had also to comply with.
On several occasions Lucic was said to have ordered and to have participated himself in acts of physical violence against the Sunje camp detainees through torture, kicking and punching, cudgel blows.
Also, on 20 June 1993, in the primary school one of the inhabitants of Rakova Noga, was reportedly given a severe beating by members of the HVO for refusing to reveal the whereabouts of his brother.
On 27 April 2006, the Court of Bosnia-Herzegovina ruled that the accused should be placed in custody. 