Cyriaque Habyarabatuma
28.04.2016
facts

Cyriaque Habyarabatuma, was born in 1955 in Gikongoro, in the south of Rwanda and has three children.
During the genocide in 1994, he was a Major and the Police Chief of the Butare Prefecture Gendarmerie (police).
After the defeat of Hutu government forces in July 1994 by Tutsi rebels, he fled to the east of former Zaire, the actual Democratic Republic of Congo. When he returned to Rwanda in 1995, he joined the ranks of the newly formed gendarmerie, which later became the National Police, where he worked until he was arrested in 2004.
According to the Prosecution, Habyarabutama was one of the key planners of the genocide in the Butare prefecture. Habyarabatuma allegedly trained a group of Burundian refugees who later committed killings in Nyaruteja and Kibayi in the Butare prefecture. Habyarabatuma is also accused of complicity in the killings in the town of Butare, at the National University of Rwanda and the suburbs of Tumba, Sahela, and in the areas of Matyazo, Karama, Runyinya and Maraba. In addition, the military Prosecution accused him of setting up roadblocks at several points in the town of Butare where people with Tutsi identity cards were tortured and killed.
It is also alleged that acting on his orders, Gendarmes armed with heavy military equipment, killed hundreds of Tutsis who had sought refuge at Cyahinda parish on 18 April 1994. According to the Prosecution, the Tutsis in the Cyahinda parish killed three policemen in self-defense. Habyarabatuma, in his capacity as commander of the police in Butare, ordered other policemen to bring the bodies of those who had been killed and to collect their weapons. The police were then allegedly dispatched to Cyahinda and killed the Tutsis in this church with the arsenal collected. Habyarabutama claimed during the trial, that the policemen concerned were sent by his superiors and had not been ordered to kill but rather to ensure the safety of refugees. He also denied having given the police the heavy artillery that was used to kill Tutsis who had fled to Cyahinda.
The Prosecution also alleges that prior to 1994; Habyarabatuma was a key figure in the arrest and torture of suspected Rwanda Patriotic Front collaborators in Butare many of whom died in the process.
On 6 February 2004, an arrest warrant against Habyarabutama was issued.
In May 2004, Habyarabutama was arrested and transferred to a Military Tribunal in Butare. 