Stanislav Galic
19.11.2012
facts 

Stanislav Galic was born on 12 March 1943 in Goles, Banja Luka Municipality, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Shortly after Bosnia and Herzegovina was internationally recognised as an independent state on 6 April 1992, armed hostilities broke out in Sarajevo. Armed forces supporting the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) and elements of the Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA) occupied strategic positions in and around Sarajevo. The city was subsequently subjected to blockade and relentless bombardment and sniper attacks from positions in the hills around and overlooking Sarajevo. On or around 20 May 1992, after a partial withdrawal of JNA forces from Bosnia, the armed forces surrounding the city became the Sarajevo Romanija Corps, a significant part of the Bosnian Serb Army (VRS – “Vojska Republika Srpska”), placed under the ultimate command of Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic.
The headquarters of the Romanija Corps were in the barracks of Lukavica (suburb south west of Sarajevo).
Stanislav Galic held the rank of Major General in the VRS. He assumed command of the Sarajevo Romanija Corps on or about 10 September 1992 and remained in that position until about 10 August 1994, after which he was succeeded by Dragomir Milosevic.
Stanislav Galic had authority over 18 000 military personnel, formed into 10 brigades.
The Sarajevo Romanija Corps implemented a military strategy which used shelling and sniping to kill, maim, wound and terrorise the civilian inhabitants of Sarajevo. From April 1995, large fragmentation bombs were used. The shelling and sniping killed and wounded thousands of civilians of both sexes and all ages, including children and the elderly.
The Sarajevo Romanija Corps directed shelling and sniping at civilians who were tending vegetable plots, queuing for bread, collecting water, attending funerals, shopping in markets, riding on trams, gathering wood, or simply walking with their children or friends. People were even injured and killed inside their own homes, being hit by bullets that came through the windows. The attacks on Sarajevo civilians were often unrelated to military actions and were designed to keep the inhabitants in a constant state of terror. The destruction of many buildings of historical, cultural and symbolic significance (e.g. the destruction of the national library in a fire) was part of the same strategy of terror.
Stanislav Galic was arrested by the SFOR on 20 December 1999 and transferred to the ICTY. 