Abed Hameed Hmoud
21.04.2016
facts

Hmoud is originally from Saddam Hussein’s hometown of Tikrit. He is a distant cousin of Saddam Hussein and Hussein’s former bodyguard. Hmoud began as a non-commissioned officer and rose through the ranks to lieutenant general. Then Saddam Hussein picked him as his right-hand man and Hmoud served as Hussein’s personal secretary, controlling access to Hussein and said to be one of the few people Hussein trusted completely. Hmoud has been described as a key figure after Saddam’s two sons Qusai and Udai and was ranked fourth on America’s list of 55 most wanted Iraqi fugitives, behind only Saddam, Qusai and Udai.
Hmoud was the Ace of Diamonds in the US’s pack of playing cards representing wanted members of the regime. Hmoud was third in power to the former president (and frequently at his side) and sheikh of both the Al-Bu-Nasir and Al-Khattab tribes.
In the 1990s, Hmoud was responsible for several security portfolios, including locations where Iraq was accused of hiding weapons. A US official told APP “He was Saddam’s key adviser and his responsibility included overseeing basically any issue of importance to Saddam, particularly regime security.” Hmoud reportedly decided who could meet Hussein (including in relation to diplomats, media people and physicians – only Qusai and Udai could see Hussein without going through Hmoud). Hmoud is is said to have directed matters of state and handed down numerous repressive orders.
Hmoud and Qusai Hussein oversaw the Iraqi Special Security Organisation, one of the most feared agencies in Iraq. The primary task of the Iraqi Special Security Organisation was to protect the Ba’ath leadership and detect potential signs of disloyalty in military and security units. Hmoud is also reported to have worked closely with Jamal Mustafa Abdullah Sultan al-Tikriti, one of Saddam Hussein’s cousins.
Hmoud was captured in a joint raid by special operations forces and the 1st Battalion, 22nd Infantry Regiment of 1st Brigade, 4th Infantry Division, in June 2003. White House spokesman Ari Fleischer called it a “significant capture”. CENTCOM reported that Hmoud was under coalition custody on 18 June 2003. 