Koichi Kido
26.04.2016
facts

The marquis Koichi Kido was born into a Japanese noble family on 18 July 1889 and was to become an influential family member.
He was a member of the court between 1930 and 1936 and was chief secretary of the Keeper of the Privy Seal for the Emperor. During this period, he was allegedly aware of Japanese military and political movement in Manchuria but was not yet at this stage actively involved in military conspiracy.
In 1937, Kido went into Konoye’s government office as Minister of Education (from 22 October 1937 to 26 May 1938) and then as Minister of Social Affairs (from 11 January 1938 to 5 January 1939). When Hiranuma rose to power as Prime Minister in 1939, Kido remained in government and accepted a portfolio as Minister of National Affairs – a position he held until 30 August of the same year. During his time working in government, Koichi Kido allegedly joined with the conspirators and advocated for the war against China. As Minister of Education, he also contributed to reinforcing the idea of a ‘warrior spirit’ in Japan.
From the end of August 1939 to June 1940, Koichi Kido and Konoye allegedly conspired to establish and impose a single political party whose main objective would be to facilitate the conspirators’ plans, and whose president would be Konoye, with Kido acting as vice-president.
Kido was appointed the Emperor’s Keeper of the Privy Seal in June 1940. He thus became one of the Emperor’s closest advisors. He is said to have used this influence for the benefit of the conspiracy.
However just before the attack on Pearl Harbour, Kido began to doubt the chances of success of a war against Western powers. Nevertheless, he continued to support the Japanese war effort against China, and similar endeavours against the Netherlands, Great Britain and the United States.
Kido was also essential in appointing Shigenori Togo as Prime Minister, and was therefore accused of facilitating the rise to power of a militaristic government. He used his position to support the war and to thwart any attempt at preventing it.
During the war, Kido liaised between the government and the Emperor. He claimed that the Emperor was unaware of the attack on Pearl Harbour until after the fact.
Kido played an important role at the end of the war. As a representative of the Japanese government to the occupying allied forces, he advised General MacArthur on numerous logistical aspects of Japanese surrender and the country’s occupation. He allegedly convinced the government to accept the Potsdam Declaration and to surrender.
Koichi Kido was then arrested by occupying forces and was charged by the Far Eastern military tribunal for his participation in the conflict. 