Zdravko Mihaljevic
04.04.2013
facts

Zdravko Mihaljević was born in Sarajevo on 27 June 1964. He completed primary school and became a caterer. He did his military service in 1983 in Šabac. He is registered in the military records of the Kiseljak Municipality. He is married and has 3 children.
According to the Indictment, from April 1993 through the end of June 1993, in his capacity as the Commander of Special Purpose Unit (PPN) Maturica and as a member of the II Croat Defence Council (HVO) Battalion, Ban Josip Jelačić Brigade from Kiseljak, Mihaljevic carried out, participated, aided and abetted the persecution of the Bosniak civilian population on national, ethnic, cultural and religious grounds including killings, enforced disappearances of persons, deprivation of liberty contrary to fundamental rules of international law, torture and other inhumane acts for the purpose of a widespread and systematic attack of the army and military police of the HVO. These events were directed against the Bosniak population on the territory of Kiseljak Municipality.
The Indictment reads that on 12 June 1993, after the artillery attack by HVO units on the place of Tulice, Kiseljak Municipality, Mihaljevic participated in an infantry attack and the destruction of the place of Tulice. Together with other members of the HVO they captured the entire Bosniak population of Tulice and rounded them up in front of the house of Mujo Bajraktarević. He then deprived Salko Bajraktarević of his life by shooting at him from an automatic rifle at point-blank range and ordered the Bosniak population to separate men from women. A group of 30 captured men was then ordered to go towards the graveyard of Tulice. Mihaljevic, together with the other HVO members, escorted them with arms. After reaching the graveyard of Tulice, Mihaljevic ordered some 7 men to step out of the line. Together with two other members of the PPN Maturica, he deprived them of their lives in a brutal manner by firing from an automatic rifle at point-blank range. Other members of the PPN unit in the meanwhile looted and killed two more persons. One of these bodies was set on fire, the other one has never been found. Mihaljevic then ordered the PPN Unit to go back to the house of Mujo Bajraktarević. All captured persons except Ibrahim Jahić, who was taken to Tulice, were taken to barracks in Kiseljak and detained in inhumane conditions. They were made to perform forced labour on a daily basis until they were exchanged. Some of them were subjected to torture.
The bodies of the killed persons, except Ibrahim Jahić and Fatima Bajrektarević, were exhumed in February 1998 from the local graveyard in Tulice.
Zdravko Mihaljević voluntarily surrendered to the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on 3 August 2006. He was charged with crimes against humanity. 