Julio Rolando Salazar Monroe
21.04.2016
facts

Julio Rolando Salazar Monroe was born on 11 February 1935 in Arequipa, Peru. He is a former General of the Peruvian Army and former head of the National Intelligence Service (DINTE).
Salazar Monroe is said to have played a prominent role in the creation and direction of the Colina group, an anti-communist death squad of the Peruvian army active from 1990 until 1994, during the administration of Alberto Fujimori. In his capacity as leader of the DINTE, Salazar Monroe allegedly participated in the organization and coordination of the various actions attributed to the group.
1) On 3 November 1991, in the Barrios Altos neighbourhood, six armed individuals attacked a civilian building. They ordered the victims to lie on the floor before firing at them, killing 15 persons, including an eight-year-old boy, and seriously wounding four other persons. One of the injured was permanently disabled.
2) Allegedly following orders of General Hermoza, in the early morning of 29 January 1992 around 20 members of the Colina Group death squad drove from Lima to Pativilca, where they searched for and forcibly removed six men from their homes. The victims, who were allegedly tortured with a blow torch and murdered, included a school teacher, farmers, and an 18-year-old mechanical engeneering student. Their bodies were left in a nearby cane field.
3) On 24 June 1992, a group of men, dressing in military clothes busted into the house of the Peruvian journalist Pedro Yauri Bustamante, who was advocating for the release of the Ventocilla family, after four members thereof had been kidnapped on 25 May 1992. The journalist was tied up, blindfolded, and kidnapped. He never returned.
4) On 18 July 1992, members of the DINTE and the Colina Group broke into the dormitories of the Enrique Guzmán y Valle National University, better known as La Cantuta. The militaries forced students to leave the dorm and to lie belly-down on the floor. They finally selected and detained nine of them. The soldiers then broke into Professor Hugo Muñoz Sánchez’s home and arrested him as well. The nine students and the professor were later allegedly tortured and executed outside Lima and their bodies were buried in three unmarked graves in Cieneguilla.
In July 1993, investigators found four clandestine graves in Cieneguilla. The graves contained skeletal human remains. The investigators could identify three of the disappeared students as well as the Professor Hugo Muñoz Sánchez. 