Mahmoud Salah
15.04.2016
facts

Warrant Officer Mahmoud Salah is an Egyptian policeman who has been involved in the beating and killing of 28-year-old Khaled Said in Sidi Gaber neighborhood in Alexandria on 6 June 2010.
According to eyewitnesses, Mahmoud Salah, together with Police Sergeant Awad Ismail Suleiman, apprehended Khaled Said in the Space Net internet café in Boubaset street in Sidi Gaber and beat him to death in the doorway of the building next to the café.
Haitham Misbah, the son of the owner of the internet café where Mahmoud Salah arrested Khaled Said, gave the following account of the events:
“Khaled [Said] was standing with me just outside the internet café and went in to say hello to a friend. At that point, two policemen in plainclothes, who we later found out had been waiting at the café opposite, went straight up to him and asked for his ID. I saw them grab his arms and hold them behind his back, so I went over to him, but then saw that they had guns and realized they were police. I asked them what they were doing and they said, “Stay out of this or we’ll close down your business.” Khaled was struggling. They grabbed his head and banged it against the marble shelf. At this point we tried to get them outside, thinking that they wanted to arrest him, but they dragged him into the entrance of the building next door. Khaled’s hair was a bit long, and I saw them grab him by the hair and bang his head against the iron door of the building and hit him in the face and the stomach.”
Mohamed, the doorman of the building next to the internet café, thus recounted what he saw:
“I was standing at the top of the stairs in the entrance when they dragged him into the building, holding his hands behind his back. They grabbed him by the hair and banged his head against the iron door of the building and then repeatedly against the marble steps in the entrance. At one point Khaled was gasping “I’m going to die, I’m going to die.” They responded saying, “You’re dead anyway.” They kept beating him although he had stopped moving. At this point the two policemen phoned an officer saying, “Basha we have a case here.” There was a doctor nearby who came in and tried to resuscitate him but couldn’t. And then a pharmacist came in and checked and said he was already dead, so we put a sheet over him. The officer arrived with the police van after a bit, and they picked up Khaled’s body and put him into the police van. They drove off but came back around ten minutes later and threw his body back into the entrance of the building. Then the ambulance came. The ambulance man didn’t want to take the body because he could see he was dead, but the officer ordered him to. There was blood everywhere. I had to clean up the blood.”
The police authorities initially denied any wrongdoing on the part of Mahmoud Salah and Ismail Suleiman. An initial investigation into the facts by the local prosecutor concluded that Khaled Said, who had been arrested for drug possession, had died of asphyxiation after swallowing a packet of drugs and the prosecutor ordered his body buried.
When Khaled Said’s family visited his body in the morgue, his brother snapped pictures of the corpse using his mobile phone.The photos of Khaled Said’s corpse were released onto the internet showing his body covered with bruises, his teeth broken and jaw smashed. Human Rights Watch released a press report about the photo stating that, “Photos of Said’s battered and deformed face published on the internet show a fractured skull, dislocated jaw, broken nose, and numerous other signs of trauma”.
On 15 June 2010, Public Prosecutor Abdelmeguid Mahmoud ordered the investigation reopened and transferred the case to the Alexandria appeals prosecution unit.
The prosecution unit in Alexandria ordered officials to exhume the body and appointed three doctors to conduct a new forensic investigation. This second forensic medical report was made public and it confirmed the cause of death as asphyxiation on 23 June 2010. However, the report also said there were a number of injuries on the body and concluded that there was “nothing to prevent the injuries from having occurred as a result of beating during the arrest of the victim.”
On 30 June 2010 the chief of the appeals prosecution services, Mohamed Omar, took Mohammad Salah and Ismail Suleiman into custody for four days pending further questioning. As part of the investigation, the prosecutor heard several witnesses, including staff at the Sidi Gaber police station, Said’s mother, the internet cafe owner, the guard at the nearby building, his wife, employees at the morgue and medical examiners.
In July 2010, at the end of the investigation, the prosecutor charged Mahmoud Salah Mahmoud and Awad Ismael Suleiman with use of violence and unjustified detention of the victim. 