Ignace Bagilishema
31.05.2016
facts

Ignace Bagilishema was born on 21 May 1955 in the Rubengera Sector, Mabanza Commune, Kibuye Prefecture, Rwanda. He attended the Military High School for two years, before taking up employment from 1978 to 1980 as a civil servant in the Rwandan Youth Ministry. On 8 February 1980, at the age of 25, he was appointed Mayor of the Mabanza commune. He held this position until mid-July 1994. In this capacity, he was the representative of executive power at the communal level. He exercised authority and control over employees of the commune and over the communal police and national gendarmerie, forces which he could requisition.
According to the indictment, during the months of April to June 1994, in various places and at different times, Bagilishema was said to have sent armed individuals into the commune of Mabanza as well as into the region of Bisesero and to have given them the order to attack the people residing and/or seeking refuge at various locations therein, including at the Mabanza commune office. Bagilishema was also accused of having personally attacked and killed people residing or seeking refuge in Mabanza commune and on Gitwa hill in the Bisesero region. In addition, he was accused of having encouraged others to capture, torture and kill Tutsi men, women and children seeking refuge from attacks within the area of Mabanza, Gitesi, Gishyita and Gisovu communes in Kibuye Prefecture. Furthermore he was also accused of having permitted and encouraged Interahamwe militiamen to set up roadblocks at strategic locations in and around Mabanza commune. The primary purpose of the said roadblocks was to screen individuals in order to identify and single out Tutsis. In addition, Ignace Bagilishema was said to have ordered the detention of several Tutsis at the various roadblocks within Mabanza, such detainees being subsequently killed by the subordinates under his authority and control.
Also, between 9 April and 30 June 1994, according to the indictment, Bagilishema was said to have detained more than 100 Tutsi refugees at the Mabanza communal prison. On or about 15 April 1994, he reportedly allowed Interahamwe militiamen access to the said prison, following which several Tutsi refugees detained therein were tortured and killed. He was also accused of ordering Interahamwe militiamen to dig a mass grave within the precinct of the commune office in Mabanza where the remains of Tutsi, killed during the attacks were buried with the knowledge, consent and acquiescence of Bagilishema.
From 9 April 1994, Bagilishema reportedly encouraged thousands of Tutsi men, women and children seeking refuge from attacks in the commune to seek safe refuge within the premises of the communal office at Mabanza.
On 11 April 1994, Bagilishema was said to have placed communal policemen outside the commune office with instructions to prevent the refugees gathered therein from leaving the office. On 12 April 1994, the refugees that had sought refuge in the communal office in Mabanza were divided into 2 groups. The first group comprising of intellectuals were put in a military truck and driven towards Kibuye and were never seen again. The second group of refugees comprising mostly of farmers were transferred to Gatwaro stadium, to the Catholic Church and to the Saint John Home in Kibuye where they were killed around 17 and 18 April 1994. According to the indictment, Bagilishema knew, or had reason to know, that an attack on these places was imminent when he directed the Tutsi to take refuge in the stadium and in the church. Bagilishema was accused of having personally attacked and killed individuals who had taken refuge in the stadium on 18 and 19 April 1994.
In July 1994, being confronted with the advance of the troops of the RPF (Rwandan Patriotic Front, an opposition movement composed essentially of Tutsi refugees and led by Paul Kagame), Bagilishema fled Rwanda. On 20 February 1999, he was arrested in South Africa, after giving himself up to the South African authorities. 