Emilio Jorge del Real
21.04.2016
facts

Emilio Jorge del Real was born on 11 November 1936.
On 15 August 1972, during the dictatorship under General Alejandro Agustín Lanusse in Argentina, 25 political prisoners belonging to far-left organisations that had taken up arms against the military regime managed to escape from Rawson Prison, in the Chubut province, in Patagonia, Argentina. Six of those who escaped successfully boarded a plane and fled to Chile, while the other 19 were rounded up in the airport and detained. Navy Captain Luis Emilio Sosa agreed to return them unharmed, and with guarantees for their safety, to Rawson Prison, on condition that they surrender their weapons.
The prisoners did give up their weapons but, against Sosa’s promise, they were taken to the Amiral Zar naval base in Trelew. At 3am on 22 August 1972 Captains Luis Emilio Sosa, Rúben Norberto Paccagnini and Raúl Alberto Herrora and Lieutenants Emilio del Real and Carlos Roberto Guillermo Bravo allegedly ordered crew chief Carlos Marandino to open the prison cell doors, wake the prisoners, bring them out of their cells and line them up in two rows. The five navy officials then shot the prisoners at point blank range. Three of the prisoners survived. Sixteen died, the majority as a result of a coup de grâce to the back of the neck.
According to the version of events given by the navy personnel and dictator Lanusse, one of the prisoners had tried to seize one of the weapons and flee.
This incident is considered to be the first illegal act of terrorism by the State, and it was used as a systematic method of repression against armed political organisations in Argentina.
Following the massacre, del Real was promoted and moved away to avoid any possible repercussions from the massacre. He was posted to Washington with a naval attaché. Sosa retired the 1 April 1981 and for twenty years the Navy kept his whereabouts a secret.
In February 2006, the family of María Angélica Sabelli, one of the victims, filed a complaint against the sailors to Rawson Federal Court, near Trewel in Argentina. The complaint was soon followed by others from the families of the other victims. 