Joseph Serugendo
08.05.2016
facts

Joseph Serugendo was born in 1953 in the Murambi sector of Satinsyi commune in the prefecture of Gisenyi, Rwanda. Serugendo was a member of the Executive Committee of the Radio Television Libre des Milles Collines S.A. (RTLM), Technical Director of RTLM, and Head of technical service at Radio Rwanda (RR), attached to the Rwandan Office of Information (ORINFOR).In this position, he exercised control over his subordinates, in particular the presenters, technicians and other staff members of RR and RTLM.
He was also a member of the National Committee of the Interahamwe militia and of its parallel committee which exercised effective control over the Kigali Interahamwe and the Impuzamugambi, the militia army created by the CDR (Coalition for the Defence of the Republic). In this capacity, he exercised control and authority over the militias.
He was also the owner of “Terminus”, a bar also known as “Chez les CDR”, in the Nyamirambo district of Kigali, where regular meetings were held by the leaders of the MRND, the CDR, the Interahamwe and the Impuzamugambi.
Serugendo had close contacts with well known company directors and highly placed political personalities such as President Habyarimana, Ferdinand Nahimana, Felicien Kabugu, Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza (see “related cases”), as well as with other highly placed politicians, notably those who, like him, were leaders of the MRND, the CDR and the Interahamwe and Impuzamugambi militia, all of which reinforced even more the authority he wielded over his subordinates at RR and RTLM.
From the beginning of 1992, and until 17 July 1994, Joseph Serugendo, in his capacity as leading member of the Interahamwe, was said to have initiated a project with other leaders of the MRND, the CDR, the Interahamwe and Impuzamugambi militia, which, by organising and holding political meetings and gatherings, was aimed at indoctrinating and inciting members of the Interahamwe and the CDR into killing Tutsis.
Between 8 April 1993 and July 1994, Serugendo, together with Ferdinand Nahimana, Jean-Bosco Barayawiza, Phocas Habimana, Felicien Kabuga and others, reportedly agreed to set up a programme to take advantage of RTLM radio broadcasts in order to disseminate a message full of hatred towards the Tutsi. During this period, and due in part to the actions of Serugendo, RTLM broadcast widely from Kigali a message which called for the extermination of the Tutsi. Between 6 April and 17 July 1994, RTLM broadcast information detailing the places where Tutsi were to be found and inciting the Hutu to find and kill them.
Between 6 April 1994 and a date on or about 17 July 1994, Serugendo, accompanied by armed militias, allegedly went on several occasions to the RTLM studios, to check that the programmes were being aired without interruption, to ensure also that his equipment was working properly, to lend technical assistance if needed and to provide encouragement and moral support to the journalists and other personnel, thereby aiding and abetting the broadcasting of messages aimed at incitement to massacre Tutsis.
From April to July 1994, in addition to the RTLM programmes mentioned above, Serugendo, in his position as Technical Director of Radio Rwanda, reportedly aided and abetted his subordinates to broadcast from Gitamara messages calling out for the extermination of the Tutsis and their accomplices.
Around 4 July 1994, forces of the FPR (Rwandan Patriotic Front, a movement essentially made up of Tutsi refugees and led by Paul Kagame) entered Kigali and destroyed the transmitters which were broadcasting from this location. Around this same date, Serugendo went to Gisenyi to meet with Barayagwiza, Ruggiu, Nahimana, Habimana and other highly placed employees of RTLM at the Hotel Meridien and in the offices of the tea factory at Pfunda. Following their discussions, it was decided to set up a new studio with new transmitters which would allow RTLM to continue with its broadcasts.
Between 5 and 14 July 1994, Serugendo and RTLM technicians under his authority and control, allegedly brought equipment which was rescued from Kigali to the top of Mount Muhe close to Gisenyi and, there, taking advantage of the transmitter and antenna which Serugendo had already installed there in January 1994, they set up a makeshift studio and a means of transmission which allowed RTLM to continue broadcasting. RTLM thus was able to continue to disseminate its call for the extermination of the Tutsi, thanks to the technical assistance provided by Serugendo, which allowed RTLM journalists such as Bemeriki, Habimana and Georges Ruggiu (see “related cases”) either to go personally to broadcast live from the top of Mount Muhe or to have their pre-recorded cassettes programmed in order to continue broadcasting the call for the extermination of the Tutsi.
Towards the end of July 1994, faced with the advance of the FPR troops, Serugendo fled Rwanda. He was arrested on the request of the Chief Prosecutor of the ICTR (International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda) on 16 September 2005 in Libreville, Gabon. On 23 September 2005, he was transferred to the ICTR prison quarters in Arusha, Tanzania. 