Fulgence Niyonteze
31.05.2016
facts

Fulgence Niyonteze was born on 1 March 1964 in Mushubati into a farming family. With a first degree in telecommunications already in his possession, he obtained a second degree in economics and statistics. After serving in various positions in both the Ministry of the Interior and Education, he was elected mayor of Mushubati. He took up this office in April 1993.
After a trip to Europe lasting several weeks, he returned to Mushubati on 19 May 1994.By this date the most serious massacres were over and there was almost no Tutsis left in the commune whereas, beforehand, they had represented 15 % of the population.
Upon his return, he resumed the position of mayor. Even though he had been a member of the opposition party, the Republican Democratic Movement, since 1991, he entered into an accommodation with the authorities in office and maintained close contacts with the government. By so doing, the latter did not think of him as a member of the opposition.
Despite the civil war and the ongoing genocide, Niyonteze always maintained an influence, which was not to be underestimated, over his subordinates, the military and the militia.
On 31 May 1994, or thereabouts, Fulgence Niyonteze allegedly called the inhabitants of his commune to be assembled on Mount Mushubati. Around 200 persons were in attendance. Niyonteze was accompanied by the military. In his speech he was said to have pointed out that the Mushubati commune was badly thought of by the government. Whereas during his absence the Tutsis’ cattle had indeed been slaughtered and their houses burned down, nevertheless it had been made possible for the Tutsis to escape and find shelter in a camp. A great number of Tutsis and moderate Hutus had been able to escape the regional massacres for this reason.
At that point in time there were scarcely any Tutsis in the region and those who were, had gone into hiding in the forest surrounding Mount Mushubati. The aim of the gathering on the mountainside was to seek out the surviving Tutsis and to push the attendees into committing acts of hatred against them. Niyonteze reportedly called upon the participants to kill the Tutsis. Hutu women who were pregnant from Tutsis also had to be murdered.
The participants in the assembly on Mount Mushabati obeyed these orders and call to action, which resulted in the death of a large unknown number of people.
On several occasions, Niyonteze, accompanied by the military, paid a visit to the Kabgayi camp. He allegedly called upon the villagers of his commune who had taken refuge in the camp to return home. He explained that the situation was now calm and there was no longer any danger for them. In reality they were being enticed away from the camp to be murdered and dispossessed of their belongings.
Furthermore, Niyonteze, reportedly gave the specific command, amongst others, to kill two brothers. One of them was struck forcibly on the chest with the butt of a rifle and an attempt made to stab him repeatedly with a bayonet. He was then thrown into the gutter. He pretended to be dead and was left lying there. His brother died in these same circumstances.
Niyonteze was also said to have used his position of authority to issue falsified Hutu identity documents to Tutsis, thus allowing them to escape. Thanks to his intervention, his family, accompanied by nuns, was able to leave the commune. He also helped the former prime minister, Nsengiyaremie to escape.
Niyonteze stayed in Mushabati until 11or 12 June 1994, the date when the troops of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) arrived and took over the village. He left the country on 23 July 1994, arriving on 12 October 1994 with his family in Switzerland, where he was granted asylum in May 1995. He lived with his family in Villars-sur-Glâne. It was his intent to undertake further studies in the autumn of 1996. Niyonteze was arrested on 28 August 1996 in Switzerland and placed in detention to await trial. 