Milorad Nisavic
09.05.2016
facts


Milorad Nisavic served as a member of State Security in Prizen, Kosovo, throughout the Kosovo War, during which time he is accused of participating in the murders of 48 members of the Berisha family that occurred during the Suva Reka Massacre.
In the spring of 1999, the Yugoslav Army, Serbian Police and Serb Paramilitary forces allegedly initiated a broad campaign of violence against Albanian civilians in order to expel them from Kosovo and maintain political control of Belgrade. During this attack, war crimes were committed against civilians, predominantly ethnic Albanians and other non-Serb citizens.
On 26 March 1999, two days after NATO began its bombing campaign in Kosovo, two buses containing special police forces (including Nisavic), commanded by Radoslav Mitrovic, arrived in front of the Suva Reka police station. Mitrovic commanded the officers to launch an attack against the Albanians in the village, the 50 members of the Berisha family. After attacking the family’s house, the officers locked all 50 civilians in a nearby pizza restaurant. The policemen drank bottles of brandy and vodka, before another officer, Radovan Tanovic, broke a window with his rifle and threw a hand grenade inside of the building. Officer Sladjan Cukaric then began firing into the building “until no screams were heard.” Inside the pizzeria were 50 people, of which 48 were members of the Berisha family; 14 of these 48 were children, two were babies, one was a pregnant woman, another, a 100-year-old woman.
After the attack, the bodies were loaded onto military trucks to be buried. Two members of the Berisha family, Siret and Violca Berisha, had survived the attack and escaped by jumping out of the truck. The remaining bodies were then transported and buried in a mass grave in Prizren, a police firing range. Other bodies, as an attempt to conceal the crime, were excavated and relocated to a mass grave in the Batajnica base near Belgrade.
After the Kosovo War ended on 3 June 1999, Nisavic moved to Kragulijevac, a city in southern Serbia, and began operating a driving school.
Nisavic, along with seven other alleged perpetrators, was indicted in April 2006 for committing war crimes against Albanian civilians in the village of Suva Reka on 26 March 1999, during the Kosovo War. 