Rape and Ill-treatment of Devi Maya Nepal in August 2002
12.02.2016
The case 
In March 2015 TRIAL submitted a communication to the Human Rights Committee on behalf of Ms. Devi Maya Nepal (pseudonym). Ms. Devi Maya Nepal is a member of the Tharu indigenous community.
On 20 August 2002 Ms. Devi Maya Nepal was subjected to rape and other forms of ill-treatment by six members of the Royal Nepalese Army (RNA) when she was at home with her three years old daughter.
The subsequent attempts of Ms. Devi Maya Nepal to obtain justice and redress for the harm suffered were frustrated, as Nepalese authorities refused to register her claims because she did not report the rape within 35 days from having suffered such treatment (which would have been materially impossible for her).
On 22 January 2015 Ms. Devi Maya Nepal submitted a complaint to the Supreme Court of Nepal, seeking relief and requesting the latter to order that the 35-day statute of limitations is not applied in her case. The claim is currently pending before the Supreme Court of Nepal, but she has no real prospect of success, considering that the Court never disregarded the statute of limitations established under domestic legislation in individual cases and that a previous order to amend the relevant provisions remains unimplemented since 2008.
Ms. Devi Maya Nepal requests the Human Rights Committee:
to find that she is a victim of a violation of Art. 7 (prohibition of torture), read alone and in conjunction with Arts. 2, para. 1 (prohibition of discrimination), 2 (obligation to adopt legislative measures), 3 (right to an effective remedy); 3 (equality between men and women); and 26 (prohibition of discrimination) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, because of the rape, torture, and ill-treatment she has been subjected to, and the subsequent failure by Nepalese authorities to carry out an ex officio, prompt, effective, independent, impartial and thorough investigation on her allegations, and to prosecute and sanction those responsible. Moreover, the violations inflicted on Ms. Devi Maya Nepal had clearly discriminatory grounds, based both on her gender and on her ethnicity; and violence against her amounted, per se, to a form of discrimination. Moreover, Nepal failed to adopt effective legislative measures to give effect to the rights enshrined in the Covenant and to remove obstacles in the existing legal framework that are at odds with its international obligations and that have disproportionately prejudicial effects on women.

to find that she is also a victim of a violation of Arts. 17 (right to privacy), and 23, para. 1 (right to family life), alone and in conjunction with Arts. 2, paras. 1 and 3; 3; and 26 of the Covenant because of the arbitrary interference with her privacy, the disruption of her family life, and the unlawful attacks on her honour and reputation. Moreover, Nepalese authorities failed to adopt the requested measures of protection of the author’s family as a natural and fundamental group of society, rather leaving Ms. Devi Maya Nepal to bear the brunt of stigma and marginalization.
to request Nepal to promptly and effectively investigate and prosecute and sanction those responsible for her rape and torture; to ensure that she receives adequate compensation for the harm suffered and integral reparation, including restitution, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition.
The case is currently pending before the Human Rights Committee. 