Rahim Ademi
04.05.2016
facts

Rahim Ademi was born on 30 January 1954 in Karac, a village located in the county of Vucitrn, Kosovo. In 1976, he graduated from the Belgrade Military Academy, and following this was sent into active service in Rogoznica near to Sibenik. In 1991, he joined the Interior Ministry (“MUP”) and shortly after became a member of the Croatian Army. On 5 December 1992, he was appointed Chief of Staff of the military district of Gospic. As a result of the absence of Brigadier-General Izdor Cesnaj for health reasons, Rahim Ademi was appointed to the rank of Commander par Interim of the Gospic military district. It was this position which he held during the period relevant to the charges with which he was indicted, namely the military operation in the Medak Pocket, which took place between 9 and 17 September 1993.
The operation in the Medak Pocket took place during the Croatian War of Independence which opposed the new Croatian government against the Serb minority which was backed both politically and militarily by Belgrade. On 19 December 1991, following Croatia’s Declaration of Independence on 25 June 1991, the Assembly of the Autonomous Region of Serbian Krajina, together with Serbs from other regions of Croatia, proclaimed their independence from Croatia and created the Republic of Serbian Krajina (“RSK”).
Between 1992 and 1993, the Croatian forces launched several military operations against the RSK. During these operations, on 9 September 1993, the Croatian forces launched an attack on the Medak Pocket. With a surface area of five kilometres wide by six kilometres long, Medak is located within the territory of the RSK, south of the town of Gospic in the Croatian Republic. Prior to the attack it had around 400 Serbian inhabitants. During the operation, the Serbian forces are said to have completely destroyed all of its villages, thereby depriving the Serbian population of their homes and livelihood.
As alleged in the indictment, Rahim Ademi, acting individually and/or in concert withMirko Norac and Janko Bobetko, planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted in the planning, preparation or execution of persecutions of Serb civilians of the Medak Pocket on racial, political or religious grounds. Amongst the allegations of persecution can be cited as an illustrative example the unlawful killing and capture of protected persons namely Serb civilians and wounded soldiers, the cruel and inhumane treatment which they were subjected to (notably by means of shooting, stabbing, cutting of fingers, severe beatings, burning with cigarettes, jumping on bodies, tying bodies to a car and dragging them along the road, mutilation and other forms of mistreatment), the terrorising of the Serb-civilian population in the Medak Pocket, and the systematic destruction and plunder of the personal property of this population. During this operation, at least 29 Serb civilians lost their lives. Others were severely wounded and for the most part the buildings in the villages in this zone were destroyed.
Rahim Ademi voluntarily gave himself up to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) at The Hague on 25 July 2001. 