Radoslav Brdjanin
05.05.2016
facts

Radoslav Brdjanin was born on 9 February 1948 in Celinac, Bosnia Herzegovina. Civil engineer by profession, he worked in the building trade until 1990. At that time, given the difficulty to maintain the unity of Yugoslavia, certain regions in Bosnia Herzegovina began to organise themselves into regional structures based on the concept of Municipality Assemblies such as existed under the 1974 Yugoslavian Constitution. The Municipalities Assembly of Bosanka and Krajina, based in Banja Luka, was created in April and May 1991.This Assembly adopted a Serbian political programme. Radoslav Brdjanin was its first Vice-President
On 25 June 1991, Slovenia and Croatia declared their independence from Yugoslavia. In Croatia, fighting broke out during the summer of 1991 between the Yugoslav Popular Army (JNA) and the Croatian Armed Forces. With the war dragging on in Croatia, it became probable that Bosnia Herzegovina would also declare its independence from the Federal Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia (FSRY). The Serbian Democratic Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina (SDS) realising that it could not keep Bosnia Herzegovina within the FSRY, undertook the creation of a separate Serb entity within Bosnia Herzegovina. In September and October 1991 the Municipalities Assemblies mentioned above were transformed into autonomous Serb districts. The Municipalities Assembly of Bosanka and Krajina was transformed into the Autonomous Region of Krajina (ARK)
On 9 January 1992, the Serbian Republic of Bosnia Herzegovina was proclaimed and re-baptised as the Republika Srpska on 12 August 1992. The leaders of the SDS felt that the large Muslim and Croatian population, living in the zones they had claimed as part of the Serb Republic of Bosnia, presented a major obstacle to the creation of their State. The creation of this State and the protection of its boundaries therefore implied, in time, the complete evacuation, or “ethnic cleansing”, of practically the whole Bosnian Muslim and Croatian population.
A strategic plan was adopted and set going under the impetus of Radovan Karadzic(see «related cases”). Crises groups were formed to act as organs of coordination and execution of the main elements of the operational phase of the plan and to take over the administration of the regions and the municipalities. The ARK Crisis Staff was set up on 5 May 1992 with Radoslav Brdjanin as its President.
In this capacity, Radoslav Brdjanin was said to have played a role of the first order in the campaign to create an ethnically pure Serb State. His position enabled him to facilitate the ethnic cleansing by putting all of the instruments of State power (media, central administration, housing authority, health service, police, legal system, means of production and employment) in the hands of the governing bodies and those persons committed to an ethnically pure Serb State. It was he who reportedly signed the decisions and orders of the Crisis Staff of the ARK, which in turn instructed and compelled the municipal Crisis Staffs into taking action. Certain members of these cells participated directly in carrying out the alleged crimes: persecutions, deportations, murders, torture, and destruction.
Radoslav Brdjanin allegedly knew or had reason to know that such crimes were being committed, and failed to take the necessary and reasonable measures to prevent such acts or punish the perpetrators thereof.
He was arrested by the SFOR on 6 July 1999 and transferred on the same day to the International Criminal Tribunal for ex-Yugoslavia (ICTY). 