Pablo Barrientos Nunez
19.10.2016
Facts

At the time of the coup d’état led by General Augusto Pinochet in Chile on 11 September 1973, Pedro Pablo Barrientos Nuñez was a Lieutenant in the Chilean Army and Section Commander in the Tejas Verdes Regiment.
On 12 September 1973, the Chilean Army invaded the State Technical University and transferred about 1’000 students, professors and other civilians to the Chile Stadium, which became one of the first mass detention centres in the Pinochet military dictatorship. Lieutenant Barrientos and soldiers under his command in the Second Combat Company of the Tejas Verdes were among the troops deployed to the mass detention site at the Stadium. There, he was in charged of overseeing the arbitrary detention of civilians, including Victor Jara.
Many of the civilian detained, mainly intellectuals, political leaders and perceived political supporters of the Allende government, were tortured and subsequently murdered for suspicion of opposition to the new military regime. Among those victims was Víctor Jara, a faculty member and a popular Chilean folk singer, songwriter and political activist who advocated for social and economic equality in Chile.
On 15 September 1973, Victor Jara was separated from the other detainees and taken to an underground locker room of the Stadium, which the Chilean Army used to torture civilians. Soldiers under Lieutenant Barrientos’s command allegedly blindfolded, handcuffed, interrogated, brutally beat, and otherwise tortured Victor Jara. Lieutenant Barrientos reportedly ordered soldiers under his command to further beat and torture Victor Jara to punish him for his political beliefs and support for President Allende.
Lieutenant Barrientos allegedly put a pistol to the back of Victor Jara’s head and proceeded to “play” rounds of “Russian roulette.” Reportedly, Lieutenant Barrientos finally shot Victor Jara in the back of the head at point blank range. He then ordered the five military conscripts under his command to repeatedly shoot Victor Jara’s corpse. The subordinates then shot Victor Jara’s corpse at least forty times. His body was discarded outside the Stadium, along with the bodies of other civilian prisoners who had been killed by the Chilean Army.
In 1989, Lieutenant Barrientos moved permanently to the USA. 