Vladimir Kovacevic
08.05.2016
facts

Vladimir Kovacevic, alias ‘Rambo’, was born on 15 January 1961 in Niksic in Montenegro.
In 1985 he completed his military service in the JNA (Yugoslav People’s Army). In autumn 1991 he was promoted to Commander of the Third Battalion of the motor brigade JNA 472 (Trebinje). This battalion was under the command of the 9th naval sector, led by Miodrag Jokic, who in turn was subordinate to the second operational group under the command of General Pavle Strugar.
The year 1991 marked the beginning of the collapse of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. On 25 April 1991 a referendum on independence was held in Croatia, and on 8 October of that year, independence was declared. However, from the end of August on, the JNA took up positions in several Croatian villages and towns close to the Serbian border and laid siege to Vukovar. The Croatian Republic answered by besieging the barracks of the JNA; at the same time it organised its own army with the support of the Croatian National Guard (ZNA).
The confrontations between the JNA and the ZNA in the vicinity of Dubrovnik began in September 1991. Units of the JNA, now under Serbian control, were subsequently transferred to Dubrovnik. On 1 October 1991, the JNA launched a terrestrial, naval and airborne attack against the city and its surrounding area; the attack was commanded by Pavle Strugar, Miodrag Jokic and Vladimir Kovacevic.
It was alleged that the JNA injured and killed numerous civilians in the city of Dubrovnik and its vicinity in the course of the illegal bomb attacks carried out between 1 October and 31 December 1991. Moreover, the historic centre of the town was supposedly hit by 1000 missiles fired by the JNA between 1 October and 6 December 1991. The whole historic town centre of Dubrovnik had been declared a UNESCO world heritage site.
A study carried out by the Institute for the Protection of Cultural Monuments, in collaboration with UNESCO, concluded that 563 (68.3%) of the 824 buildings of the historic centre were hit by the projectiles.
Vladimir Kovacevic, as a commander of the 3rd battalion of the motor brigade JNA 472, reportedly ordered and supervised the bombardment (artillery and mortar fire) of 6 December 1991. Two civilians were killed and three more were injured in this bombardment.
Vladimir Kovacevic, after an initial period on the run, decided to turn himself in after the federal government of Serbia and Montenegro, in an attempt to lessen friction with the ICTY, and increase cooperation, issued ultimatums against 23 fugitives. Six fugitives complied, among them being Vladimir Kovacevic. In exchange, the federal government guaranteed that the accused could remain in liberty until the opening of the proceedings.
He was transferred to the ICTY on 23 October 2003. 