Harry Männil
15.04.2016
facts 

Harry Männil was born on 17 May 1920, in Tallin, Estonia as the son of an iron salesman. He graduated from the Gustav Adolf Grammar School in 1938 and from 1939–40 studied economics at the University of Tartu and the Tallinn University of Technology. After hiding in the forest during the Soviet occupation, Männil joined the Estonian Political Police as an assistant in September 1941 until 1942 when he was fired.
After being fired, Männil continued his studies at the University of Tartu. In October 1943 he escaped to Finland when the German Security Service began to consider him politically dangerous as a student leader at the university. In Finland Männil studied business management in Helsinki when he was accused by a local police official of illegal trade in gold and valuables brought to Finland by Estonian refugees. These accusations were however denied by Männil himself. In September 1944 Männil moved to Sweden to continue his studies and he lived in a refugee camp for a short while until he received a working permit that allowed him to take a job at the archive.
In November 1944, a complaint regarding Männil’s Nazi involvement was filed at the Swedish Commission of Foreigners, and he was investigated by the Sandler Commission, a commission appointed to audit the Swedish refugee policy during World War II. The Sandler Commission heard testimony of how Männil interrogated Jews and communists and allegedly handed victims over to the Nazis to be executed during his time with the Estonian Political Police. The complaint resulted in Männil losing his work in September 1945 at the request of the Commission of Foreigners and an extension to his residence permit was declined. Moreover he was denied entry in Britain due to the accusations.
In Feburary 1946 Männil moved to Maracaibo, Venezuela where he started working in a department store and later he would begin a successful carreer in Venezuela’s automotive trade. Männil received Venezuelan citizenship in 1952. In 2002 Männil was forced to temporarily relocate to Costa Rica due to the Venezuelan general strike and he retired the following year. Harry Männil died on 11 January 2010, in San José, Costa Rica. His ashes were placed in a chapel on his ranch located in the mountains of Costa Rica. 