Edgar Cevallos Jones
08.05.2016
facts

Edgar Cevallos Jones, of Chilean nationality, was born on 17 December 1931. He was an engineer and later became an air force colonel in the Chilean Armed Forces.
After a 1973 coup led by Augusto Pinochet, the military government was implicated in systematic human rights violations. Cevallos was a member of a group that tortured political opponents of the government at the Air Force Academy, which was one of the main torture centres established after the coup. In 2009, he was convicted of inhumane treatment and torture of seventeen members of the Chilean army for these acts.
Moreover, Cevallos, together with Colonel Pedro Ramón Cáceres Jorquera, held their former superior, Alberto Bachelet, an air force brigadier general, at the Air Force War Academy. Bachelet was arrested in September 1973 after he had been court-martialled for remaining loyal to then-president of Chile Salvador Allende and for his opposition to the coup. During his detention, Bachelet was blindfolded and tied. He was denied access to water and ordered to stay motionless for hours. Both Cevallos and Cáceres allegedly presided over Bachelet’s interrogation sessions during which he was subjected to physical and psychological mistreatment.
Bachelet was held at the War Academy for six months. On 12 March 1974 he died, at the age of 51, according to official records, from a heart attack suffered in prison.
In early January 1975 Bachelet’s wife, Angela Jeria, and daughter, Michelle, were held first under house arrest and subsequently they were transferred to Villa Grimaldi, a notorious secret detention centre in the capital. They were subjected to interrogation and torture there. Immediately after their release at the end of January, both fled Chile. Michelle Bachelet, who returned from exile in 1979, served as a President of the country between 2006 and 2010 and was elected again in 2014.
In 2011 the Group of Family Members of Executed Political Prisoners in Chile, of which Jeria is a member, brought a complaint alleging that general Bachelet was tortured to death. In August 2011 a Chilean judge agreed to open a criminal investigation. A forensic study concluded that Bachelet died of heart problems aggravated by torture sessions during his confinement.
Cevallos was arrested on 17 July 2012 on charges of torturing Alberto Bachelet to death. 