Enforced disappearance of Fadil Icic in June 1992
12.02.2016
The Facts 
In December 2010, TRIAL submitted an application to theUnited Nations Human Rights Committee concerning the enforced disappearance of Fadil Ičić, on behalf of his mother, Mrs. Mevlida Ičić.
On 20 June 1992, when ethnic cleansing operations were taking place in Trnopolje (Bosnia and Herzegovina – BiH) and in the surrounding area, members of the Bosnian Serb forces arbitrarily deprived Fadil Ičić of his liberty as he was working in the field outside his house. He was taken to the concentration camp known as “Omarska”. In Omarska, Fadil Ičić and other men were living in inhumane conditions and they were frequently beaten and ill-treated. Fadil Ičić was last seen alive by another prisoner, in the hands of the guards of the concerntration camp. The fate and whereabouts of Fadil Ičić remain unknown since then.
Mrs. Mevlida Ičić lives in a lacerating situation of uncertainty, in spite of numerous attempts to establish the truth regarding the circumstances of the arbitrary deprivation of liberty, ill-treatment and enforced disappearance of Fadil Ičić, his fate and whereabouts and the progress and results of the investigations. Almost 18 years after the events, no ex officio, prompt, impartial, thorough and independent investigation has been carried out by BiH authorities and no one has been prosecuted, judged and sanctioned for the crimes concerned, thus fostering an ongoing climate of impunity. Although Mrs. Mevlida Ičić and the other members of the family have given their DNA samples to international mechanisms and national institutions dealing with the subject of missing persons, to date the mortal remains of Fadil Ičić have not been duly located, exhumed, identified and returned to the family.
Besides, Mrs. Mevlida Ičić has still not received integral reparation or compensation for the harm suffered by her and her son.
In March 2008 Mrs. Mevlida Ičić submitted an application to the Constitutional Court of BiH. On 13 May 2008 the Constitutional Court adopted a ruling on the case, finding a violation of various provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights because of the lack of information on the destiny of Fadil Ičić. Therefore it ordered the authorities to disclose all available information on the fate and whereabouts of Fadil Ičić.
As of today, Mrs. Mevlida Ičić has still not received any information. Consequently TRIAL submitted an individual communication to the United Nation Human Rights Committee asking it:
to recognise that BiH violated numerous articles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights subsequently to Fadil Ičić’s enforced disappearance;
to declare that BiH also violated the Covenant with regard to the suffering caused by Fadil Ičić’s mother owing to his disappearance;
to request that BiH undertake all necessary action to launch independent investigations as a matter of urgency with a view to locating Fadil Ičić and, in the event of his death, exhuming, identifying, respecting and returning his mortal remains to the authors;
to request that BiH undertake all necessary action to identify those responsible for his arbitrary deprivation of liberty, ill-treatment and subsequent enforced disappearance, judge and sanction them;
to request that BiH undertake all necessary action to guarantee that Mrs. Mevlida Ičić obtain without any further delay fair and adequate compensation and, in particular, access to medical and psychological care free of charge. 