Abdul Alim
14.04.2016
facts 

Abdul Alim was born on 1 November 1930, in West Bangal. Abdul Alim migrated with his family to Joypurhat in 1950-1951 (northwest of present-day Bangladesh).
In 1958, he joined the Convention Muslim League and became one of its most influential leaders.
In 1971, during the Liberation War, he held the position of Vice-Chairman of Bogra District Council and served as a Chairman of the Peace Committee in the district of Joypurhat, one of several committees formed by the Pakistan Army to aid its efforts in fighting the rebellion for Bangladesh independence.
Over this period, Alim allegedly established an army camp and a training centre for “Razakars”, a paramilitary force organized by the Pakistan Army.
He was allegedly involved in a number of operations led by the army, most notably in Operation Searchlight, which was launched on 25 March 1971 and was known to have been particularly violent and deadly.
Following this operation, Alim is suspected to have launched a surprise attack, accompanied by other members of the Peace Committee and the Pakistani army personnel, on the civilian population in six Hindu-dominated villages. Alim and his accomplices damaged properties, looted burned houses and also allegedly lined up and shot to death hundreds of civilians. In the attack, many civilians were tortured and some slaughtered or buried alive.
Moreover, in April 1971, Alim allegedly forced one of the richest businessmen of Joypurhat to leave the country with his family, before occupying his properties.
In May 1971 Alim, accompanied by the Pakistani Army Major Afzal, arranged a meeting at Uttarhat Shahor in which he delivered a speech that triggered the looting of assets of the Hindu population. Following this gathering, members of the Peace Committee, members of Rakazar forces and Pakistani Army personnel allegedly attacked several surrounding villages and arrested a dozen Hindus, who were later killed on Alim’s orders. They also arrested and killed 26 “freedom fighters” after they had laid down their arms.
By virtue of the Collaborator’s Act, Alim was arrested in March 1972 for his co-operation with the Pakistani forces during the 1971 Liberation War. In 1974, he was released on bail and the new regime repealed the Collaborator’s Act the following year.
In 1977, Alim was appointed as a Minister in the government of the Bengalese President, Ziaur Rahman (1977-1981), after joining the Bangladesh Nationalist Party. A short time later, Alim was elected as a lawmaker from Joypurhat in the 1979, 1996 and 2001 elections.
On 6 March 2011, an investigation report was submitted to the International Crimes Tribunal (ICT) for Bangladesh, accusing Alim of committing war crimes, genocide, forced transfers and murders of civilians; offences punishable under the International Crimes Tribunal Act of 1973. Alim was also charged with attempt, abetment and conspiracy to commit crimes against humanity during the Liberation War.
Alim was arrested on 27 March 2011, shortly after the issuance of an arrest warrant by the ICT. 