Enforced disappearance of Husein Hamulic in July 1992
12.02.2016
The case 
In November 2010, TRIAL submitted a communication to theUnited Nations Human Rights Committee concerning the enforced disappearance of Mr. Husein Hamulić.
On 20 July 1992, when ethnic cleansing operations were taking place in Hambarine and in the surrounding area, members of the Yugoslav National Army (Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA) went to the house of the Hamulić family. Mr. Husein Hamulić tried to hide behind the house and to escape in the woods near Hambarine. Three other men trying to escape capture and who were also hiding in the woods saw there Mr. Husein Hamulić alive for the last time. To avoid looking suspicious, Mr. Husein Hamulić and the other three men decided to split up. The whole area was under the control of the JNA and paramilitary groups. Mr. Husein Hamulić was then allegedly apprehended by members of the JNA. His fate and whereabouts remain unknown since then.
In spite of numerous attempts from his relatives to establish the truth regarding the circumstances of the arbitrary deprivation of liberty and the subsequent enforced disappearance of Mr. Husein Hamulić , his fate and whereabouts and the progress and results of the investigations remain unknown. Since then, Mrs. Halima Hodžić and Mrs. Nura Hamulić, who are respectively the sister and the mother of Mr. Husein Hamulić have lived in a lacerating situation of uncertainty.
Indeed, more than 18 years after the events, no ex officio, prompt, impartial, thorough and independent investigation has been carried out by BiH authorities and no one has been prosecuted, judged and sanctioned for the disappearance of Mr. Husein Hamulić, thus fostering an ongoing climate of impunity. Although the victim’s relatives have provided DNA samples to international mechanisms and national institutions dealing with the subject of missing persons, to date the mortal remains of Mr. Husein Hamulić have not been duly located, exhumed, identified and returned to the family. In addition, as of today, Mrs. Nura Hamulić and Mrs.Halima Hodžić still have not received reparation or compensation for the harm suffered by them and their loved one.
TRIAL therefore submitted an individual communication to the United Nation Human Rights Committee asking it :
to recognise that BiH violated numerous articles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights subsequently to Mr. Husein Hamulić’s  enforced disappearance;
to declare that BiH also violated the Covenant with regard to the suffering caused by Husein Hamulić s mother and sister owing to his disappearance;
to request that BiH undertake all necessary action to launch independent investigations as a matter of urgency with a view to locating Mr. Husein Hamulić and, in the event of his death, exhuming, identifying, respecting and returning his mortal remains to the authors;
to request that BiH undertake all necessary action to identify those responsible for his arbitrary deprivation of liberty, ill-treatment and subsequent enforced disappearance, judge and sanction them;
to request that BiH undertake all necessary action to guarantee that Mrs. Halima Hodžić and Mrs. Nura Hamulić obtain without any further delay fair and adequate compensation and, in particular, access to medical and psychological care free of charge. 