Suhartono Suratman
02.05.2016
facts

Colonel Suhartono Suratman was born on 6 September 1952 in Makassar, Indonesia. He has a military background and spent most of his career in East Timor and West Java. At the time of the events in question, he was Military Commander for East Timor. On 13 August 1999, he was however relieved of his duties under pressure from the United Nations. It was then that he was promoted Brigadier General and became spokesman for the central command of the Indonesian army.
The accusations of criminal responsibility against him go back to the events which took place in East Timor in 1999. Around 1400 people were killed in the months leading up to a referendum on independence for the region, organised by the United Nations on 30 August 1999, and during the days following this vote. In addition, more than 250’000 people were transferred by force or fled to West Timor or Indonesia. A large number of people were also victims of other violations of human rights, notably of torture and rape. These crimes were carried out by the militia with the support and coordination of members of the armed forces, the police and the Indonesian Civilian Authorities in order to influence the outcome of the referendum and to upset adoption of the results of the referendum.
Suhartono Suratman was said to have played a role, essentially in disseminating propaganda and in training and instruction linked to these events. From August 1998 onwards, he reportedly met with heads of the pro Indonesian militia on several occasions to help them to get organised. Furthermore he was reported to have facilitated the provision of arms. His direct responsibility was also called into question in certain specific events, in particular for the massacres committed in the church in Liquica on 6 April 1999, and for the murder of the independence leader Manuel Carrascalao on 17 April 1999.
On 22 February 2003, Suhartono Suratman, and seven other highly placed military and civilian individuals, were indicted by “The Serious Crimes Unit”, a body set up by the United Nations Transitional Administration of East Timor (UNTAET). 