Joshua Arap Sang
19.04.2016
facts

Joshua Arap Sang was born in Kitale, Trans‐Nzoia District, Rift Valley Province in Kenya. He is part of the Kalenjin ethnic group.
In 1993, he graduated from the Kitale Academy Secondary School and in 2006 from the Kenya Institute of Mass Communication.
Since 2005, Sang, prominent Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) supporter, has been a radio broadcaster at the Kenyan radio station KASS FM based in Nairobi where he hosts a call-in program called “Lene Emet” (“How is the country?”)
In December 2006, Sang, along with William Samoei Ruto and Henry Kosgey, allegedly established a network with the aim of committing crimes directed against supporters of the Party of National Unity (PNU). Sang allegedly held a key position in planning and organizing crimes against PNU by using his radio program to collect support and provide information for the members of the plan on when and where to attack through a coded language.
During the period of violence following the presidential election of December 2007, members of the network organized by Ruto and Sang allegedly began attacking target locations including Turbo town, the greater Eldoret area (Huruma, Kimumu, Langas, and Yamumbi), Kapsabet town, and Nandi Hills town. They approached each location from all directions, allegedly burning down PNU supporters’ homes and businesses, killing and torturing civilians, and systematically driving them from their homes. On 1 January 2008, they allegedly burnt down a church in Kiambaa with more than 100 people inside the church. At least 17 people died.
According to the ICC Prosecutor, the post-election attacks resulted in more than 1,100 people dead, 3,500 injured and up to 600,000 forcibly displaced. During 60 days of violence, there were hundreds of rapes, and over 100,000 properties were destroyed in six of Kenya’s eight provinces.
On 15 December 2010, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) requested the Pre-Trial Chamber II of the ICC to issue summonses to appear for Ruto, Kosgey and Sang. According to the Prosecutor, there were reasonable grounds to believe that they were individually criminally responsible for murder, torture, deportation or forcible transfer and persecution on political grounds, as crimes against humanity. 