Miroslav Sisik
15.04.2016
facts

Miroslav Sisík is a former Slovak police officer, who worked at the police station in Revúca, Slovakia. Sisík, together with six other police officers, was involved in a torture case of a Slovak citizen of Roma ethnic origin, Karol Sendrei.
The incident started on 4 July 2001 in the village of Magnezitovce, in Revúca district in the region of Banská Bystrica, Slovakia. Karol Sendrei’s stepson, Róbert Gunár, got involved in a dispute in a local pub to which a police unit was called. One of its police officers was the son of the newly elected Mayor of Magnezitovce, Andrej Hudák. Karol Sendrei had some issues with the approach the police took towards his stepson and went to complain about it to the Mayor’s house on 5 July 2001. The Mayor hit Karol Sendrei in the face and the Mayor’s family called the police. They did not allow Sendrei to leave before the arrival of the police. Sendrei’s three sons, Peter, Karol Jr. and Róbert arrived in the courtyard of the Mayor’s house and a new dispute started.
When the police arrived, they allegedly hit Sendrei and his sons with nightsticks. Miroslav Sisík was one member of the police unit, which captured Sendrei and two of his sons and brought them to the Jelšava County Police Station, where they allegdly continued to kick them and hit them with nightsticks. Later on, the policemen brought the three men to a hospital for treatment, after which they took Sendrei and his sons to the Revúca Police Station. There, Sisík and several others allegdly handcuffed Sendrei and his two sons to iron bars and canalization tubes and continued beating them. Sendrei and his two sons were allegdly kept and beaten at the police station for about 12 hours.
On 6 July 2011, another policeman supposedly kicked Sendrei and jumped on him. As a result of the beatings Karol Sendrei died tied to the iron bars in front of his two sons, who were also attached. According to a medical certificate, the immediate cause of death was post-trauma shock caused by serious internal injuries: advanced brain swelling, bleeding into the brain, multiple skull fractures, bleeding into the chest and abdominal cavities, a ruptured liver and lungs.
While Sisík and the other policemen admitted they had handcuffed the three Roma to the iron bars at the police station, they denied maltreating them. Sisík and the others claimed that Sendrei had suffered his injuries when initially arrested after a scuffle at the house of the mayor of Magnezitovce. However, a court-appointed pathologist said that such injuries could only have resulted from 10-12 hours of violence, judging from the amount of internal bleeding in the skull and abdomen, and the lividity of the external bruising.
The Prosecutor charged Sisík and six other policemen- Ladislav Kiss, Igor Gužák, Hudák Jr., Marek Urban, Roman Roják and Ján Kubej with infringement on health and opened investigation into the case. 