Radovan Karadzic
12.04.2016
facts

Radovan Karadzic is born on 19 June 1945 in Savnik, actual Republic of Montenegro.
He is one of the founding members of the Serbian democratic party, the SDS as well as its President from 12 July 1990 to 19 July 1996. On 27 March 1992, he became President of the Bosnian Serb Republic national security council.
Karadzic became one of the three members of the presidency before becoming on 12 May 1995, the unique President of the Serbian Republic from 17 December 1992 to 19 July 1996. As such, Karadzic was also the armed forces supreme commander.
In July 1991, the Serbian officials of Bosnia, particularly Karadzic, sought to take control of the Bosnia-Herzegovina regions, which were declared integral part of the Serbian Republic. They purposely created inhuman life conditions for the non-Serbian populations, plunging them into terror to force them to leave these areas. Persons refusing to leave were expelled or killed. Until the end of September 1995, persecutions and expulsions were multiplied.
The Muslim population sought refuge mainly in the Bosnian rural regions, which had been spared until then by the Serbian forces of Bosnia, particularly in Srebrenica. On 16 April 1993, the United Nations Security Council adopted the resolution 819 urging all parties of the conflict to treat Srebrenica, Zepa, Gorazde and Tuzla as « safety zones » that must not be the target of any armed attack or other hostile act.
However, around 6th July 1995, the Serbian forces of Bosnia, by order of Karadzic, bombarded Srebrenica and attacked the UN observation posts located in the « safety zone ». On 11 July, they entered into the city. Several thousands of Muslim people were gathered in the enclave, men, women and children. They sought refuge in the United Nations complex in Potocari, inside the « safety zone ».
The day after, the Serbian forces of Bosnia separated men from women and children and sent them in detention. Between the 11 and 18 of July, men were massively executed.
When the Serbian forces entered into the enclave, another group of around 15 000 Muslim, mainly men, chose to flee through the woods to go to Tuzla. Thousands of them were captured by the Serbian forces and executed. The rest of the Muslim population was massively expelled outside the Srebrenica enclave, leaving it empty from any Muslim people.
The SDS and governmental authorities opened camps and detention centers for the non-Serbs, kept by police and militaries, under the command of the high Serbian authorities, particularly Karadzic. Muslims and Bosnian Croats were detained in inhumane conditions, in constant fear of physical, moral and sexual violence. Thousands of detainees died because of these inhumane conditions or were executed.
Between 1st April 1992 and 30 November 1995, the Serbian forces of Bosnia, under the direction and command of Karadzic, carried out an attack against Sarajevo from the strategic positions in the center and suburb. They blockaded the city, bombed it and used isolated shootings that resulted to thousands of civilian victims, among them children and old persons. This siege lasted for 44 months and established a climate of terror among the inhabitants.
Finally, between 26 May and 2nd June 1995, in response to NATO air strikes, the Serbian forces of Bosnia, under the direction and command of Karadzic, detained more than 200 military observers and members of the UN peacekeeping forces, particularly in Pale and Sarajevo. They were kept hostage at military or strategic sites in order to protect them from other NATO strikes. Some of the hostages were abused and threatened during their captivity. 