Predrag Kujundzic
19.02.2013
facts 

Predrag Kujundžić was born on 30 January 1961 in the village of Suho Polje, Doboj municipality. He was a welder by occupation. At the beginning of the war, Kujundžić was a Commander of the Military Police Detachment in the 1st Ozren Light Infantry Brigade, known locally as Predini Vukovi or “Predo’s Wolves”. This unit was transferred to the civil police in July 1992 and Kujundžić remained Commander. Kujundžić is married and the father of three children. For several years, Kujundžić was included on the list of suspected supporters of Radovan Karadzic, and as such was banned from entering EU countries and the US.
From spring 1992 until autumn 1993, while an armed conflict was taking place between Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (later Serbia and Montenegro) and Croatia on the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a widespread and systematic attack was launched by the Bosnian Serb military, paramilitary and police forces against the civilian non-Serb population of the municipality of Doboj.
According to the indictment, in his capacity as the Commander of Predo’s Wolves, Kujundžić committed, incited, aided and abetted the murder, enforced sexual slavery, rape, severe deprivations of liberty and persecution of non-Serb civilians on political, national, ethnic, religious and cultural grounds, as well as other inhuman acts. In relation to some of these acts, Kujundžić was accused of direct participation; in others, he was accused of being aware of the acts being perpetrated by his subordinates but failing to prevent his subordinates from committing those crimes or to punish the perpetrators. The crimes committed by the Predo’s Wolves unit were included in the indictment of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia against former Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic.
Kujundžić, as leader of the Predo’s Wolves unit, was accused of participating in an infantry attack on the village of Grapska, in Doboj municipality on 10 May 1992, and subsequently forcibly resettling the inhabitants. He was further accused of killing a minor and inflicting injuries on another minor whilst they were trying to flee the attack.
It was further alleged that, on 12 June 1992, during an attack on the village of Čivčije Bukovačke, in the course of which the village mosque was blown up, houses were set on fire and all Bosniak men were ordered to gather in front of the village cultural centre, Kujundžić and his unit subjected approximately 160 Bosniak men to several hours of physical and mental abuse. Kujundžić was accused of then ordering the men to board buses, after which they were transported and unlawfully detained in a camp called “Perčin disco”.
On an unconfirmed date in June 1992, Kujundžić allegedly raped a minor in her home and incited a soldier to rape her mother. He was also accused of threatening the minor that she would have to comply with everything he requested of her or he would otherwise kill her mother and her younger sister. From June to December 1992, Kujundžić allegedly forced the minor into sexual slavery and, by use of force and threats, established exclusive access to her, control over her movements, psychological control and control over her sexuality. Kujundžić was accused of forcing her to read a statement on Radio Doboj stating that Muslims were guilty of the war, that Muslims had killed her brother, and inviting all to convert to Christianity. It was also alleged that he ordered her to wear a chain with a crucifix around her neck, the Serb army camouflage uniform and a red beret on her head and that he changed her Muslim name to a Serb name without her or her parents’ consent, obtained new identification documents in the Serb name, and demanded that she always introduce herself by her Serb name.
On 12 July 1992, 50 Bosniak and Croat civilians were taken from the Perčin disco camp and were used as human shields in the settlement of Makljenovac during active combat operations between units of the army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Serb army. At least 17 civilians were killed. Kujundžić was accused of knowing that these civilians had been taken and would be exposed to a life threatening situation but failing to take necessary and reasonable measures to prevent such treatment.
On two occasions in 1992 and 1993, Kujundžić was accused of inhuman treatment of Bosniak civilians. This included pointing a pistol at the head of a prisoner in Doboj Central Prison in 1992, asking him, “Should we play some Russian roulette” and then pulling the trigger, after which he slapped the civilian and left the room; and physically abusing another civilian in 1993, together with 5 unidentified soldiers, by beating him around the head with a rifle and walking over his bare feet whilst wearing boots.
It was further alleged that, on 19 July 1992, members of the Predo’s Wolves unit went to the Perčin disco camp and subjected the detained non-Serb civilians to several hours of torture and inhuman treatment by punching and kicking them, hitting them with chains, batons, electric cables and other items all over their bodies, thereby inflicting on them severe physical injuries. It was also alleged that they forced several detainees to eat soap and to beat each other, particularly insisting that close family members beat each other. Kujundžić was accused of being aware of these incidents but failing to take any action to prevent them or to punish the perpetrators.
Predrag Kujundžić was arrested on 10 October 2007 and was detained in custody to avoid possible witness interference. 