Carlos Mario Jimenez Naranjo
28.04.2016
facts

Carlos Mario Jimenez Naranjo was born on the 26 February 1966 in Marsella, Colombia. During the eighties he became involved in the drug trade via the Norte del Valle Cartel. After a gradual ascent, he became the head of a very notorious paramilitary group in Colombia, the Central Bolívar Bloc (Bloque Central Bolivar), of the United Self-defence Forces of Colombia (Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia or AUC). The Central Bolívar Bloc controlled the region of Middle Magdalena, as a de facto government. Carlos Mario Jimenez Naranjo, alias “Macaco” is currently considered by USA, as the most powerful Colombian narcoparamilitar.
To understand the power and the actions taken by Jimenez Naranjo, it is important to first recall the historical context of Colombia. From 1948 to 1960, a civil war period also called “la violencia” took place in Colombia opposing liberals and conservatives. In 1953, the government of General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla tried to pacify the country, leading to an agreement between the two parties. Unfortunately this agreement didn’t fix the problems which originated “la violencia”. Facing the inequalities and the poverty still affecting the country, a guerilla warfare inspired by the Cuban revolution emerged in the sixties to take control over the territory. Threatened by the objectives of the guerilla, landowners, supported by the government, formed paramilitaries groups to stop the insurgency and protect their land. A triangulated war between guerillas, paramilitaries and government forces began. This three-front war was further strengthened by the fact that financed by the drug trade, paramilitaries became more and more independent and powerful, which in turn led to the creation in 1997 of the AUC bringing together violent paramilitary groups across the country.
Under the BCB, Jiménez Naranjo and the 7000 combatants under his command, conducted in Middle Magdalena, a systematic campaign of torture, extrajudicial killing and forced disappearances, focusing especially on members of the Program for Peace and Development in the Middle Magdalena (PDP). The aim was to keep control over the territory and drug trade. PDP is an organization that focuses on building transparent civil society institutions, sustainable economic development and agricultural alternatives to the drug trade. Twenty members of its organization were allegedly killed by Martínez Jiménez forces from 1997 to 2007.
They notably allegedly killed and tortured two members of this organization, Eduardo Estrada Gutierrez and Alma Rosa Jaramillo. On 28 June 2001, Jaramillo was allegedly abducted by members of the BCB and tortured to death. Only a portion of her body was discovered then. Estrada Gutierrez, a potential concurrent of the BCB for mayor election, was gunned down the same year, and killed in front of his relatives on 16 July 2001.
Carlos Mario Jiménez Naranjo was captured in 2002 by Colombian government forces. 