Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova
01.05.2016
Facts

From 1979 to 1992, El  Salvador  was  in  the  midst  of  a  bloody  civil  war  between  the Salvadoran Government and guerrilla forces. Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova was head of the Salvadoran National Guard between 1979 and 1983. He led the department of the Salvadoran security forces that carried out the brutal slaying of four U.S. churchwomen in 1980 and was responsible for the torture of several civilians. At that time General Jose Guillermo García was Minister of Defence of El Salvador. In the following years 1983 to 1989 Vides Casanova succeeded this post.
After retiring, General Vides Casanova moved to Florida in 1989 as a legal permanent resident and had been living in Palm Coast until his extradition in 2015.
He has been allegedly involved in the commission of several crimes:
On 26 December 1979, Neris Gonzalez was abducted by Salvadoran National Guard soldiers. She was detained for two weeks and endured horrific forms of mental and physical torture, including repeated rape, electric shocks, beatings, and being forced to watch the torture of others. At the time she was pregnant and although she later gave birth to the child, he died two months later as a result of the injuries incurred during her detention.
On 12 December 1980, Salvadoran National Guardsmen and paramilitary opened fire at a church clinic in Santa Anita, El Salvador. They later arrested one of the doctors, Dr. Juan Romagoza as a “subversive leader”, mistaking his surgical equipment for Soviet technology. He was detained at the National Guard headquarters, where he was interrogated and subjected to beatings, electrical shocks, water torture, excruciatingly painful stress positions, and other torments.  He was shot in the left hand and lost the ability to perform surgery again. On two occasions during Dr. Romagoza’s detention, defendant Vides Casanova was physically present – once when he visited him in his cell and a second time, when the doctor was released from prison.
In June  1983, Carlos Mauricio, a professor at the University of El Salvador, was abducted by individuals dressed in civilian clothes who later turned out to be National Policy agents.  For nearly two weeks, he was interrogated and tortured, beaten, denied food for days, and subjected  to excruciatingly painful stress positions.
In 1992, the Commission on the Truth for El Salvador report revealed the role that the National Guard played in the disappearance, rape and execution of four US nuns – Maura Clarke, Jean Donovan, Ita Ford and Dorothy Kazel. Vides Casanova has been linked to these crimes by four national guardsman convicted in 1998 of the nuns’ murder who testified that they were working on “orders from above”.
In 1999 Generals García and Vides Casanova were charged with liability for the torture of Juan Romagoza, Neris Gonzalez and Carlos Mauricio, all civilians, under the command responsibility doctrine. 