Reynaldo Benito Antonio Bignone
18.04.2016
facts

Reynaldo Benito Antonio Bignone was born in Moron, Argentina on 21 January 1928. When he was 19 years old, he joined the Infantry. He studied at the National War School (Escuela Superior de Guerra) in Spain during Franco’s regime. In 1964 he was named head of the 6th Infantry Regiment and in 1975, when Jorge Rafael Videla took power as Commander in Chief of the military forces, he was named Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.
In 1976, Bignone participated in the coup d’état against President María Estela Martínez de Perón.
On 28 March 1976, he led the military operation in which the Alejandro Posadas Hospital was overtaken and turned into one of the detention centres operated by the military dictatorship.
In 1980, Bignone was named Chief of the Military Institute Command by President Videla. He retired from the army in 1981, after the fall from power of Videla.
Between 1976 and 1980, the Military Institute Command, led by Bignone, had control and command over the “Campo de Mayo”, which is a large military area outside Buenos Aires. During this period, the Campo de Mayo was divided into four different secret detention and torture centres.
After the defeat of Argentina in the Falkland Islands war, General Leopoldo Galtieri, who had succeeded Roberto Viola, stepped down and a vacuum of power was left. Bignone was then elected president and took office on 1 July 1982. During his presidency, political parties were allowed to resume their activities and it was announced that elections would be held in October. Meanwhile, members of the armed forced strove to eliminate the evidence of the crimes committed during the dictatorship.
On 28 April 1983, Bignone issued a decree which ordered the destruction of all existing documents on the detention, torture and murder of disappeared persons and of the document which determined their death, the so-called Final Document on the War against Subversion and Terrorism (Documento Final sobre la Lucha contra la Subversion y el Terrorismo).
On 23 September 1983, he approved a self-amnesty law, called the National Reconcilitation Law (Ley de Pacificación Nacional), for all the members of the armed forces for the acts committed during the military dictatorship.
On 30 October 1983, the candidate for the Radical Civic Union party, Raúl Alfonsín, won the elections. 