Goran Saric
18.04.2016
facts

Goran Saric was born in 1964 in Konjic, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
SIEGE OF SARAJEVO
During the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina and siege of Sarajevo from 1992 to 1995, Saric served as Chief of the Public Security Station located in Centar municipality, Sarajevo, and Commander of the Special Police Brigade of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Republika Srpska in Jahorina (SPB Jahorina).
On 16 June 1992, Saric, as Public Security Station Chief, ordered all non-Serb men in the Sarajevo suburb of Nahorevo to gather in the local community center. Around 100 men gathered there. Saric ordered these men taken to and imprisoned in the Jagomir Psychiatric Hospital. On 21 June 1992, on Saric’s orders, the prisoners were separated into three groups. Sixty men were sent to the frontline of fighting between the Bosnian army and Serbian troops; twenty nine men were unlawfully placed in a detention camp in Vogosca, near Sarajevo; eleven men were executed in Skakavac.
Saric also ordered the forcible transfer of the remaining non-Serb population in Nahorevo, comprising around 200 women, children, and elderly, to territory controlled by the army of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
SREBRENICA GENOCIDE
The Indictment against Saric alleges that, as that as Commander of SPB Jahorina, he knowingly participated in a joint criminal enterprise to forcibly transfer 40,000 Bosniaks, including women, children, and the elderly, and execute 8,000 Muslim men and boys.
The Indictment charges Saric with ordering members of the SPB Jahorina to secure the Bratunac-Konjevic Polje road near Srebrenica and capture Bosniak civilians who were trying to escape to territory controlled by the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina after Bosnian Serbs had overrun UN-protected areas of Srebrenica. Several hundred civilians were captured. Bosniaks who tried to escape from this police check-point were allegedly shot at and told to surrender. Fifteen to twenty men who did surrender were allegedly taken to a house in the nearby village of Sandici and executed by members of the SPB Jahorina. The wounded did not receive medical treatment and were stripped of their personal belongings.
After securing the Bratunac-Kojevic Polje road, Saric allegedly orderd the SPB Jahorina to take the captured civilians to the warehouses of the Agricultureal Co-Operative in Kravica. The Indictment alleges that 1,000 Bosniaks later were executed in the Kravica warehouses with firearms and hand grenades. One witness at Saric’s trial tesitified that soldiers ordered him and members of the civil defense to conceal corpses from the executions. In his opening statement, the prosecutor said that forensic evidence has identified 6,380 individuals from mass graves connected to the Srebrenica genocide.
Members of the SPB Jahorina may have tricked survivors of the mass executions into coming out of the Kravica Co-Operative warehouses with promises of medical help, only to shoot at them with infantry weapons and machine guns. Individuals who tried to escape from the execution sites were arrested.
The Indictment also charges Saric with ordering SPB Jahorina to participate in raids to search and disarm UN peacekeepers and overtake UN controlled positions.
Goran Saric was arrested 2 November 2011 in Bijeljina, Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his role in the attacks against the Bosniak civilian population in Sarajevo’s Centar municipality. 