Mohammed Ajmal Amir Kasab
17.04.2016
facts

Mohammed Ajmal Amir Kasab was born on 13 September 1987 in Fardikot, Pakistan. He grew up in a poor family along with his four brothers and sisters.
Due to financial constraints, Kasab dropped out of school at the age of 13 and briefly resided with his elder brother before returning home to Fardikot. He left his home at age 18 and became involved in small time criminal activity. In December 2007, Kasab and a friend enrolled for training with the Lashkar-e-Taiba Islamist group, either after meeting members of Jama’at-ud-Da’wah (the political wing of Lashkar-e-Taiba) during an arms purchase or after high-ranked commanders of Lashkar-e-Taiba offered his family money in exchange for his enrolment. His joining pertained as much to receiving money and training useful for a criminal career as to sympathy for the group’s goals.
Kasab underwent a three-week training with the Lashkar-e-Taiba group in its camps in Pakistan-administered Kashmir from December 2007 to January 2008, most likely returning home thereafter before being brought back for the advanced training camp in February 2008 for another 21-day training period. At the end of the camp, he chose to stay and follow the subsequent three-month training program from March till May 2008. After another two and a half month program and a final one-month training, he was picked to be part of a group of ten in charge of the Mumbai attacks.
On 22 November 2008, Kasab and nine others left Pakistan by boat with guns and grenades to reach ports near Mumbai, India, undetected. On the evening of 26 November 2008, Kasab and an accomplice took a taxi and placed a bomb under the driver’s seat, to be detonated later. Around 9:20pm, Kasab and his accomplice entered the Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus railway station and indiscriminately opened fire on the people present. After exchanging fire with policemen and killing several of them, they fled to the Cama Hospital nearby, continuing to shoot and kill police officers and civilians alike. After an hour, they fled the hospital, stole a police car by killing the occupying officers and fled the scene. Both men were injured during the shootings. After another confrontation with policemen and civilians, they stole a different car, which they crashed while trying to bypass a police barricade. They were subsequently overpowered and arrested by the police.
Following their capture a few minutes after midnight on 27 November 2008, Kasab and his accomplice were taken to the hospital, where Kasab’s accomplice died from his injuries. Kasab survived and was treated at the hospital, before being taken into custody. During the events that spanned three hours, they killed 71 people and injured approximately 130 others. 