Karl Hass
14.04.2016
facts 

Karl Hass was born on 5 October 1912 in Kiel, Germany. In 1933, he joined the Nazi Party and in 1934 Hass joined the Sicherheitsdienst, the SS’s intelligence service.
After the downfall of Benito Mussolini and the occupation of Italy by Nazi Germany, Hass was sent to Rome to set up a network of radio operators and to organize saboteurs behind the invading Allied lines. While in Rome, under Lieutenant-Colonel (Obersturmbannführer) Herbert Kappler, Hass allegdly aided in the deportation of more than 1,000 Jews to the Auschwitz concentration camp.
On 23 March 1944, 17 members of a resistance cell, the Patriotic Action Group (Gruppi d’Azione Patriotica), under the leadership of Rosario Bentivegna, detonated a bomb near a column of police marching down the Via Rasella in Rome. As a result of the incident, 33 German soldiers from a battalion of the 11th Company of the Police Regiment Bozen died. The final death toll of the incident amounted to 42 policemen and additional casualties among civilian bystanders. Following the incident, the Commander of the Security Police and Security Service (Sicherheitsdienst-SD) in Rome, SS Lieutenant-Colonel Kappler, and Lieutenant-General Kurt Mälzer, the Wehrmacht commandant in Rome, recommended a reprisal action in which ten Italian civilians would be shot for each German policeman killed in the guerilla action. Consequently, 335 persons where picked among prisoners and Jews, including two 15 year old boys, previously arrested by the SS or randomly picked on the streets in the area of Via Rasella. Field Marshal Albert Kesselring authorized the reprisal plan. On 24 March 1944, Captain Erich Priebke, Hass and his fellow officers allegdly transported the 335 Italians to the Ardeatine Caves at the outskirts of Rome and systematically executed each captive with a shot to the back of the head.
After the war, Hass was captured by the Allies, but did not face trial for his alleged war crimes. Instead, he was supposedly employed by the United States Army Counter Intelligence Corps. In 1947, Italian authorities issued an arrest warrant against Keppler and his subordinates, including Hass and Priebke. In exchange for immunity from prosecution, Hess returned to Italy in 1996 to testify against Priebke. However, on the night before he was due to testify, Hass decided against it and attempted to flee from his hotel room by jumping from a balcony. He seriously injured himself and was taken to hospital where he ultimately gave testimony to Court officials. Hass’s attempt to flee meant that he lost his legal immunity from prosecution and from 5 August 1996 he was put under house arrest in a private clinic near Rome after having confessed during Erich Priebke’s trial to have killed two civilians. 