Edwin Wladimir Casierra Lara
22.04.2016
facts

Edwin Wladimir Casierra Lara is a former police officer of the former Ecuadorian Special Forces and part of the Support Operations Group (GAO in Spanish). He participated in an irregular operation along with other police agents from the Ecuadorian Special Forces on 30 September 2009.
Without a judicial order having been issued that day, the officers arrested Yorgi Hernán Cedeño Saltos along with his stepchildren, Fabricio Colón, Javier Universy and Jenny Karina Pico for an alleged robbery of the Rumiñahui Bank, located in the Quito Military Hospital.
The arrest of these alleged criminals took place in the north of Quito.
According to the case records the lieutenants who participated in the arrest of Cedeño and Colón were Sergio Cevallos, commander of the operation and Paúl Muñoz; Corporals Santiago Brito, Edwin Casierra and Hugo Hidrovo were also involved. However, the arrests of Pico and Universy were carried out by Corpoal Rodrigo Coba, police agent Angel San Martín and sergeants Rodrigo Sigcha and Lenin Barriga. Law enforcement officers but without court order, they handcuffed the four of alleged suspects and placed them in two unmarked vans.
After a journey of just a few minutes in the vans the officers transferred the detainees from the vans to two other vehicles – where Corporals José Sánchez Estrella and Luis Llinin were waiting – and an unmarked car driven by Corporal Luis Lasso.
Pico and Universy were immediately interviewed by Lieutenant Cevallos. He cautioned them and when he received no response sent them to Tenis in old Quito, to a building known as the GAO Security House.
Inside they brought down the detainees and put them in different places. Here Casierra was one of the former officers who questioned those arrested.
In turn, the police officers hit and tortured the detainees, using – among others – methods such as the so-called ‘submarine’ and ‘forced intoxication’ methiods. They demanded them to give up the money from the alleged assault and bank robbery.
At 7pm on 30 September 2009, it was ordered that the three men be reunited : Colón, handcuffed, with his feet tied up and mouth filled with newspapers, was placed in the boot of a car; Pico and Universy, tied up, blindfolded with packaging tape and with newspapers filling their mouths, were put into a taxi-like car. Nothing more has since been heard of Cedeño.
All of the detainees were brought to Northwest Quito via a narrow, poorly maintained road. Given the condition of the road, the cars should have driven slowly and carefully, especially since there were no street lights.
That situation was used by Colón to get himself out at a gorge. This was possible due to the neglect of his captors.
At 7pm on 1 October 2009, Colón appeared semi-naked, at a ranch whose owner offered him help and communicated with the Nono Police Community. He was transferred into their custody.
Colón described the circumstances he had faced and asked that they be taken to the judicial police in order to press charges. Then unknowing the whereabouts of his brothers and stepfather, he feared for their lives.
While this was going on Nono, Pico and Universy were in the custody of Hidrovo and Brito in a private house in Calderón. In light of the knowledge that Colón appeared to be alive, they received the order to make the others drink copious amounts of liquor, and afterwards abandon them in an uninhabited area of Santo Domingo in Carretas. Those who had been tortured were aided by those living nearby, who called an ambulance, because of the state Pico was in and it took him to a clinic.
The investigations into this matter which violated human rights began following a formal complaint by the sister of one of the tortured victims, in front of the Fourth Court of Criminal Guarantees in the province of Pichincha, Ecuador. 