Bruno Dogbo Blé
18.04.2016
facts

Bruno Dogbo Blé was born on 26 January 1952 in Daloa, a town in west-center of Ivory Coast. He is part of the Bété ethnicity, like Laurent Gbagbo, which represents 18% of the Ivory population, the second ethnicity in Ivory Coast after the Baloués (23%). He received his military training in the French military school of Saint-Cyr Coëtquidan in the Morbihan where he graduated first class honour. Back in Ivory Coast, he led the armoured brigade of Akouédo right until the end of the 90’s.
On 23 October 2000, during the presidential elections between General Robert Gueï, in power since a year, and Laurent Gbagbo, the first results announced the latter winner. During the night from the 24 October to the 25th, Gueï dissolved the electoral commission. The Ministry of Interior’s announced him elected. Strong tensions arose and Gbagbo called on Ivorians to demonstrate. Dogbo Blé, then chose the Gbagbo camp and allied himself with another former Saint Cyr graduate, Captain Jean Siaka Remarck. He then led an assault on the powder keg of Akouédo in order to make tanks go out and attack the presidential palace. Guéï was finally forced to resign power and Gbagbo was proclamed president. Dogbo Blé was then rewarded by Gbagbo who charged him of modernising the presidential guard. He climbed little by little all the steps and ended up general.
Between 2010 and 2011 arose the Ivorian crisis, a political crisis born after the contested results of the second turn of the presidential elections. Following presumed fraud, two candidates proclaimed themselves winner, Gbagbo and Alassane Ouattara. During those events that will cause 3000 deaths, Dogbo Blé played a key role in the defence of the Gbagbo clan. He participated in the repression of pro-Ouattara demonstrations as well as to the blocus of the Golf Hôtel, where Ouattara, finally elected, was taking refuge. He also organised the Abidjan resistance from the presidential palace, transforming it in powder keg.
Arrested on 15 April 2011 by the republican forces of Ivory Coast, he is suspected of being responsible of the kidnapping and murder of the director of the Novotel of Abidjan, Stéphane Frantz Di Rippel, of the director of the Sifca group, Yves Lambelin and of two other expats. He is also accused of being involved in the kidnapping and murder of the retired colonel Adama Dosso as well as of blood crimes and genocide. 