Qi Liu
09.04.2012
facts 

Qi Liu was born in November 1942, in Wujin, Jiangsu Province. He is engineer, graduated from the metallurgical department of the Beijing Institute of Iron and Steel Engineering, majored in iron smelting. He joined the Communist Party of China in September 1975, and is still a member. In February 1999, he became the Mayor of Beijing (Peking), a position he held until 2003.
In 1998, Li Hongzhi, founder of Falun Gong (or Falun Dafa), a spiritual discipline based on Buddhism consisting on moral teachings, meditation and exercises, was forced to leave China under the threat of an arrest. This practice became widespread in China and at the international level. Following Li Hongzhi’s arrest, a national crackdown began in China against practitioners of Falun Gong, a discipline finally declared illegal by Chinese President Jiang Zemin on 22 July 1999. The campaign against Falun Gong practitioners was violent and characterized by its lack of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. On 30 October 1999, the National People’s Congress of China enacted an anti-cult law (Article 300, Criminal Act), effective retroactively, to remove a thousand religious sects in the country, including the Falun Gong.
Since July 1999, practitioners of Falun Gong expressed their disagreement concerning the prohibition of their discipline. On 20 November 2001, they stage a peaceful demonstration in Tiananmen Square in Beijing. Many demonstrators were arrested, held without charges and without access to their families or legal advice. The demonstrators were violently interrogated, and allegedly beaten and deprived of sleep, to force them to reveal the names of other practitioners of Falun Gong and renounce their beliefs. Some inmates were allegedly sexually abused or tortured by the use of electric shocks and other prisoners were allowed to beat detained practitioners in exchange for a pardon or reduced sentences. These events took place under the supervision of the Mayor of Beijing Qi Liu.
Still a member of the Communist Party of China at present, Qi Liu presided over in 2007 the Chinese Olympic Committee and the Organizing Committee for the Olympic Games in 2008. On 31 October 2007, he gave a speech in the framework of the debate on Sport for Peace and Development at the United Nations, despite the accusations existing against him. 