What Does ‘Home’ Mean to a Survivor of Torture?
 Wednesday, November 2, 2016 
Cynthia Crooks is a CVT volunteer coordinator.When you are from another country and working to speak English in the U.S., people hear your accent and want to know where you are from. This is usually done out of friendliness; people come up and ask questions – where are you from? How long have you been here? Why are you in the U.S.? Lots of questions. But it’s different for those I work with as a volunteer at CVT. Individuals who have survived torture don’t want to talk about where they’re from. They avoid answering questions about their past. And as the questions continue, many of them would rather not talk at all.I’ve learned many things from my work as a volunteer with survivors of torture. One is that survivors have a very complicated relationship with ‘home.’Before I came to CVT, I had a long history of working with newcomers to the United States as a volunteer with an organization that resettles refugees. I helped families get established here for about ten years. This work had a profound effect on me, and I wanted to continue to connect with people coming to the U.S., and to help them as they began to rebuild their lives.One person I worked with had experienced torture in his home country. He was hospitalized with symptoms resulting from his past torture, and he told me he was having trouble recovering. I did some research for him to see if there were resources that could help with his problems. I found CVT online, so I referred him. However, I found that after I met him and after speaking with so many friends who were refugees who had experienced torture or extremely difficult situations of war, I was very affected. I found I wanted to connect with others who were familiar with these kinds of stories, these horrifying situations. I felt like I had a case of secondary trauma from hearing what they had endured, and I didn’t know anyone who knew about these things. I felt isolated. I knew that if I was going to continue to work with refugees, I needed support. I needed people who understood this.So I began volunteering for CVT. This allowed me to stay connected and help those who had been through torture and war atrocities, but it was a way for me to take care of my own well-being in this.I started out as a befriender for a couple years, working directly with CVT clients. I moved to become a volunteer coordinator in 2008. This was a big change from working one-on-one with clients and going on excursions with them. I knew I would miss these long-term relationships, but at that time my children were at an age where I needed to make them my priority. The new role as a coordinator allowed me to work on my own time, from my home. It also meant I could help a much wider number of people in a shorter amount of time. That felt good for now!I love my coordinator work matching people up – volunteers with clients, tutors with students – and imagining how they will work together. When I connect a befriender with a client I am almost jealous! The befriender role is very special – going out to places, showing clients things for the first time, seeing clients’ faces as they enjoy it all. On any given weekend, it is really wonderful for me to think that there are multiple befriender/client visits going on; five or six clients with volunteers are out there enjoying a trip to the market or a walk around the lake.One of the things that is most important to me about this work is the activities that sometimes bring a little burst of extra life or encouragement to a client. What an energizing feeling it is when someone from another part of the world goes to the Conservatory in St. Paul, for example. They walk inside and feel the warmth, the damp air, they smell the flowers – for many, it brings back their country, the good memories of their country. They find a piece of home right here, and it is a feeling of home that is nurturing and positive. And that stays with them. They know there is a place they can go to have this experience again.Another thing that is very important to me in this work is helping clients work on their goals with the English language. Many clients want to change their accent or focus on pronunciation. I sometimes work with people who have trouble pronouncing a specific word – they can substitute another word for it, but oftentimes, they want to master that word. So we practice and look at ways to alter the way they say it. Clients are so happy when they make that change. It may be only one word, but it is so empowering. And they can take that learning everywhere they go, one more way of feeling they fit in.One client worked on his accent with a volunteer for about three or four months. One day, he called the center, and no one recognized his voice! This was a significant accomplishment, and it made him very happy.A client’s accent can bring up questions about their past, about their home. Many clients want to shed accents for this reason; they want to avoid questions that bring up uncomfortable memories. And a strong accent can also result in one’s job being on the line – if too many people don’t understand what they say, they could be fired. English and accents are very important. Your English skills impact your further job possibilities. One thing I’ve learned is that clients have very high goals. This has impressed me since I began volunteering with clients. It’s inspiring. They aim so high; they don’t want anything to hold them back.Over and over, clients tell me of their hope that things will get better. I know that they face difficult days most of the time. I think what gets clients up in the morning is hope – their desire to ensure that their children will have a much better life and a secure home. They work very hard for this. Education, secure jobs, a safe home, safety in their community. With a complicated sense of home from their past, creating a solid place of peace and community here for their children is always in the hearts of so many clients.