Guest Blog Post: Filmmaker Chris Cotter Tells the Story of Eritrean Refugees
 Monday, February 29, 2016 
By Chris CotterChris Cotter is director and producer of Refugee: The Eritrean Exodus. The film will be shown at a screening at the Humphrey School of Public Affairs at the University of Minnesota Thursday, March 3.Luckily for me, I was born just outside of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in the United States of America. I spent my childhood as an optimistic, naive kid more interested in playing music than studying geography. Honestly, I didn’t really put much thought into anything or anyone outside of my small bubble. My biggest issue as a child was deciding whether to watch Thundercats or He-Man.Like most of us born in a truly democratic state, I have taken many of my basic rights and freedoms for granted. It wasn’t until I began traveling outside of the U.S. that I started to understand how vastly different other countries could be. At first, I traveled mostly for the adventure of it, an achievement of some kind, or just out of sheer boredom. I did it because I could. I was hungry to see the world. My world.It took quite a few trips before the actual world finally came into focus for me. I started to realize that not everyone was as sheltered and spoiled as I was here in the United States. Not every person had the freedom to question authority or to have their vote counted when something needed to be changed. Not every man, woman, or child had a voice.As it turned out, “my world” ended up including other people who were not born as lucky as I was. I took on this project to tell the stories of people whose cries are falling on deaf ears and not reaching the public eye. These refugees are underdogs born into a severe situation and if things had gone another way, any of us could have been facing similar fates.It's hard to imagine living a life in a refugee camp. Our documentary paints a clear picture of why so many Eritreans leave their homeland and what they need to do to survive. The film guides you through their lives and gives you a glimpse into the conditions that so many people still have to live in. Refugee: The Eritrean Exodus is a story told by the Eritrean people courageous enough to stand up and be heard. Their stories are compelling and their bravery is motivating.My life will forever be changed from meeting the Eritrean people. I now understand that borders may put certain limits on our identity, but they do not need to define the limits of our humanity.