CVT Refugee Staff Leave Camp for the First Time
 Thursday, November 19, 2015 
In the huge refugee camps in Dadaab, Kenya, life is contained. The camps are closed. Guarded. You may live there for many years, but you are a guest in the country. Homes and schools, offices and markets are tents, and the land is arid. For many adults in their 20s, the camp is the only home they’ve ever known.Recently, the Center for Victims of Torture held a self-care retreat for the Dadaab staff in a hotel near Nairobi. This retreat included 13 clinical staff members who are refugees; most of these individuals had never left the camp before, never visited a city, never stayed in a hotel. This was a truly unforgettable experience.The largest refugee camp in the world, Dadaab was established in the early 1990s as thousands escaped famine and violence in neighboring Somalia. Today, at least 350,000 refugees call Dadaab home, the vast majority from Somalia, with others from South Sudan, Eritrea, Ethiopia and other countries.Pictured: Hibo, Hamdi and Malyun, CVT psychosocial counselorsCVT began extending rehabilitative care to torture survivors in Dadaab in 2010. A key part of CVT’s model of care in Dadaab is that it is community based. With supervision, refugee staff psychosocial counselors (PSCs) run the group counseling sessions, along with the screening and intake processes. Their connections in the community ensure those who need help find CVT.The work with torture survivors in Dadaab is rewarding but extremely challenging. Over 60% of those CVT helps are women, many of whom have been subject to sexual violence and targeting based on their gender. Fully 85% of CVT clients in Dadaab have had a family member killed in conflict. In addition, the security situation in Dadaab intensified in 2014-15 after attacks in the area by Al-Shabaab, creating tension and stress within the camp.For clinical staff, security stress and the effects of being exposed to the horrific stories shared during therapy can create a secondary form of trauma. Because of this, mindful self-care is an essential component of CVT’s work. In spring 2015, the clinical staff assessed the recent period of instability and  self-care needs of the clinical team and decided it was time to hold a self-care retreat for the counseling staff. It would take many hours of planning to ensure the necessary permissions and safety protocols were in place, but they determined the retreat would be most effective if done away from the camps.Self-care: Leaving the camp for the first timeThe group of CVT staff traveled to Thika, located about 45 kilometers northeast of Nairobi, a six-hour drive from Dadaab. Highway travel with its views of the mountains and hills, followed by the fast-paced atmosphere of a large urban environment, were entirely new experiences. The group stayed in a hotel in town; many had never had their own rooms before. One counselor asked “Is all this mine?” Several  counselors remarked they had never before taken a hot shower.The abundance of food was almost overwhelming. The hotel had a big breakfast buffet, which was very popular, and in a special event, one of the clinicians organized a barbeque for the group at his home nearby.CVT brought in external consultants to conduct team-building exercises, and at one point the group went out to a wilderness area to practice techniques for working together effectively. They played badminton and football, and one of the PSCs led self-care sessions in the evening.Pictured: Abubakar Hassan, CVT psychosocial counselorAbubakar Hassan, CVT psychosocial counselor, came to the Dadaab camp after the famine in Somalia in 1997 when he was five years old. This retreat was Abubakar’s first trip outside Dadaab, and he said he saw things he had only seen in magazines and newspapers: supermarkets, malls, markets filled with fruits and vegetables – he found many healthy options that were Halal. He was impressed with the hotel and his private room with soap and towels, but also with the hospitality of the people. People were very welcoming. Abubakar said that nobody even noticed them as strangers in the town.Abubakar also found that the trip brought back old memories from his childhood in Somalia. On the drive, the mountains and hills they passed reminded him of times when his parents took him and his siblings to the hills for weekend trips and walks. He remembered that land as flat with high mountains rising in the horizon. He remembered that the animals were taken there to graze during the rainy seasons when the flat land was flooded.Abubakar said he also appreciated seeing wildlife during the retreat trip, including white ducks, ostriches and even a wild crocodile. The group visited waterfalls during the team-building field trips, and Abubakar found the green environment and foggy weather a good form of self-care compared to the heat and dry air in Dadaab.The group truly enjoyed having the opportunity to work together outside the camp environment, and to have dedicated time to focus on managing the stress that comes with their work. It was a successful, and unforgettable, journey of self-care.Note: for privacy reasons, some last names are withheld on request.CVT’s work in Dadaab is funded by a grant from the U.S. State Department’s Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration, the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, Al Kaneb, and the United Methodist Women International Ministries.