CVT New Tactics in Human Rights Program is a Drucker Prize Semi-Finalist
 Tuesday, August 9, 2016 
Curt Goering is CVT executive director.Last week, CVT was thrilled to learn we were one of 50 organizations selected by the Drucker Institute as a semi-finalist for the Drucker Prize, which seeks to recognize organizations for innovative work in the pursuit of creating meaningful change in the lives of others. Selected from nearly 500 applications, our entry focuses on the work of CVT’s New Tactics in Human Rights program, which since 1999 has exemplified the stated goals of the Drucker Prize. New Tactics’ work focuses on providing human rights organizations and defenders with the resources, tools and knowledge necessary to do their work more strategically and effectively, to be more adaptive and in many ways, to be innovative.As we move forward with the second stage of the Drucker Prize, we look back at the work New Tactics has accomplished, including the development of the New Tactics Strategic Effectiveness method; the development of an online database of over 340 tactics, in English and Arabic; and 120 online conversations held with content experts on an array of human rights issues. As Tarek Lamouchi, New Tactics field & training development officer, noted in his latest blog piece, “…New Tactics gave us tools and ways to think differently – we could work cooperatively with those in power.” These accomplishments have helped New Tactics advance its goal of building the strategic and tactical capacity of human rights advocates around the world.With the New Tactics website set to reach well over 150,000 users this year – the highest numbers in the program’s history – New Tactics looks to expand online offerings to reach a wider and more varied audience. Through the development of new, interactive tools and online learning courses, we seek to be able to reach defenders in larger numbers as well as those working in locations with limited access. We also continue to expand our pool of trainers, who work with defenders face-to-face. In 2015 alone, our trainers trained 210 individuals from 43 organizations. Those trainers will also be able to offer defenders a new selection of training options, or mini-modules, heading into 2017. The new modules will allow New Tactics to be more responsive and adaptive to the meet the needs of organizations and individuals.We continue to expand our efforts to support and assist human rights defenders in their work, as it is a critical first line of defense in preventing and ending torture worldwide.We are grateful to the Drucker Institute for this recognition and support in this goal. Learn about the innovative work of our New Tactics in Human Rights program here.