Following a Massacre, Individuals, Families and a Community Struggle to Rebuild
 Tuesday, April 17, 2018 
Curt Goering is CVT executive director.I had the opportunity recently to travel to CVT’s office in Gulu, Uganda, and some small surrounding communities in the northern part of the country. CVT has had a small but growing presence in Gulu, the main urban center in northern Uganda, for nine years now. It is about a five-and-a-half hour drive from Kampala.Over the last year, we have been able to expand our operations working with the traumatized individuals and communities who were victims of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) conflict in the 1990s and 2000s. One of the many brutal attacks committed by the LRA in this region took place in Lukodi, a community about 20 km from the city of Gulu. On May 19, 2004, more than 60 people lost their lives at the hands of the LRA in what has since been called the Lukodi Massacre.The LRA regularly committed massive and exceedingly gruesome human rights violations during the conflict. Among the many atrocities it was known for was its widespread abduction of children, both boys and girls, who were forced to become child soldiers, “wives” of fighters, or porters carrying supplies. Abducted children were often forced to kill their own family members—a son forced to kill or mutilate his father, mother or sibling. If they refused, they themselves would be killed.The vast majority of CVT clients report being captured against their will for a period ranging from one day to several years. Virtually the entire population of northern Uganda—up to 2 million—was displaced during this period. Thousands of children in villages in the countryside were at such risk of abduction that they left their homes unaccompanied at dusk and walked to camps or to places of refuge in Gulu, where they would spend the night in order to avoid abduction, before returning home the next morning. These children were known as “night commuters.”Since the fighting subsided after a ceasefire was agreed upon more than a decade ago, the population has gradually been returning to their villages. Entire communities were deeply traumatized by the horrific events and many remain so today.We met with survivors of the massacre in Lukodi, as well as with abductees. Many specific details of their stories are too gruesome to describe here. Our staff there have heard literally thousands of these accounts in the course of their work, many in group counseling sessions. The individual and collective pain in the stories they relate defies description.In one group there may be a woman who was abducted, forced to be a militia commander’s “wife” and repeatedly raped. A woman in this situation may have returned to her village with the child conceived of rape, but is not welcomed. That very commander may have forced the next woman in the group to identify and then kill her own parents or even her own children. Another woman’s husband may have been killed by her neighbor’s son on the orders of an LRA commander. Many have children who were abducted and have not been heard from since. No family was spared these awful atrocities. To complicate matters further, many victims were also forced to become perpetrators of these crimes.I heard many stories about how CVT’s services enabled survivors to reconnect with their community and surviving family members, despite what had transpired between them. They are picking up the pieces and rebuilding their lives under circumstances that few of us can begin to comprehend. Community leaders and other members of the community in Lukodi recognized that CVT’s assistance allowed survivors to rebuild the social fabric the LRA had destroyed, and some urged individuals to avail themselves of CVT’s services.One woman said that she abused her own daughter, who had been born in captivity, in part because she was a constant reminder of the abuse she herself had endured at the hands of the LRA over several years. When they returned to her community, they struggled with discrimination or rejection by families and the community.Neighbors persuaded her to seek treatment at CVT. She said CVT had enabled her to cope with her traumatic past and transformed her relationship with her daughter. Although she, like so many in the region, struggled with many formidable challenges, including extreme deprivation and difficulties finding money to enable her daughter to go to school, she said she was coping better and had renewed hope for the future. It was evident that CVT programming enabled both mothers and their children in situations like this to be engaged and provided opportunities for their voices to be heard in a safe setting.After many years of enduring horrific suffering and hardship on a massive scale, Gulu seems in many ways revitalized. Markets were lively even into the night and many people were out on the streets. It felt as if many were trying to get back to the business of living. Many organizations made efforts to address economic, physical health and basic needs in the immediate aftermath of the conflict. Despite some progress in these areas, the passage of time and the shift of global attention to other international conflicts have meant that many donors, and therefore many services, have disappeared from the region.Yet, many communities and individual survivors in the north continue to struggle with hidden and severe physical and psychological wounds. Some spoke about the urgent need for transitional justice processes, including truth-telling, accountability and reparations as an essential part of true recovery. And they reminded me that, while the LRA is a shadow of its former self and has not operated in the area for years, its leader, Joseph Kony, is still at large (although indicted by the International Criminal Court) and commands some forces in neighboring countries. One staff member told me that, because of these and other factors, “In the minds of many in the rural areas, the violence of the war still continues, although the shooting has stopped.”Despite these and other challenges, CVT’s staff in Gulu was palpably enthusiastic about being able to address more of the urgent needs evident in these communities. CVT is fortunate to be able to expand its much-needed work in this area at this time as individuals, families and indeed entire communities, struggle to move beyond this gruesome chapter, determined to rebuild lives filled with potential, promise and hope.CVT Uganda is supported by the Trust Fund for Victims and Fondation d’Harcourt.