Connecting With Women Torture Survivors in Jordan
 Wednesday, December 2, 2015 
Valerie Spencer is a member of the CVT Board of Directors.Photos by Valerie Spencer.The warm Amman sun lit the small room where we sat on office chairs in a circle. The woman who was speaking was kind and welcoming. Eye to eye, I saw her strength and resilience. Through an interpreter, she shared with me the details of her life as a Syrian refugee. She said, “My children can’t be children.” I saw the sadness in her eyes, but I saw determination. This woman was a torture survivor. She was on a healing journey, on the way to changing that difficult reality for her family and herself.Last month, I visited CVT Jordan, where each year close to 1,600 survivors of torture and war atrocities seek out the organization to help rebuild their lives after escaping conflict in Syria or Iraq. I have been involved with CVT over the past two years, and I traveled there to see what daily life was like for survivors, as well as see the center and learn about the latest in CVT’s interdisciplinary rehabilitative care.At first glance, people seemed fine. I didn’t see homeless people on the street or see the stories behind the faces of people in the markets. But then I heard from staff and survivors what’s really happening: most refugees do not have enough money to feed their families. Many cannot afford the necessary school supplies, clothes or transportation to send their children to school. It is against the law for refugee adults to work in Jordan, and with the threat of deportation, illegal child labor is often the only, and painful, source of income for families. They can feel hopeless. Their lives are in limbo.And the numbers of refugees are overwhelming Amman. Jordan’s unemployment rate is nearly 14%. For people under 35, it’s almost 34%. The global recession is hitting Jordan, a country heavily dependent on tourism, hard. Jordanians have good hearts – they’ve taken in over 1 million Syrian and Iraqi refugees and asylum seekers. But now it’s become too much for the country. Any relocation strategy to move refugees to other countries is stagnant. Refugees wait months to get an interview with the UNHCR about relocation, and the waiting has a huge impact. The sad truth is it’s likely only 1% can hope to be relocated.The group of women torture survivors I met completed CVT’s 10-week group counseling cycle a year ago. I felt very connected to these women. I listened to their stories and understood that any of them could be me. One woman was a nurse. At home, she had a job, a family, a house. She had dinners with her family in the evening. Then one day, she had nothing. I could imagine this happening to me. She is the same age as me; she is an educated woman like me. The world changed and her life was gone.This is when one woman said “My children can’t be children.” Syrian refugees in Amman live in crowded housing. The children don’t wake up and go to school and play. They wake up feeling they can’t play. And if their families are able to send them to school, because they are refugee children they are often subjected to bullying. The children, too, are in limbo.A CVT therapist told me one client said her little girl wanted a cat. The therapist thought this would be very good for the child as she worked on her coping skills and self-care. The mother, however, said no. Se said they might be leaving Amman and it would be worse for the girl to have an attachment she would have to break. The therapist, though, told me the reality is they could be there for years. An innocent girl wanted a cat, but her life is in limbo.But even in that limbo, I saw an amazing sense of resilience and strength of spirit in the survivors I spoke with. The women shared their determination not to resort to what they called “negative coping mechanisms.” They shared their relief that they found each other. They said before CVT, they were alone in their homes, so traumatized they were afraid to leave the room; they didn’t interact with anyone. After the 10-week group counseling cycle, they became friends. Now they support each other. They have a voice; they have others they can speak to about problems and concerns. They are empowered to mourn what they don’t have, but also to advocate for themselves. As they improved their mental health, they became better able to speak up for themselves. And they were able to laugh again.I heard both men and women survivors talk about what CVT’s unique combination of mental health care and physiotherapy meant to them. I was told that for Syrians and Iraqis, religion and culture don’t encourage talking about death and grief. For torture survivors, their bodies have been brutalized and most are experiencing profound grief. They feel it in their bodies. CVT gave them the tools for psychological and physical healing.In Amman, I saw hope and resilience – I saw people’s ability to have fun and make friendships. To laugh. Survivors were just like me. Mothers. Grandmothers. People with hopes and dreams. Women with concerns for their spouses. It’s hard to imagine all they have lost, but I came to understand the courage it takes to rebuild your life and restore your dignity.