10 Best Practices for NGOs to Consider When Working with Photographers and Photography 
 Tuesday, August 11, 2015 
Brent Jensen is online community coordinator for New Tactics in Human Rights, a CVT program that provides strategies and tools to activists around the world who fight human rights violations and the systems that allow abuses and torture to exist. Here, he summarizes the 10 Best Practices discussed in the latest online New Tactics Conversation, this one focused on working with photography to effect change.Photography is a powerful tool that can create awareness and effect change. The visual narrative created through photographs can move individuals to a place and understanding of people, geographies, and events that would otherwise be impossible. Used as a tool to document, educate, move, and inform, photographs have the ability to be a powerful resource in the efforts of human rights practitioners when used effectively and ethically.Drawn from a conversation held by New Tactics in Human Rights titled The Use of Photography in Advancing Human Rights, the following are ten of the best practices NGOs should consider when working with photographers and photography in their advocacy efforts.Best Practices for Working with PhotographersIn my experience, the best NGO projects are born of some informed freedom on the photographer's behalf …With some room to breathe, I take it upon myself to approach the stated themes but also seek the unexpected. We must forget what we expect to find and embrace and follow what's actually there. In my view, this is how strong narrative work is born. — Pete Muller, PhotographerAsking questions, pursuing curiosity, and responding positively to stories that defy conventional wisdom -- these are definitely things I encourage organizations to give photographers freedom to do in the field. Let them use their own eyes and hearts to find the human stuff that otherwise goes unseen, unheard or unexplored. — Mo Scarpelli, Rake FilmsWithout everyone, including the photographer, at the table it is difficult to produce a robust strategy that integrates the role of the photos… In my experience the best use of photography in advocacy campaigns comes when a multi-disciplined team is working together - research, campaigns, comms, media and the photographer. — Robert Godden, The Rights Exposure ProjectA photographer who understands the issues and the goals of the NGO will do a better job than one brought in at the end of the process to document the NGOs’ plan. — David Stuart, PhotoEvidenceI have a preference for local NGOs and local photographers working together as they generally have a better understanding of the cultural and political terrain. — Robert Godden, The Rights Exposure ProjectPlacing stories is equally important as developing them for people who are trying to bring important stories to the public in a world filled with endless noise and infinite suffering. — David Stuart, PhotoEvidenceWhile we rarely discuss editing and framing with our audiences, we could further activate them as viewers by engaging in a conversation about why a photo might be cropped and levels adjusted, or why an image should not be edited at all. This would help all of us think more critically about issues of representation and constructed narratives, and photographers make enormous contributions to this conversation.— Claire Dillon, ART WORKS ProjectsThe edit and sequence greatly affect not only the structure of the story but the feeling that it conveys. The inclusion and omission of certain images, and their placement in the sequence, heavily impacts the viewer. — Pete Muller, PhotographerThe nature of the subject, the breadth of the information that needs to be conveyed, and the types of images and how they relate to one another all need to be considered before deciding on whether words or images should lead a narrative. —Diana Zeyneb Alhindawi, PhotographerSafety, Security, and Ethical ConsiderationsImportant images in human rights narratives are often made in areas and situations that NGOs are simply not permitted to go… From a storytelling standpoint, I always think that stories about human rights abuses resonate more when the abuses are placed into the appropriate context… In order to make many of the contextualizing pictures, I had to venture well beyond the security cordon that most NGOs had set… This meant taking risks that most NGOs were not comfortable with. — Pete Muller, Photographer...it is important to recognize the importance of keeping a professional photographer's images secure and preserving the value of their prints. Any sort of usage must be cleared with them (printing for an exhibition, in exhibit materials, on websites, etc.) as they will have strong opinions on resolution and dimensions, any sort of cropping or editing, printing, appropriate credits, and so on. You must be prepared to clear the specific use of every photo and to share any proceeds that may result. — Claire Dillon, ART WORKS ProjectsIn my work with the Caesar torture evidence file we have found that the most important element of using photography is the integrity of the images, the metadata, and the hardware used to take the pictures. Any international or domestic investigative body will do extensive checks on these elements. If any semblance of tampering is found, the entire set of photos may be compromised. —Tyler Jess Thompson, United for a Free Syria…even accepted photographic adjustments may undermine the integrity of the image in the eyes of those who seek to invalidate it. Perhaps, when working with human rights groups, photographers ought to note that any images of torture marks or other purely evidentiary images ought to be presented in their completely RAW, untouched version in addition to the toned version that the photographer might prefer. — Pete Muller, Photographer