

Tanzania: Open letter to States for joint action to address crackdown on civic space and prevent a further deterioration of the situation

September 12, 2018
Excellency,Ahead of the 39th regular session of the UN Human Rights Council (“the Council”), which will be held from 10-28 September 2018, we write to call on your delegation to deliver statements, both jointly and individually, to address the ongoing crackdown on civic space and human rights backsliding in the United Republic of Tanzania.Considering the rapidly declining environment for human rights defenders (HRDs), civil society, journalists, bloggers, the media and dissenting voices in Tanzania, we, the undersigned non-governmental organisations (NGOs), make a joint appeal to Member and Observer States of the Council. At the 39th session, States should urge the Tanzanian Government to change course, cease any form of intimidation, harassment and attacks against HRDs, journalists, bloggers, and opposition members and their supporters, and amend restrictive laws and regulations with a view to bringing them in line with international human rights standards.Since 2015, Tanzania has implemented newly-enacted draconian legislation and applied legal and extrajudicial methods to harass HRDs, silence independent journalism and blogging, and restrict freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly, and association.We call on your delegation to make use of the following agenda items1 to raise concern, jointly and individually, and to engage in a constructive dialogue with the Tanzanian authorities:Through these opportunities for dialogue, your delegation can help the Council fulfil itsresponsibility to “address situations of violations of human rights […] and make recommendations thereon” and to “contribute, through dialogue and cooperation, towards the prevention of human rights violations and respond promptly to human rights emergencies.”The 39th session should be leveraged to help prevent a further deterioration of the human rights situation in Tanzania and send the Tanzanian Government a message that the international community expects it to uphold its citizens’ human rights, in line with its obligations and the country’s history of openness, engagement, and respect for human rights.We thank you for your attention to these pressing issues and stand ready to provide your delegation with further information.Sincerely,1. African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights Studies (ACDHRS)2. Africans Rising for Justice, Peace & Dignity3. ARTICLE 194. Association for Human Rights in Ethiopia (AHRE)5. Association for Progressive Communications (APC)6. Caucasus Civil Initiatives Center7. Сenter for Civil Liberties – Ukraine8. CEPO – South Sudan9. CIVICUS: World Alliance for Citizen Participation10. Collaboration on International ICT Policy for East and Southern Africa (CIPESA) – Uganda11. Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ)12. Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative13. Conectas Human Rights – Brazil14. DefendDefenders (The East and Horn of Africa Human Rights Defenders Project)15. FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders16. Freedom House17. Global Witness18. HAKI Africa – Kenya19. Human Rights Concern – Eritrea20. HURISA – South Africa21. International Civil Society Center22. JOINT Liga de ONGs em Mocambique – Mozambique23. Ligue Burundaise des droits de l’homme Iteka – Burundi24. Observatoire des droits de l’homme au Rwanda – Rwanda25. Odhikar – Bangladesh26. Réseau Ouest Africain des Défenseurs des Droits Humains/West African Human RightsDefenders Network (ROADDH/WAHRDN)27. Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights28. Southern Africa Litigation Centre (SALC)29. World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory forthe Protection of Human Rights Defenders30. Zambia Council for Social Development (ZSCD) – Zambia