

Searching for a Lost Democracy:  A Fact Finding Mission Report on the Maldives (Executive Summary)

February 24, 2016
Below is the executive summary of CHRI’s fact finding mission report “Searching for a Lost Democracy”.INTRODUCTIONPrompted by alarming reports of human rights violations, threats to democracy and the rule of law in the Maldives, the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) mounted a fact-finding mission to the Maldives in November 2015.  The mission’s objective was to evaluate Maldivian compliance with the Commonwealth’s fundamental values laid out primarily in the 2013 Commonwealth Charter, as well as in the Latimer House Principles and international standards.  The mission found that the Maldives is in clear violation of the above.CHRI commissioned a diverse and expert fact-finding team made up of: Mr. Satyabrata Pal, a former member of the Indian National Human Rights Commission, Ms. Kishali Pinto-Jayawardena and Mr. Asad Jamal, both prominent legal practitioners from Sri Lanka and Pakistan respectively, and Mr. Uladzimir Dzenisevich from CHRI.Principal among these findings is that a sure slide to authoritarianism, as well as a flagrant disregard to the rule of law, human rights and good governance is taking place in the Maldives.  This is compounded by the rise of radicalised non-state actors targeting those perceived to be secular, unorthodox or “un-Islamic”.  The government has been unwilling to punish these perpetrators, instead tolerating them, which threatens core democratic and Commonwealth values. Government policies are disenfranchising and in some cases jeopardising political opposition, endangering the functioning of human rights organisations, activists and journalists, and fast narrowing the space for free expression.  These findings echo the international community’s concerns regarding the erosion of democratic values in the Maldives.SUMMARY OF FINDINGSSlide to Authoritarianism, exemplified by:Increasingly politicised, partisan and tyrannical Judiciary:Independent institutions, including anti-corruption and police oversight bodies, unable to fulfil their mandate:Radicalisation poses an existential threat to Maldivian democracy:RECOMMENDATIONSIn order to reverse the authoritarian shift and tackle this radicalisation, the fact-finding mission has made a number of recommendations to various stakeholders including the Maldivian government, the Commonwealth and international community.Please find the full report here.For more information please contact:
Uladzimir Dzenisevich | uladzimir@humanrightsinitiative.com | phone: +91-11-43180-213