Killing of Berta Cáceres: public joint letter to the President of Honduras
7 March 2016
Dear President Juan Orlando Hernández, We, a group of 50+ international organisations, write to express our shock and concern over the recent killing of Berta Cáceres, environmental activist and head of the indigenous rights group COPINH. As you will know, Mrs Cáceres was shot dead by gunmen in the late hours of 2 March 2016. Over the years she had received multiple death threats and attempted kidnappings because of her work defending indigenous Lenca land against the Agua Zarca dam project in Río Blanco. These threats had escalated in recent weeks since construction of the dam had restarted. We demand an independent international investigation into the circumstances around Mrs Cáceres’ death, and guaranteed protection for her family and colleagues. Mrs Cáceres was granted emergency protection measures by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights because of her acute vulnerability, but she claimed the Honduran state did not fully implement them. We also demand urgent action to protect Gustavo Castro Soto, a Mexican activist who witnessed her assassination, and to ensure his safe passage back to Mexico.  Mrs Cáceres’ case is the most high-profile killing within a growing trend in the murder, violence and intimidation of people defending their indigenous land rights in Honduras. Honduras is the world’s most dangerous country per capita to be an environmental or land defender, with at least 109 people killed between 2010 and 2015. Mrs Cáceres’ case has not escaped international attention. In a statement issued in response to her death U.S. Senator Patrick Leahy called on you to find and punish those responsible for “this despicable crime.” Last year, US Senator Barbara Boxer wrote a letter to US Secretary of State John Kerry urging for better protection of environmental defenders in Honduras. This was in direct response to Mrs Cáceres winning the 2015 Goldman Environment Prize – a prestigious award recognizing grassroots environmental activists from around the world. News of her death has generated substantial international media attention. The 50+ international organisations listed below call on the Honduran state to ensure indigenous peoples’ right to their land is respected and that they are able to carry out their legitimate work without fear for their safety. Yours faithfully, Goldman Environmental Prize
	Front Line Defenders
	Global Witness
	Business & Human Rights Resource Centre
	Bank Information Center
	Amazon Watch
	AIDA (Asociación Interamericana para la Defensa del Ambiente)
	Oakland Institute (USA)
	Environmental Investigation Agency US (EIA US)
	GreenpeaceEarthRights International
	Global Green Grants Fund
	International Service for Human Rights
	War on Want
	The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH and OMCT)
	COFADEH (Comité de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos en Honduras)
	CIPRODEH (Centro de Investigación y Promoción de Derechos Humanos)
	Friends of the Earth International
	Friends of the Earth US
	Peace Brigades International
	EcoWaste Coalition
	Right Livelihood Award Foundation
	Jenifer Altman Foundation
	Earthjustice
	Rainforest Action Network
	International Rivers
	CESTA/Friends of the Earth El Salvador and Goldman Prize winner
	National Toxics Network Inc.
	Secrétaire Général Alternatives Durables pour le Développement
	Alaska Community Action on Toxics
	Lynn Henning, Socially Responsible Agriculture Project, 2010 Goldman winner
	The Story of Stuff Project
	Greenpeace Australia Pacific
	Pesticide Action Network Aotearoa New Zealand
	Red de Acción en Plaguicidas y Alternativas en México (RAPAM)
	CEO - ESTAMOS
	South Durban Community Environmental Alliance
	Jan Chetana
	People and Water Slovakia
	Fern
	BaliFokus Foundation
	Armenian Women For Health And Healthy Environment (AWHHE)
	Greenpeace Switzerland
	Ohio Valley Environmental Coalition Huntington (OVEC)
	Rettet den Regenwald (Rainforest Rescue)
	Salva la Selva
	Jorge Varela Marque, Goldman Prize Winner 1999
	Coalition against Land Grabbing – Philippines:
	Central America Women’s Network
	Common Frontiers Canada
	Urgewald
	GreenWood
	Loire Vivante
	Eco-Accord Centre 