Bangladesh: Conduct a credible investigation into threats of violence and ensure protection of Sultana Kamal
13 June 2017
We, several international and regional civil society organisations, express deep concern over violent threats received by Sultana Kamal, a prominent lawyer and women human rights defender in Bangladesh. Sultana received these threats from the radical Islamist group Hefazat-e-Islam (Hefazat), a coalition of teachers and students of quami Madrasas1, after expressing her opinion on a news channel’s talk show. On 28 May 2017, news channel News 24 invited Sultana, together with Awami League Parliament Member Apu Ukil, Garanajagaran Mancha Spokesperson Imran H Sarker, and Hefazat representative Mufti Sakhawat Hossain to discuss the removal of the lady justice sculpture from the Supreme Court premises. Hefazat-e-Islam and other radical Islamist groups had insisted the statue needed to be
	dismantled on 26 May 2017 arguing that instituting the statue would lead to idol worshipping which is against the tenets of Islam. During the talk show, the Hefazat leader remarked that the statue was a religious object and as such should not be placed on Supreme Court premises. Sultana responded with hypothetical argument
	that if no religious structure is permitted, then no mosques should be on the premises either. Based on this statement, Hefazat demanded her arrest within 24 hours. Hefazat Vice President, Junayed Al- Habib, further stated that ‘we will break every bone in [her] body.’ Triggered by the threat made by Hefazat, Sultana received various other threats, including on social media. One person posted a photo of Sultana which was edited to make it look like she was being hanged. The Dhaka Metropolitan Police Ramna Division and the Detective Branch said on 5 June 2017 that they were taking joint measures to ensure the safety of Sultana. So far, efforts to ensure her safety are limited to closely monitoring her neighbourhood. We are concerned by the threats faced by Sultana. Violence has been used numerous times to stifle freedom of expression and the legitimate and peaceful work of human rights defenders in Bangladesh. We urge the authorities in Bangladesh to: We remind the Government of Bangladesh, as a citizen of Bangladesh, Sultana Kamal has the constitutional rights to (i) 'enjoy the protection of the law, and to be treated in accordance with law',
	Article 31 (ii) the 'protection of right to life and personal liberty', Article 32, and (iii) 'the right of every citizen to freedom of speech and expression', Article 39. Signed: 1 Quami Madrasas are privately owned Madrasas which operate without government oversight 