European Parliament adopts human rights resolution on Sudan and HRD Salih Mahmoud Osman
15 March 2018
As of yesterday, the European Parliament adopted a human rights resolution addressing the recent human rights violations in Sudan, specifically including concerns voiced by HRD Salih Mahmoud Osman. Human rights defenders remain in detention amid a recent crackdown in Sudan. On 1 February 2018, Sudanese forces arrested Salih Mahmoud Osman, who is Vice President of the Darfur Bar Association, member of the Democratic Lawyers Association, a human rights lawyer, and recipient of the 2007 Sakharov Prize. He has promoted the rule of law and advocated for legal reform through the National Assembly of Sudan, which he was appointed to in 2005. The human rights defender has also provided legal aid to victims of violence. Human rights defender Mohamed Aldouma, President of the Darfur Bar Association, was also arrested during a demonstration in Omdurman on 17 January 2018 and has since been transferred to Khartoum North Common Prison, commonly known as Kober, where he is now being held. On 31 January 2018, human rights defender and lawyer Hanan Hassan Khalifa was arrested while traveling to meet detainees who she was legally representing in Kobar Prison, North Khartoum. Sudanese forces also arrested Rawa Gafar Bakhit, a human rights defender and advocate of displaced persons on 17 January 2018 in Omdurman. She has advocated against corruption and police brutality in Sudan. "We welcome the European Parliament's strong condemnation of Sudan's crackdown on peaceful protest, civil society and human rights defenders," said Emma Achilli, Head of Front Line Defenders European Union Office. "The Parliament is calling for for the protection of human rights defenders at risk by both the government of Sudan and by the EU in its relations with Sudan -- with particular attention to women activists.  It is urging the EU to put all its weight behind the release of detained defenders and to prioritise the implementation of protection mechanisms for Sudanese human rights defenders at risk. The EU must implement its Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders, by fully utilising all means at its disposal such as public statements, political and financial support. The resolution also warns the EU not to commit direct or indirect violations of human rights via its migration programmes, in response to reports which have emerged on the possible link between EU funding and repression by the security forces. Parliament is also calling for Member states to be active and united, and plans on keeping the EU accountable for its actions." The European Parliament resolution: 8. Underlines its continued commitment to the protection mechanism for human rights defenders at risk; calls on the EEAS to continue to improve its implementation of the EU Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders, by fully utilising all means at its disposal in Sudan; emphasises that EU delegations must prioritise support in their local calls for proposals under the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR) for those human rights defenders most at risk, thereby ensuring effective and targeted support; 9. Requests that the EEAS and the EU Delegation to Sudan report back to Parliament on actions taken to provide protection and support for human rights defenders; calls for united EU and Member State action in support of human rights defenders at risk; and also: 13. Shares the concerns expressed by Salih Mahmoud Osman that the current focus on migration may divert the EU’s attention away from human rights matters; 14. Calls, therefore, on the EEAS to resume issuing statements in response to widespread human rights violations by actors of the state and militias, as well as statements concerning the shrinking space for civil society, in order to demonstrate that the EU remains deeply concerned about the human rights situation in Sudan; 15. Strongly requests that the EU and its Member States ensure that the implementation of projects with the Sudanese authorities observe the ‘Do no harm’ principle, which would rule out cooperation with actors responsible for human rights violations; Front Line Defenders commends the European Parliament for passing legislation in favour of Sudanese HRDs. Front Line Defenders calls upon the government of Sudan to: 1. Immediately and unconditionally release the human rights defenders Rawa Gafar Bakhit, Mohamed Aldouma, Hanan Hassan Khalifa, and Salih Mahmoud Osman, as Front Line Defenders believes that they are being held solely as a result of their legitimate and peaceful work in the defence of human rights; 2. Cease targeting all human rights defenders and activists in Sudan and guarantee in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate human rights activities without fear of reprisals and free of all restrictions including judicial harassment. 