Joint statement in solidarity with Colombian HRDs Miller Dussan and Elsa Ardila
1 February 2017
Miller Dussán is a Colombian university professor and President of the Association of Those Affected by the Quimbo dam (ASOQUIMBO). El Quimbo is a mega-dam built by the Italian corporate energy giant ENEL-EMGESA, on the Magdalena river in the Department of Huila in southern Colombia. ASOQUIMBO has been resisting this hydroelectric project for several years, highlighting its social and environmental impacts as well as a series of legal irregularities on the part of EMGESA (an Enel subsidiary in Colombia).  They have also called into question current energy and mining policy in Colombia, demanding in its place the construction of a policy based on national sovereignty and local control of renewable energy sources to meet the needs of local communities. Miller Dussan now faces up to twelve years in prison as a result of two legal charges being brought against him based on accusations made by Emgesa. In the first case, Dussan and his co-accused Elsa Ardila, ex–president of ASOQUIMBO, face charges of ‘blocking public roads in ways that affect public order’, in relation to a series of social protests in 2012.  These charges carry a sentence of up to four years in prison. In the second case, Dussan is accused of instigating the occupation of land owned by the corporation, a charge that carries a sentence of up to eight years. According to his defence, these charges relate to land occupations by small farmer communities in 2013 as part of a protest against forced displacement and in order to demand just compensation from the corporation. Formal charges and the request for those charges to be dropped During hearings on 10 August 2016 in the municipal court in Gigante, Huila, the public prosecutor brought formal charges for the alleged offences of blocking public roads.  Nevertheless on 27 October 2016, defence lawyers requested the charges to be dropped, arguing among other things the absence of any criminal conduct, given that any damage of transport routes occurred as a result of construction work by EMGESA as part of the QUIMBO dam project. The legitimate protests that followed were in response to these impacts on local infrastructure. Now the Municipal Court in Garzon, Huila, has convened a public hearing to make a decision on the request by lawyers to drop the charges against Dussan and Ardila. The hearing, which was originally scheduled on 9 December 2016 is now due to be heard on 6 of February 2017. ASOQUIMBO has declared that the hearing is the result of both the serious concerns raised regarding the criminalisation of social protest and the broad recognition by social and environmental organisations, national and international NGOs, state institutions and the International Commission of Jurists of the legitimacy of protests against the building of the Quimbo dam and in defence of territory and life itself. We demand As a result of the above stated, the signatories below demand that: 1. Garzon Municipal Court in Huila to drop the charges brought as a result of accusations made by EMGESA against Miller Dussán and Elsa Ardila for the supposed crime of ‘blocking public roads in ways that affect public order’. We firmly believe that the legal cases being brought against these two environmental leaders are part of an overarching strategy of judicial intimidation, the final aim of which is to repress local resistance to mega-dams and other extractivist projects across the region. 2. The Corporation, ENEL-EMGESA, immediately desist from the judicial persecution of leaders of ASOQUIMBO; withdraw the two charges it has brought; and withdraw its plans for building of any further socially and environmentally destructive megadams in Latin America. 3. Multinational corporations and Latin America governments stop using court proceedings as a way of criminalising protest and respect the legitimate right of people to defend their resources, their lands and life itself against the voracious capitalist model of development currently upheld – one that promotes the destruction of the environment and the killing of environmental defenders across the entire region. The signatories below also express our most fervent support for the fight of ASOQUIMBO, and their struggle to defend their territories and life itself. The letter complete with signatures will be delivered ahead of the hearing on the 6th of February to : Garzon Municipal Court, Huila.
	The CEO of ENEL, Francesco Starace, as well as to Lucio Rubio Díaz, director of EMGESA in Colombia. A copy will also be sent to members of ASOQUIMBO as well as to Miller Dussan and to Elsa Ardila. TO SIGN-ON TO THE LETTER, PLEASE GO TO THE FOLLOWING LINK  Signatories: Maude Barlow, Council of Canadians
	Nnimmo Bassey, Health of Mother Earth Foundation (Homef)
	The Democracy Center
	Global Justice Now
	Corporate Accountability International
	Corporate Europe Observatory (CEO)
	Observatorio de la Deuda en la Globalización
	Observatorio de Multinacionales en América Latina (OMAL)
	Frontline Defenders
	Un Ponte Per
	Re:Common
	The Transnational Institute (TNI)
	CENSAT (Amigos de la Tierra), Colombia 
	Wecan – LAC
	International Rivers
	Movimiento Ríos Vivos
	London Mining Network
	Plataforma Interamericana de Derechos Humanos, Democracia y Desarrollo (PIDHDD Regional)
	Plataforma Boliviana frente al Cambio Climático
	Asamblea por la paz, Siero
	Centro de Documentación en Derechos Humanos “Segundo Montes Mozo S.J.” (CSMM)
	WIDE+
	An Claoimh Glas
	Coordination Climat Justice Sociale, Genève
	Coordinadora de Afectados por Grandes Embalses y Trasvases, COAGRET
	Red Vida (Vigilancia Interamericana para la Defensa y Derecho al Agua)
	TierrActiva, Bolivia
	Entrepobles
	Institute for Intercultural Research and Cooperation, Vienna, Austria 
	Maynooth University, Ireland 
	Informationsgruppe Lateinamerika (IGLA)
	Institute for Policy Studies, Global Economy Project
	Campaña No al TTIP, Cataluña
	Africando
	Biolife
	Ekologistak Martxan
	Colectivo Educación para la Paz y los Derechos Humanos, A.C.
	Ecologistas en Acción
	Ecoloxistes n´Aiccion
	Ecologistas en Acción, Valladolid
	South Durban Community Environmental Alliance
	Xarxa per la Sobirania Energetica, Catalunya
	ISS, Erasmus University Rotterdam
	Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL)
	CEAR-Euskadi
	Prensa Indígena org
	Université de Montréal
	Comité por los Derechos Humanos en América Latina (CDHAL)
	Salva la Selva
	Comité de solidaridad con América Latina (COSAL)
	Otros Mundos AC/Amigos de la Tierrra México
	Unión Universal Desarrollo Solidario
	La Asamblea Veracruzana de Iniciativas y Defensa Ambiental – México
	Latin American Solidarity Centre, Ireland 
	Informationsgruppe Lateinamerika (IGLA), Vienna,
	Corporacion ecológica y cultural, penca de Sabila
	Associació la ruda amics de Can Deu per a l’agricultura ecològica
	CESTA Amigos de la Tierra, El Salvador
	ECOTROS
	Otros Mundos AC/Chiapas, México
	Grupo de Consumo Responsable La panera de L’Ametlla de Mar, Tarragona
	Moviment per la Justícia Climàtica
	Grup per a la Defensa del Medi Natural de la Segarra, Ecologistes de Catalunya
	A Sud
	CDCA – Centro Documentazione Conflitti Ambientali
	Grupo de Trabajo Suiza Colombia
	Avvocati minacciati
	New Wind Association
	Asamblea de pueblos del Sur Ecuador
	Euskal Sindikatua (ELA)
	Asocaiman 