Open Republic press release against hate and violence – 12 December 2012
19 December 2012
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Open Republic, Association against  Anti-Semitism and Xenophobia calls on all citizens of the Republic of  Poland, who cherish the ideals of democracy and freedom, to firmly  oppose the more and more frequent manifestations of intolerance,  xenophobia, homophobia, anti-Semitism, racism and other forms of  exclusion and stigmatization of “others”: those with different outlook,  believing in something else, making different life choices, having  different life style. Let us not be inactive and idle to the multiplying  hateful statements – in the press, in public speeches and discussions  and in the Internet – and to more and more frequent stepping from verbal  attacks to physical violence. Let us not hesitate to loudly express our  condemnation and outrage. We are concerned about the exceptionally  abominable fact of using the argument of defending freedom of speech  and civil freedoms by all those, who in fact call to belittle hateful  actions. No consent may be given to statements to the effect that  declarations praising crime and violence and organizations, which  demonstrate with such slogans, have the same moral right to do it as  those, who honor the victims of intolerance and defend the threatened  democratic and humanist values. We shall not give up to blackmail, i.e.  accusations regarding intent to impose censorship on opponents. Our goal  is not to harass stalkers, but to defend the stalked ones. We call on all those, who share our  values and our concern about the growth of hate and aggression in  Poland, to speak publicly. The appeal by Aleksandra Duz and Izabella  Gawecka, which we publish, is also our position. We encourage everybody  to support it and come out with similar initiatives, about which – if  only we get informed about them – we will inform you. We also appeal to  join our campaign Delete ONR, which is aimed at the removal of ONR page from z Facebook (https://www.facebook.com/events/458043600925894/).  We call on you to take similar actions with respect to other websites,  which contain xenophobic, anti-Semitic, or racist content.  You can read the press release on Open Republic website. 