Editorial by Dominique Guibert: “How much do you want of Europe?”
31 March 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) 31 March 2017 – Does anyone remember the quote of François Mauriac: “I love Germany so much that I wish there were two”? There was only mistrust at the end of the war. But it is quite pleasant to use these words again wondering if the on-going situation does not have a similar nature: some love Europe so much they would like to have many Europes. One for the single market, one for the South, one for the North, one for the Visegrad group… and of course one for the EMU! And on top of it all, a white Europe, claimed by the ones contaminated by the ideas and parties of the far-right… How to find the ideal way again in such a mess? In the debates preceding elections, in Bulgaria, in the Netherlands, in France and Germany, we can say that Europe is poorly served. Between those who do not want it, those who want it to subject even more to the law of the single market and those who use it as a scapegoat, future is uncertain. Against the disillusion of citizens, being legitimately angry with this EU that is shakened to its foundations, but most of all, against the tendency of all member states to reduce transnational discussion to purposeless intergovernmental bargaining, President Juncker, has just released a “white paper” on behalf of the European Commission that details the possible scenarios for the development of the EU. He starts to erase those most extremely opposed. Indeed, the federalist solution seems unattainable while complete blow-up is unacceptable… Five solutions are presented offering an “outlook for how Europe could evolve by 2025”: For each scenario, feasibility is detailed by a series of “+” and “-“. At the end of the reading, we can conclude on the weakness of this outlook: it is an agreement between the member states that is needed before any of the solutions can be envisaged. Nothing is less certain. When he took office, President Juncker announced a last chance for Europe, it could be it now. Surely, except for the feasible catastrophe to happen, namely the power takeover by xenophobic, nationalist, racist if not fascist, in some member states, the most probable scenario will be the one of a mix between all these possibilities within a generalised “opting-out” in which everyone will do what he wants. In other words, as much Europe as possible. In the white paper, the word “rights” is only mentioned in the context of two of the scenarios: in the context of the second one, the single market only: “Citizens’ rights derived from EU law become restricted over time”. And also in the description of the third one, those who want more do more: “Citizens’ rights derived from EU law start to vary depending on whether or not they live in a country that has chosen to do more”. What will be the future then of one of the main achievements of the EU, namely the free movement of persons? We, as activists fighting for rights and freedoms, cannot accept that human rights are sidelined in the European project. Whatever may be the solution, it is necessary to continue defending them, because while there might be uncertainty about the future development of the EU, we know for sure the risks for the rights of us all. 