European Union : Stop or more ?
28 January 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) “Europe is over, we’ve missed the boat, it’s too late” declared Michel Rocard during the event “les journées de Bruxelles” on November 19th, 2015. Is this highly pessimistic opinion the reflection of the future of the European integration?  When having a look at the state of the Union, it is clear that there is a certain mistrust in EU institutions, officials and their actions. European citizens feel excluded from the decisions taken “too far away from people”. This feeling is not new; euroscepticism has been present from the beginning of the construction. But today’s situation seems different from the eventuality of a “Brexit” or “Grexit” –the exit of Greece and United Kingdom of the European Union- is no longer impossible. Therefore the future of the EU depends on it; should we stop or continue? If we keep going, what would be the form of the Union, its objectives and the member states participating?  This notion of euroscepticism was born in the United Kingdom (UK) resulting in the granting of a special status: refusal of Schengen, several opt-outs on the Euro and the Charter of Fundamental Rights. Today this notion is still relevant as Primer Minister D. Cameron announced in November 2015 its desire to renegotiate EU treaties and promised to hold a referendum on UK membership before the end of 2017.  The UK reforms are structured around 4 pillars: economic governance, competitiveness, sovereignty and migration. In other words, the UK wants the recognition of other currencies beside the Euro, the protection of the free market, the acceptance of its rights not to take part to the concept of “ever closer union”, and the direct control of migration.  Some of these demands of treaty revisions are considered admissible and have received a support from EU leaders. Other reforms such as the last pillar on social benefits are highly problematic and frankly incompatible with the principles of the European Union. PM Cameron wants to deprive EU migrants arriving on British territory of the benefice of social rights (child benefit, unemployment, healthcare…) during a period of 4 years. This reform proposal was opposed by the majority of member states because it would create discrimination between EU citizens and would restrict their freedom of movement. Negotiations are ongoing and the issue should be discussed at the European Council meeting on February 2016. The outcome of these negotiations will be of major importance for the future of the Union. The decision will be taken together during the meeting of the head of states and governments of the twenty-eight member states and will influence the issue of the referendum on UK membership.  The issue is quite controversial: should we abandon European founding principles out of fear that the UK leaves the EU and thus open the Pandora box giving other member states the possibility to renegotiate treaties by ultimatum strategies? Should we retain the UK “at any price”? Or should we rather stand firm on a common desire to work for the general good within the Union?  The role of the European Commission in the conduct of EU policy is also problematic. It is commonly accepted that member states negotiate with each other openly trading certain provisions in the exchange of other possibly more advantageous. For example, Poland, that has many of its citizens living in the United Kingdom, announced on January 4th its willingness to negotiate the last pillar on social rights in exchange for the UK’s support to install NATO bases on Polish soil to counter Russian ambitions. The Polish foreign minister Witold Waszczykowski justified his statement by claiming that he’d only accept a cut in social benefits applied to all UK residents.  Beyond this little adventure between Poland and the UK, it is unacceptable, regarding the principle of EU integration, to trade social benefits for a geopolitical support. Member states are seeking to meet strict national interests. This is a direct attack on the progress made in the past by the collective actions of member states. The 1950’s spirit of the European integration, created to avoid war and poverty, is dead. The Union becomes “à la carte”, a “two speed” Europe. The pro-European spirit present at the beginning of the European integration disappeared giving way to the national fold, closed borders, building walls and the rise of populism. The idea of Europe is going under. The decisions of the Swedish and Danish government to restore control on their common border following the influx of migrants illustrate the path Europe is taking, a Europe that is no longer united and hides behind its walls.  According to EU leaders it seems that there are only two future case scenarios for the European Union. The metaphor used by Walter Veltroni during “Les journées de Bruxelles” illustrates this dilemma:”Europe must choose: finalize the plane or stop the construction”. Does the future of EU lies in ultra-liberalism or ultra-nationalism? Is it the beginning of “the United States of Europe” or its dislocation?  Are there no other paths for Europe? Many actors agree on the need to focus on citizens and restore their confidence, to make Brussels affairs accessible and understandable by all. For Georges Dassis[4] that could help restore the confidence of EU citizens in the activities of the institutions.  Economists Michel Aglietta and Thomas Brand argue that the economic crisis is due to flaws in the design of the European Monetary Union (EMU). The Euro is an incomplete currency and there is no real fiscal policy at EU level. The European Central Bank (ECB), the only genuine federal entity, has no official direct power on the currency and cannot participate in the direct funding of member states as it is the case in UK or in USA. Its role is limited to the control of inflation.  According to Aglietta, the current monetary union is valid only in “calm weather”, the economic crisis of 2008 has spread too quickly and the ECB remained powerless. The central bank had to modify its policy and use unconventional practices to answer effectively to the crisis such as “quantitative easing” (QE). In 2015, the ECB decided to buy sovereign debt and some obligations of states in the market. In exchanges of these purchases, money and liquidity have been created to bail out the financial system. This practice is widely used by the US bank and normally prohibited by the Treaty of Maastricht. The application of these measures of quantitative easing helps reduce the tensions on the financial markets.  Aglietta considers deepening the monetary union to cure the negative effects of the crisis. In his opinion, it is necessary to reform the eurozone and give more power to the ECB to intervene directly regarding member states. He suggests adopting true economic governance across the euro area; to mutualise member states’ public debts; invest in environmental industrial policy that would allow long-term recovery of the EU economy.  Martin Schulz, president of the European Parliament, still believes in the European dream. Invited at “les journées de Bruxelles”, he completed the Veltroni’s metaphor adding “the problem of the European plane is that there are 28 pilots in the cockpit”. He continued by saying “it takes courage to face those who say that the solution is the withdrawal to a community of sovereign nations while this is precisely the cause of the current crisis”. Unity must prevail and the retreat behind walls is not the solution.  We have the facts, the EU has to evolve in a way to answer effectively to major challenges. The “United States of Europe” or the dislocation are not the only two options. Member states must return to founding principles that motivated the construction. Isolationism is not the solution; EU is facing cross-border and transnational challenges that need to be addressed collectively. Member states advocating for a return to domestic policy or strict national interests would undoubtedly be caught by a possible end of the EU. The end of a common area of free market and movement – the death of Schengen – would have negative effects on national economies and markets.  The enlargement of the Union, understood as greater cooperation between member states, will have to focus on different areas: foreign policy, economy, social and environment.  Within the Union, poverty, social exclusion and unemployment are rising to very high levels. These issues are crucial for EU citizens; they need to be addressed in priority. It is then necessary that the policies adopted in response are true success to restore confidence in European integration, especially of those who have forgotten that the EU is capable of progress.  The economic crisis still affects EU economies and especially member states from the South of Europe put under memorandum. M. Aglietta suggests a convergence of EU economies because markets are not self-regulating. It is necessary to adopt a lasting common policy that will stem the negative effects of the crisis and create a system of perennial economies supported by a strong European Central bank having a wide range of actions. The EU must reform its economy and make it more “green”. It involves abandoning the monopoly of fossil energies and a diversification of the energy mix with a wide majority of renewable energy.  Finally, Europe is currently facing what is commonly called a “major migration crisis”. In reality it is indicative of an underlying double crisis: the instability of the world and of the EU integration policies. The EU was created to prevent the atrocities of war and to fights against poverty; it’s therefore a duty to welcome peoples running from conflict. The EU must unite to help these populations that have not chosen this fate.  All these challenges cannot be solved with member states trying to save their national interest by retreating behind their borders. This two-speed Europe cannot continue, it is unacceptable that member states create various European blocks according to common affinities.  One way for the European Union to evolve and address its future challenges would be to focus on the founding principles of the EU, on unity, solidarity (both internal and external) and the will to contribute to a common good.  http://www.euractiv.com/sections/uk-europe/cameron-sketches-out-eu-reform-demands-stays-quiet-timing-319341  https://euobserver.com/institutional/131486  http://neurope.eu/article/the-union-our-only-chance/  http://www.eesc.europa.eu/?i=portal.fr.soc-opinions.26830  AGLIETTA Michel, BRAND Thomas, Un new deal pour l’Europe /Croissance, Euro, Compétitivité, Paris, éditions Odile Jacob, 2013.  http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/People_at_risk_of_poverty_or_social_exclusionb  