AEDH supports the documentary film “Ceuta, sweet prison” – 21 September 2011
21 September 2011
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) AEDH supports an initiative launched by the Zaradoc documentary production company which aims at finishing the production of a documentary film of 52 minutes entitled “Ceuta, sweet prison”, directed by Jonathan Millet and Loïc H. Rechi. This film tackles the situation of Ceuta, this Spanish enclave in the north part of Morocco, which belongs to Europe but does not belong to the Schengen area. The film deals with the construction of the wall built by Europeans to prevent migrants from entering the EU and with the situation of migrants who have been able to go over the wall but who are now waiting in Ceuta, sometimes during years, to find a way to access the EU which constitutes a dreamland for them. AEDH naturally decided to support that movie in terms of communication and after the film will be released, regarding the organisation of screenings and debates at the European level. The movie is available on a website called Kisskissbankbank, which is a participative funding website that proposes to internet users to support movies related to topics they like. The Zaradoc production company indeed needs financial support to be able to finance the post-production of the movie (montage, sound mixing and calibration) which amounts to about 4000 euros. If you wish to support the movie, it’s easy. You just have to go on Kisskissbankbank website (only available in French) and click on the amount you would like to donate.  In doing so, you will see the logo of your organisation and/or your name appear in the closing credits and other advantages in return proportionately to the amount of money you donated. Please, do not hesitate to support; the lowest contribution is only 5 euros! Only 53 days left to support the movie! AEDH truly believes that this initiative constitutes a great opportunity to draw national and European authorities’ attention to the situation in Ceuta. That is why we call on your generosity to support this project. Please, do not hesitate as well to communicate about this film and the possibility to support it. 