AEDH TAKES ACTION FOR THE 2009 EUROPEAN ELECTIONS
8 May 2009
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) On the 7th, 8th and 9th of June, European citizens will elect their representants for the European Union. The European Parliament, composed by 785 MEPs, is the only European institution elected through direct universal suffrage. It’s the citizen’s voice in the EI legislative process. By voting at the European elections in June, you decide what the EU will be like for the 5 upcoming years. On this occasion, the AEDH has prepared a series of cards in the form of questions-answers on various key topics related to human rights, that it puts at the disposal of its members. Therefore, the AEDH invites citizens and residents of the European Union to call on their candidates for the European elections of these sensible questions. This press release is available in Bulgarian, Danish, French, Greek, Italian, Polish, Romanian and Spanish. Click on the number for the English version.  1. European asylum policy 1.a. Should the implementation of the Common European Asylum System, starting from 2010, lead to impose higher procedure and protection standards to all member States, without any possible exemption? (in Spanish here, in Italian here)  For more information… 1.b. Can a person claiming to seek protection but intercepted in irregular situation at the border or on the EU territory, alone or with others, can be put in detention?  (in Spanish here, in Italian here)  For more information… 1.c. Should people seeking international protection in the EU be able to choose the country in which they want to lodge their demand?  (in Spanish here, in Italian here)  For more information… 2. Is it right to hold migrants in detention centres simply because they lack a residence permit? (in Spanish here, in Italian here)      For more information… 3. Can we select our migrants?   (in Spanish here, in Italian here)  For more information… 4. Is the retention and trasnfer to police authorities of personal data contained in the internet and telecommunications necessary to fight organised crime? (in Spanish here, in Italian here)   For more information… 5. Should biometric and DNA files be allowed for the sake of security, but at the expense of privacy and individual freedoms? (in Spanish here, in Italian here)     For more information… 6. Is there a "European social model" and/or does it have to be promoted? (in Spanish here, in Italian here)   For more information… 7. Is the ratification of the UN Migrant Workers Convention a necessary step for the defence of the social rights of migrants? (in Spanish here, in Italian here)       For more information… 8. Should access to Services of General Interest (SGI) be considered as a fundamental right? (in Spanish here, in Italian here)     For more information… 9. Are you in favour of a European citizenship based on a residence criterion? (in Spanish here, in Italian here)    For more information… 10. Are you in favour of having a European Parliament with true legislative powers and an executive branch that answers to it? (in Spanish here, in Italian here) 11.Does the fight against terrorism justify a restriction on individual liberties? (in Spanish here, in Italian here) 12. Do you support equal treatment across Europe for couples recognised as such by national legislation? (in Spanish here, in Italian here) 13. Do you think that a common system of minority protection is needed? (in Spanish here, in Italian here) 14. Do you think that a European common policy is needed to fight discrimination which affects the Roma? (in Spanish here, in Italian here)    For more information… 15. Are you ready to support the principle of a European text dealing with the problem of violence against women through a global or an integrated approach? (in Spanish here, in Italian here) 16. Are you ready to support the right to give birth as a liberty and fundamental right for women? (in Spanish here, in Italian here)  The answer to these questions is now in your hands. Starting today, call on your candidates and make full use of your citizen power. 