Editorial by D. Guibert: Causes worth fighting for
26 October 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) The European Union and its Member States are in crisis. No one knows what the EU will look like in a year or two, or even after the next European Parliament election cycle in 2018. In the meantime, a number of national legislative and presidential elections will be held that are certain to bring changes. Unfortunately, as things stand now, there is little hope that we will see improvements in rights for all across Europe. The most recent meeting of the European Council in Bratislava showed just how alarming the EU’s crisis situation is, with Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker declaring as he began his mandate, “this is the last exit to Europe”. All in all, this so-called summit was simply a blatant ambush of the common good by national interests. This is hardly a proper solution for an “attractive” European Union. And yet, with the Union in such apparent disarray, citizens and residents have joined forces in a show of solidarity to counter the talk of abandonment and discrimination that have dominated national discourse. In The Hague two weeks ago, a citizen conference – the “Monsanto Tribunal” – demonstrated the toxicity of Monsanto products, which the company markets as pest control products but which are actually noxious to all living beings. The mayor of Catania, Italy, which is on the front lines of the immigration crisis, vehemently denounced the situation migrants face when they land on European shores, stating that the principle of reception must take precedence over politics. In cities and towns across Europe, people have already started preparing to receive these migrants and refugees; they are women, children and men who are fleeing war, repression and poverty as they attempt to restart their lives among their fellow citizens of the world. In Poland, despite the government’s disdain, hundreds of thousands of people have taken to the streets to demand respect for democratic rules, freedom of information and women’s rights. In Germany, citizens’ movements have questioned the supposed benefits of transatlantic trade deals purported to improve economic and social situations but which in fact multiply the possibilities for lowering social standards in the name of non-existent and destructive competition. It is difficult to predict how the Europe we want will turn out in the end. However, certain causes are worth fighting for. There is a well-known quote by Antonio Gramsci that sums up his philosophy: “I’m a pessimist because of intelligence, but an optimist because of will” (written in a letter to his brother while in prison, 19 December 1929, Cahiers de prison, Gallimard, Paris, 1978-92). It is time to take an optimistic stand along with the witnesses from The Hague, the mayor of Catania, the citizens of Warsaw and everyone else fighting together. 