Editorial by the AEDH President – I had a dream…
30 October 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) For the past several weeks, the European Union’s active circles are discussing the establishment of a major instrument for the European construction, the social Pillar. Using the word ‘pillar’ is revealing: without it, the whole structure would collapse. Little does the social policy appear in a clear sky. Everybody knows that the liability of social rights to the imperatives of the economic policy for achieving those so-called stability and growth, in fact, austerity resulted in disasters. Without such common pillar, European citizens will move further away from the European Union. Therefore, it should be a priority, maybe even the only one. Alas ! Member States’ interests lie elsewhere: in the increased competition among themselves. For years, everybody knows, or more accurately, the overwhelming number of truly scientific studies – that is, not sponsored by industrial manufacturers – preach for a complete ban on glyphosate due to the fact that it is both carcinogenic and an endocrine disruptor. This should be done without delay. The debate is reaching the European level due to the upcoming renewal or not of its license agreement. We expect from the Member States to answer the citizens’ fear. Unfortunately, they prevaricate, they wait and see, leading at the end of the day to a half-measure: a shortened license agreement of 5 years instead of 10. Yet, there are only two options: either the glyphosate is dangerous, hence it should be banned now, either it is safe and giving a half-license makes no sense. For months, the situation of democracy in some EU Member States is deteriorating. Lately, the Hungarian government has put under surveillance associations that it blames of not defending their country and of being linked to “outside interests”. In Poland, not content to put the justice to its orders, the government arrests and threatens independent journalists with penalties and prison sentences. The European Commission pushed by the European Parliament – or at least by many of its members – seems fully aware of these disastrous policies. But to counter those, Article 7 of the TEC should be triggered… But to reach such extreme the Member States’ unanimity at the European Council is unfortunately needed! Is this to say that the European Union is just an inaccessible dream? We would like to believe otherwise and be able to say that, on the model of what was the basis of its construction, i.e. peace, from now on, the Europe of all rights is on its way… 