Speech on the State of the Union: Optimism shall not render oblivious of reality
17 September 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) On 13 September, Jean-Claude Juncker, President of the European Commission (EC), delivered his annual speech on the State of the Union in front of the MEPs gathered in Strasbourg for the plenary session. For his third exercise of the kind, Jean-Claude Juncker adopts a tone definitely more optimistic than in the past : galvanised by the Union’s positive economic indicators, he shares his great ambitions for Europe summarised under a “sixth scenario” : freedom of expression, equal pay, respect of the rule of law, immediate integration of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen Area, enlargement of both the Eurozone and banking union, quick adoption of the European Pillar of Social Rights, transnational lists for the European elections. All in all, aspirations surpassing by far the ambitions of the Commission’s five scenarios introduced in its White Paper on the Future of Europe; but aspirations that remain personal and commit neither the Commission nor the Union. Beyond an overall accurate diagnosis and laudable ambitions, the speech of the EC President marks the limits of the exercise. Thus, on social issues, announcing the creation of a common Labour Authority to track down social dumping is not enough : what you truly need are substantial efforts in harmonising the labour market so as to tackle the very root of social dumping, in other words, fighting against the social “optimisation” as well as tax optimisation. Moreover, in a field that falls primarily under the Member States’ competence, one cannot but wonder exactly with what kind of responsibilities and powers the 27 Member States will be willing to entrust such common Labour Authority. In the same vein, we can only welcome the President’s enthusiasm regarding the adoption of the European Pillar of Social Rights, but what will be its fate once gutted by the Member States? Regarding the economic policy, the ambition is certainly voluntarist but the means are too modest. Including a mere ‘Euro’ budget line to the EU budget is not enough to enable the Eurozone to have a policy genuinely leveraging investment: such policy could only be enabled through a budget, a minister, and parliamentary control. Let’s remind ourselves that while the Eurozone accounts for 85% of the EU GDP, the European budget represents only 1% of it. In terms of trade policy, the main shortcoming of the EU policy in this respect is to have accompanied, if not promoted, deregulation, abandoning de facto tax competition, the social protections’ unraveling, public service missions, environment protection, etc., to the “free” market. The debates surrounding the CETA Treaty have had the advantage of enabling the European public opinion to take up the issue, in particular with regards to the resort to private arbitration in conflicts of interest between multinational enterprises and EU Member States. However, President Juncker’s proposal in the area is precisely to divide future trade treaties into two parts, one dedicated to trade policy on goods and services – subject to national and regional Parliaments’ ratification – and the other to the protection of investments – solely within the remit of the European institutions. ‘Generous’, he announces however that, from now on, the complete negotiating mandates submitted by the Commission to the European Council will be publicly available and he invites the Council to proceed likewise. In addition, he affirms that “the European Parliament will have the final say on all trade agreements” but in practice this only means that the European Parliament is confined to a mere single choice: endorsing, or not, the future treaties. Hence, no real negotiating power for the institution. As for national and regional Parliaments, they “must be kept fully informed from day one of the negotiations “! A position that stands very far from the principles set out in the “Declaration of Namur” of European academics adopted in the aftermath of the avatars of the CETA negotiations. And what about the embryonic European public opinion aroused by the CETA debates that the European Commission is desperately begging for? Still, in trade-related issues, Jean-Claude Juncker announces the introduction of an investment screening mechanism allowing for transparency, scrutiny and debate should a foreign state-owned company wishes to acquire a European company or infrastructure of strategic interest. But what about the respect for social and environmental standards in the reciprocity of foreign investments in the EU, and the other way round? Don’t they deserve such a framework either? As to migration-related issues, they remain a priority for the European Commission but the answers provided are not those expected. President Juncker praises FRONTEX’s action in strengthening external borders, but in practice the agency remains a symbol and the acting arm of European policies locking up borders in violation of several fundamental rights such as people’s right to leave any country, including one’s own country, the right to seek asylum and to non-refoulement, without forgetting the right to personal data protection and the right to an effective remedy. It should be reminded that, in disregard of the European Court of Human Rights’ decisions and the principle of non-refoulement, the Agency is allowed to disembark intercepted persons in a port designated as “safe”, including in non-European countries. President Juncker is pleased with the agreement with Turkey which allowed a 97% reduction in the number of irregular arrivals in eastern Mediterranean and thus a reduction in the number of victims at sea ; Yet he later admits that Turkey does not comply with the rule of law, justice and fundamental rights, i.e. serious shortcomings ruling out any EU membership for Turkey for the foreseeable future. Henceforth, why being so pleased with an agreement defining Turkey as a “safe third country” with the sole purpose of outsourcing, against financial compensation, the reception, containment, and readmission of those refugees that managed to reach Greece? Instead of establishing a European policy of solidarity and responsibility, a new set of proposals focusing on returns is promised, while emphasising strongly on the distinction between migrants “in real need of protection” and the others. In March 2017, without any prior consultation of the civil society and local authorities, the Commission had already urged Member States to deprive migrants of liberty more rapidly and for longer periods arguing that an increase in the rate of effective returns would serve as an essential disincentive. However, in practice, this obsession with immediate returns to countries of transit or origin results for instance in the detention of children in closed centres, in violation of ECHR judgments, as well as in highly dubious collaborations between EU Member States and third countries such as Sudan or those considered with Lybia. Jean-Claude Juncker announces the opening of legal migration pathways. A certainly positive statement, but on the sole condition that those legal pathways will be opened to all and not exclusively to migrants holding a European Blue Card, which concerns highly qualified people only. On the future of Europe, the speech of the EC President is more encouraging. Hence, while the notion was absent from his 2016 speech, Jean-Claude Juncker refers directly to the civil society and in particular to the necessity of its involvement in the work related to the future of Europe at national, regional and local levels. Similarly, he gives new impetus for a European Union more inclusive and voluntarist and advocates, at present, for the integration of Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia to the Schengen Area as well as for the enlargement of the Eurozone to the Member States which have not yet adopted the euro through an accession instrument to the single currency. The possibility of a two-speed Europe based on enhanced cooperation, which he raised last March following the publication of the Commission’s White Paper on the Future of Europe, seems to be left aside. Nevertheless, those promises and commitments must be met with caution: President Juncker merely presents “[his] view”, “[his] own sixth scenario”, in other words, we are far from a commitment from the European Commission as a whole and even less from the other institutions. And indeed, Member States have already expressed some reservations about the EC President’s voluntarism: Germany on the expansion of the Eurozone, the Netherlands on the enlargement of the Schengen Area or France on the abandonment of a multi-speed Europe. Hence, the actions stemming from the EC President’s words remain to be seen. 