8 April 2010 – One World Festival: AEDH invites you to the screening of the documentary film “The Arrivals” by Claudine Bories and Patrice Chagnard, on 13 April 2010 at 8.30 pm
8 April 2010
The Best of One World 2010 is organized this year by the One World International Human Rights Documentary Film Festival, the Permanent Representation of the Czech Republic to the EU, People in Need, the Bozar Centre for Fine Arts and the Human Rights and Democracy Network (HRDN). On this occasion, AEDH is co-supporting the documentary film entitled “the Arrivals”, by Claudine Bories and Patrice Chagnard. Synopsis: Caroline and Colette work for CAFDA, which provides assistance to families seeking asylum in France. Caroline is young and impulsive, the older Colette understanding and caring, but both of them, in their own way, become engrossed in the stories they deal with on a daily basis. They do not want to become engaged emotionally and attempt to establish an official barrier between themselves and the "applicants" – made all the easier because their interviews are conducted through translators. New people from around the entire world appear on the other side of their desk, constantly bringing new tragedies and emotions. The daily toil requires cutting through circuitous procedures, paradoxes and absurd regulations. This documentary by Claudine Bories and Patrice Chagnard shows breakdowns and flashes of anger, but also compassion shown by both sides. By helping the "arrivals," Caroline and Colette often ultimately cross the line of deeper engagement. "You are like my mother," says one of the refugees near the end of the film, but not all the people in this documentary are so lucky and some will have to leave Europe. The screening is free and will take place on 13 April at 8.30 pm at the Permanent Representation of the Czech Republic to the EU (rue Caroly 15, 1050 Bruxelles). The screening will be followed by a debate led by Aleksejs Dimitrovs, Board member of AEDH. To register for the screening, click here. 