Hundreds of thousands, millions … statistics to be interpreted with caution
16 December 2015
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) 16 December 2015 – The numbers which were being published in abundance over the last months are sometimes difficult to interpret and their comparison is rather hazardous. Depending on the sources, they consist of numbers on: arrivals in the Mediterranean (UNHCR), disappearances (International Organization for Migration, IOM), transit routes (IOM again), irregular border crossings (Frontex), asylum applications (Eurostat). Below you can find a review for a better measurement of the challenges. è Nearly one million arrivals at the Mediterranean borders of the EU  For several months now, UNHCR has published a weekly update on the migratory situation at the maritime borders of the EU: “Europe’s refugee emergency response update”. With this weekly update, the agency provides figures on the situation at different border points, on the context in different Member States, on its interventions and some decisions of the EU.  In parallel, UNHCR also presents computer graphics of the arrivals of migrants and refugees coming over the Mediterranean, in particular heading towards Greece and Italy and then continuing their journey towards other member states of the EU. Each day one can observe the increase of the numbers indicated on the graphics. On 10 December, the number of arrivals reached 921 713 (since 1 January 2015).   http://data.unhcr.org/mediterranean/regional.php (consulted on 10 December 2015)   As detailed as the numbers are, they only count the arrivals from the maritime route. In order to create a complete picture of the situation, the arrivals from other routes have to be added to these numbers. This is what Frontex does by summing up the “illegal border crossings”. Solely for the Western Balkan route the agency counts 502 018 migrants who crossed the terrestrial border in the period between January and October 2015 (consulted on 10 December).  By aggregating these numbers we reach a total higher than IOM’s estimation: 985 312!  Therefore, the interpretation requires extreme caution. In fact, Frontex counts all border crossings; once arrived on mainland, migrants coming from the maritime route and who do not want to stay in Greece, for example, can cross several borders by leaving towards Albania, Macedonia or Serbia, before coming back to the EU by crossing Hungary’s or Croatia’s borders. In this case, the migrants will be counted several times!   è Close to one million registered asylum applications and almost as many pending cases  Eurostat published statistics on asylum applications which were registered by Member States during the 3rd trimester of 2015: 413 80, nearly the double of the preceding trimester.   As in the previous months, Syrians, Iraqis and Afghans constitute the three most frequent nationalities and represent more than half of the total of the first time asylum applicants. More than half of the asylum applications have been submitted in Germany or in Hungary. With 10 974 first time asylum applicants per 1 million inhabitants, Hungary has registered the highest proportion of asylum applications relative to its population. The European average is 814.  Up to date, in cumulating the monthly number of officially registered asylum applications in the year 2015, we reach a total of 996 654. But Eurostat specifies that at the end of September more than 808 000 files were still under consideration of the competent national authorities…   è At least 3 601 disappearances  Besides its figures on the “migratory routes” and the main entry points, IOM collects data on disappearances within its « Missing migrants project » which updates on a daily basis the number of disappeared migrants and the location of the disappearance. 3 601 missing migrants are counted during the first 11 months of 2015! Following the same idea, the agency decided to dedicate the International Migrants Day on 18 December to remember lost lives of migrants.    http://missingmigrants.iom.int/en/mediterranean-update-4-december-2015 (consulted on the 10 December 2015)   More sources :  ? On UNHCR’s website:  Europe’s refugee emergency response update #13 in [EN]  UNHCR’s database in [EN]  ? On IOM’s website:  Missing migrants project in [EN]  International Migrants day in [FR], [EN]  IOM’s website in [EN]   ? On Frontex’ website:  Map of migratory routes in [EN]  ? On Eurostat’s website:  Monthly update on asylum applications in [EN]  Press release of 10 December 2015 in [FR], [EN]  ? See as well: Nando Sigona « Seeing double? How the EU miscounts migrants arriving at its borders”; The Conversation, 16 octobre 2015 – in [EN]      