No Europe without rights ! Resolution adopted by the General Assembly of AEDH on June 21st and 22nd
24 June 2014
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Brussels, 23th June 2014 Gathered in Brussels for its General Assembly on June 21st and 22nd, AEDH, European Association for the Defence of Human Rights, confirms its commitment and of its member organisations to a Europe of rights. The European Parliament election results present concern on the one hand for the extremely high rate of abstention and on the other hand, for the magnitude of the vote for the extreme right in many European countries with different xenophobic and / or nationalists groups. Instead of bringing citizens of Europe together for the goals of democracy and social progress, the European project gets bogged in rejection and then in withdrawal within national borders. This disengagement is made of disillusion, procrastination, unrealised progress and finally declines in rights, especially in states subject to implementation of the Troika’s austerity policies.
Rejecting any form of European construction, demagogic “anti-systems” statements thus claim the sovereignty of the people in order to return to national preference with key measures such as hunt for immigrants, leaving the eurozone, return to single market, closing borders. As if the competition of all against all at all levels, local, national, European or global would create wealth. As if the goal would be institutionalising a division of Europe into its South and its North. All across Europe, political forces are on the rise requesting the exclusion of entire populations living on their national territory, their solutions lying in the exclusion of the poorest, the weakest, the most vulnerable. If these discourses challenging the  universal access to political, economic, social, cultural, environmental rights, resonate among public, it is because the European and the national policies do not guarantee any longer a future based on equality and solidarity, on convergence between living standards and an effective access to rights in the countries of the European Union. Despite the discontent with the European construction which is reflected in the vote for the European Parliament, leaders of the Member States and the Commission continue to advocate for the same policies that distance EU institutions from citizens. AEDH is equally concerned about this blindness and about the distancing of European citizens and more broadly all the residents. The reasons are to be found within the austerity policies and the financial, economic, regulatory constraints that call their consequences inevitable collateral damage. Europe needs more democracy, more public services, increased combating of inequalities suffered by the most disadvantaged. Europe has to break with the policies prioritising the profits of banks and multinationals. Europe aspires to greater equality and social solidarity. This is the meaning of the Manifesto of AEDH, common to its 31 organisations acting in 22 EU countries and Switzerland. AEDH calls on all to listen to our requests and follow on them. Because a Europe of Human Rights it is now, for all those who reside, live and work on its territory. AEDH proclaims that there is no way ahead if not based on rights. 