Editorial by D. Guibert: Who governs the EU, on what and for whom?
11 October 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) On September 16th, the weather was really good in Bratislava. Beautiful photos in front of the castle and on the Danube as was the wish after the major event of the “Brexit” in order to show that there is a common point of view among the Member States although they do not agree on almost anything. As the Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi said: “I am not able to follow a script to make people I agree”1.  So, what is behind “the institutions of governance of the European Union?”2. The Council, supposed to be a unit, is followed, preceded or even accompanied by several meetings of diverse bilateral or multilateral groups. In Athens, a meeting of the heads of government of the states of Southern Europe took place aiming at pushing for a less severe austerity policy and more of budgetary impulse. As for the countries of the “Visegrad Group” they have agreed on opposing any opening to refugees. And let us not forget that Angela Merkel and François Hollande have set up a new dominant Franco-German partnership to react to the Brexit. And nothing has stopped the heads of governments of the 27 countries (28 minus the United Kingdom) to gather to define an umpteenth roadmap “to offer to our citizens in the coming months an attractive vision of the EU which they can trust and support”3. But what kind of Union? One where financial and monetary policies prevail? One of borders closed to migrants and refugees? One where democratic principles are weakened? One where we can observe a return of the far right to power while promoting national preference and racism ?  One where women’s rights are restricted, for instance in Poland with regards to abortion? As for the European Commission, it has developed a 10 points reform plan of the asylum system seemingly to establish a new shared approach by the Member States4. But against the new concept of “flexible solidarity” put forward by the Visegrad group member states, it is the Commission which retreats, and its president refers to a “solidarity we cannot order”. If the relocations remain necessary, it is said in the corridors and in the micros which drag on there that “the solidarity has to be encouraged and accompanied rather than ordered.” Is this a trade for Viktor Orban not making propaganda for his “European counter-revolution” and calling Juncker as “nihilist”? Two other examples for doubts to have on the direction the EU has taken. The European Commission puts forward new proposals on company taxation in reaction to the case of Apple that does not pay taxes in the countries where it makes its profits. But then the reaction of Ireland is to appeal to this European decision to impose on the company a considerable tax “reminder”. The problem is of course the cynicism of the company, but above all of Ireland which, beyond this special agreement, has the lowest tax rate on companies’ profits. At the same time, the Posting Workers directive is again on the agenda under a new form. Of course, due to the Brexit, an important issue is to find a solution for the case of the United Kingdom. But while the European Commission makes proposals that are incomplete and not adequate to solve the issues of fiscal dumping, Poland and Hungary, where are located these companies avoiding to pay social security contributions and bring in countries additional incomes, categorically refuse a new European regulation affecting directly their residents. Let us summarise what is on the table: a general policy reduced to the smallest common denominator between Member States; national interests overriding the general interest; a Parliament that is only consulted to the extent that it is obligatory by EU law: a rather strange way to make the European Union “attractive”! ——  