Statement of the General Assembly of AEDH on the occasion of Europe Day, 9 May 2016
9 May 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French)  The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (AEDH) held its General Assembly in Vienna, Austria, on 7 and 8 May 2016.  Every day, the policies that are approved unilaterally in the Member States and the negotiations at the European Council show that the EU finds itself in dark times that could lead to its disintegration. When starting his mandate in 2014, Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker felt that his objective was to ward off a major crisis. “Last exit to Europe,” he said. AEDH feels that we are already in a major crisis. The consequences are disastrous. The evaluation of the state of civic and political rights as of economic, social and cultural rights is devastating. Although the principles of the foundation of the EU were claimed to bring ever more convergence, ever more rights, ever more citizenship, they have largely reduced to statements of self-affirmation at best, but in reality they are largely misleading. AEDH and its associations believe the responsibility for the current situation undeniably lies with the Member States. Rather than spearheading EU development, they have dug in their heels to protect their own national interests, allowing outrageous, xenophobic and even racist propaganda to spread both inside and outside their countries.  The indisputable rise of right-wing parties is the result, unfortunately, up to the extent that some of the same are at the margin of power and are influencing public debates in a detestable way. The some are preoccupied with upcoming elections while others are tempted to return to archaic nationalistic ideologies one would have thought obsolete since the end of the Second World War. Member State governments have shown an inability to work towards comprehensive development since the fall of the Berlin Wall. Instead, they believe they can compensate for global instability and its consequences by limiting the European project to a battlefield of national exceptionalism. The end result is a race to find the least common denominator that can maintain the mirage of a common position. The political process needs to be revisited and civil society must have a say. AEDH is not a substitute for the political process, but it can and must oppose the current course of action. AEDH appeals for a European project that recognizes and does not violate rights. Flagrant proof of the contrary is demonstrated by the current Member State governments that have shamefully retreated to their alleged traditions and national concerns to avoid the world’s disasters and wars. In the end, they will reap both shame and war. AEDH calls on all citizens and residents to take control of their futures. AEDH and its organisations call on citizens to take action and join us. European rights need allies, activists and associations to help stop the neoliberal direction of European politics and end the reign of wheeling and dealing at all levels. Europe’s citizens must no longer be considered mere extras on the political stage. AEDH calls for a Europe built not upon competition, but upon rights. Read the Statement of the General Assembly  in French, in English or in Spanish (pdf).  