One in four children at risk of poverty in Europe, the figures are overwhelming
16 December 2015
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) 15 December 2015 – MEPs adopted with 569 in favour, 77 against and 49 abstentions a resolution urging EU member states to adapt their agendas in order to fight effectively child poverty and social inequalities. AEDH appreciates this initiative focusing on the specific situation of children among people at the risk of poverty and social exclusion (a quarter of the population is concerned). This resolution adopted by the European Parliament is a further argument in the fight against inequalities and social exclusion. Indeed, children are a particularly vulnerable group that needs protection.  Poverty and social exclusion have reached a critical level in Europe (1). According to Eurostat, over 120 million people are exposed to this risk in 2014. This report, yet very alarming, did not have sufficient media resonance.  Similarly, Eurostat recently published the child poverty figures: 26 million children (under 18 years) are affected by this risk meaning more than one in four children in Europe. This situation is unacceptable in particular in light of the ratification by many European countries of the UN convention on the rights of the child (CRC) thus accepting to protect children against poverty and social exclusion. AEDH highlights that this legal text can be used before courts in “the best interest” of children. CRC recognizes the right of all children to education, health care services, leisure and a balanced diet.  If we have a look at the figures published by Eurostat, it is clear that the implementation of the convention is not complete. Child poverty is high in countries such as Hungary (41.4%), Bulgaria (45.2%) and Romania (54%). In France, Belgium or Luxembourg, just over 20% of children are affected by the risk of poverty and social exclusion.  In order to address this situation efficiently, member states have to intensify their efforts to tackle child poverty and inequalities. It is their duty to adopt policies implementing the right to free, inclusive and quality public education at any age, decent living conditions, access to health care services and any protection that allows children to live their childhood in safety.    