The “protection” of states vs protection of migrants
16 December 2015
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) è The risk of a humanitarian crisis at the border crossing points between Greece and the Balkans On 24 November, UNCHR, IOM and UNICEF have expressed their shared concern on the risks coming with new restrictions at several border crossing points of countries in the Balkans. Depending on their assumed nationality, people are blocked in some of these countries, without an appropriate and durable solution.  At the border between Greece and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, as well as at the border between the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia, Syrian, Afghan and Iraqi nationals are being allowed to cross the borders, while other country nationals (Iranians, Bangldeshis or Pakistanis and others) are being hold back. At the main entrance point to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia all non-Syrian nationals are told to return to Athens, where they can submit their asylum application.  Stating that “refugees and migrants (are) expected to continue arriving in Europe via Greece over the winter”, Adrian Edwards, UNHCR spokesperson, declared “it is imperative that the situation be managed in such a way as to minimize the risks of new problems being created. All people have the right the right to seek asylum, irrespective of their nationality and to have their individual cases heard. Proper information needs to be provided to people affected by decisions at border points, and proper counselling needs to be available. In addition, arrangements to accommodate people affected must be in place.”  The three international organisations estimate that a new humanitarian crisis is currently developing in Europe, this time in the East; and they urge for this situation to be recognised.  With the current situation in Greece, UNHCR remains concerned that the measures on the borders “will play into the hands of people smugglers as people seek alternatives to the chaotic situations in which they find themselves. As we head into winter, stabilization and proper and comprehensive management of Europe’s refugee and migrant situation remains urgently needed.”  See the UNHCR press release in [FR], [EN]    è The Commission reminds reluctant member states of their obligations  On 22 September, the Commission opened 40 infringement procedures against 19 Member States for delays in the transposal of legislative texts of the Common European Asylum System (CEAS). These procedures were added to the 34 ongoing procedures. The member states were given two months to give a reply.  The Commission addressed, among others, a letter of formal notice to Greece for violation of certain provisions of the updated Reception Conditions Directive and the updated Asylum Procedures Directive.  See AEDH’s article in [FR], [EN]  On 10 December, 8 infringement decisions have been adopted, following the 40 decisions launched in September. The concerned States are Greece, Croatia, Italy, Malta and Hungary.  8 The Commission urges Greece, Croatia and Italy to correctly implement the Eurodac Regulation which provides for effective fingerprinting of asylum seekers and transmission of data to the Eurodac central system within 72 hours. The Commission highlights the importance of an efficient implementation of this regulation “for the functioning of the Dublin system and EU relocation schemes”.  8 Furthermore, the Commission urges Greece and Malta to communicate the national measures taken to fully transpose the Asylum Procedures Directive and the Reception Conditions Directive.  8 The Commission also decided to open an infringement procedure against Hungary concerning its asylum law. Three main points are criticised:  –          There is no possibility to refer to new facts and circumstances during an appeal and Hungary is not automatically suspending decisions in case of appeals; effectively, asylum seekers can be forced to leave Hungarian territory before the time limit for lodging an appeal expires, or before an appeal has been heard.  –          The Hungarian law on fast-tracked criminal proceedings for irregular border crossings might not respect provisions of the Directive on the right to interpretation and translation in criminal proceedings.  –          The new Hungarian law on judicial review of decisions rejecting an asylum application could give an optional character to the personal hearing of the applicant; furthermore, these decisions can be taken at a sub-judicial level (by court secretaries) in lack of judicial independence.  It has to be underlined that the letter of formal notice is a first official request of information and the first step of an infringement procedure. Hungarian authorities have two month to respond to the Commission. “If no reply to the letter of formal notice is received, or if the observations presented by Hungary in reply to that notice cannot be considered satisfactory, the Commission may decide to move to the next stage of the infringement procedure, and send a ‘reasoned opinion’ to Hungary. If necessary, the Commission may then refer the case to the Court of Justice of the EU.”   See the Commission’s press releases of the 10 December:  ? “December infringements’ package: key decisions” in [FR], [EN]  ? “Implementing the Common European Asylum System: Commission escalates 8 infringement proceedings” in [FR], [EN]  ? “Commission opens infringement procedure against Hungary concerning its asylum law” in [FR], [EN]     