Report: Conference-debate “Crisis: Europe at the service of people?”
25 November 2013
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) On Monday 11th November 2013, AEDH, its Belgian leagues – the Ligue des Droits de l’Homme and the Liga voor Mensenrechten – and Bruxelles Laïque co-organised a conference-debate : « Crisis : Europe at the service of people ? ». During this conference, several speakers were invited to discuss the situation of economic and social rights in the European Union since the economic crises and to assess the impact of the crisis on European democracies and integration. John Pitsey, philosopher and jurist, researcher at CRISP, highlited that we cannot talk about the current economic crisis without mentioning the previous crises as well as the rise of populisms and extremism in Europe. At the same time, the climate of mistrust vis-a-vis democratic organs and the feeling of social and economic injustice predate 2009. He also drew attention to the various questions we may have in relation to our institutions. According to him, citizens no longer know by whom they are governed and who has the power, thus reflecting a lack of democratic transparency. During this conference-debate, speakers from the Belgian leagues and the Spanish league testified about the situation on the ground and their strategies to combat Human rights abuses. After exposing the castrophic economic situation in Spain, Rafael Lara, AEDH Secretary-General and member of the Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos de Andalucía (APDHA – Spain), made clear that Europe was not at the service of people. According to him, the policies of fiscal restraint imposed by the Troika do not take us out of the crisis, but are driving us into poverty. Paul Pataer, vice-president of the Liga voor Mensenrechten, then testified how fundamental rights, and more particularly the right to housing, are implemented in Flanders (Nothern of Belgium). Emphasizing the interconnectivity of rights, he recalled that the right to housing is a fundamental right from which many other rights flow. Finally, Edgar Szoc, administrator of the League of Human Rights, said that the economic situation in Belgium was not as bad as that of its southern neighbours. He highlighted that the lack of government during a period that broke records prevented the imposition of drastic austerity measures ; measures that have had a destructive effect on economic growth in other countries such as Greece and Spain. In conclusion, this conference-debate allowed attendees to gain a European perspective on the situation of economic and social rights and to better understand the social reality in the most affected countries, those of the South of Europe. It was part of AEDH and its members’ campaign aiming at, among other others, the defence of economic and social rights in Europe.  