AEDH seminar on citizenship is now on line!
31 July 2013
The AEDH held on May 31st, and June 1st and 2nd its annual seminar and  its General Assembly. The General Assembly took place in Tallinn,  Estonia, and dealt with the issue of citizenship, in the frame of the  European year of Citizens. The public seminar “citizenship, citizenships” of May, 31th aimed to  gather member organisations of the AEDH, academic experts en members of  the European Parliament as to enable discussions and exchanged view  regarding core aspects of the EU citizenship, notably the issue of  statelessness, the citizenship of residence and the social citizenship.  This seminar was also the opportunity for member organisations of the  AEDH to exchange best practices.  Download the programme of the seminar in English. The seminar was conducted in three parts. The first panel aimed to picture the lack of access to citizenship in  Europe. As to argue that the European Citizenship is the core issue of  Europe’s future, speakers based their interventions on the current  European legal framework on citizenship and highlighted the main  interaction spheres between the European and National citizenship. You can find bellow the videos of the interventions: ·    Statelessness, Mr. Boriss Cilevics,  MP, Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), special  rapporteur on statelessness and European Convention on Nationality Watch the intervention ·    Statelessness and minorities in the Baltics M. Aleksejs Dimitrovs, member of the AEDH’s executive board and the Latvian Human Rights Committee Watch the intervention ·      M. Dimitry Kochenov, Academic expert on citizenship Watch the intervention During the second session,  speakers used the recent democratic crisis in Bulgaria and Hungary to  show how much democracy and citizenship are linked. Speakers also  emphasised the need for a citizenship of residence, You can find bellow the videos of the interventions ·     Residence-based citizenship, Jean Pierre Dubois, honorary president of the Ligue des Droits de l’Homme (LDH), France Watch the intervention ·      Threat on the elections in Bulgaria, Rumania Decheva, chairwoman of the European Association for the Defence of Human Rights – Bulgaria (ADHR-BG) Watch the intervention ·    Citizenship and democracy in Hungary, Andras Kadar, co-chair of the Hungarian Helsinki Committee, could not attend this meeting. M. Dimitry Kochenov, Academic expert on citizenship, spoke on his behalf. Watch the intervention The last panel was dedicated to  the issue of economic and social citizenship. Speakers highlighted the  link between the current economic crisis affecting Europe and the  exercise of the European citizenship. Tatjana Zdanoka, MEP, enabled us  to deal with the issue in the frame of the upcoming European elections. Bellow are the videos of the interventions: ·      The situation of economic and social rights in South Europe – common presentation of the member organisations from Portugal, Italy, Greece, Spain and Cyprus, Rui Pedrosa, Liga Portuguesa dos Direitos do Homem – Civitas Watch the intervention ·      A Belgian insight, Veronique van der Planque, vice-chairwoman of the Ligue des Droits de l’Homme, Belgium Watch the intervention ·      Kristiina Ojuland, member of the European Parliamant (ALDE) unfortunately could not attend this conference ·      The role of the European institutions on economic and social citizenship, Tatjana Zdanoka, member of the European Parliament (Greens/EFA) The final part of the seminar was  based on a best practices exchange between the different member  organisations of the AEDH. The AEDH used the recommendations that came  out from these latter debates to write the final resolution concluding  its annual seminar and General Assembly: “A Europe for all its citizens”.  The AEDH intends to make these claims heard by the candidates during  the 2014 European elections, and thereby to have the support in the  promotion of the equality of rights of the only European institution  both democratic and representative of the European citizens: the  European parliament. 