Data retention: Member States in denial
16 December 2015
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) 07 December 2015 – On April 8, 2014, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) invalidated the directive on data retention because it did not respect the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the Union. Since then, other decisions on similar matters have consolidated this first ruling. Nevertheless, during the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 3 and 4 December 2015, Member States considered that retaining bulk electronic communication data in a generalised manner was still allowed. It is true that the exact scope of the judgment made by the Court in 2014 is subject of debate. On the one hand, it is clear that this ruling has invalidated the Directive on data retention voted in 2006 and, consequently, the Member States no longer have a duty to impose on providers of electronic communications services the retention of all their customers’ connection data (this data could be stored for a duration up to 2 years). On the other side, not to have the duty does not necessarily mean not to have the right. While some national courts followed the path laid out by the CJEU and stroke down in their respective Member States the transposal of the directive[1] into national legislation, others, more cautious, preferred to ask the CJEU  for clarification. For example, in May 2015 (i.e. before the Schrems ruling), the Stockholm Court of Appeal sent a request to CJEU to know if:  “a general obligation to retain traffic data covering all persons, all means of electronic communication and all traffic data without any distinctions, limitations or exceptions for the purpose of combating crime” is compatible with the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the Union?  On November 20, 2015, it was the UK Court of Appeal’s turn to refer to the CJEU:  “Did the CJEU in Digital Rights Ireland* intend to lay down mandatory requirements of EU law with which the national legislation of Member States must comply?"  So, it seems that the decision of 2014 might need indeed to be specified on some points. However, according to the Member States, no need for waiting: let’s step right now into the breach. For them, things seem clear: “retaining bulk electronic communication data in a generalized manner is still allowed”[2]. From their point of views there is no doubt, nothing has changed and it is still possible to:    While it is possible to consider that the CJUE was not very specific on minimum requirements that would, in its opinion, limit data retention to the strict minimum, there is no doubt that it made clearer what is a disproportionate measure. Among other things the directive has been invalidated because it covered “in a generalised manner, all persons and all means of electronic communication as well as all traffic data without any differentiation, limitation or exception being made in the light of the objective of fighting against serious crime”. In particular, the Court noted that the Directive:    In light of such statements, to consider – leaving no room for doubt – that “retaining bulk electronic communication data in a generalized manner is still allowed” is at least denial and at worst irrespective of the decisions made by European judicial authorities. As AEDH has stated before, many national Constitutional Courts have already followed the path traced by the CJEU and invalidated the national transposals of the Directive. Also, while in May 2015 the Court of Stockholm could have some doubts on the matter, that was without taking into account the Schrems ruling made some months later which clearly states that “legislation is not limited to what is strictly necessary where it authorises, on a generalised basis, storage of all the personal data of all the persons […] without any differentiation, limitation or exception being made in the light of the objective pursued”.  The Council’s position is even more shocking since, by a fact of timing, December 4th is also the day on which the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) condemned Russia for violation of Article 8 of the Convention (on the right to respect for private life and confidentiality of correspondence) because of its secret system of interception of mobile communications. In its judgment, the ECHR reiterated that “national law must define the scope of application of secret surveillance measures […] – in particular by clearly setting out […] a definition of the categories of people liable to have their telephones tapped”. The Court “must be capable of verifying the existence of a reasonable suspicion against the person concerned, in particular, whether there are factual indications for suspecting that person of planning, committing or having committed criminal acts”. In short: please use targeted and justified surveillance measures rather than disproportionate mass surveillance systems.  The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights condemns this denial by Member States: it is past time to take into account the repeated calls from civil society and the various decisions of different Courts of Europe. No matter the political decision, bulk retention of all persons’ communication data is and will continue to be disproportionate.  Further information :      Boehm F., Cole M., Data retention after the Judgement of the CJEU [1]In Particular in Austria, Slovenia, Romania, Bulgaria, Netherlands and Belgium.  [2]Main results of the Justice and Home Affairs Coucil, 3 and 4 December 2015.  Serious crime?    