Working life – Carer’s life, tackling the Gender Pay Gap
17 November 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) According to Eurostat, in 2014 the Gender Pay Gap (GPG) amounted to 16% in the European Union. One of the reasons for this disparity is the role as informal carer of persons, meaning someone helping a close family member who is dependent or with disabilities. This informal care is carried out most of the time by women. AEDH has joined as associate partner a European project of some of its member organisations highlighting this phenomenon hindering wages and career development, thus impacting the amount of people’s pension in the future. However, little known or unknown, this specific cause of the gender pay gap due to this informal carer’s role is not tackled, whereas the number of informal carers is increasing and they play an essential role for providing care for dependent persons at a lower cost for the society. Lead by the French Human Rights League, the project gathers the Austrian and Luxembourgish Human Rights Leagues, the Rhône Alpes General Labour Confederation (CGT), the Italian Association for Culture and Development (ARCS), and is supported by the Institute for Economic and Social Research (IRES). A state of play has been established; it includes an overview on the policies of assistance for dependent people in the countries involved in the project, a study on specific cases of the gender pay gap due to the role of informal carers, a review on the reality of this aspect of the gender pay gap that, however is invisible in official statistics as well a research of good practices in companies and the existing solutions in the different contexts of public policies. AEDH and its partners call on political leaders as well as social partners to recognise and fight against these inequalities. We also try to mobilise the public and to raise awareness on this reality. You can download the project’s report below, as well as the concise awareness tools in English, French, German and Italian. A transnational conference will take place in Brussels on the 21st of November 2016.  English version: Vidéo Vie active – vie d’aidants. Toutes et tous concernés Download the booklet "Carers" Download the flyer  Italian Version: Vidéo Vie active – vie d’aidants. Toutes et tous concernés Scaricore l’opuscolo "assistente" Scaricore il volantino  German version: Vidéo Vie active – vie d’aidants. Toutes et tous concernés Die Broschüre über "die Pflege eines Angehörigen" herunterladen Der Flyer herunterladen  Download the report Speaking out against the Gender Pay Gap (GPG), taking into account the case of an informal caregiver 