Editorial by AEDH President – To prevent the end of the European project, social intervention has to be renewed!
28 February 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) On 25 March 2017, we will celebrate the 60th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome which marks the birth of the European project. We will surely talk about the continuous progress that has been made since the emergence of the ECC, European Economic Community, to the development of  the EU, European Union. There has been some trouble in the process but the project seems to be a good one in the end. Five elements are central when we analyse the state of the European Union: the return to nationalism and individualism; the lack of democracy in several EU Member States; the arrival of migrants at the shores of the European Union – phenomenon which is more a symptom of the world crisis than a cause in itself – and the priority given to macroeconomic politics at the expense of social concerns. Those four elements lead to the fifth one: the development of different mindsets across the European Union leading to the emergence of different kinds of governance. Cooperation does not prevail anymore. There are still remarkable initiatives and reports proposed by some MEPs but the Council of the Heads of states and governments only agree on one thing: competition against each other. Indeed, far-right parties are more and more active. Some of them already share the power. Others are still at the margin but even so influence decisions. We have to fight against such mindsets but we will need more than that. We have to question the political and social model put in place by the governments of the EU member states and the European Council for the last 60 years. An economic globalisation without social concerns:  richer persons are still earning more and more while the poorest ones still earn less. Austerity measures that have hurt many EU countries – Greece, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, Italy,… called “PIGS” or the “Club Med” by some orthodox economist from ECOFIN. The Mediterranean Sea that has become a cemetery for migrants and refugees. The risk of poverty and social exclusion that still concerns a quarter of the European population since the 2020 strategy has been launched. These are some of the reasons why the European project faces a rising Euroscepticism and in response a constant progress of far-right movements. We observe four different political behaviours. The first one consists of pretending everything is fine and one has to care only about its national zone. The second one chooses to continue the way no matter what although even if the FMI and OCDE recommend the abandonment of strict austerity measures. The third one proposes the construction of a two-speed Europe paving the way to the emergence of several federalisms. The last one envisages bursting the European Union and accepts the resurgence of nationalism, of their wars, armies, fascism and racism. In Rome, we, rights defenders, we will stand for the political behaviour that defines our place. We do not make politics only with rights but what I am sure of, is that we do not make good politics without rights. In order to prevent the end of the European project, social intervention has to be renewed! 