Editorial by the AEDH President – Hands off the European Convention on Human Rights!
29 November 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Every six months, one of the member states of the Council of Europe (CoE) holds the rotating presidency of the Council of Ministers of this institution, which includes four other pillars, the General Secretariat, the Parliamentary Assembly, the European Court of Human Rights and the Conference of INGOs, (International Non-Governmental Organizations). To participate in the latter, “Participatory Status” must have been obtained. AEDH has participated for the last three years. As such, we have to intervene on some current issues of the 47 countries of the CoE. A German television channel asked our opinion about an orientation of the Danish presidency. It is known that given the pace of the renewal of this function – six months by 47 countries – it’s understood that each of the countries concerned (roughly every 24 years!) wants to leave its mark. Why not? But the devil is in the details and if it is not about improving the protocol then we are involved, and sometimes more than one might expect. It turns out that the Danish government is at the moment showing by a strong propensity to consider that human rights are only subsidiary and that there are superior considerations which can lead to putting them in parenthesis. And Mr.Rasmussen says this is about terrorism and immigration. And that’s how, quite baldly, that this sort of thing is said. And we know that the Danish government isn’t backward in coming forward to say that the country would not accept migrants or refugees, regardless of the European injunctions. The Danish Prime Minister is one of those who do not hesitate to listen to the vociferations of the far-right Danish Volks Partei. And from there it becomes necessary to question those institutions that protect migrants in an abusive and exaggerated way, namely essentially the European Court of Human Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights. Of course, with the required reverence, the Danish ambassador says that he considers Human Rights to be of the highest value, that he would do everything to respect them … but times change and what was possible before is no longer so, given the overlapping issues of terrorism and migration. AND with regret, it is necessary to shift the legal positions to take into account reality. We could reassure ourselves. The attempt is not new and other presidencies must have thought to do the same thing. There is thus an additional protocol to the Convention, No. 15, whose ratification awaits its number of favorable countries, which aims to amend the preamble to introduce a development favorable to the national courts compared to the Court and its jurisprudence. It is a question of moving the lines of subsidiarity and the margins of appreciation that organize the relations between them. But the Court largely blocked the process by pointing out that the vagueness of the protocol was not permissible if it concerned the content of the rights, but debatable if it was the procedure that was in question. The Danish Presidency goes further and in the wrong direction. Without touching the substance, it says that subsidiarity should not be conceived as a procedural sequence, but should be modified with the will to limit the judgment at the national level when it is sufficient according to national laws, which amounts to depriving the subject to recourse before the ECHR. And it adds that in terms of margins of appreciation, it must be judged according to national traditions and policies that translate into norms. In other words, it is a violation of the Convention. We can therefore consider that the Danish presidency goes too far! It proposes nothing less than changing the procedure and the content by limiting the scope of the Convention. And the AEDH, within the Conference of INGOs will oppose it. 