Contribution of the CSO liaison group to the Europe 2020 mid-term review
3 June 2014
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) The Lisbon Strategy, launched in 2000, aimed to make Europe “the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion”. In 2005, after a mid-term review revealed mixed results, the focus was narrowed to productivity, jobs and growth. Social cohesion, social inclusion, and gender equality and equality for all were lost. When the crisis started in 2008 policies were mainly orientated towards saving the private banking sector and financial and fiscal consolidation. It became apparent that the EU would need another strategy which would also answer to the emerging social crisis. Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) and their overarching platforms actively participated at every step in the preparation process for the new strategy.   In 2010, Europe 2020 was launched as the EU’s strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. Five headline targets were set – including objectives on employment, the reduction of poverty and social exclusion, education, and climate change and energy. Extracts: “Currently the involvement of CSOs in, for example, the processes of the European Semester, is disappointing. Member states do not want to consult – or if they do consult it is a poorly designed process lacking in quality engagement. Decision making processes need to be opened up to CSOs ready to play their role in their areas of expertise, in European Governance and in the implementation of the economic and social priorities of the EU.” “We, the EESC’s Civil Society Organisations liaison group, expect the review of Europe 2020 to allow for a better protection of social,  education and cultural budgets when developing policies to tackle macro-economic imbalances; to increase social investments, particularly in the light of the Commission’s SIP; to develop a true and integrated anti-poverty and social inclusion strategy at EU and national level; to mainstream social targets in all other policies; and finally to invest in the creation of, access to and progression in quality and sustainable employment. In particular, we expect the review of the Europe 2020 strategy to integrate the following measures in the future implementation of the strategy, with a view to ensure it reaches its goals on inclusive growth”. Read the the CSO laison group’s contribution here 