Editorial by Dominique Guibert – Human rights in Europe: Is 2017 worse than 2016?
30 June 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) The sentences that you are about to read below are drawn from Nils Muižnieks, Commissioner for Human rights, in its report on the state of human rights in Europe in 2016. He makes a dramatic assessment bearing a dark future because if 2017 is worse, then we will have to say that a turning point will have been reached and the entire international system of guarantees would be affected. Without taking too much risk, we can say that the question is put on the table. Hungary, migrants and refugees, democracy and community life, invasion of interconnected files, private life which is no longer private, parades of xenophobic, racist, right-wing extremist groups: This is the sad list of signs of Europe’s crisis. “In the future, we will likely look back at 2016 as a critical turning point for human rights in Europe. In a positive scenario, we will look back and see it as a low point from which European countries individually and collectively bounced back to reaffirm their commitment to human rights and co-operation. In a darker scenario, we will look back to 2016 as the beginning of the end of the European human rights system and European integration. Why do I frame the year in such dramatic terms? After all, Russia’s actions in Crimea, the conflict in Ukraine, which has had a devastating impact on human rights and the humanitarian situation in the country, the migration policy crisis and serious human rights backsliding in several Council of Europe member states began several years ago. Why will 2016 be remembered? 2016 will be remembered as the year of the Brexit referendum in the United Kingdom and a coup attempt in Turkey, followed by a massive crackdown in the country. Following Ukraine’s and France’s moves in 2015, Turkey became the third member state to derogate from the European Convention on Human Rights – an unprecedented situation. The year also stands out with the highly problematic EU-Turkey statement on migration, as well as a number of moves at the national level undercutting the right to asylum. It was a year in which policy initiatives in Poland created what the European Commission called a “systemic threat to the rule of law” in that country. Finally, 2016 was capped off by the election of Donald Trump as President of the United States of America – an exogenous shock to Europe and the broader world.” Read, meditate and ACT: the rights deserve to be defended and expanded! Otherwise…  Dominique Guibert, President of AEDH  Learn more: Commissioner of Human Rights, Report on the state of human rights in Europe in 2016, 6 April 2017.  AEDH has obtained in 2015 the participatory status with the Council of Europe and is part of the Working Group on the Convention 108 on the protection of personal data. 