Editorial by Dominique Guibert – “Manchester attack: despite the pain, we must not grant terrorists any victory”
31 May 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Once again, women, children and men died in a bomb attack claimed by Daesh, terrible player of a policy of terror. We express our full solidarity with all families as wells as we share their pain. As each time an attack occurs, it must be said that these acts have no possible justification whatever the cause, that the authors claim to defend, might be. The attack of Manchester represents a turning point where Daesh is gradually losing its territorial supports under the blows of military interventions but also because of the criminal policy conducted by this group against all civilian populations. The attack has also an ultimate objective; to force a repression against all Muslims to produce a clear separation based on a dictatorial understanding of the religious faith. It is not simply a blind massacre, all the more despicable as children and teenagers were among the innocent victims. Should we admit that there would be farsighted massacres? For Daesh, the massacre is a strategy. Asking the question is answering it. It requires a strong political response. For all the components of society, combatting murderers first implies to avoid amalgams in the name of a supposed or real origin and not to confuse a belief and its deviance. For governments, it means to be able to respect rights and freedoms and not fall into the traps set up by the killers. It should be recalled, on the eve of a major poll in the United Kingdom, that any policy which does not maintain a balance between civil liberties and public security, if it might enable electoral successes in the short run, is carrying catastrophic divisions, conflicts and wars, here in Western European countries and elsewhere in the Middle East, where the conjunction between the crimes of the Assad regime and the devastating impacts of the American intervention in Iraq will continue to prevail. In November 2015, after the Paris attacks, a brave man overwhelmed by the pain related to the loss of his wife said: “they will not have my hate”. He is right and those are the words of a good policy.  Dominique Guibert, President of AEDH 