Editorial by the AEDH President – Libya is a safe country … for the traffickers of human beings!
15 December 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) A CNN report revealing the existence of slave markets in Libya provoked a legitimate commotion. Some have even described it as a crime against humanity. We at the AEDH share this emotion and greatly welcome the fact that these horrible criminal abuses have been made known. However, this situation has existed for years and it is astonishing that the condemnation of these crimes comes so late. For years, human rights organisations have been denouncing what is happening in Libya. For years, humanitarian organisations have been trying to help the victims. For years these activists have been subjected to checks, harassment or even aggression. For months now, criminal gangs have been openly derisory about the sanctions that could be applied to them, knowing that they can count on the inaction of European countries, the United States and any country to which migrants might flow. Why this inaction? As with the notorious and disastrous “EU-Turkey Declaration”, it is a question of asking a third country to keep migrants on its territory in exchange, on the one hand, for a large financial compensation, and on the other, of a withholding of judgement on questions that the leaders of these countries consider “internal”. The convenient characterization of these countries by the EU and its member states, as “safe countries” gives a sort of aura of legitimacy to dealing with murderers, rapists, torturers, racketeers and thieves, as long as they do everything they can to keep migrants on their territory and prevent them from crossing the borders of the Union. The media hype that followed CNN’s report leaves a bitter taste. This is a subject that has led to protests from a whole group of well-known personalities. We appreciate this reinforcement. But why only now? In 2016, a remarkable photographer reported this horror. His name is Narciso Contrera and he won the Carmignac Foundation Award. But at the time it was not the fashion to criticise Libya… And when we showed that the establishment of “safe” country lists was a cynical encouragement to the denial of people’s rights to seek to survive and attempt to rebuild their lives elsewhere than in their home country, hardly any interest was shown… Why are member states reacting only now to the savagery that reigns in Libya? The belated media coverage has overcome the hesitations and realism has made it necessary to take the protests into account. We welcome the fact that some governments have taken on the responsibility of denunciation.  But we have our doubts about any future action. What is absolutely certain, however, is the fate of migrants who have been snatched from the hands of their tormentors. They will be sent back to their country of origin. They will no longer be massacred or tortured. Just returned to their country, after often months of vagrancy or travel, to the dramatic situation that they wanted to flee. And inevitably, one day they will take to the road again to try to find a home country offering dignity to human beings. Why not the European countries ? It simply needs a new migration policy largely to deprive the mafia of a reason to exist. Any other policy is unrealistic and irrational. But this the Council does not want to hear this. In other words, Libya has a future, as a safe country, in the inhuman treatment of migrants and refugees. AEDH is outraged by the double game which consists of expressing horror at the fate of migrants in Libya whilst continuing to negotiate the safe country lists. We must end this hypocrisy which is at the heart of the denial of rights. 