“Safe Harbor”: the CJEU gives back all rights to the protection of personal data.
27 October 2015
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French)  Brussels, 07 October 2015  Less than two weeks after the publication of the opinion of the Advocate General Yves Bot, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) sent Tuesday, October 6, 2015, a clear message to the European Commission, the EU Member States, multinationals and the US government: personal data protection and privacy are citizens’ fundamental rights which must be respected and guaranteed, even in an economy of personal data or in the context of the fight against terrorism. It was forbidden through an agreement concluded in 2000, the Safe Harbor, which allows the transfer of personal data from the EU to the United States. The European Association for the Defense of Human Rights (AEDH) welcomes this judgment of the CJEU which states firstly that national supervisory authorities must be able to examine, in all cases, whether a third country to which personal data are transferred ensures, in accordance with the Data Protection Directive (95/46/EC), an adequate level of protection. Thereby, it gives back an essential role to these organizations that remained quiet so far despite the accumulation and the retention of personal data by US companies conducting business in Europe and the reuse of this data within mass surveillance programs. On the latter, AEDH notes that the Court based its reasoning on the fact that US regulation “is not limited to what is strictly necessary where it authorises, on a generalised basis, storage of all the personal data of all the persons [1″>…] without any differentiation, limitation or exception being made in the light of the objective pursued”[2]. By also arguing that “the mass and undifferentiated accessing of personal data is clearly contrary to the principle of proportionality”, one is able to understand that not only the inaction of the Commission is condemned, but also and implicitly, the actions of some Member States that are legalizing the same kind of practices without care about the respect of their citizen’s fundamental rights. Data protection legal framework, Umbrella Agreement, PNR, national surveillance laws… The judgment of 6 October must be the basis to restore citizens’ fundamental rights at the heart of these different texts. This CJEU’s ruling is a consequence of the Max Schrems’ complaint against Facebook which finds its origins in the revelations made by Edward Snowden on NSA’s mass surveillance programs. It highlights that our rights might be better guaranteed when citizens take possession of the means of communication or legal instruments at their disposal. However, after the decision, the first reaction of the European Commission was to remind the numerous statutory exceptions contained in the Directive 95/46/EC. Thereby seeking to maintain the flow of data of EU citizens to the United States which is, according to the Commission, “the backbone of our economy”. AEDH condemns the position of the Commission which is still determined to violate, for purely economic reasons, the fundamental rights reaffirmed by the CJEU.  Contact:  Dominique Guibert, chairman AEDH, European Association for the Defence of Human Rights 33, rue de la Caserne. B-1000 Bruxelles Tél : +32(0)25112100 Fax : +32(0)25113200 Email : info@aedh.eu  The European Association for the Defence of Human Rights (Association Européenne pour la défense des Droits de l’Homme -AEDH) consists of associations and leagues defending human rights in the countries of the European Union. For more information, visit http://www.aedh.eu/?lang=en     Paragraph 93 of the decision C-362/14. Paragraph 95 of the decision. Paragraph 33 of the decision 