Editorial by the AEDH President – The critter is crawling up…
29 September 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) There is currently a widespread idea that in the end will have devastating effects. While the President of the European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, stated with quite some panache that social ambition is required to reconcile the European citizens with the European construction, we have a deep feeling that we went backwards to the usual negotiations among the Member States’ governments. The European Commission is not in the driver’s seat went it comes to the European affairs, contrary to the common comments on Brussels’ eurocrats, neither is the European Parliament, where heterodox discourses difficultly deliver. The European Council, the institution where heads of states or governments negotiate, on an unequal footing, between their respective national interests, is the true reins holder. Three elements illustrate this state of play : Firstly: What will become the famous social pillar? While it was announced as the strategic axis in winning back people’s hearts, it seems to have now become secondary. Once again, the outcome will show a social dimension lagging behind the economic dimension. Secondly. What about the civil society? Currently, there is this widespread idea that individual citizens solely are the civil society while the associations organising this civil society a mere obstacle to the citizens’ pure expression. Thirdly. Which is the “European leadership”? For months, between the French and German elections, we surfed on Europe’s return thanks to M&M. Today, the leadership is said to be nowhere to be found, therefore no more Europe. Return back to national politician politics. And what about democracy? The blows it undergoes, both through speeches and acts, due to an immoderate use of emergency laws or the repression of the opposition, legitimate the indefinable but dangerous feeling that all this has no importance but is a mere façade for the gullible. The critter is crawling up. It is up to us to stop it. 