Europe 2020 strategy: what are the mid-term results?
16 December 2015
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) 15 December 2015 – Under the initiative of the European Union in 2008, the Europe 2020 strategy was implemented to respond in a relatively short 12 year term to some major economic and social issues(1): unemployment, investment in research and development, poverty and social exclusion, climate change, renewable energy and education. Is there any progress after eight years of operation of this so-called “operational and visible” program? At this point, AEDH considers that the Europe 2020 strategy has had a limited success with regards to some economic objectives and has been deficient concerning social rights.  At first, we should mention the progress made by some member states that have completed many objectives such as the investment rate in R&D (3%), lowering the rate of early school leaving (under 10%) and the access to a diploma of higher education for at least 40% of the population (aged 30/34). But as usual the devil is in the detail. The improvement of a specific figure can hide a less satisfactory situation. For example the figures can show a decrease of unemployment but it can lead to an augmentation of poor workers. This is true especially for women having a part-time job hiding a situation of low wage.  For the majority of member states the road is long and the efforts made to achieve the other objectives are not sufficient. The declining employment rate is not necessarily linked to a decrease in  the risk of poverty and /or social exclusion.  According to Eurostat, the statistical office of the EU, ¼ of the European population lives at the risk of poverty and social exclusion. The objective set in the Europe 2020 strategy was to get 20 million people out of this situation. In 2014 over 120 million people are still concerned. The Policies that are adopted on the basis of  the paradigm of growth and competitiveness and its translation in elements of economic policies, austerity in particular, are responsible for this precarious social situation for many people. These policies are followed constantly, persistently, even with blindness and we cannot help, but remembering Einstein’s wise words: “insanity is behaving in the same way and expecting different results”. It is necessary to free ourselves from these dogmas and return to a more inclusive vision of the society. Neoliberals emphasise all the time that growth would redistribute wealth from the top and tackle poverty. This assumption is wrong, the situation requires public policies oriented towards social investment in the protection and public services.  Another objective of the Europe 2020 strategy is to achieve an employment rate of 75 % (population of 20/64 years). This rate is stagnating at around 69% in the EU with large disparities existing between member states. Germany, CzechRepublic and the Nordic Countries lead the way and have met the target set up in the strategy. Even with satisfactory results, we have to analyse and verify if the improvement is durable and robust. The improvement can be built on the deterioration of other social elements. When new reforms are implemented whether by a legislation or conventionally agreed, it is necessary to check if there are no hidden or adverse effects. What are Germans thinking of “Minilöhne” and English of “zero hour contract”? What about those who see the horizon getting darker and darker because unemployment benefits and pensions are decreased? What happens when the minimum legal age of retirement does not give access to a full pension? All these social elements are threatened. At the end of the day, it is the idea of Europe that  is collapsing.  In member states such as Italy, Greece or Spain the employment rate is approaching 55%. Unemployment is particularly strong among young people who represent 12% of the unemployed population in the European Union. The economic crisis of 2008 combined with policies giving priority to economic measures over social ones has led to a deterioration of the labour market especially in Southern Europe. People living in countries put under memorandum with the surveillance of the “European semester” are tired of the deterioration of the social situation and the primacy of economic policies.  New mechanisms aiming at fighting unemployment in specific groups are emerging. This is the example of policies targeting long-term unemployment (2) or youth (3).  President Juncker and Commissioner Thyssen also announced a pillar of social rights for 2016. This reaction seems a bit late considering the gravity of the situation. AEDH has many doubts towards the effectiveness of a social pillar if at the same time there is no change of economic policies.  The Europe 2020 strategy had set ambitious objectives that are far from being met. The program included a mechanism of “mid-term review” to adjust the policies. It was supposed to take place at the end of 2015 but was postponed to an unkown date in 2016. Tools to change our policies are available but not used. We can easily question the trajectory taken by the EU. Is the Europe 2020 strategy still appropriate or is it the Five Presidents’s report that will be the new guideline? Finally how can the EU achieve the goals set out in the strategy in the four remaining years when between 2008 and 2015 the social indicators have at best maintained their level or regressed?  AEDH regrets that the Europe 2020 strategy was built on the foundations of a policy based on the broad economic policy guidelines (BEPGs). The latter only focus on competitiveness and markets and give no credit to social. We have the results and they are negative.  