Editorial by the AEDH President – Europe: the risk and the uncertainty
27 July 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) While the last events have been enlightening for European issues, some questions remain. What will trigger Brexit negotiations, which seem locked into ideological orientations regardless of pragmatism? All economic studies agree to assert that the Brexit will be detrimental to its leaders although it will bring nothing to its opponents. Will European Social Pillar eventually be adopted while State Members assert that its implementation depends on the transposition of directives into national law, and thus become useless? At the same time, the fate of the EU and of its citizens is lying on the new start of a Social Europe, at last. Will democracy resist against fierce attacks it undergoes as much in Poland, where the executive is taking control over every power, as in Hungary, where civil society’s realm for action is restricted every single day, or even in France, where the state of emergency is perpetrated and an umpteenth law of liberties limitation is adopted? Although it is precisely on both the existence and expansion of the Rule of Law that the EU is living and growing. Is there a move toward a better understanding of the origin of migrations and refugees, so that Italy and Greece can eventually receive the help they desperately need? Is there a move toward the implementation of a voluntary and common system which defines reception as a moral absolute of the European construction? Instead, Member states governments continue to bury their head in the sand of beaches where dead wrecked migrants are grounding (because they haven’t been?) not having been rescued. Whereas a European regulation about data protection has just been adopted, are new data files not being created and crossed every day, regardless of people Rights, in the name of the struggle against terrorism which is unfortunately opposed to individual liberties? Still, experience shows that disequilibrium between liberty and security is more likely to feed terrorism than to eradicate it. Thus, uncertainty embraces all. This is the one which can neither be calculated nor predicted. Well, there is one certainty: governments and the Council that gathers them are responsible for this situation. Only one thing can now impede Europe from becoming a patchwork of die-hard national situations: the desire of citizens for another Europe.  