Editorial by D. Guibert: “CETA: the beginning of the end or the end of the beginning of the debate?”
1 December 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) The Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) has limped past a last hurdle in Brussels. The European Parliament has unfortunately resoundingly rejected a motion tabled by 89 Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) calling for a European Court of Justice opinion on the agreement’s legality. On 23 November in Strasbourg, this motion was rejected by 419 votes to 258, with 22 abstentions. It is therefore now up to the European Parliament Committee on International Trade to vote on the CETA agreement before an attempt at a vote in plenary sitting before Christmas. There are unlikely to be any surprises there, given that the majority of parliament members support laissez-faire economics. As European People’s Party MEPs would say, let’s adopt the CETA – it has no impact on our legal framework, the EU’s competences or our constitutional rights! In other words, this may be the beginning of the end of the debate… CETA started out on the “right” track before being brought to a standstill by a veto from the Walloon Parliament. It was eventually signed on Sunday, 30 October by the EU. The agreement must still be ratified by the parliaments of Canada and the 28 EU Member States. So this may also be the end of the beginning of the debate. For it is reasonable to assume that the process is very uncertain. Not, of course, because the majority of political leaders and governments in EU Member States are unconvinced, but because there are many active opposition movements. In this field, civil society is both strong and determined. CETA is less well-known than the TTIP (the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, otherwise known as TAFTA) and was discreetly negotiated by the EU and Canada between 2009 and 2014. Yet it bears several striking similarities. If adopted, this agreement would be unprecedented in European trade history, as regards both the guarantees accorded to multinationals and the gradual elimination of social and product standards, as well as the Investor-State Dispute Settlement processes. It is unbalanced in favour of businesses. One very emblematic example is the negative list method for the liberalization of services, which means opening up all services to competition by default, except those explicitly listed by the parties. To trade unions, consumer groups and environmental NGOs, the economic benefits of CETA appear small and uncertain compared to the democratic dangers and the undermining of social standards. The “citizen” movement can therefore but gain in momentum. Will 2017 be the year citizens wake up to the dangers of CETA and TAFTA and fight back? Let us hope so. This is just the beginning – the fight continues. Dominique Guibert 