AEDH in Sweden: meeting with Swedish militants and discussions on social economy
5 December 2017
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) In parallel to the Gothenburg Summit on Social Rights organised on 17 November 2017, AEDH travelled to Sweden in order to meet with various Swedish organisations active in the defence and the promotion of human rights. These exchanges highlighted the main challenges that Sweden is currently facing. Hate crimes, ethnic profiling, the protection of personal data, the rights of indigenous populations, the reception of migrants are issues shaking up the Swedish society and mobilising human rights organisations on the ground. On this occasion were laid the groundwork for future cooperation between AEDH and these organisations. AEDH also participated in the event organised by the European Economic and Social Committee on 16 November 2017 in Gothenburg and dedicated to the social economy and its potential for the European Union in terms of economic growth but above all in terms of social cohesion. Alternative to the classical economy, the social economy does not focus exclusively on profit but is based on a number of essential principles such as the purpose of service to the members and the community rather than profit, the primacy of the people and work over capital in the distribution of income, management autonomy or democratic and participative management. At the level of the European Union, the social economy represents more than 13.6 million paid jobs (6.3% of the active population) employed in more than 2.8 million enterprises and entities. It mobilizes more than 82.8 million volunteers and has more than 232 million members of cooperatives, mutual societies and similar entities[1]. By bringing together actors from a still under-supported social economy as well as political decision-makers and academics, the EESC event reminded that social enterprises suffer from unfair competition and must therefore be able to benefit from concrete support, in particular through fair financing opportunities : competition must not be tax-based ! As it offers job opportunities to workers facing difficulties in finding a job (long-term unemployed persons, people with disabilities, people in professional retraining, etc.) as well as fair working conditions, the social economy shall be genuinely considered by the European institutions as a promising area that it would be wrong to neglect, especially in the context of the European Pillar of Social Rights. In its December newsletter, AEDH will devote an article to the social economy. [1] CESE and CIRIEC-International, Recent evolutions of the Social Economy in the European Union, 2017, p. 66 http://www.eesc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/files/qe-04-17-875-en-n.pdf 