Report Seminar AEDH on poverty 16 November 2015
10 December 2015
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) « Poverty: changing the languages in order to change the policies » :  On November 16, AEDH hosted a seminar on the topic “Poverty: changing the language in order to change the policies” at the European Economic and Social Committee. In his introduction, Dominique Guibert, president of AEDH, deplored the situation of subordination of social rights to the major objectives of economic policy in the European Union. He noted that President Juncker announced a change for 2016 with the definition of a social pillar. AEDH will be very attentive to the development of this new instrument of “governance”, but continues to be sceptical given the maintenance of the stability and growth dogma.  Conny Reuter, Secretary General of Solidar, reiterated the commitment of the organisations present at the seminar to the fight against poverty, inequality and the strengthening of social protection. He criticised that European policies are adopted on the basis of the growth paradigm of neoliberal theory: Growth is supposed to redistribute wealth among citizens. This assumption is wrong as can easily be seen by having a look at the unemployment and poverty statistics in the EU (Eurostat report). In 2014, 126 millions Europeans have been at risk of poverty and social exclusion. 25 millions people coud not live only by the income of their job. 24 millions people were unemployed and the European market is precarious.  The successive economic policies are the causes of the increase of poverty in Europe. These policies have only accentuated further inequalities and the gap between the very rich and the very poor. An investment in social policies is necessary in order to return to a more inclusive vision of society.  Nevertheless, both Solidar and the AEDH noted a progress announced by the Commissioner Thyssen in 2016: a pillar of social rights. Both organisations emphasise rights and the issue of their definitions. The Commission should not consider that the priority is to focus on the very poor. On the contrary, equal rights among the European population should prevail. We must fight for a social Europe that is more just. We have to avoid the trap of social legislation targeting only the very poor. History shows that a right for the poorer always drifts towards a “poor” law.  Conny Reuter reminded the participants of the seminar that the Commission was well equipped with indicators and tools to fight poverty and improve the social situation in the EU. However, many of these tools have been abandoned or reported. The social agenda has been abandoned by the previous Commission in 2010, the Europe 2020 strategy and its mechanism of “Mid-term review” was postponed to the end of 2016.  A new social agenda is needed to tackle poverty because the objectives set in the 2020 strategy are in no way fulfilled. This social agenda should address important proposals such as minimum wage and income, social insurance protection benefits and investment in employment.  Dominique Guibert quoted the latest statistic published by OXFAM (see report of OXFAM). In 2016 the combined wealth of the richest 1 percent will exceed that of the other 99 percent of people. This information has a direct impact on the veracity of the growth dogma since it is clearly established that wealth is not redistributed effectively as politicians suggest. Therefore an investment in social policies is needed to correct the negative effects.  In Europe ¼ of the population lives in the risk of poverty and social exclusion. This figure should have made it to the headlines and yet this was not the case. The 2020 strategy was adopted to correct this problem and get 20 millions people out of poverty. But the employment rate and the spending on R&D fell and the number of people affected by this risk of poverty and exclusion has increased. The social does not seem to be the main issue addressed by the Commission.  What about today? Does the Union have a social responsibility? In theory, the answer is no; the social policy is not part of the Treaties. But it is indirectly affected by the major economic policy objectives. Finally it would be disastrous to think that the EU is a mere economic and monetary union. It would be a direct attack to the effort put in the construction of the European Union.  Didier Gelot from the National observatory of poverty and social exclusion (ONPES – France) underlined the close link between poverty and inequalities. According to him, the vocabulary used to speak about poverty is really important to measure it. There is no agreed definition of poverty; it often refers to the concept of exclusion rather than the concept of income poverty. Didier Gelot presented its methodology developed by ONPES to measure poverty. It is based on the definition of reference budgets calculating poverty according to thresholds.  Certain terms can be stigmatising. For example in France, under the previous presidency, the negative concept of “assistanat” (assistantship) has been developed and was considered as the cancer of the French society. This concept refers to a negative approach of the person recipient of social protection that is comprehending him/her as not incited to work because  he/she can benefit from social policies. The vocabulary has a direct consequence on citizens concerned. There is a refusal to be stigmatised that can result in the refusal to be helped by these social policies. Yves Gelot quoted statistics that shows that 68% of poor workers who are eligible for support do not use them.  Yves Lochard, researcher at the Institute of Economic and social research (IRES) presented the result of a study he conducted for the ONPES after the implementation of the French law of 1998 related to the fight against exclusion. He analysed how poverty was addressed in French periodicals during two specific periods. His conclusion shows that poverty is unquestionably an important issue in the minds of French people. But this interest is more or less intense depending on the period. Poverty is more present in periodicals in the winter period because the cold is often fatal to homeless people. This phenomenon is accentuated by a “charity calendar”: religious holidays, day for the eradication of poverty …  The study also shows that the lexicon and the journalistic approach are important on how poverty affects the readers’ opinion. The word used by the journalist can lead to compassion but also describe delinquency situation. It is then necessary to change the look on poverty. This goal has to be addressed on two levels: the regard of the journalist itself and the regard he contributes to disseminate through his/her writings. This is particularly important when poverty can lead to stigmatising situations.  Fintan Farrell, acting director of the European anti-poverty network (EAPN), also underlined the necessity to apply social rights to all the population and not only the poorest. The problem is not the creation of wealth but the redistribution. The European Union should redistribute wealth by investing in social policies. But this is not the main priority now. The attention is given to economic governance, growth and competitiveness. There are some significant improvements: the introduction of a minimum wage in Germany, the increase investment in social in Denmark. But we need a greater involvement of civil society and national parliament in the process.  Georges Dassis, president of the EESC, concluded by recalling that his door is open to all organisations fighting for social and economic progress. According to him, problems must be prioritised because it is impossible to resolve all matters at the same time. At the same time, the priority is the establishment of a minimum income guaranteed by a European Fund (See the EESC report). This income can be calculated according to the minimum wage for example. In almost every European country there is a minimum wage set legally or by agreement with the social partners. We could take a percentage of that wage and deduce that this amount should be given to citizens in order to survive. This action must necessarily be supported by a European fund to avoid inequalities between member states. The European Union must have the courage to change things and want to address these challenges. If the situation does not change, it will not be surprising to see the rise of populism, racism and xenophobia.  Dominique Guibert concluded by noting that without European social construction there will be no Europe. It will burst into pieces. Another danger would be to make the mistake to reduce the EU to a simple market. The language must be changed and the challenges addressed by the EU institutions and the civil society.   To go further:  Strengthening the social rights to exit the crisis  Does the minimum wage fights against unemployment or promotes social dumping  The economic situation in Greece, mirror of the European future?  Unemployment in the EU continues its way : Young people are the first affected  –    Recommendation to the member states regarding their economic policy : how  correcting a crisis with the bad that brought it  Economic and social rights of migrants in the EU : AEDH fact sheet   Presentation Didier Gélot (available only in French)  Presentaion Yves Lochard (available only in French)  Presentation Fintan Farrell  