4th European Forum on Migration: focus on the integration of migrants into the labour market
13 March 2018
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) On 6 and 7 March 2018, the 4th European Forum on Migration, a platform for dialogue between civil society, institutions and authorities, was held in Brussels. This year, the Forum focused on the challenges and opportunities involved in integrating migrants into the EU’s labour markets. Present at this event organised jointly by the European Commission and the European Economic and Social Committee, AEDH stressed that before even talking about integration of migrants into the labour market, Member States must first and foremost regularise undocumented workers and offer asylum seekers with the possibility of exercising a professional activity while awaiting for the processing of their file. As EESC President Georges Dassis reminded that “the majority of migrants have fled persecution, wars and oppressive regimes. Now they are trying to build a life for themselves in Europe. They deserve a new life and that’s why we must always promote solidarity and help them achieve normalcy in their lives – among other things, by integrating them into the labour market.” However, in the absence of regularisation, undocumented workers find themselves in a situation of great precariousness: financial precariousness, social precariousness but also precariousness in terms of rights as they are more vulnerable to labour exploitation. In this respect, disparities between Member States are abysmal, as highlighted in the workshops focusing on irregular migrants: if in Spain and Belgium, undocumented workers can call on to the Labour Inspection to assert their rights without fearing denunciation to the Immigration Department, such is not the case in Poland or in the United Kingdom, for example. Hence, in the United Kingdom, in order to avoid a financial penalty, an employer may report the undocumented workers it employs to the authorities. What a wonderful way to get rid, at a lower cost, of embarrassing or claimant employees and put pressure on already vulnerable populations who are desperate not to be sent back to their country of origin. Unfortunately, we cannot count on an intervention in the near future from the European Commission in this area. Commissioner for Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship, Dimitris Avramopoulos stated that: “It is now time to go beyond the “crisis discourse” about migration we hear every day, and to focus instead on how to turn migration into a real opportunity, for all of us. Now and in the long term. For those who have obtained a legal right to stay into the European Union it is essential, and even urgent, that we now focus on their integration into our societies.” It is clear: integration, rights yes, but only for those who have papers. As for the means of obtaining these “papers”, the question is obviously not relevant. To read further on the topic: Economic and social rights of migrants in the EU. AEDH fact sheet – April 2015 http://www.aedh.eu/en/economic-and-social-rights-of-migrants-in-the-eu-aedh-fact-sheet/ 