Commemorating 10 years of the Data Protection Day: celebrating while remaining vigilant:
6 April 2016
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Brussels, 28 January 2016 For the past 10 years, the Data Protection Day is celebrated every January 28 at the initiative of the Council of Europe. At each occasion it is an opportunity to recall the importance of this right which is a necessary legal counterweight in view of the proliferation of technological tools whose invasive potential is continuously increasing, regardless of whether they are used daily by each of one us, by important private sector companies or by states and institutions that seek to create an illusion of security. 10 years ago, negotiations on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) were just starting.  Since, and thanks to a broad mobilization of the civil society, the text has been finally rejected by the European Parliament in July 2012. Meanwhile, and this is not unrelated to the above-mentioned success, the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union became legally binding in 2009 with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty. Consequently, data protection and privacy rights are now principles inherent of the EU. In 2013, it was the turn of a whistleblower, Edward Snowden, who allowed one to discern global awareness of the practices of intelligence agencies in the US and even Europe. More recently, it is the courts of the European Union and of the Council of Europe which have distinguished themselves by invalidating a set of measures contrary to fundamental rights. However, despite these progresses which are going in the direction of a greater respect for citizens’ rights, practices that violate the protection of personal data and the right to privacy are still going on and even encouraged by a significant number of governments. One can witness the endless succession of anti-terrorism laws and measures in France and in several EU countries, such as the UK or the Netherlands. At an EU level, parliamentarians are preparing to vote for the Passenger Name Record (PNR), a programme which the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) has said is “the first large-scale and indiscriminate collection of personal data in the history of the Union”. Another current project is “smart” borders, officially intended to accelerate the movement of people at the external borders of the EU and to help identify overstayers in the EU territory. We are now witnessing the creation of a database gathering fingerprints of all travelers crossing these borders. At a global level, the advent of Big Data also raises many questions in terms of data protection and the respect for privacy. Nearly 35 years after signing the first legally binding international instrument on data protection, the Convention 108 of the Council of Europe, this right is still regularly flouted. Data Protection Day is of course the opportunity to celebrate the progress that has been made but especially to recall that data protection is still a daily struggle. Everyone should pay attention to the tools he uses and how he does it, public authorities must recognize that it is illusory to see technological tools as a miracle solution to the current crises and, in the case of civil society organisations, they must continue to directly oppose the disproportionate attacks against this fundamental legal principle. AEDH stays vigilant and will continue to inform citizens and to alert members of the European Parliament on the risks related to the texts they vote.    EDPS’ opinion: EDPS supports EU legislator on security but recommends re-thinking on EU PNR, 15 décembre 2015.   