The LIBE committee adopted the “Passenger Name Record” in breach of fundamental rights
14 December 2015
This post is also available in: 
    Français (French) Brussels, 14 December 2015 The Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs (LIBE) Committee of the European Parliament voted in favour of the compromise text on the PNR. In a letter sent to the members of this committee the European Association for the Defense of Human Rights (AEDH) called on the MEPs to reject the draft law that is contrary to the fundamental rights of the Union, as noted by the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) who immediately challenged this vote.  It is by 39 votes in favour, 19 against and 2 abstentions that the committee adopted the PNR on 10 December. The directive that aims at fighting against terrorism and serious crime by the profiling and the conservation of the personal data of all air passengers traveling within, to or from Europe is a source of many threats to human rights. It should be recalled that there are hundreds of millions of non-suspected individuals flying in Europe every year. The name of all of them, their address, their bank details, their dates and places of travel but also their nationality, their date of birth and any other “general remarks" they might have indicated during the booking  will be retained during 5 years. In its letter, AEDH reminded the non-proportionnality, the uselessness and the ineffectivity of this proposal which will undoubtedly be invalidated by the Court of Justice of the EU as it had already been the case on April 2014 for the data retention directive.  Sharing the same opinion, the EDPS recalls in his statement his “unconditional support” to the resolution of the challenges currently faced by Europe. However, he encourages legislators to find “new approaches” that have to be “more selective”, “less intrusive” and “based on targeted categories of flights, passengers or countries” in order to be “truly necessary and proportionate”. The EDPS comments further that the necessity and proportionality of the retained project – refered as “the first large-scale and indiscriminate collection of personal data in the history of the Union” – are not proven. Without being explicitly expressed, EDPS seems to share the opinion of many members of civil society: the PNR provides no added value compared to existing systems or databases (API, SIS, VIS). As a glaring proof, he recalls that “information about the perpetrators was already available”.  The final vote on the PNR will take place shortly in theplenary session of the European Parliament. On this occasion, AEDH calls on all MEPs not to get carried away with emotion and to reject this text which is not a solution since it violates the human rights of hundreds of millions of people. EDPS says: “our freedoms cannot be protected by undermining the right to privacy”. AEDH adds that every infringement of liberties following the terrorist attacks is a new victory for the ones who committed them as their will is also to attack our democracies.   Further information :  Compromise text of the Council, published by Statewatch, 2 Decembre 2015.  EDPS’ statement, 10/12/2015   See the list of all retained data  