 CEJIL & APRODEH reiterate their condemnation against the 1997 MRTA-led takeover of the Japanese ambassador's residence
 23/06/2015 
Washington, D.C. and Lima, June 17, 2015 .- In light of the upcoming publication of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights’ (Inter-American Court) decision in the case of Eduardo Cruz Sánchez and others vs. Peru, the state of Peru has repeatedly lobbed accusations against the Asociación Pro Derechos Humanos (APRODEH) and the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL) of conducting a campaign of persecution against the Chavín de Huántar commando unit—responsible for the hostage rescue operation that took place in the residence of the Japanese ambassador in 1997—and claimed that no extrajudicial executions ever took place. APRODEH and CEJIL have always pointed out that they have never persecuted the Chavín de Huántar commando unit. Moreover, the decision to submit the whole unit to a judicial process within the Military Justice System was made by the permanent committee of the Supreme Council of Military Justice which then proceeded to indict them under the code of justice in June 2002. It is also necessary to point out that the attorney at the time is now President of the Military Code of Justice Police Brigadier EP Juan Pablo Ramos Espinoza. APRODEH and CEJIL, both co-petitioners in the case before the Inter-American Court, reiterate their rejection and condemnation of the Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA)-led takeover of the Japanese ambassador’s residence that occurred between December 17, 1996 and April 22, 1997. As a result of this international crime, hundreds of guests at the birthday celebration of the Japanese Emperor Akihito were taken hostage. However, the resulting execution of three members of the MRTA who had surrendered and were found under the control of military agents does not constitute as an appropriate means to sanction this crime. According to the coinciding testimonies of three direct witnesses, two members of the National Police of Peru, and one Japanese diplomat, Eduardo Cruz Sánchez (alias “Tito”) was alive at the end of the special ops mission. This extrajudicial execution, as well as the obligation to investigate it, has been established in the Peruvian jurisdictional bodies. After a third oral trial in October 2012, the Third Criminal Chamber issued a sentence signaling that: “after an analysis, it reaches the conclusion that Eduardo Cruz Sánchez, was detained alive by two policemen from the surveillance mission of house N1, located behind the residence of the Japanese ambassador, and after being subdued by those police members was turned in on orders of the accused Jesús Zamudio Aliaga, a person dressed as a member of the commando unit who returned Cruz Sánchez to the interior of the residence and later was found dead with a single bullet”. The execution of Cruz Sánchez has been demonstrated in the national criminal processes, so much so that despite counting on the faculties to appeal the decision, the attorney of the Minister of Defense at the time and is now the Minister of Justice, Gustavo Adrianzén, opted to not question this conclusion. Likewise, on July 24, 2013 the Transitory Penal Chamber of the Supreme Court issued a resolution that establishes that an extrajudicial execution did in fact occur in the case of Eduardo Cruz Sánchez and an investigation to identify the culprits of this violation should be undertaken. During the public audience celebrated in Costa Rica on February 3rd and 4th of 2014, the judges of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights strongly urged the Peruvian State to clarify its position. On the one hand, they denied the extrajudicial executions, yet on the other, through the Public Ministry and the Judicial Power, accepted responsibility in one of the three cases. Finally, the State should adopt legislative, judicial, administrative, and any other necessary measures in order to effectively guarantee that the facts as they occurred in the present case are not repeated again. Peru must carry out an effective investigation in to the claims of extrajudicial executions. The litigation of this case before the Inter-American Court, despite what has been published in several sources, is about the victims’ families’ interest in receiving compensation. They request the fulfillment of several steps, including an official sanctioning of the human rights violations committed against these three victims. For APRODEH and CEJIL, this case exemplifies the general duty that all authorities have to guarantee and respect the consecrated rights in the Political Constitution of Peru and in the diverse international instruments of which Peru is party to. 