Mexico required to address situation of  enforced disappearances 
 21/03/2015 
Washington D.C. March 21st, 2015.- Nineteen organizations presented information before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights yesterday on the situation of enforced disappearances in Mexico  and the challenges faced by State in addressing this issue. A lack of proper search and identification processes for disappeared persons and a widespread pattern of impunity found within the investigation and prosecution of those responsible has allowed the phenomenon to reach disproportionately high levels across the country.  Given the near-absence of trustworthy institutional channels, many victims´ family members have resorted to conducting their own searches and investigations, which often places them at even great risk. “We are the relatives of thousands of missing persons from Mexico. We do not get the benefits the State and its institutions boast about providing us," said Ms. Leticia Hidalgo, mother of Roy Rivera Hidalgo a student who was forcibly disappeared, “I will ask you today to help us in our push for field searches and scientific-evidence based searches where the intelligence and involvement of family members—who have searched for their loved ones by scrapping the dirt with their own nails—is not belittled." Many women who demand justice are threatened. In Cuauhtémoc, Chihuahua, where an estimated 350 young people have gone missing, mothers, daughters, and wives face serious roadblocks in their search for justice. According to official information, from 2010 to 2014, 90 common graves containing 225 people were unearthed in Chihuahua. Only 100 of those bodies have been identified. Within the same time period, 207 common graves containing 299 bodies were found in Guerrero, of which only 40 people have been identified. Today, there are estimated 250 complaints of disappearance in Guerrero. Moreover, reports cite a pattern of disappearance by prior identification, where established networks of municipal police and civilian members of organized crime work in tandem to identify who targets for detention and subsequent disappearance. It is worth nothing that to this date, none of those accused of involvement in the case of the missing Ayotzinapa students has been charged with enforced disappearance, but with a lesser charge of kidnapping. Additionally, members of the Armed Forces suspected of involvement have also not been investigated. The nineteen participating organizations requested the Commission to conduct a site visit to Mexico and study the human rights situation with a specific focus on evaluating the phenomenon of enforced disappearances and the public policies needed to prevent future cases and repair victims of this crime. Petitioners also solicited the Commission to monitor protection measures, rulings, and background reports about Mexico that demand urgent measures to address the situation of enforced disappearances. 