Rejection over Attorney General's anouncement over possible suspension of investigations into Ayotzinapa case
 30/01/2015 
San Jose and Washington D.C., 29th of January 2015. –  CEJIL would like to express its rejection and concern over the possible closure of investigations into the Ayotzinapa case, after an announcement made by Mexico’s Attorney General Jesus Murillo Karam on Tuesday January 27 . The Attorney General (AG) stated with “legal certainty” that the 43 students of the Normal Rural Raul Isidro Burgos were murdered, burned and their remains thrown into a municipal dump by members of the Guerreros Unidos gang, which is integrated by police officers from Iguala and Cocula. The announcement was made only a few days after the Inter American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) announced the formation of an international group of experts. This group, which counted with the Mexican government’s approval, is expected to create an action plan to seek the 43 students, analyze current lines of investigation to determine penal responsibilities and carry out an analysis to create a holistic plan of attention for victims. Unfortunately, the AG’s hasty declarations raise serious questions about the government’s will to pursue the truth and find the students. It is clear that there is not enough scientific evidence that justifies the AG’s conclusions. Additionally, internal investigations have been insufficient for the information that is of public knowledge. The AG’s office announced the arrest of 99 people, including 28 military personnel, for their involvement behind the students’ disappearance s. In his declaration, the AG announced that the principal theory over the events places the blame on the mayor of Iguala and his wife. In addition, the involvement of the ex-governor of Guerrero has not been yet determined. Given the unclear levels of involvement by military and state authorities, it is evident that investigations into the case have not been exhaustive. Finally, it is highly preoccupying that this is not being tried as a forced disappearance instead of an abduction. “The response of the authorities to the events that took place in Ayotzinapa is unfortunate and remains insufficient. The Mexican State is obligated to hear the voice of the families and exhaust all the lines of investigation through reliable scientific proof. The closure of the case will further strengthen the generalized climate of frustration, violence and impunity,” said Marcia Aguiluz, Director of CEJIL’s Central America and Mexico Program,“If the State closes this case, they will be wasting an historic opportunity to comply with its international obligations and would close the doors to the future of the nation.” In dealing with this new injustice, CEJIL would like to express its solidarity with the families of the disappeared students.  We call on the authorities to rectify their position and allow the group of experts elected by the IACHR to initiate the process of international investigation immediately. 