Post-election crisis in Honduras and human rights situation of people affected by the cancellation of DACA and TPS, will be part of the thematic hearings of CEJIL before the IACHR 167th Session
 23/02/2018 
Washington, D.C. and San José, February 23, 2018.- The Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL), together with partner organizations, will participate in five thematic hearings before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in which it will report various violations of the human rights suffered by vulnerable groups in the Americas. All hearings will be held at Hotel Tequendama, Cra. 10 # 26-21, Bogotá, Colombia Allegations of human rights violations in the post-electoral context in Honduras
11:30 am-12:45pm
Room B
The objective of the hearing will be to present updated information on the human rights violations that occurred in Honduras after the elections of November 26. This is intended to urge the authorities to cease human rights violations and investigate the recent events, setting the corresponding responsibilities. In addition, it seeks to highlight the similarities of the current crisis with the coup in 2009, emphasizing the actions and state omissions that have made possible a repetition of the facts. FACT SHEET. Situation of sexual and reproductive rights of girls and women in Central America
9:00 am - 10:00 am
Room A
The purpose of the requested hearing is to expose the serious violations of women and girls’ human rights in Central America. FACT SHEET. Situation of human rights of people affected by the cancellation of the TPS (Temporary Protection Status) and DACA (Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals) programs in the United States
11:30 am - 12:30 pm
Room A (Convened by the IACHR) The Department of Homeland Security of the United States (DHS) announced that it would revoke, as of September 9, 2019, the Temporary Protection Status (TPS) - a provisional benefit that allows those people of certain countries in the States United to live and work legally - for more than 200,000 Salvadorans living in the United States. This will also happen with the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program that benefited more than 800,000 young people who were brought to the United States as children. The elimination or suspension of TPS and DACA would destroy thousands of families, ignoring fundamental human rights to the protection of families and the rights of children. FACT SHEET. Human Rights and the Internal Security Law of Mexico
10:15 am - 11:30 am
Room B
The purpose of the hearing is to provide information on the recent approval of the Internal Security Law in Mexico, which gives the Armed Forces greater powers in public security tasks -without complying with international human rights standards-, under the justification of combating organized crime, as well as the possible impacts of this law. FACT SHEET. Human rights and pardon to former President Fujimori in Peru 
11:30 am - 12:30 am
Room A (Convened by the IACHR)
The organizations called by the IACHR will provide more information on the legal and political context behind the pardon granted to former Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori, who was sentenced to 25 years in prison on charges of corruption and crimes against humanity in 2009, and how this decision runs contrary to Peru's international obligations. LINK A FICHA TECNICA 