Panama announces its willingness to comply with the decision made in Vélez Loor case
 06/02/2015 
San José and Panama City, February 6, 2015.- Yesterday, the Panamanian government recognized during a hearing at the Inter-American Court of Human Rights  (Inter-American Court) its breach of compliance of a court imposed sentence over the mistreatment of Ecuadorian immigrant Jesús Velez Loor and expressed its willingness to create a roadmap for advancing possible resolutions. "We are satisfied with the readiness expressed by Panamanian authorities and we hope that, in the next few months, there will be significant changes," said Marcia Aguiluz, CEJIL´s Program Director for Central America and Mexico. As the first sentence issued by an international tribunal involving the treatment of a migrant within the Americas, the decision made in the Vélez Loor vs. Panama case established landmark international jurisprudence. However, the judgment handed down on November 23rd, 2010—which asked for the full investigation of acts of torture committed against Vélez Loor during his detention and training of government officials on human rights issues—has not been fully complied with, nor have the conditions under which undocumented immigrants detained in Panama improved. CEJIL lawyers asked that the State´s compliance action plan include substantive progress in the investigation of torture and statements from those identified as responsible for committing these acts; and the creation of a research plan and a compendium of strategies to prevent further delay of justice. "I'm truly fearful that justice has not come," said Jesús Vélez Loor, victim in the case, “The Panamanian government will set a bad example if these important points are not met; it’s a poor international image. It's very scary to know that there is no justice. What will happen to people who migrate? What will happen to those who leave in search of a better life because they have not been able to find one in their own countries? I hope every effort is made to continue this cause, to continue this investigation, to punish those responsible. We want justice, we want truth.” Under its international obligations, Panama is required to comply with the Inter-American Court´s judgment in order to prove its willingness to respect the human rights of all people found within its borders. 