CEJIL condemns 13 years of Guantánamo Bay
 09/01/2015 
Washington, D.C.  Friday, January 9th 2015- With only two days left before the 13th anniversary of Guantánamo Bay, the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL) urges the U.S. Government to immediately shut down the detention center in accordance with its international human rights obligations.

Of the 127 men who are currently detained, 59 have been cleared of all charges by intelligence and security agencies yet continue to await their liberation. The remaining 68 are classified as “indefinite detainees,” a category used for individuals considered by state agents as ineligible for trial or for transfer to a third country. These men will face Periodic Review Board hearings, an incipient interagency process that will assess whether an inmate poses a threat to the United States or is eligible for transfer. However, this procedure lacks guarantees to due process and could possibly prolong situations of arbitrary detention.

“The recent transfers of 13 inmates to Uruguay, Afghanistan, and Kazakhstan are a step towards finally shutting down Guantánamo,” said Viviana Krsticevic, Executive Director for CEJIL, “However, the revelations made by the Senate report on the CIA’s use of torture highlights the urgency with which the government needs to act. This report underscored the administration’s repeated failure to close Guantánamo, despite promises made six years ago. It is unacceptable that many detainees have not been tried by a competent tribunal, or that instances of torture and ill-treatment have not been tried and sanctioned.”

It is highly concerning that the U.S. government is trying to overturn a ruling issued by a judge in December 2014 which asked for the publication of over 30 tapes documenting the force feeding of hunger striking Guantánamo detainees. Among these detainees was Abu Wa’el Dhiab—one of the six men recently sent to Uruguay.

It is also concerning that the U.S. continues to ignore requests made by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) within resolutions made in 2006 and 2011. Said resolutions determined that the State caused irreparable damage to detainees and that Guantánamo must be shut down immediately. Additionally, in a joint declaration issued last year by the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, several other UN agencies, and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR), the United States was urged to “adopt all legislative, administrative, judicial, and any other types of measures necessary to prosecute, with full respect for the right to due process, the individuals being held at Guantanamo Naval Base or, where applicable, to provide for their immediate release or transfer to a third country.”

Thirteen years after Guantánamo opened, CEJIL once again demands for the U.S. government to shut down one of the darkest holdovers from the War on Terror; to put an end to arbitrary detentions and guarantee due process to those who have been charged with a crime and remain in detention. The government ensure detainees’ right to not be returned to countries where they will face persecution, torture or ill-treatment. Finally, we call on the U.S. to comply with its obligations to pursue truth and justice over all denunciations made by Guantánamo inmates on torture and ill-treatment. 