In landmark hearing Human Rights Organizations will ask Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to hold U.S. accountable for abuse and discrimination of Guantánamo detainee
 05/09/2017 
 When and What Time: Thursday September 7, 2017 | 11:30 a.m. – 1 p.m. MX
Where: Room B, Inter-American Conference on Social Security CISS San Ramón s/n, Col. San Jerónimo Lídice, 10200, Mexico City, Mexico
What: 164°  Period of Ordinary Sessions of the IACHR |  Public Hearing: “Case 12.865 – Djamel Ameziane”
Livestream: cidh.org Context: For nearly 12 years, Djamel Ameziane, an Algerian citizen, was arbitrarily detained without charge at the Guantánamo Bay prison camp. During his detention, Mr. Ameziane was tortured and suffered from other forms of abuse. In 2009, the U.S. approved his release from Guantánamo, yet he remained imprisoned for another five years. In December 2013, Mr. Ameziane was forcibly repatriated to Algeria despite having fled from violence and persecution for belonging to a minority ethnicity. More information. More than 15 years after Mr. Ameziane was captured and brought to Guantánamo, his case will be presented at a merits hearing before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. During the hearing, his lawyers from the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL) and the Center for Constitutional Rights (CCR) will: I. Highlight the serious human rights violations committed against Mr. Ameziane during his detention at Guantánamo Bay; II. Indicate what reparations the United States is obligated to provide, in light of the human rights violations in question, including guarantees for non-repetition for all other Guantánamo detainees; and III. Petition the Commission to issue a merits report to establish the responsibility of the United States with regards to the case and recommend reparations. If the IACHR rules in favor of Mr. Ameziane, it would be the first case regarding human rights violations committed at the Guantánamo Bay prison that a regional human rights body issues  a decision on. Moreover, the decision will mark a historic victory for him and Guantánamo Bay detainees and their right to judicial reparations. Additionally, the IACHR’s decision will be a decisive condemnation against one of the most reprehensible vestiges left from the “War on Terror.” Finally, at a time when U.S. President Donald Trump has stated his intention to not only keep the detention center open, but to fill it up, the September 7 hearing will be an opportunity for CCR and CEJIL to urge the Commission to remain vigilant on the issue of Guantánamo and U.S. accountability, and encourage OAS member states to remain engaged and accept detainees for resettlement where needed. **Djamel is unable to travel from Algeria to Mexico City to give in testimony in person, but he will certainly be following the hearing. CCR is collecting messages of support for Djamel, to remind him that he has a community of supporters around the globe, and that so many of you continue to stand up against indefinite detention and torture at Guantánamo. Please consider showing your solidarity.** Additional Information: Ameziane v. Obama / Ameziane v. United States Guantánamo by the Numbers Timeline: Djamel Ameziane Contact info Alex McAnarney
amcanarney@ceji.org
+1 (305) 335-5665

Fran Stuardo
fstuardo@cejil.org
+506 8606 9878

Jen Nessel
jnessel@ccrjustice.org
212-614-6449 