CEJIL regrets reaction to serious human rights situation from Mexican authorities 
 09/12/2014 
The organization calls for consensus building with ample participation from victims and civil society Last Saturday, the identification of the remains of Alexander Mora Venancio—one of the 43 students who had been disappeared on September 26 in Iguala, Guerrero—were confirmed and made public. The Mexican state must continue to investigate his extrajudicial execution, prosecute and punish all those responsible, and use all means at its disposal to locate the other young students who are still missing. Unfortunately, this event that has shocked Mexico and the whole world is not isolated incident. According to data from the Ministry of the Interior, in October 2014 there were over 23,000 registered missing persons. This figure started to increase since 2007, and doubled since 2009 in large part due to the so-called "war on drugs". While this situation is not new, different governments have been unable to take effective measures to fulfill their obligations to either prevent and investigate disappearances, nor have they made significant efforts to locate missing persons, which is vital to ensuring the rights of victims to truth, justice and reparation. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights (I-A Court) has heard numerous cases involving such practices and concluded that enforced disappearance "constitutes a multiple violation of rights protected by the American Convention and places the victim in a state of complete helplessness, being particularly serious when it is part of a systematic pattern or practice applied or tolerated by the state." By analyzing various cases, including the Rosendo Radilla vs. Mexico case, the I-A Court ordered for the creation of measures for non-repetition, such as adequate criminalization of enforced disappearance, training and lifelong learning for different authorities (military, police, prosecutors, etc.), the creation of commissions for tracing and exhumation programs, development of research and investigation protocols and creating genetic information systems, among others. In light of these standards, it is preoccupying that the Mexican State has not submitted a proposal addressing in a comprehensive and timely manner the serious situation faced by the country. It is particularly worrying that the views of victims and organizations that have historically worked this issue have not been taken into account. Moreover, it is incomprehensible that in times of great tension—such as those currently faced by Mexican society—coupled with legitimate claims against violence and impunity, the response of the authorities is to restrict social protest through the approval of constitutional reforms. In this regard, it is worth reminding the State that the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) deemed  the right to demonstrate publicly as an essential element of freedom of expression. For sectors of the population that have been traditionally discriminated, this is the only mechanism available against institutional agendas that do not favor their participation or before serious barriers to more traditional forms of mass communication. CEJIL respectfully calls on the authorities to reconsider the proposals so far submitted, in order to make a plan of action that is previously agreed with the victims and the numerous civil society organizations working on human rights in Mexico. The now recognized execution of Alexander Mora Venancio and the disappearance of the other 42 students is an opportunity to rethink human rights policy and to reach a consensus to deal comprehensively with the enormous challenges the State is facing to strengthen its institutional framework and fully guarantee the rights of all people in Mexico. 