Human rights groups denounce Venezuela before the Inter-American Court over Barrios Family case
 05/02/2015 
San José, February 5th 2015.-  the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL), the Comité de Familiares de las Víctimas de los Sucesos de Febrero y Marzo de 1989 (COFAVIC), and the Comisión de Derechos Humanos de Justicia y Paz del Estado Aragua (Comisión de Justicia y Paz de Aragua) before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights (Inter-American Court) Venezuela´s almost complete disregard in complying with a sentence involving a case having to do with the extra judicial execution of ten members of the same family—primarily at the hands of police officers from the state of Aragua, Venezuela. “The Barrios family case is emblematic in that it illustrates a pattern of extrajudicial killings carried out by members of the Venezuelan police in which the victims are primarily young men from poorer socioeconomic backgrounds whose murders go unpunished,” said Liliana Ortega, Executive Director for COFAVIC. “The State has a new opportunity to ensure that those who killed, threatened and harassed members of the Barrios family are brought to justice and that remaining family members will be protected.” Between 1998 and 2013, ten members of the Barrios family were killed. Benito Antonio (1998), Narciso (2003) and 16 year old Rigoberto Barrios (2005) were executed by police officers of the State of Aragua. In the following years, Luis Alberto (2004), Oscar (2009), Wilmer (2010) and Juan José Barrios (2011), Jorge Antonio Barrios (2012) Víctor Navarro Tomás Barrios (2012) and Roni David Barrios Alzul (2013) were killed under similar circumstances. On November 14, 2011, the Inter-American Court condemned Venezuela for the deaths of and failure to protect seven members of the Barrios family, as well as the absence of effective investigation. Additionally, the Court issued eight resolutions between November 2004 and February 2013 demanding the protection of the Barrios family, making it the case with the largest number of requests made by the Court to a State to ensure the protection and safety of members of one family. Yet, eight of the killings took place after the issuance of protection measures and three after the Court handed down the ruling. To date, the seven criminal investigations launched into these murders are at a standstill and no prosecutions have been made or suspects identified. Moreover, several members of the Barrios family have been subjected to threats and harassment over the last decade and forced to flee their homes. "The United Nations Committee´s on Torture and Human Rights Committee have expressed their concern over the high number of  extra judicial executions endured by the Barrios family despite the issuance of protective measures and the State´s pending obligation to investigate, prosecute and punish those responsible,” said Francisco Quintana, Program Director for the Andean Region, North America and the Caribbean for CEJIL, "It is clear that the international community has their eyes on Venezuela and are monitoring the State´s response. In light of this, we ask the court to issue a resolution to condemn the lack of compliance in the short term.” In its defense, the State argued that many members of the Barrios family had deferred in their responsibility to cooperate with authorities designated for their protection. Further, the state said, it was impossible to assign a guard to 21 people and finally, that the timeline for compliance demanded by the victim´s representatives was not realistic considering the country´s social and legal realities. The Barrios family´s situation reflects the lack of respect for human rights found within the Venezuela. Despite their denunciation of the American Convention—which entered into force for the country on September 10th, 2013—the Barrios family case is one of 16 cases with convictions issued between 1995 and 2012 that Venezuela must comply with. 