Civil society organizations criticize Bolivia’s response over rights violated during the dictatorship
 20/03/2015 
Washington D.C., March 19, 2015.- Several organizations reported insufficient achievements of the State of Bolivia in the search of truth, justice and redress for severe violations of human rights committed in Bolivia during the 18 years of military regimes. ASOFAMD, Freedom Women’s Movement (Movimiento de Mujeres Libertad), the Platform of Social Fighters (Plataforma Luchadores Sociales), Union of Victims of Political Violence (Unión de Víctimas de Violencia Política), Amnesty International and the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL), presented today before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the State of Bolivia, their demands regarding the rights violated during the dictatorship. It is estimated that, between 1964 and 1982, there were approximately 150 forced disappearances in Bolivia. Moreover, 40 persons of Bolivian nationality were detained in neighboring countries and later disappeared in the course of the “Operation Condor”. “We still have not found our loved ones, given that an effective policy for searching, locating and identifying the remains does not exist. The criminal investigations for these events do not have positive improvements either,” said Ruth Llanos, from ASOFAMD. “50 years after the first case of forced disappearance in Bolivia, the relatives are dying without knowing the truth.” Petitioners also reported before the Commission on the insufficient developments in criminal investigations for the events occurred during this period, and the absence of political will to order the declassification, analysis and access to information hold by the military forces. The Minister of Justice of Bolivia, Virginia Velasco, expressed during the hearing that her “will as a maximum authority is to establish a dialogue to achieve good results” as a response to the invitation from Commissioner Paulo Vannuchi of expanding “ways to continue with the demands”. However, for María José Eva, from Amnesty International, “the State’s presentation has been disappointing because it doesn’t bring anything new to the response that it has been giving for the past years.” For her part, CEJIL’s attorney, Juliana Bravo, emphasized that to improve “is needed a plan and an integrated policy in matter of justice, truth and redress, that gives account for the severity of the facts occurred in order to not to happen again. This will only be possible if there are laws and actions that adjust to international obligations, avoiding impunity of the acts committed during the military regimes,” she underlined. 