Human rights violations, situation of impunity in Guerrero exposed before IACHR
 20/03/2015 
Washington, D.C., March 20th, 2015.- Human rights groups presented today before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) about the serious human rights violations committed in the State of Guerrero during the dirty war and how these violations reverberate in the present.

The hearing was based on the conclusions and recommendations found in the Truth Commission of the State of Guerrero’s (COMVERDAD) final report, which was published on October 2014.

The report provided evidence on widespread and systematic tactics— including repression and lack of guarantees to due process—employed during the dirty war that seized the State from 1969 to 1979 which resulted in serious human rights violations.

However, according to petitioning organizations CEJIL, COMVERDAD and el Centro de Derechos Humanos de la Montaña "Tlachinollan", these patterns of repression and human rights violation used nearly 40 years ago still persist today.

In 2011, the State Commission on Human Rights recorded 52 complaints of torture, 41 of cruel, inhuman and/or degrading treatment and 275 injuries. "It is particularly serious that the state of Guerrero continues to experience human rights violation.  Torture, forced disappearances and extrajudicial executions remain, as in the past, widespread practices used by state," said Viviana Krsticevic , Executive Director of CEJIL .

Petitioners demonstrated how enforced disappearances, torture, and extrajudicial executions are still committed in the state of Guerrero. The most significant cases include the murders of two students of the Normal Rural School "Raúl Isidro Burgos" in December 2011; and even more pointedly, the events of September 26, 2014 in Iguala, Guerrero, when 43 students from the same institution were forcibly disappeared by members of the police and the criminal organization, Guerreros Unidos.

Regarding the criminalization and harassment of human rights defenders, presenting organizations stressed that more than 14 community leaders have been prosecuted for kidnapping and robbery, four of which have been sent to maximum security prisons. From 2010 to date, 13 community leaders have been killed. Thus far, none of those involved have been prosecuted or sentenced.

The petitioners requested attending members of the State to observe the recommendations of the COMVERDAD report; manage, print and circulate the document; and submit the report as teaching material in Guerrero’s schools. The IACHR was asked to conduct a visit to Mexico this year, in order to evaluate the human rights situation in the country and Guerrero. 