CEJIL will Represent Victims of Human Rights Violations before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
 26/01/2015 
San Jose, January 26th 2015.-The Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL), along with partner organizations, will represent victims from various parts of the continent before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights (I/A Court) during its 107th period of regular session. Public Hearings Caso Comunidad Campesina Santa Bárbara vs. Perú:
Monday, January 26th 3:00pm-7:00pm and Tuesday, January 27th 9:00am-1:00pm (Local time: Costa Rica) On July 4th, 1991, members of the Peruvian military advanced an operation within two sectors of the rural, quecha-speaking community of Santa Bárbara, which is nestled in Andean mountains that trace the department of Huancavelica in the south-central area of the country. This case is related to the forced disappearance of 15 people (93% of which were women and children) by members of the Peruvian military and demonstrates the systematic practice by the military of carrying out abductions and other heinous human rights violations against subversive groups. Two decades later, the Peruvian state continues to deny the force disappearance. Represented by the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL) and Asociación Paz y Esperanza the families of the victims hope the hearing before the Inter-American Human Rights Court (I/A Court)) represents a step towards truth and justice. Caso López Lone y otros vs. Honduras: Monday, February 2nd 10:00am, 1:00pm, 3:00pm, and 7:00pm; Tuesday, February 3rd 9:00am-1:00pm (Local Time: Costa Rica) This case refers to the arbitrary and illegal dismissal of four judges during the 2009 Honduran coup. The victims of the case, Judges Adán Guillermo López, Luis Alonso Chévez de la Rocha, and Ramón Barrios Maldonado, and Tirza Flores Lanza will be represented by the Association of Judges for Democracy (AJD) and the Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL). This is the first known case linked to the 2009 Honduran coup that will be presented before the I/A Court. It also presents a transcendental opportunity for Honduras to take actions that strengthen the institution of Judicial Power and to ensure that Honduran citizens can count of independent judges. Private Hearings on Compliance with Sentences and Interim Measures Veléz Loor vs. Panamá: 
Thursday, February 5th 4:45pm-6:45pm  (Local Time: Costa Rica) The sentence from the Veléz Loor vs. Panamá case was issued on November 23rd, 2010 by the I/A Court and became a historic landmark by being the first sentence issued in the americas involving immigrants. This sentence determined the responsibility of the Panamanian government on the cruel, inhumane, and degrading treatment of Ecuadorian citizen Jesús Veléz Loor, who was detained for being a migrant, arbitrarily deprived of his liberty for almost a year, and tortured in various different ways while in detention. The Panamanian government has yet to investigate the torturous acts, has not trained the Panamanian agents in the area of human rights, and has not bettered the conditions under which immigrants are detained. Familia Barrios vs Venezuela: 
Thursday, February 5th 3:00pm-4:30pm  (Local Time: Costa Rica) The sentence from the Familia Barrios vs. Venezuela case was issued on November 24th, 2011 by the I/A Court. This case is concerned with the extrajudicial executions of 10 members of the Barrios family in the Aragua region of Venezuela between 1998 and 2013. The goal of the hearing will be to receive updated and detailed information from the Venezuelan government about the fulfillment of the reparations ordered by the sentences, which is still pending compliance, and to listen to the observations of the Committee and the representatives of the victims. The Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL), the Committee on Families of Victims of the Events of February and March of 1989 (COFAVIC), and the Committee of Justice and Peace of Aragua will participate in the hearing. Public Hearings on Interim Measures
Friday, February 6th 9:00am-11:30am  (Local Time: Costa Rica) Following an application from the Venezuelan Government, the Court summoned a public hearing concerning the interim measures ordered for the issues from certain penitentiaries in Venezuela. The goal is to receive updated and detailed information from the Venezuelan government about the fulfillment of the interim measures and to listen to the observations of the Inter-American Committee and the representatives of the beneficiaries. 