Once again Central Govt tells Parliament: no mechanism to monitor compliance with its own monthly transparency directive
February 09, 2018
Image courtesy: http://www.mountainsoftravelphotos.comReaders may remember previous despatches about our efforts to ensure compliance with proactive information disclosure obligations under the Right to Information Act, 2005 (RTI Act). Under Rule 10 of the Rules of Procedure in Regard to the Proceedings of Cabinet, 1987 they are required to submit such reports to the Cabinet Secretariat every month. With the exception of the Ministry of Coal no other Ministry had volunteered to make this information public.In April 2016, the Central Information Commission (CIC) had issued a recommendation to the Cabinet Secretariat to upload monthly reports of work done by all Ministries and Departments on their respective websites. Within two months of the CIC's recommendation, the Cabinet Secretariat issued a circular to all Central Ministries and Departments requiring them to upload monthly reports of their major achievements, significant developments and important events. Ever since, Parliament has been asking questions regarding compliance with this circular.Central Government admits in Parliament, absence of mechanism to monitor its own transparency directiveYesterday, i.e, on 08 February, 2018, Mr. V. Vijaysai Reddy, MP (YSR Congress) of Andhra Pradesh asked the Hon'ble Prime Minister (PM) in the Rajya Sabha  about the existence of the CIC's order, the Cabinet Secretariat's circular and as to whether the Government has any mechanism to monitor the compliance across Central Ministries and Departments.In a written reply to the Unstarred Question of the MP, the Minister of State for Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (who assists the PM) has once again said that the Government does not have any mechanism to monitor compliance with its own transparency directive. See attachments belowEarlier, in March 2017, the same Minister gave a similar reply to a similar question regarding compliance with the CIC/Cab Sectt.'s directive raised by Mr. Rajesh Ranjan, MP @ Pappu Yadav and Ms. Ranjeet Ranjan, MP (both belonging to Rashtriya Janata Dal) in the Lok Sabha.Current status of compliance with the transparency directive across Central Ministries and DepartmentsAnticipating the Central Government's reply, we we kept ready a quick website check of 52 Central Ministries and 52 Departments under their charge for compliance with the requirement of proactive disclosure of monthly activities and achievements. Our findings about the status of compliance across these 104 entities are given below (tabulated data is in the 3rd attachment):Status of compliance across 52 Central Ministries:Status of compliance across 52 Central Departments:This research was put together by John Mascrinaus and Shikha Chhibbar of ATI Programme, CHRI and Geetika Vyas of Symbiosis Law School NOIDA who interned with CHRI.Urgent need for establishing a monitoring mechanismSection 25(1)(c) of the RTI Act obligates the Central Government to require all public authorities under its control to publish accurate information about their activities from time to time. This is a statutory mandate. The CIC/Cab. Sectt.'s transparency directive are the right steps in this direction. However, the evidence indicates a deficit of both political and bureaucratic will to ensure compliance with this transparency requirement. The Central Government has not committed to developing a mechanism to monitor compliance despite being reminded twice in Parliament. Perhaps it is time to move the CIC again to issue a binding direction for establishing such a mechanism under the Cabinet Secretariat or the DoPT.CHRI trail of enquiry: RS Query- English | RS Query- Hindi | Compliance ChartPress: Dainik Bhaskar