SRI LANKA: An appeal to save the life of the young girl facing death sentence in Saudi Arabia
November 5, 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the NGO’s Collaborative Action to Put the National Human Rights Commission of Korea in its Place (NHRCK Watch), South Korea. ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement of resignation from Ms. Kyung-Ran MOON, former standing commissioner of the National Human Rights Commission of Korea. Asian Human Right...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement of resignation from Mr. Nam-Young YOU, Standing Commissioner of the National Human Rights Commission of Korea. Asian Human Rights Commis...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Steering group of the Right to Food Campaign. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sri Lanka guardian, written by Suriay Wikremasinghe. See the AHRC’s urgent appeal on Rizana Nafeek here. Asian Human Right...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Indo-Asian News Service (IANS). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from the Indo...The Asian Human Rights Commission urges the government of Sri Lanka to immediately enable the family of Rizana Nafeek to travel to Riyadh to participate in the proceedings of Rizana’s case. It i...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sri Lanka Guardian, written by Dr. Hatoon Ajwad AL FASSI (Ph.D). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong   ——...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from investigative journalist Allan Nairn regarding a secret Indonesian military report planning intelligence operations against civilians...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following news by AFP published in the Sydney Morning Herald. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A press release by AFP p...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Anjuman Mozareen Punjab. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Anjuman Mozareen Pu...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Korean civil society groups. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from the Korean ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following joint press release from the following organistions in Indonesia: ICJR, IDSPS, Imparsial, INFID, KontraS, ...Dear friends,   We wish to share with you the following article, A plea for Rizana Nafeek by Paula Fielding published in Arab News on November 5th, 2010.   Please also see the following Urge...Dear Friends,   The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward the following statement from the Thai Netizen Network requesting representatives to consider urgent amendment to Article...An article from Daily News and Sri Lanka Guardian forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission Save Rizana  By Malinda Senevitane It is the nature of the engagement that makes enemies and frien...A Statement from Alice Jay — Avaaz.org forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission IRAN: Tomorrow, Iran could execute Sakineh Ashtiani Our global outcry stopped her unjust stoning sentence in...We are forwarding two articles which appeared in the Arab News.Com relating to Rizana Nafeek who is facing the death sentence in Saudi Arabia. The first article is from a prominent citizen of Saudi ...PHNOM PENHI October 29 — The Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR) welcomes United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to Cambodia and urges her to show leadership by encouraging Cambod...ISLAMABAD Oct 31: The Pakistan Federal Union of Journalists (PFUJ) has expressed concern over non-arrest of officials of the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) who ruthlessly tortured and inflected more t...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367