JAPAN: Re-writing of history books
May 13, 2001
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The political detention of a Kyrgyz opposition parliamentarian, Mr. Azimbek Beknazarov, 47, has taken a turn for the worse with reports of him being brutally beaten while in prison. Hund...Dear Friends We are forwarding you an appeal from the highly respected Task Force Deteinees of the Philippines, regarding the torture of a fisherman in Cebu by the police of that region. Please read t...Dear Friends,  We are forwarding the following appeal by the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU) in South Korea for your urgent solidarity action.  The KCTU president, Mr. Dan Byung-ho, has ...Dear Friends, The following is an appeal for the release of a 35-year-old Tibetan ethno-musicologist, Mr. Ngawang Choephel, who is in prison on charges of espionage by the Chinese government. The Asia...Dear Friends, Regarding our earlier urgent appeal (28-08-2001) on the refugee crisis in Australia, we are forwarding the following appeal by Amnesty International in Australia for your urgent action. ...Dear Friends, We’re forwarding you the following appeal made by Beginning a Solidarity Electronically in the 21st Century (BASE21) in South Korea. After President Kim Dae-jung took office, the S...Dear Friends  We are forwarding the following appeal from the National Commission For Justice and Peace for your urgent action to try to stop the killing of Ayub Masih by the military government of P...Dear Friends Take a minute today or tomorrow to appeal for an end to caste discrimination! We are forwarding the following urgent appeal from the National Campaign for Dalit Human Rights (India). We h...Dear Friends We are forwarding you the following Urgent Appeal from Suaram, a highly respected human rights organisation in Malaysia. Yesterday, July 15th – marked 100 days since the government ...Dear Friends, Regarding continuous crackdown in Malaysia, we are forwarding the following appeal by SUARAM, one of prominent human rights group in Malaysia. Recently two student leaders were arrested ...PUBLIC AI Index: ASA 31/010/2001  UA 142/01 Prisoners of conscience 6 June 2001  NEPAL Yubaraj Ghimirey, editor-in-chief of the Kantipur  Binod Raj Gyawali, director of the Kantipur  Kailash Siroh...We are forwarding you an appeal from 12 Bishops of Japan, who are protesting the revision of history text-books. The newly approved texts give a positive view of Japan’s past, colonial invasion ...Dear Friends, We’re sending you following appeal made by Korean Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU) in South Korea. We urge you to draw your attention and to send protest letter to South Korean...We received the following Appeal from the National Campaign on Dalit Human Rights. Dalits (meaning ‘oppressed’) are the group of some 160 million people in India formerly known as ‘U...Dear Friends, We are forwarding you an appeal from WITNESS, a human rights monitaring NGO, based in New York, regarding the attacks on indigenous people in Mindanao, Philippines during recent months. ...HOTLINE ASIA  SPECIAL URGENT APPEALS  SUA010113(1): FREEDOM TO PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY AGAINST BLASPHEMY LAWS, RELEASE THE PEACEFUL PROTESTERS – PAKISTAN  January 13, 2001  SUMMARY  Fr. Arnold He...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is forwarding to you an appeal from the Center for Trade Union and Human Rights (CTUHR) calling for donations to flood victims. For more details,...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is forwarding to you an appeal from Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) – Mindanao regarding the harassment of a prominent Musli...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward an appeal from the Narmada Bachao Andolan. On 29 October, the evictees of the Narmada Dam Project started a two-day protest me...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) has received information from the Sarangbang Group for Human Rights in South Korea regarding the deaths of activists protesting against forced ev...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367