PAKISTAN: A teacher on death row
March 15, 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.WHEN someone claims to have been denied a fair hearing before the courts due to systemic flaws, I think of the golden “chain of justice” that has earned the Mughal emperor Jahangir a place in hist...A Statement from the Cambodia Civil Society forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission March 15, 2012 – We, the undersigned groups and individual members of civil society, are calling for ju...Almost three years after the end of the civil war, Sri Lanka is still dogged by allegations of human rights violations. Amid fresh moves in the UN’s Human Rights Council to hold Sri Lanka to acc...A Press Release from ‘Citizen’s Rights’ forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) The Resolution that is proposed to be taken up at the 19 Session of the UNHRC in Geneva ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Cross Culture Foundation (CrCF) and the Muslim Attorney Centre Foundation (MAC) reg...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from [Name of the Organisation/Media]. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...A Press Release from Cross Cultural Foundation and Muslim Attorney Centre Foundation forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) March 12, 2012 With the submission of an Open Letter no. 2 ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement written by a group of human rights activists published in Bintang Papua. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Colombo Telegraph, written by Sunalie Ratnayaka. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from La Via Campesina to the authorities in Sri Lanka. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong...Eighteen bloodied bodies, shot Gestapo-style, lay by the roadside. Men in army uniforms had stopped four buses bound from Rawalpindi to Gilgit, demanding that all 117 persons on board alight.Those wit...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following report published in Prothom Alo, a national Bangla language daily newspaper of Bangladesh, on 1 March 2012. The original story can be read at: ht...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following report published in New Age, a national English language daily newspaper of Bangladesh, on 1 March 2012. The original story can be read at: http:...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following report published in The Daily Star, a national English language daily newspaper of Bangladesh, on 1 March 2012. The original story can be read at:...Reporters Without Borders calls on all members of the Geneva-based United Nations Human Rights Council, which began its 19th session yesterday, to pass a resolution condemning the Sri Lankan governmen...In the past 5 months — October 2011 to February 2012 — there has been a disturbing rise in the number of abductions, especially in and around the capital, Colombo. Out of 29 abductions and...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Lanka E News, written by JC Weliamuna. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from the ...Jakarta/Brussels, 16 February 2012: Despite years of investment in community policing, the Indonesian police remain deeply distrusted by the people they are supposed to serve. Indonesia: The Deadly Co...เรียน ทุกท่าน เราปรารถนาที่จะแบ่งปันแถลงการณ์ร่วมโดยองค์กรสิทธิมนุษย...Contributors: Human Rights Lawyers Association (HRLA), Cross Cultural Foundation (CrCF), Union for Civil Liberty (UCL), Environmental Litigation and Advocacy for the Wants (EnLAW), Foundation of Musli...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367