PAKISTAN: Rains are indiscriminate&#8230; but what about the people?
September 5, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.A Press Release from the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR) forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) Today the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR), a non-aligned, independent, ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Muslim Attorney Center. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong A Statement from the Muslim Attorney Center forwarded by the As...“Land rights are the first building block on the road to achieving food security, and without international consensus on how land should be governed, the interests of vulnerable land users will ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the Steering group of the Right to Food Campaign to the Planning Commission of India. Asi...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Sindh Peoples Commission on Disaster Prevention and Management (SPCDPM). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong A Statement from S...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from India, written by Mr Vidhya Bhushan Rawat. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Mr V...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and Union for Civil Liberty (UCL) to Pri...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the Committee to Protect Journalists to the Prime Minister of Nepal, expressing concerns ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Awami Tahreek. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A ...An Article by J. C. Weliamuna forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission JC Weliamuna (Eisenhower Fellow, Senior Ashoka Fellow & Constitutional Lawyer) In legal and political literature, the ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Tamil National Alliance. ————- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AHRC-FST-046-2011 September 14, 2011 A Statement f...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Catholics in Alliance for the Common Good’s website, written by Father Thomas R. von Behren. Asian Human Rights Commission ...A Press Release from the Cambodian Centre for Human Rights forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) Press Release – Phnom Penh, 6 September 2011 Today, 6 September 2011, it was reported...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sunday Leader, written by Jamila Najmuddin. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong An article from the Sunday Leader forwarded b...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Human Rights Watch. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong A Press Release from Human ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Daily Mirror, written by Kelum Bandara. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from the...An article from Pakistan Today forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission By Amar Guriro A small classroom of third graders of a government primary school located in the outskirts of Tando Bagho t...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from The Express Tribune, written by Shamsul Islam. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- With Internation...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Human Rights Watch, Advocacy Forum, the International Commission of Jurists and Amnesty International. Asian Human Rights Commissio...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Reporters without Borders. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367