SAUDI ARABIA/SRI LANKA: Telephone Conversation with the Ministry of External Affairs Rizana Nafeek Director Middle East
July 27, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Defence of Human Rights Pakistan. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Defence of...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from The Sri Lanka Campaign for Peace and Justice. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong &...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from The Arab News, written by Mohammed Rasooldeen. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sunday Times. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong An article from the Sunday Times forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commis...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Jinnah Institute, written by Shehrbano Taseer. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from The Friday Forum. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————-...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Daily Times, Pakistan, written by Abdul Khalique Junejo. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An art...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from IPS, written by Ranmali Bandarage. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from IPS forwarde...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Guardian.co.uk, written by Tariq Ali. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Poem published by Guard...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the Steering group of the Right to Food Campaign to the Prime Minister of India and his C...A Press Release from HomeNet Pakistan and Labour Education Foundation forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) LAHORE, Aug 1: The government should recognise informal sector as a major co...Conditional cash transfer (CCTs) are a new buzzword in policy circles. The idea is simple: give poor people cash conditional on good behaviour such as sending children to school. This helps to score t...A Press Release from Journalists for Democracy in Sri Lanka forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) A top editor of the Jaffna-based ‘Uthayan’ newspaper has been brutally att...Mon, 25/07/2011 – 10:23 | by prachatai Elizabeth Fitzgerald According to the recent ruling of the Constitutional Court in relation to the case of Daranee Charnchoengsilpakul, the answer to this ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the Balawaristan National Front (BNF) to the President of Pakistan. Asian Human Rights Co...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Pakistan Peace Coalition. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following video from YouTube user Rohanlanka regarding updates in Rizana Nafeek’s. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Steering Committee of the Right to Food Campaign. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- The Ste...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from a coalition of Japanese NGOs to UN Special Rapporteurs regarding the human rights situati...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Vigil India Movement, written by Advocate. K. Pratap Reddy. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- The...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367