SRI LANKA: Concluding observations of the Committee against Torture
November 25, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.1. The families of conflict victims have been struggling for justice and truth for incidents of human rights violations committed during the armed conflict. Their organisations and the human rights co...Thousands of people have reportedly fled in terror from a large area in Paniai, West Papua as a massive combined Police and military offensive attacked villages on December 13, attempting to break arm...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Center for Victims of Torture-Nepal (CVICT). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kon...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Korean Public Interest Lawyers’ Group, GONG-GAM in South Korea. For more information, please contact GONG-GAM through email: ...Avinash Pandey L K Adavani is a toughie. I know, I could have added a ‘ji’ to his name, as the mainstream media does, but I cannot. The reason is simple. Whenever I think of him, what come to my m...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from Mrs. Sandya Eknaligoda to Mr. Joao Nataf, Secretary to the United Nations Committee again...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the International Dalit Solidarity Network. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the International Dalit Solidarity Network. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Council of Europe. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from Women Against Sexual Violence and State Repression to the Governor of Odisha state govern...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Committee against Torture at the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Asian Human Rights Commission...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sunday Leader, written by Raisa Wickrematunge. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article f...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Society for the Protection of the Rights of the Child (SPARC), written by Abdullah Khoso. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article written by the editor of Daily Times, Pakistan. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Dail...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the Turi Bangash tribes of Parachinar, writing to the National Assembly’s Standing ...The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, through his spokesperson Rupert Colville, issued a position statement in Geneva today, (October 12, 2011) concerning the death penalty in Saudi A...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Groundviews.org. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Groundviews.org forwarded b...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Aman ki Asha, written by Brian McMahon. For more information on this situation, please see this supplementary information. Asian Hum...President Mahinda Rajapaksa Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Temple Trees Colombo 3, Sri Lanka 31 October 2011 Dear President Rajapaksa, Reporters Without Borders, an international organizat...“I cannot answer and confused when people ask about the status of my child who was involuntary disappeared….” (Paian Siahaan, Father of Ucok Munandar Siahaan) Granting a Certificate ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367