THAILAND: Calling for observers for the inquest on motion to release activist Mr. Sombat Boonngamanong from Emergency Decree detention
July 2, 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Article 2. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Article 2 forwarded by the Asian Hum...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Mr. J.C. Weliamuna. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Mr. J.C. Weliamuna forwarde...To, The Legislature Secretary, Kerala Legislature Secretariat, Legislative Assembly Complex, Palayam, Trivandrum. Sir, Sub: Kerala Police Bill, 2010 – Notes and Comments for consideration by the Sel...2nd July 2010, court appoints inquest on motion to release activist Mr. Sombat Boonngamanong from emergency decree detention On 2nd July 2010 at 9.00 am, Criminal Court will hear inquest on motion to ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Mr. J.C. Weliamuna Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Mr. J.C. Weliamuna forwarded...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following extended version of an editorial that was published in the Hong Kong based South China Morning Post. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ̵...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Common...Dear Friends,   The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from MEDIAFREEDOMINSRILANKA.   Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong   ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Ahmar Masti Khan Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Ahmar Masti Khan forwarded by ...Human Rights Groups call on the Cambodian Government to Comply with the UN Torture Convention (25 June 2010, Phnom Penh), 26 June 2010 marks 23 years since the United Nations’ Convention against...Lahore, June 23, 2010: The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) has drawn the government’s attention to a United Nations expert’s report on targeted killings, including those through drone s...BRUSSELS (22 June 2010) – “Governments and international agencies urgently need to boost ecological farming techniques to increase food production and save the climate,” said UN Special ...June 25, 2010. Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) and relatives of political prisoners/detainees join the other members of UATC or the United Against Torture Coalition Philippines and the ...Muslim landowner offers to remove chains from 11-year-old boy if he converts to Islam WAZIRABAD, June 21 (CDN) — An 11-year-old Christian boy here is growing weak and ill from malnutrition from wor...(Friday 18th June 2010) On 2nd June 2010, Thailand’s Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva issued an order setting up a Special Centre to Suppress, Arrest and Prosecute Alien Workers Who Are Working ...Karachi, June 21: Her husband was Head Constable in Karachi Police and she was living peacefully enjoying life with her three children. She used to attend Sunday Services in local Church at Manzoor C...The Provincial Court of Narathiwat set the preliminary hearing on the case of Imam Yapha Kaseng at 09.00am on 2 September 2010 To determine if the case of the alleged torture to death of the Imam whil...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sri Lanka Guardian Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from the Sri Lanka Guardian f...In a historic decision the Delhi High Court ordered compensation for violation of constitutional and reproductive rights of two impoverished women. The judgment will have immense health policy implica...A Statement from International Crisis Group forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission —————————————— KYRGYZSTAN...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367