PAKISTAN: Supreme Court takes petition against Jirga system for regular hearing
March 19, 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Asian Federation Against Involuntary Disappearances. For inquiries, please contact to Ms. Mary Aileen Bacalso from the Asian Fe...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from The Express Tribune, written by Kamran Shafi. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from T...A Press Release from Freedom Against Censorship Thailand (FACT) forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) 16-04-12 You’re invited! Come to support Somyot Pruksakasemsuk on these upcoming...KARACHI, April 15, Sindh is characterized with skewed land holding pattern where small minority has got hold of the large chunks of agriculture land resulting in expanding of their power base and depr...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following joint statement from a group of Korean NGOs. For inquiries, please contact to Mr. Na Hyun Phil from Korean House for International Solidarity by e...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Lawyers for Democracy. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Lawyers for Democracy...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from Amnesty International to the Indonesian Minister of Justice and Human Rights. Asian Human...The Government of Assam has sent a 160 member-strong task force of forest officers to forcibly evict both the ‘encroachers’ and ‘other traditional forest dwellers’ living in the reserve forest...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward you the following statement from the mother of Premakumar Gunarathnam and his sister. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong &...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward you the following statement from the movement for people’s struggle and the Frontline Socialist party. Asian Human Rights...Salem News interviewed one of the exiled journalists of Sri Lanka. (CHENNAI / COLOMBO) – Nilantha Ilangamuwa is an ambitious young journalist purged by the government for his conviction to uphol...Lahore, April 02: The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) has highlighted the difficulties in verifying cases of enforced disappearance in Balochistan and urged all concerned to play their role...The Alliance of Media Organizations is disturbed by the recent wave of hate speeches and slanderous personal attacks directed against media personnel and human rights activists in the country, in the ...An article from Friday Times forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission Did the movement bring a fundamental change in the state and the society and the relationship between the two? Ayesha Siddiq...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from The Asia Foundation, written by Pema Abrahams on the shortcomings of the newly adopted NHRC Act. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong K...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from a group of Sri Lankan human rights defenders. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement fro...We Gwangju Prize for Human Rights Laureates remember Jeju Island in Korea as a peaceful island with beautiful scenery and tragic history. These days, however, the tearful crying of Jeju is echoing in ...We, the undersigned civil society organisations, are deeply disturbed by the threats faced by Mr. Herman Kumara of NAFSO and Mr. Aruna Nishantha Fernando of All Ceylon Fisher Folk Federation (ACFFF), ...A Press Release from National Commission on the Status of Women (NCSW), forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) A two-judge bench comprising Chief Justice Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry and ...WHEN someone claims to have been denied a fair hearing before the courts due to systemic flaws, I think of the golden “chain of justice” that has earned the Mughal emperor Jahangir a place in hist...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367