THAILAND: JPF and ICJ call for press and discussion on the Appeals Court judgment in the Somchai Neelapaijit case: &#8220;WAS JUSTICE DELIVERED?&#8221;
March 15, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sri Lanka Guardian, written by Basil Fernando. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article f...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following legal submission by the Attorney for the aggrieved party in the Kathri Arrachige case. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——̵...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Reporters Without Borders. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong A Press Release from...A Statement from a group of concerned media organisations in Sri Lanka forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission 24th March 2011 In view of insecurity created by a series of incidents in the afte...Statement of the Governing Council of the National Peace Council in regard to investigation being carried on it Last week, the Executive Director of the National Peace Council was called to the headqu...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Human Rights Watch. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Human Rights Watch forwa...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Justice for Peace Foundation (JPF) and International Commission of Jurists (ICJ). Asian...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Pakistan Peace Coalition. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Cross Culture Foundation (CrCF). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Cross Cultu...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Justice for Peace Foundation (JPF). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —R...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Jakarta Post written by Moh Yasir Alimi. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Jakart...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from SPARC, written by Salam Dharejo, Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from SPARC forwarded by t...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Prachatai website, written by Mr. Pokpong Lawansiri. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An art...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Posco Pratirodh Sangram Samiti (PPSS). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —&...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Pakistan Peace Council. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Pakistan Peace Counc...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the civil groups in India. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong A Statement from the civil groups in India forwarded by the Asia...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Food First Information and Action Network (FIAN) International. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from a Group of Papuan Church Leaders. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from a Group of...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Ashoka Pakistan, written by Mr. Amir Murtaza. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong An article from Ashoka Pakistan forwarded by th...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Cambodian Center for Human Rights. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —&...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367