USA/PAKISTAN: Temporary protected status for Pakistani nationals in the United States of America
September 13, 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following statement release from the Cross Culture Foundation (CrCF) regarding the incident of the brutal killing of...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Cambodian Center for Human Rights. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —&...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the NGO Federation of Nepal, at the occasion of the review of the Millennium Developmen...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Justice for Peace Foundation (JPF). The press release is for observers at the readi...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from INSEC, Informal Sector Service Centre, a leading Nepalese human rights NGO, at the occa...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from ASHOKA Pakistan , written by Mr. Amir Murtaza. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the civil groups of South Korea to the Chairperson of the Meena Gupta Committee of India....Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Judge Soliman M. Santos, Jr. of the 9th Municipal Circuit Trial Courts (MCTC) in Nabua-Bato, Camarines Sur. Judge Santos is the for...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Free Media Movement. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———&...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Steering group of the Right to Food Campaign. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from PFUJ. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Press Rel...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from Pak American Lawyers for Civil and Legal Rights to the President of the United States of ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Sri Lanka Campaign. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AHRC-FST-073-20...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Steering Committee of Net Working for Rights (NfR) — Sri Lanka. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the civil group in India. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from the civil group in...A Press Release from Mr. Abbas Butt Chairman, Kashmir National Party forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) (September 9, 2010) Kashmir National Party leaders Abbas Butt and Dr Shabir C...A Statement from the Steering group of the Right to Food Campaign forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission The Right to Food Campaign is shocked at the Prime Minister’s statement made to t...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Suriya Wickremasinghe. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Suriya Wickremasinghe...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Mr. Shoaib Habib Memon. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Mr. Shoaib Habib Memon ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from a group of Sri Lankan citizens. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from a group of S...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367