PAKISTAN: Killing of human rights defender Ms Perveen Rehman
March 16, 2013
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Wednesday, 03 April 2013 02:34 The Attorney General is reported to be collecting statistics on incidents of rape and child abuse. Though this has come a little too late it is commendable. We are sad t...An article from The Sunday Times forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission Kishali Pinto Jayawardena With a foreign policy in tatters, the judiciary and the legal system in deep crisis and the st...Dear friends,  We wish to share with you the full text of the speech of former Supreme Court Judge C. V. Wigneswaran at the 39th Annual Convocation of BASL. Asian Human Rights Commission  Hong Kong ...A Statement from the United Nations forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission GENEVA (29 March 2013) – A group of United Nations independent human rights experts today called on all parties in ...The Law Society of Hong Kong notes the Court of Final Appeal (“CFA”) published its judgment (“Judgment”) in the case of Vallejos Evangeline Banao and Domingo Daniel L. v. Commi...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) is forwarding an appeal about the ongoing illegal detention of an ailing man. The police illegally arrested and detained the victim, an Arabic te...Somchai Neelapaijit Memorial Fund, Justice for Peace Foundation, Towards Ecological Recovery and Regional Alliances (TERRA), Amnesty International Thailand will host a panel discussion entitled “Hum...19 มีนาคม 2556 เรื่อง ขอเชิญเข้าร่วมเวทีเสวนา เรียน สื่อมวลชน และผู้ที่สนใจ ...A 14-day caravan launched on March 1 at the Al-Manzar downstream Kotri, Jamshoro located at the bank of River Indus culminated at its last destination in Islamabad on March 14, 2013 to mark the  Inte...On the occasion of the 45th anniversary of the Jabidah massacre, the Mindanao Peoples Caucus calls upon the Bangsamoro people to unite  and close ranks at this most critical stage of their political ...An article from The Sunday Times forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission As family members of a murdered ruling party politician travelled to Geneva this week to lay their case for denial of ju...A Press Release from Front Line Defenders forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) On 13 March 2013, human rights defender Ms Perveen Rehman was shot and killed by armed motorcyclists, ...Countless individuals accused of apostasy and blasphemy face threats, imprisonment, and execution. Blasphemy laws in over 30 countries and apostasy laws in over 20 aim primarily to restrict thought, e...The Lawyers Collective learns that Chief Justice Shirani Bandaranayake has been summoned to appear before the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (Bribery Commission), on 18...10 มีนาคม 2556 เรียน    ท่านนายกรัฐมนตรี นางสาวยิ่งลักษณ์ ชินวัตร ดิฉัน นางอั...Her Excellency, the Prime Minister, Ms. Yingluck Shnawatra Dear Madam Prime Minister, My name is Angkhana Neelapaijit, wife of Mr. Somchai Neelapaijit, a human rights lawyer who had given legal aid to...The Office of UN Human Rights Council, Civil Society Section, Geneva. Switzerland Letter to the UNHRC in Support of North and East Christian Clergy Sri Lanka Dear Sir / Madam, We the undersigned indiv...Oxford HR is working with Amnesty International (AI) to recruit a Regional Growth Coordinator (Asia Pacific). For the past 50 years AI has brought people together to fight for human rights. Their aim ...NfR, a network of Sri Lankan journalists and human rights defenders, expresses its strongest indignation to the Government of Sri Lanka for its dastardly act of blocking Tamil civilians travelling to ...We reproduce below the press release issued by the Bar Human Rights Committee of England and Wales (BHRC) on a report by Geoffrey Robertson QC on the impeachment of the Chief Justice, Dr. Shirani Band...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367