INDIA: The treatment of Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) children in Madhya Pradesh &#8212; Suggestions for the policy
June 8, 2009
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the University Teachers For Human Rights Â– UTHR J (Jaffna ) Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An...The following represents the considered view of professors at colleges and universities throughout North America whose thoughts are with Korea and Korea’s democracy. In light of recent developme...Dear Friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from a Group of Concerned Tamils of Sri Lanka. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from aÂ...Greetings from Right to Food Campaign Madhya Pradesh Group! Right to Food Campaign Madhya Pradesh Support Group is an alliance of civil society organizations and peopleÂ’s organizations working across...Greetings from Right to Food Campaign Madhya Pradesh Group! Right to Food Campaign Madhya Pradesh Support Group is an alliance of civil society organizations and peopleÂ’s organizations working across...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Universal Periodic Review Forum of Bangladesh, a coalition of 17 human rights, womenÂ’s rights, labour and indigenous peopleÂ’s...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from D.B.S. JeyerajÂ’s website. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from D.B.S. JeyerajÂ’s We...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the State Enterprise Workers Relations Confederation, Thailand (SERC) on submission of ILO complaint regarding systematic discrimin...(This statement by the Chief Justice was aired with Tamil translation Wednesday night in MTV News bulletin). Vanni IDPs sheltered in transit centres in Cheddiku’lam cannot expect justice under t...The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) is convinced that the cost of the insurgency in the Malakand Division has been increased manifold by the short sightedness and indecisiveness of the non-...Reporters Without Borders/Reporters sans frontieres 2 June 2009 Reporters Without Borders is outraged by an assault on Poddala Jayantha, the secretary-general of the Sri Lanka Working Journalists Asso...Summary: 28 May 2009, Geneva – The European Union regrets that it was not possible for the Human Rights Council to agree on an acceptable outcome of the Special Session addressing the serious hu...The resolution is a fundamentally partial and politicised response to a human rights and humanitarian crisisÂ», said Souhayr Belhassen, President of FIDH. The text was drafted by the government of Sri...at the Human Rights Council Special Session on the human rights situation in Sri Lanka forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission SRI LANKA: Message to HR Council by High Commissioner 26 May 2009 ...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Thai Netizen Network (TNN) under Computer-related Crime Act of B.E.2550. For furthe...(New York, May 26, 2009) Â– The Pakistani authorities should immediately lift a 24-hour curfew in place since May 18 in the Swat valley and adjoining areas of the Malakand Division of Pakistan’s...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Union of PeoplesÂ’ Lawyers in Mindanao (UPLM). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement fr...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following public statement from the Working Group on Justice for Peace (WGJP). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Ko...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Amnesty International. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Amnesty International...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Amnesty International. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Amnesty International...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367