INDIA: Attack on John P Abraham, and Adivasis Tribal People
April 10, 2003
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear Friends The Anwar Appeal The oral judgments of the Court of Appeal dismissing Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim¡¯s and Sukma Darmawan¡¯s appeals against the decisions of High Court Judge Arifin Jaka¡...Dear Friends Disappeared Persons in Kashmir Parvez Imroz The Association of Parents of Disappeared Persons, since its formation in 1994, has been campaigning against Enforced or Involuntary Disappeara...Dear Friends Thomas Hundall, a 22 yr old British Human Rights activist, was shot dead by Israeli soldiers in the Gaza Strip while defending some Palestinian children by standing between them and IDF t...Dear Friends, INDIA: Attack on John P Abraham and Adivasis Tribal People We need your help to prevent any further personal attack on John P Abraham, and to show solidarity with his cause to help the a...Dear Friends, Support Religious Freedom in India We need your help to prevent the loss of religious freedom in Gujarat. Please support religious freedom in India and fax a letter of concern today. Tha...Dear Friends, The following is a forwarded appeal from Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDF) regarding a shooting incident in the city of Panabo on Mindanao Island in the Philippines on Jan. ...Dear Friends, The following is a forwarded appeal from the Commission for Disappearances and Victims of Violence in Aceh (KONTRAS-ACEH) regarding the attack of Indonesian troops on Jan. 9, 2003, again...Dear Friends, For your attention, we are forwarding you the following appeal from the Christian Solidarity Worldwide (CSW) in Hong Kong, regarding the Burmese troops’ attack against the Karen (o...Dear Friends, The following is a forwarded appeal from the People’s Solidarity for Participatory Democracy (PSPD) in Seoul regarding the deaths of two Korean schoolgirls and the ongoing protests...Dear Friends, The following is a forwarded appeal from Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) regarding cases of physical assault and fire shoot to civilians by the army. According to TFDP, th...Dear Friends, The following is a forwarded appeal from Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) regarding a case of harassment of a human rights activist. According to the following urgent appea...Dear Friends, We are forwarding you the following urgent appeal issued by SUARAM, a highly respected human rights organization in Malaysia, regarding the release of political prisoners held under the ...Dear Friends, The following is an urgent appeal from the Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (Forum-Asia), based in Bangkok, regarding the crackdown on dissidents and pro-democracy activists ...Dear Friends, Following is the forwarded appeal from Amnesty International (AI) that needs your urgent action regarding the death penalty in the Philippines. The death penalty is denial of the most fu...Dear Friends, We are forwarding you the following urgent appeal from the Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (Forum-Asia) based in Bangkok. We are concerned that the Thai authorities plan to ...Dear Friends, The following is a forwarded appeal sent by the Citizens¡¯ Alliance for North Korean Human Rights (NKHR) based in South Korea regarding the incident in which the Chinese police entered...Dear Friends, The most basic of all human rights is the right to life. Nobody can be denied this right by their own government. A government that applies the death penalty – such as the Philippi...Dear Friends,  We are forwarding you an appeal from Amnesty International (AI) regarding the death penalty issued in Mr. Hsu Tzu-chiang’s case in Taiwan.  According to the information received, Mr...Dear Friends,  We are forwarding you an appeal from the South Asia Forum for Human Rights (SAFHR) based in Nepal regarding the arbitrary detention and torture of Dr. Mohiuddin Khan Alamgir.  Accordi...Dear Friends,  In the aftermath of the savage violence in the Indian state of Gujarat, many of the survivors and families of the victims are in a desperate situation. Most of them are suffering from ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367