PHILIPPINES: Arrest and detention of human rights defender Mr Temogen Tulawie
January 17, 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Park Jeonggeun could face seven years in jail after tweeting about Kim Jong-il © Private The South Korean authorities should immediately release a social media activist accused of helping “the ...Contributors: Human Rights and Development Foundation (HRDF), Cross-Cultural Foundation (CrCF), Campaign Committee for Human Rights (CCHR), Human Rights Lawyers Association (HRLA) and Environmental Li...A Pakistani Christian from HK To, The International Christian community, churches and Organizations, Subject: – The Future of Pakistani Christians. Dear Brothers and Sisters, I, a Pakistani Chri...”Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?” (Who will guard the guardians themselves), said the Roman poet Juvenal in his “Satires” [i]. The phrase has lasted through centuries and cited in dif...Government has to Take on Military and Intelligence Services and end Impunity  (New York, January 30, 2012) – The Pakistani government should redouble efforts to find the killers of the journalist ...The Attorney General had informed the Supreme Court that steps were being taken by the Police Department to gazette the regulations covering the rights of Attorneys-at-Law to represent their clients a...On January 26, 2012, the former OIC of Polpithigama Police was convicted under the torture Act by the High Court of Kurunegala. Wijeratne, the former OIC of Polpithigama Police Station, was sentenced ...The on-going disagreement between the National and International Co-Investigating Judges at the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) over the appointment of Judge Laurent Kasper-Ans...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following editorial published by the Daily Star, an English-speaking national daily newspaper of Bangladesh, on 17 January 2012. The original editorial can ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Front Line Defenders regarding the case of Temogen “Cocoy” Tulawie. You can...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Transcurrents, written by Kishali Pinto Jayawardene. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following editorial published by the Daily Star, an English-speaking national daily newspaper of Bangladesh, on 15 January 2012. The original editorial can ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement published by the Daily Star, an English-speaking national daily newspaper of Bangladesh, on 14 January 2012. The statement can be availa...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the Malaysian Support Group for Democracy in Thailand on behalf of Mr. Somyot Pruksakasem...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Philippine Daily Inquirer, written by University of the Philippines (UP) Professor Raul C. Pangalangan. Asian Human Rights Commis...Think Centre Human Rights Defender Award 2011 http://www.thinkcentre.org/article.cfm?ArticleID=3107 Jolovan Wham — Executive Director of HOME (Humanitarian Organisation for Migration Economics) ...On 29 December 2011, Mr Choung Chou-Ngy was charged under Article 565 of the 2009 Criminal Code of the Kingdom of Cambodia (the “Penal Code”) — “Provision of Means for Escape...The car owned by Mahesh Kumar, the former President of Press Club Hyderabad was attacked by three motor-cyclists while Mahesh was inside the club building on New Year’s Eve around 11:30 p.m. Securit...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Radio Australia. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Radio Australia forwarded by t...The citation read at the NIA presentation recognizing the unyielding integrity, personal commitment and courage of J C Weliamuna, former Executive Director – TISL & Director – Transparency Int...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367