BANGLADESH: Victims of custodial torture cry for justice in a public trial
June 28, 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.เรียน ทุกท่าน คณะกรรมาธิการสิทธิมนุษยชนแห่งเอเชีย (Asian Human Rights Commission: AHRC) ปรารถน...For immediate release on 27 July 2012 On Wednesday 25 July 2012 at 15.00, a bomb exploded on the road between Ban Upao and Ban Pakasamae, Moo 7, Tambon Wangphya, Raman District, Yala. The bloody trap ...The death in custody of Mr. Kiattisak Thitboonkhrong as a result of police’s detention at Muang Kalasin Police Station 30 July 2012, 09.00 am, at Courtroom no. 913, Bangkok Criminal Court On 30 July...Phnom Penh, 27 July 2012 — The Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC) and the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR) condemn the disruption of a training session on land ri...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Babar Ayaz’a Weblog, written by Babar Ayaz. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- Mixing of rel...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Law & Society Trust. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from the Law & S...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the Secretariat of Right to Food Campaign of India to the Prime Minster of India. Asian H...Responding to the threats exerted by the Cabinet Minister Rishad Badurdeen on the Mannar Magistrate (Mr. A. Judeson), the Lawyers for Democracy (LFD) urges the President to remove the said Minister wi...Today, in the presence of the thousands of oustees, the Narmada Jal Satyagraha of the Omkareshwar dam oustees, commenced in Village Ghogalgaon. At the commencement of the satyagraha, thousands of oust...Another round of elections has been fixed and the country is turned into election mode. Elections are said to be a benchmark of democracy, and then why are we bothered when more and more elections are...ENG : http://en.rsf.org/sri-lanka-interview-with-editor-who-was-12-07-2012,43016.html FRA : http://fr.rsf.org/sri-lanka-interview-de-la-journaliste-12-07-2012,43015.html SRI LANKA Reporters Without Bo...Sri Lanka x news journalist Shantha Wijesooriya addressed a written complaint to the IGP yesterday (8) in connection with an attempt to abduct him made by a group last Wednesday (5) who are suspected ...Shantha Wijesooriya, an investigative web journalist attached to srilankaxnews.com freed himself after a scuffle with his abductors, when they tried to bundle him into a vehicle in broad daylight in N...The undersigned organisations have strongly condemned the Rakhine National Development Party (RNDP) for revitalizing ‘apartheid’ in Burma against the Muslim Rohingyas of Arakan. In its statement d...According to the report of the Red Cross Organization , the number of persons gone missing under the Rajapakse Government until 2011, is over 15000. Among those 15780 persons who went missing, the maj...Reporters Without Borders is relieved that the eight SriLankaMirror and SriLankaXNews journalists and an office assistant arrested on 29 June were released the next day by Judge Kosala Senadheera of C...Dr. Devaka Weerakoon, Media Spokesman/FUTA FUTA is dismayed by the statements issued by the University Grants Commission (UGC) and the CVCD (Committee of Vice Chancellors and Directors) on the trade u...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following articles from the New Age, sent by ODHIKAR of Bangladesh. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A news report and ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following joint press release to the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand regarding the release of Somyot Prueksakasemsuk, a labour activist in Thailan...Press Release — International Day in Support of Victims of Torture Phnom Penh, June 26, 2012 Seven leading civil society organizations will mark the United Nations International Day in Support o...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367