CAMBODIA: The Venerable Luon Sovath
October 13, 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Justice for Peace Foundation, Thailand, concerning a criminal case that police have brought against a victim of alleged torture...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the Cambodia Center for Human Rights to the United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon....Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following joint statement from the Cambodian Human Rights Action Committee and others. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————-...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from The State Enterprise Workers Relations Confederation (SERC), the Thai Labour Solidarity...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the People of Narmada Valley and the National Alliance of People’s Movement, to the...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from The Cambodian Center for Human Rights. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —&...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Professor Angana Chatterji on Kashmir. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Professo...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the POSCO Pratirodh Sangram Samthi and the Environment Support Group. Asian Human Right...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from www.asianews.it/news-en, written by Jibran Khan. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article fro...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Journalists for Democracy in Sri Lanka. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Jour...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from LICADHO The Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement and joint letter from the International Crisis Group, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong K...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from LICADHO The Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following joint statement from Cambodian Human Rights Action Committee (CHRAC) and others. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———R...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sri Lanka Guardian. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong   ————- An article from Sri Lanka Guardi...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from LICADHO The Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sri Lanka Guardian. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from The Sri Lanka Guardian ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Citizens for Democracy. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Citizens for Democra...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Human Rights Commission of Pakistan. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Human R...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from Steering Committee of the NGO Coalition for the OP-ICESCR to the governments of countries...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367