INDONESIA: Third Commission of Indonesian Parliament should force Attorney General to conduct investigation
February 12, 2007
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.CIVIL MONITORING COMMISSION (CMC) Monitoring involuntary Disappearances, Abductions, Extra Judicial Killings, Extortionsand Arbitrary arrests and detentions in Sri Lanka #72 Bankshall Street Colombo 1...The AHRC forwards a reflection on the current workings of some sections of the Sri Lankan media in relation to a recent case involving a head of the international non-governmental organisation (INGO) ...From: RSF ASIA <asie@rsf.org> Subject: SRI LANKA: Army said to be holding Tamil journalist who 23 March 2007 Following the police chief’s recent admission that the security forces have bee...It has been eight years since the so-called ‘reformation’ was launched. It has also been eight years since extraordinary human rights abuse have nearly been forgotten. Regimes come and go,...FORUM-ASIA has joined with the African Centre for Democracy and Human Rights Studies, Amnesty International (AI), the Association for the Prevention of Torture (APT), the Centre on Housing Rights and ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following statement from the editorial board of Maubima, a Sunday newspaper. Some of their staff are alleged to have...”  Representatives of the four religions and civil society groups spoke of the need for a political solution rather than a military solution.  In addition, Ambassadors from Norway, the United ...I am given to understand that the International Bar Association (IBA) will hold its Annual Conference in Singapore from 14-19 October this year. While I would very much like to welcome you to my count...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press statement by Professor Philip Alston, Special Rapporteur of the United Nations Human Rights Council ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following statement from PREDA, PHILIPPINES: Harvesting the body parts of the poor is sinful exploitation. Asian Hum...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following statement issued by Reporters without Borders (RSF ASIA) – Tamil newspapers correspondent goes missi...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you a report: CPA on Commission of Inquiry and IIGEP which appeared in the Nation, February 11, 2007. Asian Human Rights Com...Jakarta, 12 February 2007 The victims and family of the victims of human rights gross violation s cases and KontraS, IKOHI, Demos and Imparsial urge the Third Commission of Parliament to take urgent m...11th February 2007 Odhikar From 12 January to 10 February 2007 during the total 29 persons have been reportedly killed and 52027 persons have been arrested. Of the 29 people killed by law enforc...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following statement which appeared in the Phnom Penh Post:  AHRC Fernando: “rule of law in Cambodia is being ...Scholars At Risk (SAR), an international network of universities and colleges dedicated to promoting academic freedom and its constituent freedoms of thought, opinion and expression -freedoms essentia...The following report appeared in the BBC Sinhala Service on February 5, 2007 No suspects arrested six months after the murder of 17 aid workers A Paris based charity has called on Sri Lanka government...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the statement issued by Migrant CARE on the “19 Indonesian Migrant Workers facing death penalty abroad”. Asian H...Sri Lanka Area: 65,610 sq. km. Population: 20,743,000. Languages: Sinhala,Tamil, English. Head of state: Mahinda Rajapakse. Sri Lanka – Annual report 2007 The resumption of the civil war had dra...Why reluctance on the part of Indonesia to address the past human rights abuses? The Commission for Disappeared and Victims of Violence (Kontras) and the Indonesian Association of Families of the Disa...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367