THAILAND: Thai government should revoke policies that discriminate against and violate the rights of migrant workers &#8211; ASEAN states should join migrant convention
December 17, 2010
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Cross Culture Foundation (CrCF) in Thailand. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- Seven years ...เรียนทุกท่าน เราปรารถนาจะส่งต่อแถลงกาณ์จาก มูลนิธิยุติธรรมเพื่อสันติ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from UCANEWS. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong   ————- A Statement from UCANEWS forwarded by the Asi...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from UCANEWS. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong   ————- A Statement from UCANEWS forwarded by the Asi...Dear friends,   We wish to share with you the following statement from UCANEWS.   Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong   ————- A Statement from UCANEWS forwar...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from 26 Human Rights Organisations. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE   A...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following statement released by Human Rights Lawyers Association (HRLA), Union of Civil Liberties (UCL), Campaign Co...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following statement released by the State Enterprises Workers’ Relations Confederation (SERC), the Human Rights an...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Pakistan Institute of Labour and Research (PILER). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Stat...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Bahrain Human Rights Monitor. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Bahrain Human ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from Baloch Human Rights Council (UK). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——-...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from The Huffington Post, written by Rebecca Buckwalterpoza. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An arti...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from International Dalit Solidarity Network. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Inte...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from a group of Cambodian NGOs on the 62nd anniversary of the Human Rights Day. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from a group of Cambodia NGOs. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the Baloch Human Rights Council (UK) to the Rt Hon. David Cameron. Asian Human Rights Com...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following Appeal to the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for Human Rights by the NGO’s Collaborative Action to Put the Na...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Islamic Human Rights Commission. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following Joint Statement by Law Professors and Lawyers Urging for the Resignation of Hyun Byung Chul, Chief Commissioner of the National Human Rights Commi...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the International Coalition against Enforced Disappearances. Asian Human Rights Commiss...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367