THAILAND: Calling the National Council for Peace and Order to Review the Measures for Controlling Migrant Workers and Prevent Economic Effects and Human Security
June 17, 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Statement of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in Myanmar Yangon International Airport, Myanmar, 26 July 2014 Introduction: Good evening and thank you all for coming today. I hav...Adding to a series of unconstitutional restrictions placed on the legitimate activities of the Non-Governmental Organizations, the Director General of the Department of External Resources (DGDER) has ...French philosopher Michel Foucault, in his book Madness and Civilization, reveals the other side of madness. He links our narrow understanding of madness with the development of civilization, emphasiz...by Kishali pinto jayawardena The Government’s boast this week that the Colombo High Court’s conviction of a local authority chairman and three of his henchmen for the 2012 Christmas Eve murder of ...The Singapore Working Group on the Death Penalty Statement on executions carried out on the 18th of July 2014. The Singapore Working Group on the Death Penalty deeply regrets, and is gravely disappoin...Mr. Upul Jayasuriya, the President of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka has been followed by an unidentified group (a motor bicycle and a three wheeler)  today (15th July 2014) for  hours. Mr Jayasur...by Dipendra Jha Courtesy : Kathmandu Post  A cartoon depicting the face of the Chief Justice hovering above a coconut tree was published on 6 November 1996 in the weekly newspaper “Bimarsa̶...‘Lawyers for Democracy’ is dismayed at the appointment of Major General (Rtd) G. A. Chandrasiri as the Governor of the Northern Province disregarding repeated calls by the Chief Minister of the No...An article from the ‘The Island’ forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission by Maheen Senanayake “No man has a natural right to commit aggression on the equal rights of another.” ...Social Online Posting Claimed as a Breach of His Terms of Release Previously, Mr. Thanapol Eawsakul was summoned to report himself as per the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO)’s announ...Attached Communication was issued under the hand of the Director of National Secratariat of NGOs, an arm of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) recently. The MoD does not enjoy any specific legal authority ...A statement from the Friday Forum, Colombo, Sri Lanka forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission There have been several news reports recently about a surge of instances of baby elephants taken il...The Human Rights and Development Foundation (HRDF) has been providing legal representation to Air, an ethnic Karen girl who has filed a case against her former employers for inflicting on her cruel tr...The UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Cambodia, Professor Surya P. Subedi, on Tuesday ended his 11th fact-finding mission to Cambodia, noting progress in some human rights area...The Friday Forum has urged the Inspector General of Police to respond as a matter of urgency to the current public concern, including that of the Bar Council, on the deaths that are taking place in po...ตามที่ปรากฏว่า น.ส. กริชสุดาคุณะแสน ถูกควบคุมตัวตั้งแต่วันที่ 28 พฤษภาคม 2...On 28 May 2014, Ms. Kritsuda Khunasen was taken from Chonburi province by police and soldiers and has been under detention since then. No one has been able to contact her while she has been in detenti...For the third time, torture victims Raymond Manalo and Oscar Leuterio asked the Ombudsman to resolve the case of kidnapping, arbitrary detention, torture, physical injuries, threat and involuntary ser...The writer is the Pakistani Executive Director of the Center for Research and Security Studies, a think tank established in 2007, and an Islamabad-based freelance columnist. There are only 14 million ...The National Council for Peace and Order  (NCPO) has seized the power since 22nd May 2014. Now it is almost a month that the NCPO has issued many orders and announcements, as of 16 June 2014,  there...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367