SRI LANKA: The Mahanayaka theras have called President Mahinda Rajapaksa to withdraw the Impeachment Motion against Chief Justice Shirani Bandaranayake.
November 29, 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Asian Tribune, written by Tisaranee Gunasekara. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sunday Times, Colombo, Sri Lanka, written by Kishali Pinto Jayawardena. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward you the following statement from the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —&...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward you the following letter from Mr. S.L. Gunasekara, Attorney-at-Law. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——̵...We the undersigned, strongly condemn the arrest of four students of the University of Jaffna (UoJ) by the Terrorism Investigation Department (TID) on Thursday, November 29, 2012. While welcoming the r...Today the Chief Justice of Sri Lanka Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake walked out of the Parliamentary Select Committee in protest in the face of hostile and biased conduct of the government members of the PS...Pakistan’s first political party is PPP, which has governed country, first time, continuously for last five years. What nation got in continuous rule of a vibrant political party? Nothing. We h...Lack of public awareness is one the major reason of absence of watchful oversight of citizens on their rights, issues and concerned authorities. It has been appropriately said that informed citizenry ...No influence from the politician to judicial system and independence to judicial system Rev/ Your Excellency/ Dear Sir/ Madam, You are aware, that a notice of an impeachment resolution signed by appro...Standing orders protect the judge during proceedings of the PSC and if found guilty, then the proceedings would be published. Otherwise it will not be published (Standing Order 78A(8)). The purpose of...Noting with grave concern that the impeachment proceedings initiated against Her Ladyship the Chief Justice would inevitably lead to an irreparable loss of confidence and public respect of the judici...This week, a committed New Delhi based civil rights advocate and incidentally a good friend, observed in a dispassionate aside to an otherwise entirely different conversation in that country that ‘t...His Excellency the President Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka Temple Trees Colombo 3 Your Excellency, Importance of avoiding apprehension in the minds of the people in dispensing law and jus...The Supreme Court (SC) is now possessed with several cases where the Court is constitutionally bound to interpret the constitution and to determine the constitutionality of the Standing Order 78A, tha...(The Asian Human Rights Commission welcomes this Press Release by Change.org announcing the petition to support the nomination of Malala Yusufzai for the Nobel Peace Prize) Prime Minister Harper decla...The Society for the Protection of the Rights of Child (SPARC), on the occasion of   Universal Children’s Day, urges for the “Implementation of UNCRC and ratification of Optional protocol...Representatives of the leading parliamentary parties and civil society bodies have called for land reforms to get rid of the country’s colonial economic power structure. They urged political parties...The Commonwealth Lawyers Association (CLA), the Commonwealth Legal Education Association (CLEA) and the Commonwealth Magistrates’ and Judges’ Association (CMJA) are concerned about the rec...Bal Thackerey is no more. His funeral attracted lakhs of people. Mumbai remained shut for so many days. It is time to sit and ponder over what really is the legacy of Sena. The champion of Hindu Natio...Our story is simple. We believe that enormous imbalance in political power sustains intense and widespread oppression. The threat of being deprived of food and shelter is a form of imposed violence th...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367