SRI LANKA: Make the Impeachment Boomerang on the Rajapaksas
November 10, 2012
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Lawyers for Democracy (LfD), raises serious concerns with the process that has commenced to impeach the Chief Justice of Sri Lanka, Hon. Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake. The impeachment follows in the wake ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sunday Times, Colombo, Sri Lanka, written by Kishali Pinto Jayawardena Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——R...No questioning arises from subservient lips”. Andrée Chedid (For Rushdie) Ideally Chief Justice Shirani Bandaranaike would have prevented her husband from accepting Rajapaksa largesse; ideally. Ide...Commonwealth Secretary-General Kamalesh Sharma today expressed concern about the recent move by the Parliament of Sri Lanka to impeach the country’s Chief Justice, Dr Shirani Bandaranayake. Spea...Phnom Penh, 15 November 2012 — The Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC) expresses its condemnation at the arrest today of eight community activists in Thmar Kaul Village, Po Se...The impeachment process against Sri Lankan Chief Justice Shirani Bandaranayake must follow international standards of due process says the International Commission of Jurists. “Many people in Sr...GENEVA (14 November 2012) – The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers, Gabriela Knaul, today expressed serious concerns about reported intimidation and atta...CCHR Freedom of Expression Alert – Phnom Penh, 14 November 2012 According to a public announcement by the Civil Society Committee (the “Committee”) of ASEAN Civil Society Conference/ASEA...Saturday evening a traumatized friend tried to describe cold blooded murder witnessed at sunset outside his home in Gulshan Iqbal. A young man carrying a piece of cloth on his shoulder was calmly shot...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sunday Times, Colombo, Sri Lanka, written by Kishali Pinto Jayawardena Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article written by Tisaranee Gunasekara who is a Sri Lankan columnist based in Colombo Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——̵...The series of events which are naked attacks on the rule of law and the independence of the judiciary in the recent past are well recorded.  These events culminated in the unprecedented action of the...For the third time in 30 years, Members of Parliament have launched impeachment proceedings against a Chief Justice of Sri Lanka setting the stage for a crucial struggle for the preservation of indepe...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article written by Tisaranee Gunasekara who is a Sri Lankan columnist based in Colombo Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sunday Times, Colombo, Sri Lanka, written by Kishali Pinto Jayawardena Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from Citizens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) to the Ambassador of Vietnam in Cambodia. CCHR...West Papuan flag unfurled – Arrest for breach of the peace President accused: War crimes in West Papua & East Timor London – 1 November 2012 The State Visit to the UK of Indonesian Pre...The Aurat Foundation is spearheading efforts in Pakistan as part of a global campaign called One Billion Rising (OBR) to end violence against women. The call for One Billion Rising campaign has bee...The Sri Lankan government must immediately cease its assault on the independence of the judiciary, the International Commission of Jurists said in a new report released today. The 158-page report, Aut...‘An independent judiciary functions as a critical institutional mechanism providing a check and balance on the executive and legislative branches of a democratic society. The independence of thi...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367