INDONESIA: Intelligence bill drafting
April 7, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Asian NGO Network on National Human Rights Institutions (ANNI). Asian Human Rights ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from CatholicHerald.co.uk , written by Nasir Saeed. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- FAn article from...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Human Rights Commission of Pakistan. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the POSCO Pratirodh Solidarity (PPS-Delhi) and other civil society groups. Asian Human ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Centre for Legal Aid assistance and settlement (CLAAS). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- FOR I...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from National Trade Union Federation, Pakistan, written by Mr. Nasir Mansoo. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from The Daily Times, Pakistan written by Dr. Haider Shah Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sunday Leader, written by Raisa Wickrematunge. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article f...A Statement from National Commission on the Status of Women forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission The National Commission on the Status of Women, an official organisation, and members of Insa...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from D.M.T Jayarathne to the Inspector General of Police. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong K...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Human Rights Watch. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- Secretary-General Should Use Findings to ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Amnesty International. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following letter from the Sri Lankan law student, D.M. Thushara Jayarathne. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- Honorable ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from CLAAS Pakistan, written by Mr. Joseph Francis. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the US State Department. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from the US State Depart...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from a group of human rights organisations. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from a gro...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Arab News, written by Md Rasooldeen. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Arab News ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following Joint Statement from the Indonesian Advocacy Coalition on Indonesia Intelligence Bill. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong A Joint Statement f...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Amnesty International, KontraS, Imparsial, Elsam, Setara Institute, ICRP, HRWG, ANBTI, ILRC and Wahid Institute. Asian Human Rights...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from 57 human rights and civil organisations in South Korea. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Sta...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367