BANGLADESH/SOUTH KOREA: Rights group exposes Korean employers&#8217; atrocities on workers with direct participation of Bangladeshi agencies
February 15, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from a Joint Working Group of the Right to Food Campaign and Jan Swasthya Abhiyan. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Labour Party of Pakistan, written by Mr. Farooq Tariq. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An a...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from WUNRN. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from WUNRN forwarded by the Asian Human Ri...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Korean House for International Solidarity. For further information, the following person can be contacted on this regard: Mr. Na Hy...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from AsiaNews. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from AsiaNews forwarded by the Asian Human...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following joint statement from the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR) and Article 19 concerning freedom of expression. Asian Human Rights Commission H...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Freedom Against Censorship Thailand (FACT) which is report of observation on Chiranuch ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the A1SaudiArabia.com News Group. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from the A1SaudiAr...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Freedom Against Censorship Thailand (FACT) which is report of observation on Chiranuch ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Freedom Against Censorship Thailand (FACT) which is report of observation on Chiranuch ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Freedom Against Censorship Thailand (FACT) which is report of observation on Chiranuch ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article written by Mr. Farooq Tariq. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Mr. Farooq Tariq forwar...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Prachatai Website. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Cambodian Center for Human Rights. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —&...Dear friends,   We wish to share with you the following statement from the POSCO Pratirodha Sangram Samiti (PPSS).   Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong   ———̵...Dear Friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Freedom Against Censorship Thailand (FACT). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following joint statement from Thai Labour Solidarity Committee (TLSC), State Enterprise Workers Relations Confederation (SERC), Council of Work and Environ...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the group of activists who set up the trial observation on Chiranuch Premchaiporn, dire...A Statement from Human Rights and Development Foundation (HRDF) forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission TO ALL NEWS MEDIA/EDITORS and NETWORKS: FOR URGENT LETTER SUBMISSION AT 230PM to CHIEF ...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367