INDONESIA: Troops Open Fire On Papuan Gathering
October 19, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Human Rights Watch Asia. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———&...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Labour Education Foundation. Asian Human Rights Commission ————— A Statement from Labour Education Fo...An article from the BBC Sinhala Service/Sandeshaya forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission 26 October, 2011 – Published 17:04 GMT There seems to be a link between Colombo Stock Exchange (...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the BBC Sinhala Service. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from the BBC Sinhala Servic...Fabrication of Charges, delayed for 08 Years.  Pathrage Don Jayathilaka is a 56 years old unmarried farmer. He is a resident of Molkava, a village in the Kalutara district. His brother P. D Sunil, ...The International Commission of Jurists has recently forwarded a submission to the United Nations Committee against Torture. We present here the executive summary. The full report may be found at htt...An article from The Express Tribune forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission Shamsul Islam ”Torture is the only way many police officials know of extracting a confession. They don’t care...An article by Mr N Jayaram* forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission Two groups of Indians facing the gallows in India and two men executed in the United States, but vastly different reactions i...The Indonesian military and police started shooting at around 2:37pm West Papua time, yesterday 19 October. Information about what exactly transpired are still sketchy but at least one person was shot...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Jinnah Institute, written by Saba Imtiaz. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Jinna...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the UN Women, the UN Entitry for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong _________ A ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Jinnah Institute, written by Madeeha Ansari. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Ji...The Trial Chamber today announced that opening statements in the trial in Case 002 will commence at 9.00 a.m. on Monday 21 November 2011 in the ECCC Main Courtroom and continue over the following days...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Networking for Rights. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Women Making Peace (WMP) and the Korean Women’s Association United. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ——...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from a group of Sri Lankan journalists, religious leaders and other professionals. Asian Hum...Islamabad/Brussels, 12 October 2011: Reforming Pakistan’s corrupt and dysfunctional prison system is central to curbing rising crime and militancy, fixing a deteriorating criminal justice system and...A Press Release from TRIAL (Swiss Association against impunity) forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) Geneva/Bern, 22 September 2011 On 13 September, media reports already announced th...A Statement from Trans Currents forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission 9 October 2011, 1:59 pm It was just over two weeks ago that a group of 48 university academics expressed concern regardin...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Centre for Legal Aid Assistance and Settlement (CLAAS). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong A Statement from Centre for Legal A...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367