PAKISTAN: Death threats and ongoing intimidation against human rights defender Mr Nasrullah Baloch
April 2, 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.(Courtesy, Sunday Island of 11th May and 18th May 2014) What is mind? No matter. What is matter? Never mind. You might cynically apply this old aphorism to the judicial mind and judicial matters in ...JPF press release On 21 May 2014, the Supreme Court will read the Court Decision of Somchai Enforced Disappearance that Somchai’s family appeal to the Supreme Court (The Attorney General did not...I held back on writing about the extremely traumatic experience of Naomi Coleman, 37, mental health nurse in Coventry, England. I am very glad I opted to be less than current since I felt I needed oth...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward an appeal from the Kalikasan People’s Network for the Environment, Karapatan Alliance for Advancement for People’s Rights...New Delhi: The National Campaign for Dalit Human Rights (NCDHR) strongly condemns the calculated expulsion of three marginalised students from the English and Foreign Languages University (EFLU) in ...JC Weliamuna Ms. Naomi Michelle Coleman, a British Tourist with wide travel experience in many Buddhist Countries who had a large tattoo of the Buddha and of a Hindu God on a lotus flower on her right...Dear friends,  The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward an appeal from Task Force Detainees of the Philippines.  For more information, please contact: tfdp.urgentappeals@gmail.com....Hon. Mohan Peiris Chief Justice Chamber of Chief Justice Complex of the Supreme Court Hulfsdorp Colombo 12. Your Honour, This is to keep Your Honour informed of some events in relation to the Prison o...Cyclic drought and rise in temperature due to climate change has again brought havoc to the people of Tharparkar. The worst affected being women and children. Shahid Hussain Tharparkar is one of the 2...Dear friends,  We wish to share with you the following statement from Human Rights Watch. Asian Human Rights Commission  Hong Kong ————- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AHRC-FST-029-20...Cross Cultural Foundation For immediate release on April 20th, 2014 Public Statement Demanding Immediate Explanation and Investigation by Relevant Officials Regarding the Disappearance of a Karen Hill...23rd April 2014, Colombo, Sri Lanka: The Complaint filed by the Centre for Policy Alternatives (CPA) and its Executive Director (Complaint No: HRC/3083/13) before the Human Rights Commission of Sri La...• Labeling of lawyers by military continues • Practice of labeling root cause of extrajudicial killings • Pattern of ongoing threats against legal profession Philippines, 23 April 2014 – ...The ‘Standing Committee on Rule of Law of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka’ condemns the behavior of the members of the ‘Bodu Bala Sena’ who stormed Nipon Hotel where a group o...‘Lawyers for Democracy’ condemn the harassment of the editor of Lakbima Newspaper, Sman Wagaarachchi by calling him to appear before the CID for questioning for the mere reasons that the c...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Martin Ennals Founation. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ———&...Dear friends,  We wish to share with you the following statement from Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). Asian Human Rights Commission  Hong Kong ————-...Civil society organisations working for the protection of the rights of fishermen in Pakistan and India have launched a month-long joint campaign from April to May this year on both sides of the borde...On 26 March 2014, human rights defender Mr Nasrullah Baloch was subjected to death threats and intimidation by state security forces, following his appearance at the Supreme Court hearing regarding ...War Against Rape (WAR), Karachi, expresses its profound sorrow and grief over the alleged abduction, rape and burning of a five-year old girl to death in Bheempura, and similarly 22 year old trainee n...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367