SRI LANKA: UN agency concerned for over 10,000 families escaping violence
September 9, 2008
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.8 August 2008 – The United Nations refugee agency expressed concern today over the safety of thousands of families fleeing escalating violence in northern Sri Lanka between Government forces and...A UN media statement: 9 September 2008 -Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon today expressed deep concern over escalating and the humanitarian impact of the clashes on civilians. The South Asian nation’...Bangkok, 29 August 2008 – On the occasion of International Day of the Disappeared, the Working Group on Justice for Peace (WGJP) calls on the Thai government to ratify the new Convention for the Pro...Date: Wed, 27 Aug 2008 12:06:57 +0100 From: CommonwealthNet <CommonwealthNet@interights.org Subject: Sri Lanka found guilty of serious human rights abuses by UN Human Rights Committee In a case bro...People of conscience are perturbed that the current war in the LTTE occupied Vanni places the majority of civilians at tremendous risk. Unarmed and trapped in this war zone, large numbers of civilians...AMID growing insecurity and communal violence in conflict areas in Mindanao, the government is now unleashing another stealth move by allowing Secretary Ronaldo Puno of the Department of Interior and ...PRESS RELEASE 27 August 2008 The filling of Boeung Kak Lake in central Phnom Penh should immediately stop until a proper process that ensures human rights protection is in place, said Amnesty Internat...New Bilibid Prison Muntinlupa City 21 August 2008 Dear Loved Ones of the Late Col. Rolando N. Abadilla, Greetings of Peace!   We take this opportunity to reach out to you, first of all in sympathy w...Reporters Without Borders calls on the Sri Lankan government to release J. S. Tissainayagam, a Tamil journalist who has been held since March. A government minister has just said he is charged with te...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from the Free Media Movement. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from the Free Media Move...IFEX – News from the international freedom of expression community ALERT – SRI LANKA 6 August 2008 Newspaper pressured to cancel defence columns by army commander SOURCE: Free Media Moveme...ALERT – SRI LANKA 30 July 2008 FMM concerned over army commander’s justification of recent attacks against journalists SOURCE: Free Media Movement (FMM), Colombo (FMM/IFEX) – The fol...CA SERIAL DISMISSALS OF AMPARO PETITIONS: ENCOURAGING THE ESCALATION OF EXTRA JUDICIAL KILLINGS AND ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES The NUPL strongly criticizes the recent spate of decisions by the Court of A...Previously threatened journalist stalked SOURCE: Free Media Movement (FMM), Colombo (FMM/IFEX) – The following is a 22 July 2008 FMM press release 22 July 2008, Colombo, Sri Lanka – Sri La...Government officials assault two “Daily Mirror” journalists, harass Sirasa TV journalist covering home demolitions (FMM/IFEX) – The following is a 19 July 2008 FMM press release: 19 ...The International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) deplores a decision by a Sri Lanka court on June 30 to continue the detention without charge of journalist J.S. Tissainayagam and to reject his appeal...The Free Media Movement (FMM) is shocked and outraged at the brutal assault of former TNL News Director and currently Sri Lanka Press Institute (SLPI) employee Namal Perera and a friend this evening (...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from National Peace Council of Sri Lanka. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Statement from Nationa...ALERT – SRI LANKA 27 June 2008 SOURCE: Free Media Movement (FMM), Colombo (FMM/IFEX) – The following is an FMM press release: State media level dangerous allegation Free Media Movement exp...Today, 26 June, is a historical day for all mankind. Today, everyone around the world is commemorating theInternational Day in Support of Victims of Torture. On this day, everyone is coming together t...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367