CAMBODIA: CCHR condemns cowardly homophobic attack and police negligence amidst otherwise joyful PRIDE celebrations
May 22, 2011
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Paul Newman Bangalore10 Jun 2011 — Posted 03-Jun-2011 — Vol 2 Issue 22 — During the war in Bosnia, the world was horrified by stories of war babies as women were the prime target of ...Reporters Without Borders / Reporters sans frontières 06-08-2011 (Audio interview available on the website (Sinhala / English) Eng : http://en.rsf.org/sri-lanka-interview-with-wife-of-cartoonist-08-...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Thailand. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong...June 01, 2011 The Commonwealth Journalists Association is outraged over the slaying of yet another Pakistani journalist and urges the Pakistan government to do all it can to find the perpetrators. The...PAKISTAN: The Baloch Noam Chomsky is dead Malik Siraj Akbar There is renewed anger across Balochistan over the dreadful assassination of one of the most popular icons of Balochi literature and civil s...By Shamsul Islam A ban has been imposed on all government officials from interacting with the media under the new Protection and communication of official information rule. As per Rule 46 of the Punja...An article from the Women’s UN Report Network forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission PAKISTAN: Acid attacks — women and girls — PowerPoint Dear friends, The Asian Human Right...A Press Release from Lawyers for Democracy forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) Press Statement- Lawyers for Democracy The war in the North and East has come to an end. Due to the bla...An article from the Sri Lanka Guardian forwarded by the Asian Human Rights Commission SOME GOUGE OUT THE EYES OF OTHERS Basil Fernando Cry, Tagore, cry. Your nation knows you not. Yes, they have cerem...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sri Lanka Guardian, written by Basil Fernando. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article f...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and the International Commission of Jurists to ...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following joint statement from Human Rights Now and FORUM-ASIA. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A Joint Statement from...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from Kashmir National Party, Azad Kashmir Chapter. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong &...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from the Cambodian Center for Human Rights. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong —&...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following statement from Asian Federation Against Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD). Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- A...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from the Sunday Leader, written by Dharisha Bastians. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article fro...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article written by Fien Jarangga & Galuh Wandita. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Fien J...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following press release from several civil society organisations of Cambodia. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kon...Dear friends, The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) wishes to forward to you the following open letter from the Pakistan Fisherfolk Forum (PFF) to President of Pakistan. Asian Human Rights Commissi...Dear friends, We wish to share with you the following article from Arab News, written by Muhammad Humaidan. Asian Human Rights Commission Hong Kong ————- An article from Arab N...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367