INDIA: Open letter to all political parties to take up the issue of repeal of AFSPA
March 25, 2014
info@humanrights.asiaYou can filter the articles by the following criteria.Dear friends,  We wish to share with you the following article from the Down to Earth, written by Sachin Kumar Jain. Asian Human Rights Commission  Hong Kong ————- FOR IMMEDI...The address by Mr. Upul Jayasuriya, President of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka at the Convocation on March 30, 2014 As I rise before this august assembly for the second time since my last convocati...Dear friends,  We wish to share with you the following statement issued by the Intentional Commission of Jurists (ICJ)  while welcoming the just adopted third UN resolution on Sri Lanka. Asian Human...We wish to share with you the following article from Prachatai website, written by Thaweeporn Kunmetha. In October 2003, Jawa Jalo, an ethnic Lahu, was captured by armed state officials during a sea...by Nilantha Ilangamuwa The battle is on the edge. Few hours are left. Hopes and despairs are mixed in the air. One of the important establishments after the Second World War is about to take a crucial...Today, as the United Nations commemorates the International Day for the Right to the Truth Concerning Gross Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of Victims, the Asian Federation Against Involun...To, Representatives of all political parties of India The World’s largest democracy has plunged into the election season as the 16thLokh Sabha elections are approaching. The environment is tense...The AHRC would like to congratulate the Jagaran Media Center for launching a national campaign of community radios of Nepal against all kinds of discriminations, especially against caste-based discrim...Dear Madame Pillay, Nanda Prasad Adhikari and Gangamaya Adhikari of Phujel Village of Gorkha District have been on hunger strike together for the last 146 days demanding action against those responsib...18th March 2014, Colombo, Sri Lanka: The Centre for Policy Alternatives (CPA) is deeply concerned by the arrest and detention last week of several individuals in the North and East, including Human Ri...Two prominent Sri Lankan Human Rights Defenders who were detained and questioned at Kilinochchi by officials of the Police Terrorism Investigation Division(TID)on Sunday March 16th night were reported...The Law and Society Trust is deeply disturbed by the arrest of former staff member of the Law and Society Trust, Mr. Ruki Fernando and Fr. Praveen, OMI from Kilinochchi on Sunday 16th March 2014. Mr....We the Catholics of the entire Roman Catholic Diocese of Jaffna, comprising of Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu and Jaffna Districts are sad and perturbed to know from the media that Reverend Father Proveen Ma...Dear friends, These are dark days. On Thursday the prominent campaigner for the disappeared Jeyakumari Balendran was arrested along with her 13 year old daughter. While the daughter was released, Jeya...India’s arms imports are now almost 3 times as high as those of the second and third largest arms importers – China and Pakistan – according to new data on international arms transfe...National Election Watch Association of Democratic Reforms March 13, 2014 Preliminary Analysis of Candidates Announced by INC and BJP for Lok Sabha 2014 The major parties, Indian National Congress (INC...Dear friends,  We wish to share with you the following statement from Women’s Action Network (WAN). Asian Human Rights Commission  Hong Kong ————- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE...National Human Rights Commission PRESS RELEASE New Delhi: 12th March, 2014 The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has recommended that the Government of Assam pay Rs.5 lakh each to the next of ki...Press Note March 12, 2014 Stop the Bloodshed. Declare Immediate Ceasefire.  Sit for Talks to end violence. The PUBL condemns the killing of 16 security personnel, including 11 Central Reserve Police ...In its latest direct onslaught on the women rights, Pakistan’s Council of Islamic Ideology (CII) has declared laws regarding second marriage of a man in the presence of first wife, against relig...Make a difference. You are just a few clicks away from making
            a contribution to Human Rights workAsian Human Rights Commission
                        G/F, 52 Princess Margaret Road
                        Ho Man Tin, Kowloon
						Hong Kong
                        Tel: +(852) 2698 6339
                        Fax: +(852) 2698 6367