Israel:  'Israel: continuing torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of girl prisoners detained  in the Neve Tertze women's prison in Ramle
November 10, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2001 / NovemberIsrael: 'Israel: continuing torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of girl prisoners detained  in the Neve Tertze women's prison in RamleCase ISR 111001VAW/CC VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN CHILD CONCERN Torture, Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Israel.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat has been informed by reliable sources of the continuing torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of girl prisoners detained  in the Neve Tertze women's prison in Ramle, Israel.   OMCT is particularly concerned about the situation of Rab’a Hamael (14) who has been detained in an isolation cell since 13 September (see OMCT's urgent appeal ISR 240901VAW/CC). Two other fourteen year old girls, Sanaa Amer (see OMCT's urgent appeal ISR 230701.CC) and Sawsan Abu Turki have been held in isolation for the past week. In addition, Su'ad Ghazal (see OMCT's urgent appeal 251199.CC and subsequent follow up appeals), who was arrested at the age of fifteen and recently turned 18 in prison, has also spent one week in an isolation cell.   According to the information received, on 1 October 2001, the prisoners commenced a hunger strike as a protest against the repressive attitude of the prison administration following a series of raids, beatings and the isolation of several prisoners which took place on Thursday 13 September. During the hunger strike, the detainees were refused rations of milk and salt – two essential items that hunger strikers consume in order to preserve their strength. The prisoners were also not permitted to take recreation time outside of their cells and the three girls named above were placed in isolation cells.  OMCT is particularly concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of fourteen year old Sawsan Turki who was arrested on 6 September on charges of attempting to stab an Israeli soldier. According to the information received, Sawsan has a history of psychological problems and in July 2001 she was hospitalised for three days after having been hit on the head by an Israeli soldier.   Sawsan was placed in an isolation cell following her recent transfer to Ramle prison and, while her family have reportedly supplied the medication that she needs in order to treat her various medical problems, the prison administration has refused to pass this on to her or to provide her with other medical care.  According to reports, Sawsan's condition has drastically deteriorated as a result of her incarceration and particularly as a result of the prolonged period of time she has spent in isolation. During the nights of 4 and 5 October, Sawsan had her limbs spread and tied to the bed for the entire night. Witnesses reported that she sustained severe cuts to her wrists as a result of being handcuffed in this manner. Her psychological state has allegedly deteriorated to such an extent that she is no longer able to clearly distinguish her identity.   When persons concerned about Sawsan's condition petitioned the court in order to have an impartial and culturally-sensitive psychological examination conducted to assess her fitness to stand trial, the court responded by appointing an Israeli psychologist who visited Sawsan for approximately five minutes, filled in a questionnaire and declared her to be psychologically fit to stand trial. This conclusion clearly contradicts the medical reports provided by other doctors familiar with Sawsan's case.  OMCT fears for the safety of Sawsan Abu Turki, Sanaa Amer, Rab'a Hamael and Su'ad Ghazal and calls upon the Israeli authorities to release these girls from isolation and to provide them with all necessary medical, including psychological, care. In this regard, Israel as a State Party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child has obligations under Article 39 of the Convention to take appropriate measures to promote the "physical and psychological recovery and social reintegration" of all child victims of torture or any other form of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.  OMCT would like to reiterate the concern that it has previously expressed in relation to the generally bad conditions for Palestinian women and girls detained in the Neve Tirtza prison and urges the authorities to ensure that the physical and psychological integrity of all the detainees is respected and protected.  OMCT recalls that as a State party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), Israel is bound to comply with the articles contained therein. Article 37 (a) of the CRC provides that "No child shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment." Article 37 (c) of the Convention states that "Every child deprived of liberty shall be treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a manner which takes into account the needs of persons of his or her age (…) and shall have the right to maintain contact with his or her family through correspondence and visits…".  Paragraph 66 of the UN Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty provides that the solitary confinement of juveniles as a disciplinary measure at the very least constitutes cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. OMCT would argue that the prolonged solitary confinement of children as young as fourteen amounts to torture and should accordingly be prohibited and the perpetrators investigated and appropriately punished.  Action requested  Please write to the Israeli authorities urging them to:  i.	ensure that Rab’a Hameal, Sanaa Amer, Sawsan Abu Turki and Su'ad Ghazal do not remain in solitary confinement;   ii.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the female prisoners in Neve Tirtza prison in Ramle at all times and to ensure their access to medical care;  iii.	carry out a full and impartial investigation into the alleged torture and ill-treatment in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law in accordance with international legal standards;   iv. 	ensure that immediate action is taken to guarantee that the conditions in Neve Tirtza prison in Ramle meet minimum international standards;     v.	guarantee all human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards.   Addresses  ·	Ariel Sharon, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan Street, Jerusalem 91007, Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2)566 48 38  / 691 79 15 E-mail: pm@pmo.gov.il  or feedback@pmo.gov.il  ·	Meir Shitrit, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah al-Din Street, Jerusalem 91029, State of Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2) 62  8 54 38 or Fax: ++ 972 2 628 8618 Email: sar@justice.gov.il ·	Binyamin Ben-Eliezer, Minister of Defense, Ministry of Defense, 7 "A" Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv, Israel. Fax:(+972-3)691 69 40, e-mail: sar@mod.gov.il  ·	Eli Yishai, Minister of the Interior, Ministry of the Interior, Fax: 00972 2 670 1411 Email: sar@moin.gov.il ·	Minister of Police, Ministry of Police, PO Box 18182, 3 Sheikh Jarrah, Kiryat Hamemshala, Jerusalem 91181, State of Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2)582 67 69 ·	Shimon Peres, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Fax:(+ 972 2) 530 3704 E-mail: sar@mofa.gov.il  ·	The Supreme Court of Justice,  Kiryat Ben Gurion, Jerusalem,  Israel.  Fax: (+ 972 2) 652 71 18 ·	Uzi Landau, Minister of Internal Security, Ministry of Internal Security P.O Box 18182, 3 Sheirkh Jarrah, Kiryat Hamemshala jerusalem, 91181, Israel.   Fax: (+ 972 2) 582 67 69, E-mail : sar@mops.gov.il ·	Director of Neve Tirza Prison, P.O. Box 229, Ramle 72101, Israel, fax: 00972 8 9776652:   Please also write to the embassies of Israel in your respective country.  Geneva, 11 October 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply 