Bahrain:  Release on bail of Nabeel Rajab, while repression against human rights defenders continue
May 29, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / MayBahrain: Release on bail of Nabeel Rajab, while repression against human rights defenders continue

PRESS RELEASE -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
 
BAHRAIN: Release on bail of Nabeel Rajab, while repression
against human rights defenders continue
 
Paris-Geneva, May 29, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) welcomes the release on bail of prominent
human rights defender Nabeel Rajab, but remains concerned at the repressive
climate against human rights defenders still prevailing in Bahrain.
 
On May 28, 2012, Mr. Nabeel
Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR),
Director of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and FIDH Deputy Secretary
General[1], was released on bail after spending three weeks in detention. The three different sets of
charges against him (“illegal gathering”, “calling others to gather” and
“defaming the government” via twitter) are yet to be dropped, and he is banned
from travelling. 
 
Despite
this positive development, the Observatory remains concerned at the very
repressive climate faced by human rights defenders in Bahrain. On May 25, 2012,
the President of the United Nations (UN) Human Rights Council made a statement
calling on the Government of Bahrain not to expose the human rights defenders
who participated in the Universal Periodic Review of Bahrain in Geneva last
week to reprisals. Indeed, the Bahraini local press has led a harsh campaign
against human rights defenders who attended the Universal Periodic Review,
calling them “traitors” and demanding “their prosecution”. Furthermore, on May
26, the Ministry of Interior released a statement in response to the statement
made by the President of the UN Human Rights Council, stating that the Ministry
“will examine all complaints filed by members of the civil society who claim to
have been threatened in accordance with the law”[2].
According to the latest information, the delegation of Bahraini human rights
defenders who were present in Geneva were summoned for interrogation by the
Ministry of the Interior.
 
In
addition, another prominent human rights defender, Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja,
announced on May 28 that he had ended his 110-day hunger strike. Mr. Al
Khawaja, GCHR founder, former MENA Director at Front Line
and former BCHR President, appeared before the
court on May 22 for his appeal session, where he denied all charges against
him. He told the court about the human rights violations he had been subjected
to, including but not limited to: physical assault during arrest, arbitrary arrest,
solitary confinement, unfair trial, physical and psychological torture since
his arrest on April
 9, 2011[3]. His daughter, Twitter
activist Zainab
al-Khawaja, also
remains in detention on charges of
“disrupting the traffic” and “insulting a police officer”. She has been in
prison for more than a month.
 
The
Observatory has repeatedly called on the Bahraini authorities to immediately
and unconditionally release Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja and other human rights
defenders detained for the legitimate exercise of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. 
 
The
Observatory calls upon the authorities of the Kingdom of Bahrain to guarantee
the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and expression of human rights
defenders, to guarantee in all circumstances their integrity, and to order an
immediate, effective, thorough and impartial investigation into the
above-mentioned violations faced by human rights defenders, in line with the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and international human rights instruments ratified by Bahrain.
The Observatory considers that the ability of human rights defenders to operate
without fear of harassment and attacks, and the need to ensure accountability
for any such attacks are vital to prevent a further escalation of the
situation.
 
Background:
 
On
May 5, 2012, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was arrested at Manama airport upon arrival from
Lebanon, on charges of “offending the statutory bodies”. The charges related to
tweets he had posted on his Twitter account which were deemed “offensive” to
the Ministry of Interior. On May 20, Manama's Lower Criminal Court agreed to the
request to free Mr. Rajab on 300 BHD (800 USD) bail, with a travel ban, and
rescheduled the next hearing for May 23. On May 23, the hearing was adjourned
to June 17, pending further investigation. However, Mr. Rajab was kept in
detention for other charges. 
 
On May 12, Mr. Rajab was again presented
before the Public Prosecutor, who informed him of a new case against him on charges
of “calling for and participating in an illegal gathering” relating to a
protest organised in February 2012 in Manama. Based on information provided by
the police administration to the prosecutor, Mr. Nabeel Rajab is alleged to
have made speeches during rallies, calling for the use of force by
demonstrators against police forces. Mr. Rajab refused to answer the questions
of the judge and declared that the investigation was a conspiracy. The Public
Prosecutor remanded Mr. Rajab to detention for an additional seven days in
relation to this case, with the explanation that the investigation was still
pending. 
 
The
third case is in relation to charges of “participating in an illegal gathering”
and “calling others to join the gathering”, relating to a protest organised on
March 31, 2012 in Manama to denounce the detention of human rights defender
Abdulhadi Al Khawaja. On May 22, 2012, the hearing for this case before the
Lower Third Criminal Court was adjourned to May 28, 2012 for the plea.
 
 
For
more information, please contact:
·        
FIDH: Karine Appy/Arthur
Manet: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT: + 41 (0) 22
     809 49 39



[1]               Mr. Rajab
is also a member of the Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch's Middle East
Division  and Chair of CARAM Asia. 


[2]               See Manama Voice, http://manamavoice.com/news-news_read-9572-0.html


[3]              
See The Observatory's Urgent Appeal BHR 004 / 0411 / OBS 070.3, April 6, 2012. 