Viet Nam:  Arbitrary detention and ongoing judicial harassment of human rights lawyer and blogger Le Quoc Quan
February 21, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2014 / FebruaryViet Nam: Arbitrary detention and ongoing judicial harassment of human rights lawyer and blogger Le Quoc Quan​













New information
VNM 001 / 0113 / OBS 001.1
Arbitrary detention / Sentencing
Viet Nam
February 21, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Viet Nam.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Vietnam
Committee on Human Rights (VCHR) about the arbitrary detention and ongoing
judicial harassment of Mr. Le Quoc Quan, a human rights lawyer and
blogger.
 
According to the information received, on February 18,
2014, the Hanoi Court of Appeals upheld the conviction of Mr. Le Quoc Quan to
30 months’ imprisonment on charges of “tax evasion” under Section 161 of the
Vietnamese Criminal Code. 
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr. Le Quoc Quan has been
detained since December 27, 2013 in the Hoa Lo detention centre No. 1 in Hanoi. In August
2013, the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
(WGAD) declared his detention to be arbitrary and in breach of international
norms of fair trial. In its opinion No. 33/2013 adopted in August 2013, the
WGAD found that Mr. Le Quoc Quan’s detention “could be
related to his blog articles on civil and political rights. Although the charge
against Mr. Quan is one of tax evasion, given Mr. Quan’s history as a human
rights defender and blogger, the real purpose of the detention and prosecution
might eventually be to punish him for exercising his rights under article 19 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and to deter
others from doing so”. Consequently, the WGAD requested “the Government
to take necessary steps to remedy the situation of Mr Le Quoc Quan, which is
immediate release, or ensure that charges are determined by an independent and
impartial tribunal in proceedings conducted in strict compliance with the
provisions of the ICCPR”. 
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the Court of
Appeals’ decision to uphold the conviction of Mr. Le Quoc Quan, as it merely
aims at sanctioning his legitimate human rights activities. 
 
The Observatory urges the Vietnamese authorities to
implement the WGAD's Opinion and release Mr. Le Quoc Quan immediately and
unconditionally. 
 
Background information:
 
Vietnamese authorities have repeatedly harassed Mr. Le
Quoc Quan since 2007 because of his human rights activities. 
 
On October 3, 2012, some 50 security police and
plain-clothed militia forcibly entered into the head office of Mr. Le Quoc
Quan's firm in Hanoi and its branch office in Ho Chi Min City. The firm
belonged to Mr. Le Quoc Quan and his two brothers Messrs. Le Dinh Quan and Le
Quoc Quyet. Police seized files and documents belonging to the firm, assaulted
the staff, and detained Messrs. Le Quoc Quan and Le Quoc Quyet for
interrogation. On October 30, they returned and arrested Mr. Le Dinh Quan, also
for alleged tax evasion. Mr. Le Dinh Quan remains detained to date.
 
On December 27, 2012, police in Hanoi arrested Mr. Le
Quoc Quan while he was dropping off his daughter at school. The police also
searched his office and his home and confiscated various documents. They
apparently read out a warrant, but did not give it to Mr. Le Quoc Quan’s
family. Mr. Le Quoc Quan was held incommunicado for the first two months of his
detention. 
 
On October 2, 2013, a Court in Hanoi sentenced Mr. Le
Quoc Quan to 30 months in prison and to a fine of 1.3 billion VND
(approximately 45,090 EUR) on charges of tax evasion under Section 161 of the
Criminal Code. 
 
Actions requested:

Please write to the authorities in Viet Nam urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Le Quoc Quan, as well as of all
human rights defenders in Viet Nam;
 
ii. Release Mr. Le Quoc Quan immediately and unconditionally as
his detention merely sanctions his human rights activities and is contrary to
national and international law;
 
iii. Put
an end to all acts harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Le Quoc Quan and all human rights defenders in Viet Nam;
 
iv. Comply with the provisions of the UN Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN
General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular:
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the
right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive
for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at
the national and international levels”, 
- as well as Article 12.2, which provides that “the
State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”;
 
v. More generally, ensure in all circumstances
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Viet Nam.
 
Addresses:


H.E. Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Minister of
     Foreign Affairs, 1 Ton That Dam St., Ba Dinh District, Hanoi, Viet Nam;
     Fax: +84-4-38231872 / +84 4 379 92 682, Email: bc.mfa@mofa.gov.vnH.E. Mr. Nguyen Thai Binh, Minister of
     Interior, 37A Nguyen Binh Khiem St., Hai Ba Trung District, Hanoi, Viet Nam;
     Fax: +84-4-39781005H.E. Mr. Ha Hung Cuong, Minister of
     Justice, 56-60 Tran Phu St., Ba Dinh District, Hanoi, Viet Nam; Fax:
     +84-4-38431431 H.E. Mr. Tran Dai Quang, Minister of Public
     Security, 44 Yet Kieu St., Hoan Kiem District, Hanoi, Viet Nam; Fax:
     +84-4-9420223H.E. Mr. Vu Duc Dam, Minister, Office of
     the Government (OOG), 1 Hoang Hoa Tham St. Ba Dinh District, Hanoi, Viet Nam;
     Fax: 84-4-80 44130H.E. Mr. Nguyen Trung Thanh, Ambassador,
     Permanent Representation of Viet Nam to the United Nations in Geneva, 30
     chemin des Corbillettes, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, Geneva, Switzerland; Fax:
     +41 22-798 07 24; Email: info@vnmission-ge.gov.vnHE Mr. PHAM Sanh Chau, Ambassador, Embassy
     of Viet Nam in Belgium, Boulevard Général Jacques 1, 1050 Brussels,
     Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 93 76; Email: vnemb.brussels@skynet.be / unescochau@yahoo.com
 
Please also
write to the embassies of Viet Nam in your respective country. 
 
***
Paris-Geneva, February 21, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 