Bahrain:  Nabeel Rajab's hearing postponed until September 11, 2017
August 10, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / AugustBahrain: Nabeel Rajab's hearing postponed until September 11, 2017

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

New information
BHR 006 / 0812 / OBS 048.30
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment
Bahrain
August 9, 2017
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continued judicial
harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Nabeel
Rajab’s, co-founder and President of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights
(BCHR), founding Director of the Gulf Center for Human Rights (GCHR), FIDH
Deputy Secretary General and a member of the Middle East advisory committee at
Human Rights Watch. Mr. Nabeel Rajab has been one of the country’s most vocal human rights
defenders, denouncing human rights violations within the country’s Jaw prison,
and denouncing Bahrain’s participation in bombings of the Saudi-led coalition
in Yemen.
 
According
to the information received, on August 8, 2017, a Bahraini Court held its 15th
hearing in the so-called “Twitter case” against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and decided
again to postpone the hearing until September 11, 2017, despite a request by Mr.
Rajab’s lawyers to hold the next hearing sooner. Furthermore, the court stated
that by then, new judges will be seating in the court.
 
Mr. Nabeel
Rajab, who was present during the hearing, had visibly lost weight and his
voice was weaker than usual.
 
In addition, Mr. Rajab’s lawyers have been
denied visit to their client for over two weeks.
 
In this
so-called “Twitter case”, Mr. Nabeel Rajab is being accused of “insulting a
statutory body” (Article 216 of the Penal Code), “disseminating false rumours
in time of war” (Article 133) and “offending a foreign country [Saudi Arabia]”
(Article 215), which carries up to 15 years in prison. Those charges are
related to tweets he posted denouncing the torture of detainees in the
Kingdom’s Jaw Prison and the human rights violations perpetrated by the Saudi-Arabia
led coalition air strikes in Yemen (see background information). 
 
Hearings in the “Twitter
case” have been ongoing since July 2016. Additionally,
on July 10, 2017, the Manama’s Lower Criminal Court handed down a two
years’ prison sentence against Mr. Nabeel Rajab in the framework of the
“Television interviews case” (see background information). Mr. Rajab faces
additional charges in at least two other cases related to articles published in
foreign newspapers about Bahrain’s human rights record.
 
Arrested on
June 13, 2016, Mr. Nabeel Rajab has spent the vast majority of the time in
solitary confinement, in spite of his deteriorating health conditions. He is
currently detained at Manama’s military hospital.
 
In its concluding observations on Bahrain published
on May 12, 2017, the United Nations Committee Against Torture (UN CAT) drew
attention to the fact that “excessive use of solitary confinement constitutes
cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment or, depending on the circumstances, even
torture (...)”[1]. The UN
CAT added that it was “deeply concerned” by the arbitrary imprisonment, torture
and ill-treatment of detained human rights defenders, including Mr. Nabeel
Rajab[2].
 
The
Observatory denounces the continued arbitrary detention of Mr. Nabeel
Rajab, which seems to be yet another evidence of a long-standing pattern of
harassment against him to sanction his legitimate human rights activity.
 
The
Observatory calls upon the Bahraini authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release Mr. Nabeel Rajab, to put an end to any act of
harassment against him and, in the meantime, to ensure that all judicial
proceedings against him are carried out in full compliance with the right to
due process, the right to a fair trial and the right to be presumed innocent,
as protected under international law.
 
Background information:
 
On July 9, 2012,
Mr. Rajab was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment for several tweets
posted on his twitter account. On August 23, 2012, he was acquitted by the
Higher Appeal Court.
 
On August 16, 2012, the
Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Rajab to three years of imprisonment
for his participation in peaceful gatherings. In December 2012, the Appeals
Court reduced the sentence to two years. He was released in May 2014 after serving
his term.
 
On October 1, 2014,
Mr. Nabeel Rajab was arrested by the General Directorate of
Anti-Corruption and Economic and Electronic Security of the Criminal
Investigation Department (CID) for “insulting a public institution” via Tweeter
(Article 216). The case related to a tweet he published in September 2014, in
which he criticised the military institutions for generating extremist
ideologies (the “terrorism tweet” case). On November 2, 2014, the Third Lower
Criminal Court ordered his release but barred him from leaving the country.
 
On January 20, 2015, the
Third Lower Criminal Court sentenced him to six months’ imprisonment for
“insulting public institutions and the army” (Article 216).
 
In 2015, two other criminal
charges were brought against Mr. Rajab. On February 26, 2015, he was
summoned for investigations for charges of “inciting hatred towards the regime”
in relation to a speech he made in February 2011 during a funeral (the “funeral
speech case”). To date, the police investigation is ongoing.
 
In addition, on
April 2, 2015, Mr. Rajab was arrested, sent to the General Directorate of
Anti-Corruption and Economic and Electronic Security, and placed in detention
in solitary confinement in Isa Town Police Station. On April 3, 2015, he was interrogated
by the CID regarding two new charges brought against him under criminal case
No. 2015/38288. The first charge was “insulting a statutory body”, referring to
the Ministry of Interior in relation to tweets he posted denouncing the torture
of detainees at Jaw Prison (the “Jaw torture tweets” case). The second charge
was “disseminating false rumours in time of war”, in relation to tweets he
published about the Saudi-Arabia led coalition air strikes in Yemen (the “Yemen
tweets” case). 
 
On May 14, 2015, the
Bahrain Criminal Court of Appeal upheld the six-month prison sentence (the
“terrorism tweet” case).
 
On July 13, 2015, the King
of Bahrain Hamad Ben Issa Al-Khalifa ordered through Royal Pardon the release
of Mr. Nabeel Rajab for health reasons. Mr. Rajab had already served
three of the six months’ jail sentence. Moreover, on the same date, the Public
Prosecution imposed a travel ban against Mr. Rajab in relation to the Jaw
torture and Yemen tweets cases.
 
In the morning of June 13,
2016, police forces reportedly led by the Cybercrime Unit arrested
Mr. Nabeel Rajab, after raiding his house and seizing a number of
electronic devices. In the afternoon, he was able to contact his wife by phone,
and reported being detained at East Riffa police station.
 
On June 14, Public
Prosecution remanded him in custody on accusations of “publishing and
broadcasting false news that undermine the prestige of the State” (Article 134[3]).
 
On June 28, 2016, he was
transferred from police custody to the Bahrain Defence Force (BDF) Hospital due
to unprecedented heart problems. On the same day, he was examined by a doctor,
and was transferred back to West Riffa police station.
 
On July 12, during the
hearing, the judge dismissed the request for release filed by Mr. Rajab’s
lawyers and the hearing was postponed to August 2.
 
On August 2, 2016, the High
Criminal Court decided to postpone the trial to September 5 without
justification.
 
On September 4,
Mr. Rajab was summoned and questioned by CID officials. He was denied
access to a lawyer on this occasion.
 
On September 5, 2016, the
Public Prosecution announced that additional charges had been brought against
Mr. Nabeel Rajab, for deliberately disseminating “false news and
information and tendentious rumours that undermine the kingdom’s prestige and
stature”, in relation to a letter published in the New York Times on September 4, 2016[4],
describing his judicial harassment and arbitrary detention. If convicted, this
could add one year to his final sentence. In total, he now faces up to 16 years
in prison. 
 
On October 3, 2016,
Mr. Nabeel Rajab underwent surgery to remove his gallbladder as a
consequence of his poor detention conditions.
 
On October 6, 2016, the
High Criminal Court decided after a five-minute hearing to postpone the trial
to October 31, without providing any justification. Before the hearing,
Mr. Rajab’s lawyers asked the Court a copy of his medical reports after
the Ministry of Interior and the Public Prosecution failed to provide them, in
clear violation of Mr. Rajab’s right to be informed of his own health
condition.
 
Once more on October 31,
2016, the Fourth High Criminal Court postponed the trial until December 15 in
order to obtain a technical expert from the Cyber-Crime Unit to determine who
runs Rajab’s twitter account. Rajab arrived at the court right before the
hearing, and was taken out immediately after the Judge made his pronouncements,
while Rajab’s lawyers were still making applications.
 
On December 15, 2016, after
a fifteen-minute hearing during which Mr. Nabeel Rajab was not allowed to
speak, the Fourth High Criminal Court postponed the verdict until December 28,
2016 and refused to release him.
 
On December 21, 2016, the
Cybercrime Unit of the Ministry of Interior took Mr. Nabeel Rajab out of
custody for interrogation following the publication of a letter[5]
quoting him in French newspaper Le Monde
on December 19, 2016. The Cybercrime Unit accused Mr. Rajab of using the
article to “spread false information and tendentious rumours insulting Bahrain
and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) States and harming their relations”.
Investigations on those publications were still underway.
 
On December 28, 2016,
Manama’s Fifth High Criminal Court acceded to an application for
Mr. Nabeel Rajab’s temporary release following a failure to give any basis
or any sufficient evidence of a link between him and the Twitter account with
respect to the Yemeni and Jaw prison tweets.
 
Then Mr. Rajab was
taken to the CID for temporary release. However, he was re-arrested later on
the same day and referred to the Public Prosecution in relation to an
investigation into televised interviews dating from 2014, which commenced in
mid-June 2016.
 
On December 28, 2016, the
Public Prosecution ordered the pre-trial detention for seven days of
Mr. Nabeel Rajab, pending investigation into televised interviews dating
back to 2014. These interviews with television networks Lua Lua Channel, Al
Etijah TV and Al-Alam News Network were related to the human rights situation
in Bahrain. In this case, Mr. Nabeel Rajab is being prosecuted on charge
of “deliberately spreading false information and malicious rumours with the aim
of discrediting the State” (Article 134)[6],
which carries up to three years in prison.
 
On January 5, 2017, the
Public Prosecution renewed Mr. Nabeel Rajab’s pre-trial detention for a
further 15 days, pending investigation.
 
On April 5, 2017,
Mr. Nabeel Rajab underwent surgery for bleeding ulcers at Manama’s
military hospital. His family was denied the right to visit him while in
hospital. Only two days after the surgery, Mr. Rajab was sent back to West
Riffa police station where he has remained in solitary confinement most of the
time.
 
On April 8, 2017,
Mr. Rajab was rushed to the police hospital in an ambulance because of an
infected wound that followed the operation. Since that date, Mr. Nabeel
Rajab is recovering from his medical condition and remains in Qaala clinic,
which is a division of the Ministry of Interior[7].
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Bahrain urging them to: 
 
The
Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Nabeel Rajab and that of all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
ii.
Release Mr. Nabeel Rajab immediately and unconditionally, as his detention is
arbitrary and its conditions amount to ill-treatment and are endangering his
life; 
 
iii.
Put an end to any act of harassment, including at the judicial level, against
Mr. Nabeel Rajab and against all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
iv.
Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General
Assembly, in particular its Articles 1, Article 6 (c), 9, 11 and 12.2;
 
v.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Bahrain. 
 
Addresses: 
 
·               
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL
KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·               
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad
AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax : 00973 17 21 05 75; ofd@mofa.gov.bh
·               
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL
KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Fax: +973 175 31 284
·               
Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed
bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·               
H.E. Mr. Yusuf
Abdulkarim Bucheeri, Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
·               
H.E. Ahmed Mohammed
Yousif Aldoseri, Embassy of the Kingdom of Bahrain to the Kingdom of Belgium,
Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail: Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh
 
***
Paris-Geneva, August 9, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
Tel and fax FIDH: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 (0) 22 809 49
39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 
 
 



[1]                 See Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention, Opinion A/HRC/WGAD/2013/12 No. 12/2013, July 25, 2013, par. 20.


[2]                 The Concluding Observations
also refer to Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja,
former BCHR President, sentenced to life in prison in June 2011 for politically
motivated charges and whose health conditions have also been worsening.


[3]           Article
134 of the Penal Code provides that “A punishment of imprisonment for at least
3 months and a fine of at least BD100, or either penalty, shall be inflicted
upon every citizen who deliberately releases abroad false or malicious news,
s
Properties Date: August 10, 2017Activity: Human Rights DefendersType: Urgent InterventionsCountry: BahrainSubjects: Human Rights DefendersShare thisTweetRelated articlesBahrain:  15 Rights Groups to US, UK and EU: Support Nabeel Rajab Ahead of the Appeal Judgement Against 2-Year Sentence For Speaking to Press
Urgent Interventions / November 21, 2017Bahrain:  Continued judicial harassment, arbitrary detention and ill-treatment of Mr. Nabeel Rajab
Urgent Interventions / October 27, 2017Bahrain:  Joint Press Release: FCO Silence on Nabeel Rajab “Appalling”, Say 17 Rights Groups & MPs
Urgent Interventions / August  6, 2017Bahrain:  Sentencing of Mr. Nabeel Rajab to two years in prison
Urgent Interventions / July 10, 2017LanguagesThis page is available in:EnglishYou can also translate it on the fly: 
  function googleTranslateElementInit() {
    new google.translate.TranslateElement({
      pageLanguage: "en",
      autoDisplay: false
    }, "google_translate_element");
  }
  Recently Viewed Articles 