Sri Lanka:  Two years after the murder of human rights defender Pattani Razeek, still no significant progress in the investigation
February 10, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2012 / FebruarySri Lanka: Two years after the murder of human rights defender Pattani Razeek, still no significant progress in the investigation

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
SRI LANKA: Two years after the murder of human rights 
defender Pattani Razeek, still no significant progress in the 
investigation
 
Geneva-Paris, February 10, 2012. Two years after the disappearance and murder of human rights defender Pattani 
Razeek, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International 
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), expresses its deep concern about the lack of 
significant progress in the investigation.
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr. Pattani Razeek, Managing Trustee of the Community Trust 
Fund (CTF) and a member of the Executive Committee of the Asian Forum for Human 
Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA), was last seen in Polonnaruwa, a city in the north central province 
of Sri Lanka, in the afternoon of February 11, 2010, as he was travelling together with other staff members from CTF on their way 
home from a mission.
 
For over a year, the police made no attempt to apprehend 
and question the main suspect in Mr. Razeek’s disappearance, Mr. Shahabdeen 
Nowshaadh, a former CTF employee, despite evidence linking him to several ransom 
calls made to Mr. Razeek’s family on Mr. Razeek’s mobile number, following his 
disappearance. It is not until July 2011 that Mr. Nowshaadh was arrested, 
despite being identified by police in May-June 2010. Mr. Razeek’s family 
believes that the failure to take action against Mr. Nowshaadh is connected to 
his close acquaintance of the Minister of Industry and Commerce, Mr. Rishad 
Bathiudeen.
 
On the morning of July 28, 2011, police exhumed a body 
in Kavathamunai, Uddamaveli, Valaichchenai province, eastern Sri Lanka. The son 
of Mr. Razeek tentatively identified the body of his father. 

 
Yet, as of today, the police have not made any 
significant progress in Mr. Razeek’s case. Despite a post mortem was conducted 
on August 2, 2011, the police have failed to submit a post mortem report to the 
family, although the lawyer for the family believes the report was submitted to 
court. Besides, the family has no further information on the progress of the 
investigation and it appears that the DNA report has not been submitted to court 
to date. On November 3, 2011, Mr. Nowshaadh was released on bail by the 
Pollonnaruwa High Court. The second arrested suspect, Mr. Ismail Mohamed 
Mushdeen, filed a bail application on February 2, 2012, which should be examined 
on February 16, 2012.
 
The Observatory is deeply concerned by the non-resolution of Mr. 
Pattani Razeek’s murder two years later, and urges the authorities of Sri Lanka to continue to work towards bringing 
those responsible before a competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them 
the penal sanctions provided by the law.
 
The Observatory more generally urges the authorities of Sri Lanka to 
guarantee that human rights defenders can carry out their activities free of any hindrances, to 
put an end to all acts of harassment against human rights defenders 
and to conform to the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights instruments 
ratified by Sri Lanka.
 
For more information, please contact:
·    OMCT: Delphine 
Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39
·    FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 