Guatemala:  Judicial harassment by the President of the SCJ against Claudia Virginia Samayoa Pineda and José Manuel Martínez Cabrera
March 24, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Guatemala / 2019 / MarchGuatemala: Judicial harassment by the President of the SCJ against Claudia Virginia Samayoa Pineda and José Manuel Martínez Cabrera

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

GTM 002 / 0319 / OBS 028
Judicial harassment
Guatemala
March 24, 2019
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in Guatemala.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has received
information from the Unit for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders in
Guatemala (UDEFEGUA)
about the criminalisation against Ms. Claudia
Virginia Samayoa Pineda, President of UDEFEGUA’s Board of Directors and
member of the OMCT Executive Committee, and against Mr. José Manuel Martínez Cabrera, member of the Justicia Ya collective[1].
 
According to the information received, Ms. Samayoa Pineda and Mr.
Martínez Cabrera are facing a criminal complaint made by Mr. Nester Mauricio
Vásquez Pimentel, in his capacity as President of the Supreme Court of Justice
(SCJ), accusing them of theft, diversion or suppression of correspondence with
specific aggravating circumstances and influence peddling.
This complaint from the President of the SCJ is a retaliation for a
complaint filed by Ms. Samayoa Pineda and Mr. Martínez Cabrera on January 17, 2019,
in which they requested that immunity be lifted (preliminary trial request) from
11 judges from the SCJ[2]. The complaint considered that the 11 judges were breaching
the Political Constitution of the Republic of Guatemala and committing a crime
of prevarication due to their decision of January 9, 2019, to process the
request to hold Preliminary Hearing 294-2018 against three judges from the
Constitutional Court (CC), as requested by the Association of State Dignitaries
(Asociación de Dignatarios de la Nación
- ADN)[3].
Along with the complaint presented on January 17, 2019, Ms. Samayoa
Pineda and Mr. Martínez Cabrera annexed a copy of the SCJ resolution of January
9 which had been widely circulated in the media and on social media. However,
despite the fact that this document was in the public domain, the President of
the SCJ is accusing these two human rights defenders of obtaining it illegally
and of using undue influence to obtain it.
The Observatory rejects this criminalisation against Ms. Claudia
Virginia Samayoa Pineda and Mr. José Manuel Martínez Cabrera, particularly
because of the fact that the President of the SCJ, within his official role, is
unduly using criminal law against two human rights defenders.
This criminalisation appears to be a form of retaliation against
organised civil society and human rights organisations mobilising against attacks on democratic
institutions in Guatemala which pose a serious threat to the Rule of Law and to
progress in the fight against impunity and corruption in the country, characterised
by: repeated disobedience to judicial resolutions; persecution against judges
from the Constitutional Court; and the unilateral decision to end the mandate
of the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (Comisión Internacional Contra la Impunidad
en Guatemala - CICIG).
The Observatory reiterates its concerns about increasing patterns of
persecution and violence against human rights defenders in Guatemala. According
to data compiled by UDEFEGUA, in 2018 there were 391 attacks against human
rights defenders, including 26 killings and 147 cases of criminalisation. 
In light of the above, the Observatory calls upon
the Guatemalan authorities to immediately and unconditionally cease all acts of harassment, including at the judicial
level, against Ms. Claudia Virginia Samayoa Pineda and Mr. José Manuel Martínez
Cabrera, and to cease all acts of intimidation against Guatemalan civil society.
Requests for action:

Please write to the Guatemalan authorities, urging them to:
      i.       
Immediately cease all acts of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against Ms. Claudia Virginia Samayoa Pineda
and Mr. José Manuel Martínez Cabrera, and against all human rights defenders in
Guatemala:
     ii.       
Immediately adopt the most appropriate measures
to guarantee the safety and the physical and psychological integrity of Mrs.
Claudia Virginia Samayoa Pineda and Mr. José Manuel Martínez Cabrera, and of
all human rights defenders in Guatemala;
    iii.       
End the pattern of misuse of criminal law and
criminalisation against human rights defenders in Guatemala;
    iv.       
Conform with the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2; and
     v.       
More generally, ensure in all circumstances the
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human
rights instruments ratified by Guatemala.
Addresses:
·        
Mr. James
Morales Cabrera, President of the Republic of Guatemala. E-mail: jimmy.morales@fcnnacion.com. Twitter: @jimmymoralesgt
·        
Mr. Jorge
Luis Borrayo, Presidential Commision on Human Rights (COPREDEH); E-mail:
copredeh@copredeh.gob.gt; Twitter: @COPREDEH
·        
Dr. María Consuelo Porras Argueta, Public
Prosecutor of the Republic; E-mail: fiscalgeneral@pm.lex.gob.gt
·        
Mr. Jordan
Rojas Andrade, Human Rights Procurator (PDH). Fax:+
502.238.17.34; Twitter: @PDHgt
·        
Ambassador Sandra
Ericka Jovel Polanco, Minister of International Affairs; E-mail: webmaster@minex.gob.gt
·        
Ambassador Carla
María Rodríguez Mancia, Permanent Mission of Guatemala before the United
Nations in Geneva; E-mail: mission.guatemala@ties.itu.int, onusuiza@minex.gob.gt
·        
Ambassador
Luis Raúl Estevez, Permanent Mission of Guatemala before the Organisation of
American States in Washington; E-mail: oea@minex.gob.gt, guatemala@oas.org
·        
Ambassador
Jorge Skinner-Klée Arenales, Guatemalan Ambassador in Brussels; E-mail: embaguate.belgica@skynet.be
Please also write to the Diplomatic Representatives of Guatemala in your
respective countries.
***
Geneva-Paris, 24 March 2019
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·            
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·            
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·            
Tel
and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]              The Justicia Ya collective was founded in
April 2015 after the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala
(CICIG) arrested the first members of the criminal structure known as "La
Línea", which involved the highest authorities of the Guatemalan state. The
collective used social media to organise social mobilisations, which were
maintained over 5 months. The collective has maintained a presence in national
discussions on issues related to the justice sector, constitutional reforms and
deepening of democracy.


[2]              Nester
Mauricio Vásquez Pimentel, Silvia Patricia Valdés Quezada, Nery Osvaldo Medina
Mendez, Vitalina Orellana y Orellana, Josué Felipe Baquiax Baquiax, Sergio
Amadeo Pineda Castañeda, Ramiro Contreras, Silvia Verónica García Molina,
Ranulfo Rafael Rojas Cetina, José Antonio Pineda Barales and Manuel Reginaldo
Duarte Barrera.


[3]              On January
9, 2019, the Plenary of the SCJ declared that there were reasons to admit the request
for a preliminary hearing presented by the DNA against three magistrates of the
CC, because the CC had exceeded its functions due to its opposition to certain
decisions made by President Jimmy Morales in matters of foreign policy and, in
particular, by allowing the diplomat Anders Kompass to remain in the country as
Ambassador of Sweden. The SCJ thereby violated its duty to guarantee the
judicial independence and autonomy of the CC, since, in accordance with the
Political Constitution, it is an essential function of the CC to defend the
constitutional order and in that function,  it acts independently of other State bodies. 