Bahrain:  High Criminal Court postpones the trial of human rights defender Nabeel Rajab to 31 October
October  7, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2016 / OctoberBahrain: High Criminal Court postpones the trial of human rights defender Nabeel Rajab to 31 October

New information
BHR 006 / 0812 / OBS
048.25
Arbitrary
detention /
Critical
health condition /
Judicial
harassment
Bahrain
October
7, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Bahrain.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the decision
of the High Criminal Court to postpone the trial of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the
Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) and FIDH Deputy Secretary General, to
October 31st, 2016.  
 
According to the
information received, on
October 6, 2016, the High Criminal Court decided after a five minutes hearing
to postpone the trial to October 31st, without providing any
justification. 
 
At the beginning of the hearing, instead of issuing the judgment, the Judge
stated that the Court had taken note of the request submitted by Mr. Nabeel
Rajab’s lawyers to receive copies of their client’s medical
record and had decided to adjourn the case even. 
 
Before the hearing,
Mr. Rajab’s lawyers asked the Court a copy of his medical reports after the
Ministry of Interior and the Public Prosecution failed to provide them, in
clear violation of Mr. Rajab’s right to be informed of his own health
condition. 
 
This decision comes
three days after Mr. Nabeel Rajab underwent surgery to
remove his gallbladder. The surgery would result from Mr. Rajab’s poor
detention conditions since his arrest in June 2016. 
 
The trial relates to charges regarding comments posted by Mr. Rajab on Twitter
in 2015 about conditions of detention in Jaw prison and the war in Yemen. If
convicted, he faces up to 15 years in prison, for which he had already been
detained from April 2 to July 13, 2015. Charges include the following:
“disseminating false rumours in time of war” (Article 133 of the Penal Code[1]),
“insulting a statutory body” (Article 216 of the Penal Code[2]) and
“offending a foreign country [Saudi Arabia]” (under Article 215 of the Penal
Code) (see background information).
 
The Observatory
denounces the continued arbitrary detention of Mr.
Nabeel Rajab, which seems to be yet another evidence of a long-standing pattern
of harassment against him to sanction his legitimate human rights activity, and
deplores the degrading conditions of detention of Mr. Nabeel Rajab as well as
his deteriorating health condition. 
 
The Observatory calls upon the Bahraini authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release Mr. Nabeel Rajab, and to put an end to any act of
harassment against him - and more generally against all human rights defenders
in Bahrain.
 
Background information:
 
Mr. Rajab has faced continuous judicial harassment for his legitimate
human rights work since his first arrest in June 2012. On July 9, 2012, Mr.
Rajab was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for allegedly libelling the
residents of Al Muharraq via several tweets posted on his twitter account. On
August 23, 2012, Mr. Rajab was acquitted by the Higher Appeal Court.
 
On August 16, 2012, the Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Rajab to
three years of imprisonment in relation to three cases related to his
participation in peaceful gatherings in favour of fundamental freedoms and
democracy. In December 2012, the Appeals Court reduced the sentence to two
years of imprisonment. Mr. Nabeel Rajab completed his sentence and was released
in May 2014.
 
On October 1, 2014, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was summoned and remanded in
detention by the General Directorate of Anti-Corruption and Economic and
Electronic Security of the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) for
“insulting a public institution” under Article 216 of the Penal Code. The case
related to a tweet he published in September 2014, in which he criticised the
military institutions for generating extremist ideologies (the “terrorism
tweet” case). On November 2, 2014, the Third Lower Criminal Court ordered Mr.
Rajab’s release but barred him from leaving the country.
 
On January 20, 2015, the Third Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Nabeel
Rajab to six months' imprisonment on the charges of “insulting public
institutions and the army”, pursuant to Article 216 of the Penal Code.
 
In 2015, two other criminal charges were brought against Mr. Rajab. On
February 26, 2015, Mr. Rajab was summoned for investigations for charges of
“inciting hatred towards the regime” in relation to a speech he made in
February 2011 during a funeral (the “funeral speech case”). To date, the police
investigation is ongoing.
 
In addition, on April 2, 2015, over twenty police cars surrounded Mr.
Rajab’s house and policemen arrested him. Mr. Rajab was then sent to the
General Directorate of Anti-Corruption and Economic and Electronic Security to
be interrogated and placed in detention in solitary confinement in Isa Town
Police Station. On April 3, 2015, Mr. Rajab was interrogated by the CID
regarding two new charges brought against him under criminal case No.
2015/38288. The first charge was “insulting a statutory body” (Article 216 of
the Penal Code) referring to the Ministry of Interior in relation to tweets he
posted denouncing the torture of detainees at Jaw Prison (the “Jaw torture
tweets” case). The second charge was “disseminating false rumours in time of
war” (Article 133 of the Penal Code) in relation to tweets he published about
the Saudi-Arabia led coalition air strikes in Yemen (the “Yemen tweets” case).
If sentenced on the second charge, Mr. Rajab could be facing up to 10 years'
imprisonment. Mr. Rajab refused to sign the police minutes of the
investigations. On April 4, 2015, the Public Prosecution ordered seven days
detention pending investigation. On April 5, 2015, security police confiscated
all electronic devices belonging to Mr. Rajab and members of his family.
 
On April 11, 2015, the Prosecution ordered an additional fifteen days in
detention for Mr. Rajab. On April 26, 2015, the Public Prosecution officially
charged Mr. Rajab under Articles 133 and 216. The Public Prosecution
subsequently extended his detention for an additional fifteen days. On May 11,
the Bahraini High Court extended Mr. Rajab´s preventive detention for 15 days.
 
On May 14, 2015, the Bahrain Criminal Court of Appeal upheld the
six-month prison sentence (the “terrorism tweet” case).
 
On July 13, 2015, the King of Bahrain Hamad Ben Issa Al-Khalifa ordered
through Royal Pardon the release of Mr. Nabeel Rajab for health reasons. Mr.
Rajab had already served three of the six months’ jail sentence. Moreover, on
the same date, the Public Prosecution imposed a travel ban against Mr. Rajab in
relation to criminal case No. 2015/38288 related to the Jaw torture and Yemen
tweets cases.
 
Mr. Rajab’s lawyers subsequently filed appeals against the travel ban
with the investigating prosecutor on September 2, 2015, with the Attorney
General on September 16, and with the Office of the Public Prosecution on
October 1, 2015. They received no response to such petitions. On December 3,
2015, Mr. Rajab's lawyers submitted another petition to the Attorney General
requesting the lift of the travel ban imposed on Mr. Nabeel Rajab on July 13,
2015. In the written request filed to the Attorney General, Mr. Rajab's lawyers
raised the issue of urgency, as Mr. Rajab's wife health is continuously
deteriorating and needs treatment outside of Bahrain, accompanied by Mr. Rajab.
This request was disregarded.
 
In the morning of June 13, 2016, police forces reportedly led by the
Cybercrime Unit arrested Mr. Nabeel Rajab, after raiding his house and seizing
a number of electronic devices. In the afternoon, Mr. Rajab was able to contact
his wife by phone, and reported being detained at East Riffa Police Station. 
 
On June 14, he was transferred to the Public Prosecution, which remanded
him in custody for seven days, on accusations of “publishing and broadcasting
false news that undermine the prestige of the State” under Article 134 of the
Penal Code[3].
 
On June 21, 2016, Mr. Nabeel Rajab appeared before the Public
Prosecution, which remanded him in custody for eight additional days, in spite
of a request for immediate release made by his legal counsel.
 
On June 28, 2016, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was transferred from police custody
to the Bahrain Defence Force (BDF) Hospital due to unprecedented heart
problems. On the same day, he was examined by a doctor, and was transferred
back to West Riffa police station.
 
On July 12, during the hearing, the request for release filed by Mr.
Rajab's lawyers was dismissed by the judge and the hearing was postponed to
August 2. 
 
On August 2, 2016, the High Criminal Court, formed of judges Messrs.
Abdulla Al Ashraf, Ali Al Dahrani and Sh. Hamad Bin Salman Al Khalifa, decided
to postpone the trial to September 5, without providing any justification.
 
During the hearing, the lawyers of Mr. Rajab requested
his provisional release on the basis of his health conditions and the lack of
evidence, but the request was rejected by the Court. Instead, the judge ordered
to refer Mr. Rajab to the prison’s clinic.
On September 4, Mr. Rajab was summoned and questioned by CID officials.
He was denied access to a lawyer on this occasion.
 
On September 5, 2016, the Public Prosecution announced that additional
charges had been brought against Mr. Nabeel Rajab, for deliberately
disseminating “false news and information and tendentious rumours that
undermine the kingdom’s prestige and stature”, in relation to a letter
published in the New York Times on
September 4, 2016[4],
describing his judicial harassment and arbitrary detention. If convicted, this
could add one year to his final sentence. In total, he now faces up to 16 years
in prison. Therefore
the court decided to postpone once again the next hearing in his trial to
October 6, 2016.
 
Mr. Rajab finds himself in extremely poor detention conditions
while in solitary confinement at West Riffa police station. The living
conditions in his cell are extremely unsanitary, as the toilet and shower are
unclean and unhygienic, with insufficient water. Moreover, cleaning products
and other items, such as a radio, provided by his family were not allowed.
According to Mr. Rajab’s family he has lost 7kg since his arrest, has
developed high blood pressure and has irregular heart beats. Besides, his skin
has yellowed in colour. Over the past month, his health has drastically
deteriorated while in detention.
 
Actions requested:
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to:
 
i. Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel
Rajab and that of all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
ii. Release Mr. Nabeel Rajab immediately and unconditionally, as
his detention is arbitrary and its conditions amount to ill-treatment and are
endangering his life;
 
iii. Put an end to any act of harassment, including at the judicial
level, against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and against all human rights defenders in
Bahrain;
 
iv. Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations
General Assembly, in particular its Articles 1,Article 6 (c) and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Addresses:
 
• Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA,
King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
• Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: 00973
17 21 05 75; Email: ofd@mofa.gov.bh
• Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs,
Fax: +973 175 31 284
• Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Email: info@interior.gov.bh

• Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland.
Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
• H.E. Ahmed Mohammed Yousif Aldoseri, Ambassador of the Kingdom of Bahrain to
the Kingdom of Belgium, Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail: Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh

 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your
respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
October 7, 2016. 
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.



[1] Article 133 of the Penal Code
provides that “A punishment of imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 years
shall be inflicted upon any person who deliberately announces in wartime false
or malicious news, statements or rumors or mounts adverse publicity campaigns,
so as to cause damage to military preparations for defending the State of
Bahrain or military operations of the Armed Forces, to cause people to panic or
to weaken the nation's perseverance”.
Imprisonment shall be the penalty if the offence is
committed as a consequence of spying for a foreign country.
Life imprisonment shall be the penalty if the offence is
committed as a consequence of spying for a foreign country”.


[2] Article 216 of the Penal Code
provides that “A person shall be liable for imprisonment or payment of a fine
if he offends, by any method of expression the National Assembly, or other
constitutional institutions, the army, law courts, authorities or government
agencies.”


[3] Article 134 of the Penal Code
provides thats “A punishment of imprisonment for at least 3 months and a fine
of at least BD100, or either penalty, shall be inflicted upon every citizen who
deliberately releases abroad false or malicious news, statements or rumors
about domestic conditions in the State, so as to undermine financial confidence
in the State or adversely affect its prestige or position, or exercise in any
manner whatsoever activities that are harmful to the national interests. The
punishment shall be imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 years if an
offence is committed in wartime”.


[4] See Letter from a Bahraini jail,
September 4, 2016, The New York Times. 