United States:  Guantánamo – Eleven Steps to Accountability
March 17, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Reports and Publications / United States / 2014 / MarchUnited States: Guantánamo – Eleven Steps to Accountability






(1) Close detention in Guantanamo Bay
Keep the
promise of closing down the detention in Guantánamo Bay and the system of
arbitrary detention it represents.
(2) Transfer or resettle
those cleared for release
Prisoners recommended
for transfer by the Guantánamo Review Task Force should be transferred to their
home country, or where this is not possible to a host country or the United
States as fast as possible.  
(3) Ensure
human rights compliant resettlement
In doing so,
the United States has to ensure that transfers and resettlements are consistent
with obligations under international human rights law and humanitarian law and
taking into account the informed consent of the individual detainee. 
(4) Prosecute in US
Federal Court or release
All prisoners
who cannot be transferred to a host country because they are accused of having
committed a crime should be transferred to the United States for prosecution in
federal court. No prisoner should be kept in detention indefinitely without
trial in violation of human rights law.
(5) Abolish Military
Commission system
Military commission
trial can only be compatible with international law if it concerns recognized
offences against the law of war. Almost all of the past, current, and pending
prosecutions before the military commission do not deal with alleged
internationally recognized war crimes or crimes conducted in armed conflicts. The
system of sub-standard military commissions has proven both, ineffective and a
travesty of justice. It needs to be closed.
(6) Recognize the torture
policies as unlawful
The US should
publicly recognize that the policies contained in the torture memos constitute
unlawful practice and amount to a violation of torture, cruel and inhuman, or
degrading treatment. Without a legal confirmation there is no certainty about a
no return to these policies. The US should also publish the report of the
Senate Investigative Committee on the torture policies to allow proper accountability.
(7) End impunity
The United
States has a positive obligation under international law to investigate all
allegations of torture and crimes under international law. Investigations
should be directed against everyone who authorized, participated in, or was
complicit in such practices. This includes lawyers and high-level officials
from the Bush administration who drafted or authorized the torture memos, and
authorized ‘enhanced interrogation’ technics. This is not a political choice –
it is a legal obligation.
(8) Provide remedies and reparations
Everybody who
has been subject to torture, cruel and inhuman, or degrading treatment has the
right to a remedy and reparation irrespective of his affiliation. In addition
to monetary compensations, reparations should also include symbolic actions
such as public acknowledgment, public apology or commitment to non-repetition
of torture, and unlawful detentions.
(9) Recognize the role of
human rights law 
The United
States should revise its legal positions and recognize in line with general
international doctrine that human rights obligations of a state apply
extra-territorially to situations in which the state in question exercises
effective control or authority over a territory or a person. In the context of
Guantánamo and other detention outside US sovereign territory this means that
the United States have to comply with their obligations under international
human rights law because they exercise de
facto control over all detainees.  
(10) Cooperate with
ongoing investigations 
Cases have
been lodged in third countries under the principle of universal jurisdiction
and before international institutions against US officials, contractors, or
third countries that become complicit in torture, secret detention, or enforced
disappearances. The US should cooperate with these proceedings rather than
exercising pressure on third states, and provide relevant information via
mutual legal assistance and extradition. 
(11) Ensure intelligence accountability
The system of
enforced disappearances and torture within the secret detention and renditions
program has highlighted the lack of effective legal accountability of the
intelligence services, especially within their international cooperation.  Effective safeguards against complicity in
torture through the receipt, demand, and sharing of intelligence information –
possible obtained through torture – needs to be put in place. No actor in
counter-terrorism, not even the intelligence community, can stay outside the
law. 