Bahrain:  Life sentence upheld for Mr. Al-Khawaja while judicial repression of defenders continues
September  5, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / SeptemberBahrain: Life sentence upheld for Mr. Al-Khawaja while judicial repression of defenders continues


PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
BAHRAIN: Authorities keep a hard line against human
rights defenders despite international outcry
 
Paris-Geneva, September 5, 2012 – The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), is
gravely concerned at the confirmation of heavy prison terms against Mr.
Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, and more generally the repressive line kept by the
authorities against human rights defenders.
 
Two
weeks after the 3-year prison sentence against prominent human rights defender Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for
Human Rights (BCHR), Director of the Gulf Center for Human Rights (GCHR) and
FIDH Deputy Secretary General, Bahraini courts continue the
judicial harassment of human rights defenders in reprisal for their role in the protest movement that erupted in
2011 in the country.
 
On
September 4, the High Court of Appeals upheld the life sentence against Mr. Abdulhadi
Al-Khawaja, founder of the GCHR,
former President of the BHCR and former Middle East and North Africa Director
at Front Line, as well as jail sentences against 19 other leading political
and human rights activists including seven in abstentia. They were originally sentenced on June
22, 2011 by a military court created under temporary martial law under various
charges, including including “organising and managing a terrorist
organisation”, “attempt to overthrow the Government by force and in liaison
with a terrorist organisation working for a foreign country” and “collection of
money for a terrorist group”. A retrial was granted, but some charges were only
slightly changed. The High Court of Appeals was expected to issue its verdict
on June 14, 2012, but postponed it without giving any explanation, after
refusing to hold any hearing session between October 2011 and late April 2012.
Moreover, allegations of confessions under torture have not been investigated
during the retrial.
 
In addition, dozens of other human rights defenders are facing ongoing
judicial harassment and some of them remain arbitrarily detained. Those
harassed include the blogger Ms. Zainab Al-Khawaja, who has been detained since
August 2, 2012 after she peacefully protested alone at Al Qadam roundabout
against the arbitrary detention of her father, Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja. On
September 4, 2012, the Lower Criminal Court resumed her trial on charges of
“damaging property belonging to the Ministry of Interior”. The next session is
scheduled on September 10, 2012.
 
In addition, on September 4, 2012, the Third Lower Criminal Court was
due to issue its verdict against 28 medical professionals, including nurses,
consultants, surgeons and ambulance drivers, under charges including “hatred
against the regime” and “taking part in an illegal gathering”. However, the
verdict was postponed to September 11, 2012. The Observatory recalls that the
confessions were allegedly obtained under torture[1].
 
This
repressive climate continues despite recent international denunciations
addressed to the Bahraini authorities in the past weeks by key figures. For
instance, on August 23, 2012, Ms. Margaret Sekkagya, Mr. Maina Kiai and Mr.
Frank La Rue, respectively United Nations Special Rapporteurs on the situation
of human rights defenders, on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of
association, and on the right to freedom of opinion and expression, firmly
condemned the ongoing “campaign of persecution” and urged the Bahraini
authorities “to comply with the rights to peaceful assembly and expression
and immediately release those arbitrarily detained for exercising their
legitimate freedoms”. The UN experts further recalled that “the
continuing repression of free speech in Bahrain runs counter to international
law and standards that individuals will not be prosecuted for peaceful
political speech”. Moreover, it is expected that further recommendations
regarding the situation of human rights in Bahrain will be adopted during the
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of the UN Human Rights Council, on September
19, 2012.
 
The
Observatory firmly denounces the new sentences against human rights defenders
in Bahrain and recalls the authorities’ obligation to comply with the
international human rights instruments ratified by the Kingdom of Bahrain, and
with the 1998 UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. It reiterates its call on the Bahraini authorities
to immediately and unconditionally release all human rights defenders detained,
since their detention and ongoing judicial harassment are arbitrary and merely
aim at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·      
OMCT: Anne-Laurence Lacroix: +41 (0) 22 809 49
31
 



[1]            On September 29,
2011, another 20 medics who had treated the injured during the crackdown on
demonstrations were sentenced by the Bahrain National Safety Court on charges
of “possession of unlicensed weapons”, occupying Salmanya Medical Complex”,
“calling for the overthrow of the regime”, “seizing medical equipment” and
“spreading false information”. On June 14, 2012, the Court of Appeals confirmed
sentences of one month to five years of imprisonment against 11 defendants,
while the others were found innocent on all charges. 