Bahrain:  Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh arbitrarily detained and charged under Anti-Terrorism law and sentencing of Ms. Nazeeha Saeed
July 21, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / JulyBahrain: Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh arbitrarily detained and charged under Anti-Terrorism law and sentencing of Ms. Nazeeha SaeedURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORYNew information BHR 003 / 0717 / OBS 076.1 Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment /Sentencing Bahrain July 21, 2017The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership
 of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received
 new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following 
situation in Bahrain.New information:The
 Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary 
arrest, detention and the charges brought against Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh, Monitoring and Documentation Officer at the NGO Salam for Democracy and Human Rights, and the sentencing of Ms. Nazeeha Saeed,
 France 24 and Radio Monte Carlo Doualiya’s correspondent in Bahrain, 
who has been covering pro-democracy demonstrations in Bahrain and 
denouncing rights violations committed by police forces during these 
protests.According
 to the information received, on July 18, 2017, Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh 
was charged under Anti-Terrorism law. The head of Manama’s Prosecution 
of Terrorist Crimes initiated an investigation into allegations of 
organising and running an illegal group aiming at preventing state 
institutions from carrying out their work, initiating attacks on the 
individuals' personal freedom and damaging national unity through means 
of terrorism. Consequently, the Prosecutor ordered a 6 month detention 
of Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh pending investigation.Although
 no specific group name has been mentioned, the authorities portray the 
group as receiving “gifts from those who work for the benefit of a 
terrorist organization outside Bahrain to do terrorist acts against the 
kingdom of Bahrain as well as collecting and giving money to a group 
practicing terrorist activity”.On
 July 16, 2017, Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh, who is being detained in solitary
 confinement at Isa Town women’s Prison, was seen in an ambulance chair 
at the Qaala clinic, which is a division of the Ministry of Interior, by
 fellow detained human rights defender Nabeel Rajab[1] .
 As of publication of this appeal, her family is still denied access to 
her, only her husband was able to see her for a few minutes on July 16, 
2017, and reported that she was in a wheelchair.On
 July 12, 2017, Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh launched a hunger strike to 
protest torture and maltreatment she was subjected to in the Criminal 
Investigation Department following her arrest on July 4, 2017 (see 
background information).The
 Observatory expresses its outmost concerns over the arbitrary detention
 of Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh and fears that she might be at risk of torture
 while in detention. The Observatory urges Bahraini authorities to 
guarantee her physical and psychological integrity, to allow her to 
access her family and lawyer and to immediately and unconditionally 
release her.Furthermore,
 on July 18, 2017, Manama’s Court of Appeals confirmed Ms. Nazeeha 
Saeed’s 1,000 Bahraini dinars (approx. 2,365 Euros) fine handed down on 
May 25, 2017 (see background information) for “working without a 
license”. It has been reported that an appeal with Bahrain’s court of 
cassation will be filed by the defendant.The
 Observatory condemns the sentencing of Ms. Nazeeha Saeed, which only 
aims at sanctioning her peaceful and legitimate human rights activities 
and urges Bahraini authorities to overturn the sentence and to put an 
end to any form of harassment against her.The
 Observatory recalls that both women human rights defenders had recently
 been facing increased acts of harassment alongside several other human 
rights defenders[2] .
 Indeed, in May 2017, Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh was previously held, 
tortured and sexually assaulted by the NSA at Muharraq police station, 
where she was being detained in connection with her human rights 
activities.Background information:In 2011, Ms. Nazeeha Saeed was held in custody in 2011 and tortured.On
 May 25, 2017, the Second Lower Criminal Court handed down a 1,000 
Bahraini dinars (approx. 2,365 Euros) fine against journalist Ms. 
Nazeeha Saeed, for “working without a license”. Ms. Saeed, whose 
application to renew her license has been rejected without any basis at 
the end of March 2016, was summoned for interrogation and charged with 
“unlawfully working for an international media” under Article 88 of Law 
47/2002 on July 17, 2016.In
 April 2017, Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh, who together with 22 other human 
rights defenders, was subjected to a travel ban and falsely accused of 
participating in “illegal gatherings” in the city of Duraz[3], is also the target of a defamation campaign conducted by the pro-government newspaper  Al-Ayam, which accused her of fabricating reports on human rights violations in Bahrain.On May 15, 2017, Mrs. Al-Saegh’s car was burnt.On
 May 27, 2017, Mrs. Al-Saegh , was summoned by the NSA to Muharraq 
police station. She was released seven hours later and was immediately 
taken to the hospital in a very concerning psychological state, 
following a “severe nervous breakdown”. Upon her release, Mrs. Al-Saegh 
reported having suffered acts of torture, including severe beatings on 
the head, sexual abuse and was insulted threatened to be raped if she 
continued her human rights work. NSA agents also threatened to target 
her family members. According to reliable reports, she was also forced 
to repeat the royal anthem and beaten and insulted when failed to do so 
properly. During her interrogation, she was asked about the work of 
activists inside and outside Bahrain, including in Geneva during 
sessions of the United Nations (UN) Human Rights Council (HRC).On
 July 4, 2017, at approximatively 12:45am, armed, masked and plain 
clothed officers from the Bahrain security forces raided Mrs. Ebtisam 
Al-Saegh’s home and arrested her without any warrant. It is feared that 
the security forces officers might belong to the National Security 
Agency (NSA).Following
 her arrest, Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh was briefly seen by detainees in the 
morning of July 4, 2017, at the Isa Town women’s prison visibly in poor 
physical conditions before being taken away to an undisclosed location. 
Detainees who could see Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh reported that she may have
 been beaten.Although
 her whereabouts were not immediately disclosed to her family, on July 
4, 2017, at around 9pm, Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh called her family from Isa
 Town women’s prison, where she was being detained in solitary 
confinement outside of interrogation hours. She reported being 
interrogated for long hours under tough circumstances and being forced 
to sign on false confessions. She also reported being sent to the 
Ministry of Interior’s clinic in Al Qaalaa, where she was diagnosed with
 low blood pressure.Actions requested:Please write to the authorities in Bahrain, urging them to:      
 i.         Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and 
psychological integrity of Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh and Ms. Nazeeha 
Saeed,as well as of all human rights defenders in Bahrain;     
 ii.         Immediately and unconditionally release Mrs. Ebtisam 
Al-Saegh, as well as all detained human rights defenders in Bahrainas 
their detention is arbitrary since it only aims at punishing them for 
their legitimate human rights activities;    
 iii.         Drop all the charges against Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh 
andimmediately allow her to access her family and lawyers and guarantee 
her right to due process and a fair trial;   
 iv.         Order an immediate, thorough, transparent, effective and 
impartial investigation into the above-mentioned allegations of torture,
 ill-treatment, and physical and psychological pressure of Mrs. Ebtisam 
Al-Saeghby security agents during her interrogation in May 2017 in order
 to identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent 
tribunal, and apply the sanctions provided by the law to them;    
 v.         Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at the 
judicial level, against Mrs. Ebtisam Al-Saegh, Ms. Nazeeha Saeedand all 
human rights defenders in Bahrain, so that they are able to carry out 
their legitimate activities without hindrance and fear of reprisals;   
 vi.         Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations 
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles 
1, 5(b), and 12.2;  
 vii.         Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and 
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights 
standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain.Addresses:• Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587 • Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax : 00973 17 21 05 75; ofd@mofa.gov.bh• Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Fax: +973 175 31 284• Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Email: info@interior.gov.bh
 • H.E. Mr. Yusuf Abdulkarim Bucheeri, Permanent Mission of Bahrain to 
the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. 
Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch • H.E. Ahmed Mohammed Yousif 
Aldoseri, Embassy of the Kingdom of Bahrain to the Kingdom of Belgium, 
Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail: Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bhPlease also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Bahrain in your respective country.***Paris-Geneva, July 21, 2017Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the 
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this
 programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
 against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of 
ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
 implemented by international civil society.To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:·     E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org·     Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80·     Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29[1]                  See Observatory Urgent Appeal BHR 006 / 0812 / OBS 048.29, published on July 10, 2017.[2]                  See the Observatory Urgent Appeal BHR 002 / 0617 / OBS 063, published on June 13, 2017.[3]                 See Observatory Urgent Appeal BHR 001 / 0417 / OBS 047, published on April 28, 2017. 