Tanzania:  Arbitrary arrest and subsequent release of Mr. Ole Ngurumwa Onesmo and Mr. John Baraka.
June  9, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Tanzania / 2017 / JuneTanzania: Arbitrary arrest and subsequent release of Mr. Ole Ngurumwa Onesmo and Mr. John Baraka. 
URGENT
APPEAL – THE OBSERVATORY

TZA 002 / 0617 / OBS 062
Arbitrary Arrest / Release on bail / 
Judicial Harassment/
Obstacle to freedom of peaceful assembly
Tanzania
June 8, 2017
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Tanzania. 
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about police
attempts to hinder a meeting organised by an NGO, including via the arbitrary
arrest and subsequent release of Mr. Ole
Ngurumwa Onesmo, National Coordinator of the Tanzania Human Rights
Defenders Coalition (THRDC), and Mr. John
Baraka, Coordinator of the Tanzania Students Networking Programme (TSNP),
known for advocating and supporting the role of human rights defenders in
public life and civil society at large. 
According to
the information received, on June 3, 2017, TSNP was informed by the owners of the Blue Pearl Hotel that they could
not enter without a permission letter from the police the venue of a book
launch event scheduled to take place at the Ubungo Plaza, Blue Pearl Hotel to
present Sauti ya Watetezi wa Haki Vyuoni
(The Voice of Human Rights Defenders in Universities), a book that
illustrates the harassment tactics used to remove human rights defenders from
positions in higher education institutions in Tanzania, authored by Alphonce Lusako[1],
the General Secretary of TSNP.
Three police vehicles then arrived at the hotel while event organisers
were negotiating with hotel management out-front and arrested Mr. Baraka. When
Mr. Onesmo objected to his arrest, he was then immediately arrested too. Both
were transported to Magomeni Police Station without having their charges
articulated to them. THRDC Advocate Mr. Jones
Sendodo attempted to inquire about the nature of the charges, but police
were unable to confirm any charges at the time of the arrests. Police informed
Mr. Sendodo they were awaiting orders from superior authorities.
On the same day, Messrs. Onesmo and Baraka were later charged with
criminal trespass, after the Ubungo Plaza, Blue Pearl Hotel filed a complaint
stating the men had forced the hotel to host the launch event for their
colleague Mr. Alphonce Lusako. Messrs. Onesmo and Baraka were released on bail that same
day, with instructions to report to the police on June 5, 2017[2]. 
Reporting to the station on June 5, the men were informed that the Blue
Pearl Hotel had not yet filed documentation required to formalize their
complaint. They were ordered to return on June 7, 2017. When contacted by Mr. Onesmo on
June 6, the Blue Pearl Hotel claimed to be unaware of any criminal complaints
against Messrs. Baraka, and Onesmo. However, it was only on June
7 that Blue Pearl representatives confirmed that they had filed a complaint at
the direction of an “unknown authority”.
As of June, 7 2017, the Blue Pearl Hotel has not presented any evidence
or documentation to police to substantiate their claims. Indeed, TSNP reported
that Blue Pearl Hotel had freely agreed to host the event, had received the
payment agreed upon for hosting it and was issued the corresponding receipt.
Therefore the Police informed Mr. Onesmo that they would expedite the
investigation to compel Blue Pearl to provide evidence.
The Observatory was also informed that the incident described above was
not the first attempt to hinder the book launch event. Indeed, the event was
initially planned to be held at the Commission of Science Technology (COSTECH),
an institution affiliated with the government of Tanzania. In violation of a
contractual agreement, COSTECH cancelled the event, forcing the organisers to
move the event to the Ubungo Plaza, Blue Pearl Hotel[3],
where THRDC had already organised several events without any issue.
The Observatory expresses its deepest
concern with the arrests and
judicial harassment of Messrs. Onesmo and Baraka, as they appear to be linked to their human rights activities,
and condemns the unlawful
interference with TSNP’s right to organise meetings in private locations, in
violation of domestic, regional and international provisions guaranteeing the
right to freedom of peaceful assembly.
The Observatory urges the Tanzanian authorities to drop all charges
against Messrs. Onesmo and Baraka and to ensure that all judicial
proceedings against them are carried out in full compliance with their right to
a fair trial as protected under domestic and international law.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Tanzania asking them to: 
i.           Put an
end to all forms of harassment against Messrs. Onesmo and Baraka, including at
the judicial level, against them as well as against all members of the TSNP and
the THRDC and generally against all human rights defenders in Tanzania;  
ii.         Guarantee Messrs. Onesmo and Baraka’s right
to due process and a fair trial, as protected under domestic and international
law;
iii.          Order an immediate, thorough, transparent
investigation into the facts, including the alleged interference of state authorities,
mentioned in this urgent appeal in order to clarify the events, identify all
those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and apply them the
sanctions provided by the law;
iv.          Conform with the
provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9,
1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, especially Articles
1 and 12.2; 
v.         Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Tanzania. 
Addresses:
·      
President
of Tanzania, Hon. Dr. John Pombe Joseph Magufuli; Fax: +255 22 2113425; E-mail:
ikulu@ikulu.go.tz 
·      
Prime Minister of Tanzania, Rt. Hon. Kassim Majaliwa; Fax: +255 22
2112850; E-mail: ps@pmo.go.tz 
·       Minister of Constitutional Affairs and Justice, Hon. Prof. Palamagamba John Kabudi; Fax: +255 22 211 3236; E-mail: katibumkuu@sheria.go.tz 
·       Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and East African Cooperation, Hon. Dkt. Augustine Mahiga;
Fax: +255 (0)22 226600 
·       H.E. Mrs.
Agnes Kayola, Ambassador, Embassy of Tanzania in Brussels, Belgium; Fax (0032)
(0) 2 646 80 26; Email: tanzania@skynet.be  
·      
H.E. Dr. James Alex Msekela, Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary,
Permanent Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania to the United
Nations,
Geneva and Vienna, Fax: +41 22 732 82 55; Email: mission.tanzania@ties.itu.int.
· Executive
Secretary of the Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance (CHRAGG);
Email: chragg@chragg.go.tz/mary.massay@chragg.go.tz, Fax: +255 22 2111533/2111281. 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Tanzania in your
respective countries.
***
Geneva-Paris, June 9, 2017
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European
Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                Mr. Lusako got expelled from the
University of Dar es Salaam in 2011 without motive. He was re-admitted by the
same University through the Tanzania Commission for Universities (TCU), and got
expelled again on January 26, 2017. He has lodged a case to challenge the
decision of the University and his case is still pending in the High Court of
Tanzania. 


[2]               See THRDC Press statement, June 3, 2017:
http://thrdc.or.tz/press-statement-on-the-arrest-of-the-national-coordinator-of-the-tanzania-human-rights-defenders-coalition-thrdc-mr-onesmo-olengurumwa-and-mr-bara



[3]               The Blue Pearl Hotel is owned by the MARK Hospitality
Group International, which manages 11 premier properties in Tanzania. 