Bahrain:  Series of harsh, disproportionate and unfair sentences against professionals for standing by human rights victims
September 30, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2011 / SeptemberBahrain: Series of harsh, disproportionate and unfair sentences against professionals for standing by human rights victims

PRESS RELEASE -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
BAHRAIN:
Series of harsh, disproportionate and unfair sentences against professionals
for standing by human rights victims
 
Paris-Geneva, September 30, 2011. The International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), in the framework of their joint programme, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, express their utmost concern following a
series of harsh criminal sentences targeting civil society leaders for their
involvement in the popular protest movement that started on February 14, 2011,
and for denouncing human rights violations committed by the authorities during
its repression. Such decisions demonstrate that the authorities continue to
stifle civil society, notably human rights defenders in Bahrain, through
criminalisation and de-legitimation of their role.
 
On September 29, 2011, Bahrain National Safety Court
sentenced 20 doctors and medical workers who
provided medical assistance to demonstrators injured during the
crackdown on demonstrations
to heavy prison sentences ranging from five to 15 years on charges of
“possession of unlicensed weapons”, occupying Salmanya Medical Complex”,
“calling for the overthrow of the regime”, “seizing medical equipment” and
“spreading false information”[1].

 
On September 25, the same court had already sentenced
two heads of the Teachers’ Association of Bahrain, Mr. Mahdi Abu Deeb,
President, and Ms. Jalila Salman, Vice-President, to respectively ten
and three years in prison on charges of “disrupting schooling”, “broadcasting
false news” and “threatening national security” for expressing solidarity with
the popular protest movement in Bahrain and for denouncing human rights
violations committed during its repression. Several of them were reportedly
tortured during pre-trial detention and deprived from access to their lawyer
and family over long periods of time. Mr. Mahdi Abu Deeb is detained in Gurain
military prison, while an arrest warrant was issued against Ms. Jalila Salman,
who was in provisional release at the time of the verdict.
 
On September 28, 14 opposition leaders and human
rights defenders were also sentenced in appeal to heavy prison terms, including
life imprisonment for Messrs. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, former President of
the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) and former Middle East Region
Coordinator for Front Line Defenders, and Abduljalil al-Sengais, in
charge of the Human Rights Unit of Haq Movement for Civil Liberties and Democracy. Both are currently detained in Gurain
military prison and have 30 days to appeal before the Court of Cassation.
 
The Observatory recalls that the National Security
Court, presided over by a military judge, was created on March 15, 2011 under
the law establishing the state of emergency and with no respect for guarantees
of a fair trial, to try those suspected of having supported, organised or taken
part in the protest movement. 
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern about the
sentences against the above-mentioned human rights defenders as it considers that they seem to merely aim at
sanctioning their human rights activities and that their right to a fair trial
has been disregarded. Accordingly, the Observatory calls upon the Bahraini authorities to guarantee
in all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity, to immediately and unconditionally release
those detained and to put an end to
all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level - against all human
rights defenders.
 
For further information, please contact:
·       FIDH:
Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39
 



[1] The doctors Messrs. Ali Al-Ekri, Ali
Alsadady, Nader Al-Diwani, Ahmed Omran, Mahmood
Asghar, Ebrahim Al-Demestany, Abdulkhaleq Al-Oraiby, Ghassan
Dhaif, Basem Daif, Sayed Marhoon Al-Weda'y, Qasem Omran,
Ms. Rula Al-Saffar,
President of the Bahrain Nursing Society (BNS), and Ms. Nada Dhaif were sentenced to 15 years
in prison; Messrs. Hassan Al-Tublani and Saeed Al-Samaheejy to
ten years; Ms. Fatima Hajji, Ms. Dia Ebrahim Abuldris,
Ms. Najah Khalil Al-Haddad, Ms. Zahra Al-Sammak and
Mr. Mohamed Al-Shehab to five years. The convicts, who were all
in provisional release at the time of the verdict, have the right to appeal
within 15 days the sentences before the Criminal Supreme Appeal Court (ordinary
court) according to Decree by Law (28), 2011 and will have to report to prison
within that time to be allowed to lodge their appeal. The 20 were originally
part of a group of 48 medical workers charged on May 3, 2011, which was split
into two groups, one of 20 accused of “felonies” and the other 28 accused of “misdemeanours”,
or less serious offences. All those accused of misdemeanours were released on
bail by the end of June. Their case will resume on October 24 before an
ordinary court. The group of 20 was released on bail between June and September
7. See Observatory Urgent Appeal BHR 005 / 0511 / OBS 073. 