Egypt:  Arbitrary detention and subsequent release of 33 human rights activists
January 20, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2010 / JanuaryEgypt: Arbitrary detention and subsequent release of 33 human rights activistsEGY 001 / 0110 / OBS 009
Incommunicado detention / Release / Ill-treatments
Egypt
January 20, 2010
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
Brief description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the arbitrary detention and subsequent release of Messrs. Wael Abbas, Mostapha Al-Nagar, Ms. Israa Abdel Fatah and Ms. Marianne Nagy Hanna, journalists, Messrs. Sameer Awad Bassem, representative of Al Ghad party, Fathy Mohammed Bassem, representative of the Egyptian Democratic Institute, Sharif Abdel Aziz Mahmoud, Mahmoud Mohammed Khalid, known as "Mac", and Ms. Shahinaz Abdelsalam, bloggers, Mr. Nasser Abdel Hamid and Ms. Salma Akal, members of the Democratic Front Party, Mr. Roaa Ibrahim, student, Mr. Ahmed Badawy Abdel Meguid, a member of the “Sixth April Youth”, Messrs. Ahmed Abu Zekry, Talaat Al-Sawy, Ahmed Mahmoud Mustafa, Ismail Sayyid Omar, Ahmed Fathy Mohamed, Hossam Saber Ali, Hanan Ismail, Hamada Abdel Fatah, Gamal Fareed, Mohamed Khalaf Mohamed, Al- Hosseiny Sayed Ahmed, Mohamed Hamdy Hassan, Mohamed Abdallah Mohamed, Heshmat Abdallah Mohamed, Ismail Eleskandarani and Tareq Sabry Abdallah, Ms. Nadia Al-Zeiny Barouni, Ms. Amira Al-Tahawi, Ms. Baula Abdo Ameen and Ms. Mona Fouad Ahmed in the Governorate of Qena.
According to the information received, on January 15, 2010, the thirty-three above-mentioned human rights defenders were arrested upon their arrival to the Egyptian Governorate of Qena, where they had travelled to express support with the families of the victims of the shooting that occurred on Coptic Christmas, between January 6 and 7, 2010, which left seven persons dead and incited tense sectarian protests in Egypt and to denounce sectarian violence and the human rights violations committed by the authorities allegedly to combat it.
The group of human rights defenders was told by the police that an arrest warrant had been issued against them on January 15, 2010, but none was shown to them. The group was detained incommunicado in the Qena Security Directorate, their lawyers being denied access to the Qena Security Directorate and told that their clients were not being held there.
On January 16, 2010, the group was released. According to the information received, no charges have been brought against them to date. But during detention, the group was threatened of prosecution for “violating the Constitution” and “constituting a group of more than five people inciting demonstrations” pursuant to the Emergency Law[1].
The detainees reported that Ms. Israa Abdel Fatah and Mr. Ahmed Badawy were subjected to ill-treatments during their arrest. Ms. Abdel Fatah was roughly grabbed by her arm and Mr. Badawy violently pushed. Additionally, the group was held in inhumane conditions, its members being given one single meal during their detention, and given neither bed nor blankets. While in custody, Mr. Tareq Sabry Abdallah suffered severe health conditions and had to be transferred to the hospital on three occasions.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Egypt, urging them to:

 Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of the thirty-three above-mentioned human rights defenders as well as of all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into above-mentioned acts of ill-treatment faced by above-mentioned defenders during their arrest and detention, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring all those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
 Put an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against the thirty-three above-mentioned human rights defenders as well as of all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 Comply with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, and Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Egypt.

Addresses

President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, His Excellency Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg, Fax: +202 390 1998
Prime Minister Mr. Ahmed Mahmoud Mohamed Nazif, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 735 6449 / 7958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
Minister of the Interior, General Habib Ibrahim Habib El Adly, Ministry of the Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 579 2031 / 794 5529
Minister of Justice, Mr. Mamdoh Mohie E-din Marie, Ministry of Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 795 8103
Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Maher Abd al-Wahid, Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 577 4716
National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 5747497 / 5747670
Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be

Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in your respective country.

Paris-Geneva, January 20, 2010
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:


E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
Tel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 

    [1] The Emergency Law, in force since 1981, states that no more than five people can constitute a group to set up a public demonstration. 