Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Free all human rights defenders and stop ongoing arbitrary arrests
November 20, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2013 / NovemberMyanmar (ex-Burma): Free all human rights defenders and stop ongoing arbitrary arrests Paris-Geneva, November 20,
2013. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an
FIDH-OMCT joint programme, welcomes the latest release of human rights
defenders who were among the political prisoners detained in Burma/Myanmar, and
now urges the Government to immediately and unconditionally release all those
who remain detained and to stop ongoing arbitrary arrests and imprisonment.
 
“President Thein Sein’s promise to release all
political prisoners by the end of the year is not enough”, said Karim
Lahidji, President of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH).
“He should ensure an immediate halt to the judicial harassment and detention of activists and
human rights defenders in the country”, he added.
 
On November 15, 2013, Burma’s President Thein Sein
ordered the release of 69 political prisoners in his latest amnesty. Among
those freed were high profile human rights defenders such as Ms. Naw Ohn Hla,
leading member of the Democracy and Peace Women Network, but also U Aung Soe,
a member of Yangon People’s Support Network, which campaigns for the respect of
rule of law and democracy in Burma and has been involved in the campaign
against the Letpadaung project, along with Ko Soe Thu and U Maung San,
two villagers, for their participation in peaceful protests against the
Letpadaung copper mining project in Salingyi Township, Sagaing Region, a joint
venture between the Burmese military's Union of Myanmar Economic Holdings
Limited (UMEHL) and Wan Bao Company which led to the displacement of farming
families in 26 villages from their land, with more than 7,000 acres confiscated
in 2010. 
 
“It is vital to repeal the whole legal arsenal that has been abused against
human rights defenders and rehabilitate those who unduly suffered”, said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). “The international community,
too, has a card to play to ensure
an enabling environment for civil society allowing the full strength of Burmese
society to contribute to the process of transition”, he added.
 
At least 60 political prisoners remain behind bars and
265 people, mostly farmers who protested against land confiscation, are
awaiting trial. In addition, the Government continues to use oppressive laws to
jail activists as well as villagers in ethnic nationality areas. The amnesty
indeed fell on the same day that a Yangon court sentenced Ko Htin Kyaw,
leader of the Movement for Democracy Current Force (MDCF), a community-based
organisation which represents grass-roots communities and struggles against
land-grabbing and other human rights violations, to six months in prison under
the Peaceful Gathering and Demonstration Law, in relation to a protest against
land grabbing. In addition, on the same day that President Thein Sein ordered
the release of the 69 political prisoners, a court in Myitkyina sentenced four
Kachin men to two years in prison under the Unlawful Association Act for their
alleged ties to the Kachin Independence Army (KIA). The jail term contradicts
the much-heralded October-10 agreement between the Burmese Government and the
KIA to reduce hostilities, signed in the presence of United Nations and Chinese
officials. 
 
The amnesty also failed to address the dire situation
of Tun Aung and Kyaw Hla Aung, two defenders of the rights of the
Rohingyas in Arakan/Rakhine State who remain detained along with hundreds of
Rohingya following sectarian violence in 2012. In August and October 2013,
various courts in Northern Arakan State sentenced a total of 115 Rohingya to
lengthy prison terms for their alleged involvement in last year’s communal
unrest.
 
As with previous releases of political prisoners, the
November 15 amnesty was strategically timed to coincide with an important
international event. In this instance, it was a three-day visit to Burma by a
high-level EU delegation.
 
The Observatory urges the Burmese authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release all human rights defenders who remain
detained as of today, to put an end to any kind of harassment - including at
judicial and administrative levels - against all human rights defenders in the
country, and to conform more generally with the provisions of the 1998 UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders.
 
For more information, please contact:
· FIDH:
Audrey Couprie/Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18
· OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 