Nepal:  Death in custody of Mr. Som Bahadur Darai. OMCT calls for a proper investigation into the circumstances of his death
November 22, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2010 / NovemberNepal: Death in custody of Mr. Som Bahadur Darai. OMCT calls for a proper investigation into the circumstances of his death NPL 221110Death in custody/ Lack of a
proper investigation
                                               
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in Nepal.
 
Brief description of the situation
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source and
Antenna International, a member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about
the death in custody in unclear circumstances of Mr. Som Bahadur Darai, a 49-year-old
permanent resident of Ratnanagar Municipality-2, Anamnagar, Chitwan district
and temporarily living in Jayamangala, in ward no. 13 of the same municipality,
and the lack of a proper investigation into the surroundings of his death. 
 
According to the information received, on 22
September 2010 at about 4 pm, Mr. Som Bahadur Darai was handed over by villagers
alleging that he had stolen a bicycle to the Ratnanagar Area Police Office
(APO)[1], in
Chitwan district, where he was subsequently detained without charge. The police
later stated that, the same evening around 7:30 pm, Mr. Som Bahadur Darai
committed suicide. He would have hanged himself from the window panel of the detention
cell by using a piece of blanket. He was then brought to Bharatpur Hospital
where he was declared dead.
 
According to the same information, Mr. Som
Bahadur Darai’s family members were only informed about his death on 19 October
2010, although they live just 500 meters from the police station. The police
stated that they did not know Mr. Som Bahadur Darai’s identity as he was drunk
when he was handed to them. However, it is reported that the family already
inquired about Mr. Som Bahadur Darai’s whereabouts on 25 September 2010 but a
police inspector at Ratnanagar APO denied having arrested him and suggested
that the family should visit Bharatpur District Police Office (DPO). There, the
police reportedly said that no one was detained with that name. Only on 19
October 2010 was Mr. Som Bahadur Darai’s wife informed that her husband had
died when she returned to DPO Bharatpur and the police eventually showed her Mr.
Som Bahadur Darai’s clothes and pictures. The family had then to sign a receipt
for the body although it had already been cremated in Bharatpur Municipality.
On the same day, Mr. Som Bahadur Darai’s father registered a First Information
Report (FIR) into the custodial death of his son at DPO, Bharatpur. 
 
OMCT is deeply concerned about the
circumstances surrounding Mr. Som Bahadur Darai’s death. Indeed, according to
the same information, on 24 October 2010, a man who was detained the same night
as Mr. Som Bahadur Darai but who was in another room when the alleged facts
occurred, had to return to DPO Bharatpur and had to sign a paper stating that
the deceased person had not been tortured in police custody. Furthermore, according
to the same information, the window panel where Mr. Som Bahadur Darai allegedly
hanged himself is only almost 5 feet high (approximately 1m53) whereas Mr. Som
Bahadur Darai was almost 5.4 feet tall (approximately 1.65m). It is also
reported that the window panel is not bended or broken. 
 
OMCT has been informed that an informal and
internal police investigation team has been set up, however no further
information could be obtained. OMCT is gravely concerned that the investigation
into the circumstances surrounding Mr. Som Bahadur Darai’s death in custody is
not carried out independently, thoroughly and impartially. 
 
OMCT recalls that the authorities are legally bound to
effectively ensure the physical and psychological integrity of all persons
deprived of liberty in accordance with international human rights law, and in
particular, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. 
 
Accordingly, OMCT
calls on the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the circumstances
surrounding the death in custody of Mr. Mr. Som Bahadur Darai in accordance
with international human rights standards, such as the UN Principle on the
Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary
Executions, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.
 
Action
requested
 
Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them
to:
 
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the circumstances surrounding the death in custody of
Mr. Som Bahadur Darai, in accordance with international human rights
standards, inter alia, with the UN Principle on the Effective Prevention and
Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of which must
be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law;Ensure that adequate, effective
and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation, is granted to the
victim’s family;Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, in
particular ensure that all acts of torture, and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment and punishment are clearly defined in law as offences in accordance
with the provisions set out in Articles 1, 4 and 16 of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and that
they be made punishable with appropriate penalties which take into account the
grave nature of the crimes as required.
 
Addresses
 
Home Minister,Mr. Bhim Rawal, Ministry of Home Affairs, Singha Darbar,
Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: +977 1 4211211 / 4211264, Fax: +977 1 42 11 232Inspector General of Police, Ramesh Chand
(Thakuri), Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407, Tel: +977 1 4 412
432, Fax: +977 1 4 415 593. Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.npAttorney General,Mr. Bharat Bahadur Karki, Office of Attorney GeneralRamshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +977
1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.npChief of Human Rights Cell of police,Mr. Yadav Raj Khanal l, Human Rights Cell,
Nepal Police, Kathmandu, Nepal PO. Box. No.: 407, Fax: +977 1 4415593 E-mail: hrcell@nepalpolice.gov.npChairman of the National Human Rights Commission, Mr. Kedar Nath
Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email:
nhrc@nhrcnepal.org and also  complaints@nhrcnepal.org, Fax: +977 1 5547973Permanent
Mission of Nepal, 81 rue
de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: +4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int
 
Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your
respective country.
***
Geneva, 22 November 2010. 
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1]Ratnanagar
Area Police Office is a “B” grade police station which has reportedly no
authority to detain and file case against individuals. 