Russian Federation:  Hundreds of inspections conducted against NGOs throughout the country to paralyse human rights work
March 25, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2013 / MarchRussian Federation: Hundreds of inspections conducted against NGOs throughout the country to paralyse human rights work


PRESS
RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION:
Hundreds of inspections conducted against NGOs throughout the country to
paralyse human rights work
 
Paris-Geneva, March 25,
2013. While a resolution was adopted last week by the UN Human Rights
Council recalling that “domestic law and
administrative provisions […] should facilitate the work of human rights
defenders, including by avoiding any criminalization, stigmatization,
impediments, obstructions or restrictions thereof contrary to international
human rights law”, hundreds of NGOs are being subjected to inspections by
Government officials across the Russian Federation. This follows the adoption
in 2012 of several laws contradicting the right to freedom of association,
peaceful assembly and expression. The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), denounces this
crackdown, which appears to merely aim at intimidating discommoding vocal
Russian human rights groups. This campaign also attempts to tarnish the image
of NGOs in the public eye.
 
Since the end of February and until today, dozens of
inspections of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) have been launched in at
least 13 regions of the Russian Federation, including Krasnodar, Moscow,
Orenburg, Penza, Perm and Altai territories, St. Petersburg, Primorsky, Saratov
and Rostov provinces. In St. Petersburg, the Spokesperson for the Office of the
Prosecutor declared on March 19, 2013 that over the month some 5,000
inspections would be conducted to check compliance with the laws on terrorism,
extremism as well as other offences. After this date, dozens of NGOs were
inspected in St. Petersburg, including LGBT, human rights and environmental
NGOs. 
 
Across the country, these operations have been
conducted by prosecutors, together with, in some cases, officials from the
Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Federal Security
Service (FSB), the Ministry of Emergencies, the Federal Service for Supervision
of Protection of Consumer Rights and Human Well-Being, the Tax Inspectorate,
the Centre E, a unit specialised in anti-extremism, and even the fire service. 
 
According to the information received, inspections
have particularly targeted groups that supposedly receive foreign funding and
conduct monitoring or advocacy work. The scope of the inspections appears to be
far-ranging, though inspectors have particularly insisted on the issue of
funding. The massive character as well as methods used during inspections
disproportionately interfere with the right to freedom of association: the
number of inspections is massive, most inspections are unannounced, NGOs have
been given short deadlines to provide a huge amount of documents and vague and
non-exhaustive lists of requirements. In the case of prominent NGO Human Rights
Centre “Memorial”, a pro-government TV crew was informed and present during the
inspection. The news report entitled “Memorial hides its income from the
Prosecutor's Office” was broadcast the same day before the end of the
inspection, in flagrant violation of the presumption of innocence.
 
“Information on NGOs' sources of funding are
public. They are posted on their websites and regularly reported to relevant
agencies in compliance with national laws. All programmes are also regularly
audited by donors. This massive crackdown and media campaign amounts to a
large-scale defamation and attempts to hamper the legitimate and necessary
activities of NGOs”, said Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President.
 
“In Russia, we are witnessing a spreading of laws and practices that
target human rights NGOS under the pretext of their international connections,
and particularly of foreign financial support. The right of NGOs to access funding is a universal right that is protected under the
right to freedom of association. It has nothing to do with politics”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
While States have a legitimate right to impose regulations
and ensure security and public order, they should not instrumentalise
legitimate concerns to impose unnecessary restrictions targeting NGOs. Under
international law, States have an obligation to
support, directly or indirectly, the funding of civil society activities, in
particular by creating a conducive environment, without interfering in their
independence. The Russian authorities should stop creating and maintaining an amalgam between
defenders and criminals.
 
Therefore the Observatory is calling for an end of
this campaign of State-sponsored harassment as well as the
repeal of recently adopted laws that contain provisions inconsistent with
Russia’s international and constitutional commitments on human rights.
 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders has recently released a comprehensive study on restrictions on human
rights defenders’ access to funding, which demonstrates how NGOs’ access to
funding, in particular foreign funding, is increasingly being hindered by
governments around the world. 
 


The Report is available here. 