Azerbaijan:  Sport For Rights: Joint Statement: Anniversary of Leyla Yunus' arrest marks one year of unprecedented repression in Azerbaijan
July 30, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JulyAzerbaijan: Sport For Rights: Joint Statement: Anniversary of Leyla Yunus' arrest marks one year of unprecedented repression in AzerbaijanAzerbaijan_2015.07.30_SFR_Statement_English4 pages / 621 KB​​Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. 
Sport For Rights: Joint Statement: Anniversary of human rights defender’s arrest marks one year of unprecedented repression in AzerbaijanA year after the Azerbaijani
government launched an unprecedented crackdown on human rights, the situation
in the country continues to deteriorate. The Sport for Rights Coalition calls
on the international community to immediately and publicly condemn the
government of Azerbaijan's actions and take concrete steps to support
Azerbaijani civil society.
One year ago, on 30 July 2014, Azerbaijani human
rights defender Leyla Yunus was
arrested and charged with treason, fraud, forgery, tax evasion, and illegal
entrepreneurship. Yunus, the Director of the Institute of Peace and Democracy,
was a tireless rights advocate, likely targeted for her work on behalf of
Azerbaijan’s many political prisoners, and her call for a boycott of the
inaugural European Games, which took place in Baku in June 2015.
Yunus’s arrest marked the start of a period of
unprecedented repression in Azerbaijan. The human rights situation in the
country has now reached alarming lows as the authorities aggressively pursue
the very individuals who worked to defend those already targeted for expressing
critical opinions.
On 2 August 2014, human rights defender and
founder of the Sport for Rights campaign Rasul
Jafarov was arrested on charges of illegal entrepreneurship, tax evasion,
and abuse of power. On 5 August 2014, Leyla Yunus’s husband Arif Yunus, a historian and activist in
his own right, was arrested, followed by human rights lawyer Intigam Aliyev on 8 August 2014, on
similar charges. 
Also on 8 August 2014, authorities searched and closed the office of
Azerbaijan’s leading press freedom organisation, the Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety (IRFS), as part of a
wider criminal investigation into a large group of NGOs working on issues
related to democracy and human rights. IRFS Chairman Emin Huseynov sought refuge in the Swiss Embassy in Baku, where he
remained for 10 months, fearing arrest. On 12 June, Huseynov flew out of
Azerbaijan on the plane of Swiss Foreign Minister Didier Burkhalter, who
attended the opening ceremony of the European Games in Baku. 
For many years now, the Azerbaijani authorities
have employed a range of tactics to silence critical voices, from physical
attacks and torture to blackmail and imprisonment. In Huseynov’s case, however,
they introduced an outrageous new tactic. In an unprecedented step, in violation
of international and Azerbaijani law, the government stripped Huseynov of his
Azerbaijani citizenship. He has become a stateless person, left with no choice
but to apply for asylum in Switzerland.
Many other human rights defenders and
journalists have fled Azerbaijan out of fear for their safety. The Sport for
Rights coalition fears that without widespread international condemnation, the
same tactic could be applied to others, with the nationality of “unwelcome”
activists renounced. 
“The international community must keep its
focus on Azerbaijan as the worst for the bravest, independent-minded
individuals – both the ones remaining on the ground and those forced into exile
– may be yet to come”, CPJ Europe and Central Asia Program Coordinator Nina
Ognianova said. “The Azerbaijani regime is known for punishing its critics in
the aftermath of the global mega events it has hosted, and the illegal,
retaliatory renouncing of Emin Huseynov’s citizenship is an illustration of
that. So is the harassment of the few remaining independent journalists in the
country and the intimidation of the families of those pushed into exile”.
In a renewed assault against civil society, the
Azerbaijani authorities have increasingly been targeting the family members of
exiled activists. Ganimat Zahid, the
editor-in-chief of Azadliq newspaper
who has been in political exile since being forced to flee Azerbaijan in 2011,
has seen the persecution of family members who remain in the country. His
cousin and two nephews were arrested on charges varying from “refusing to
comply with police instructions” to drug possession. Most recently, on 23 July,
the authorities arrested the brother-in-law of Emin Milli – the Director of Meydan TV and a whistleblower in political
exile – on similar drug charges. He faces up to 12 years in jail if convicted.
“This is a clear and worrying
escalation of the Azerbaijani authorities' crackdown on free expression”, said
ARTICLE 19 Executive Director Thomas Hughes. “When those reporting the truth do
not bend to intimidation, the authorities start detaining their family members
and loved ones as a way to silence criticism entirely. This is a completely
unacceptable attack on human rights in general, and specifically on free
speech”.
Now, as international media attention has
shifted from the country following the European Games, the broader human rights
crackdown continues. The jailed Azerbaijani rights defenders are facing show
trials marred by irregularity and due process violations, carried out by a judiciary
that completely lacks independence. Although the charges against these rights
defenders are spurious and politically motivated, they have no hope of fair and
impartial trials.
On 15 July, a preparatory hearing was held in the
case of Leyla and Arif Yunus, with
the substantive portion starting on 27 July. After nearly a year of pre-trial
detention, Leyla Yunus appeared ill and fatigued, and was kept in an isolated glass
cage during the hearing. It was also the first time she has seen her husband
Arif after many months of separation in different detention facilities.
On 21 July,
the Baku Court of Appeals upheld the 22 April decision of the Court of Grave
Crimes in the case of award-winning human rights lawyer Intigam Aliyev, leaving him in jail to finish his 7.5-year
sentence. Aliyev was one of the few lawyers in Azerbaijan willing to take on
human rights cases. He has filed hundreds of cases with the European Court of
Human Rights, and had more than a dozen cases pending hearing at the time of
his arrest.
"Intiqam Aliyev, the 2012
laureate of People in Need’s Homo Homini Award, is one of the bravest and most honest
lawyers in the region, and has been punished solely for his human rights work.
His continued imprisonment, following a sham trial, is a sad reminder that
Azerbaijan’s justice system is broken and completely dependent on the political
will of the government", said Ivana Skalova, head of the East European
Programme at the Prague-based NGO People in Need.
On 24 July, a preparatory hearing took place in
the case of award-winning investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova, jailed since December 2014 on charges of inciting
someone to attempt suicide, with more serious charges later added of
embezzlement, illegal entrepreneurship, tax evasion, and abuse of power.
Ismayilova was one of the few journalists in Azerbaijan willing to cover risky
topics such as corruption of the ruling elite.
“We condemn the ongoing
imprisonment of Khadija, who has spent nearly eight months in detention as
authorities attempt to suppress the most vibrant voices reporting from
Azerbaijan”, said Karin Karlekar, director of Free Expression Programs at PEN
American Center. “The charges against her are clearly fabricated, and we urge
the government to respect the right to freedom of expression and allow her and
other independent journalists to do their jobs freely”.
On 31
July, Rasul Jafarov will appeal the
16 April decision of the Court of Grave Crimes, sentencing him to 6.5 years in
jail. He is also prohibited from holding any office for three years. During the
first-instance trial, all of the prosecution’s witnesses testified in his favour,
and the prosecution failed to prove his guilt. After the verdict, Jafarov
reiterated that the charges against him were fabricated and politically
motivated.
As
Chairman of the Human Rights Club and founder of the Sing for Democracy, Art
for Democracy, and Sport for Rights campaigns, Jafarov worked to defend the
rights to freedom of expression, assembly and association. Just prior to his
arrest in August 2014, he had published information on more than 100 cases of
political prisoners in Azerbaijan.
As members of the Sport for Rights coalition,
we urge the Azerbaijani authorities to cease this crackdown and take concrete
steps to improve the human rights situation in the country. We reiterate our
call for the immediate and unconditional release of Leyla and Arif Yunus, Rasul
Jafarov, Intigam Aliyev, and Khadija Ismayilova, along with the other jailed
journalists and human rights defenders. We further express deep concern at the
severe deterioration in health of Leyla and Arif Yunus, who require urgent medical
attention and should be immediately released on humanitarian, if not political
grounds.
We also urge the international community to
sustain attention to Azerbaijan in the coming months, as the few critical
voices left in the country are at elevated risk in the aftermath of the
European Games and in the run-up to the November parliamentary elections.
Immediate and concrete action is needed to protect and support these
individuals and to hold Azerbaijan accountable for its international human
rights obligations.
Supporting organisations:
89up
ARTICLE 19
Committee to Protect Journalists
Index on Censorship
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
International Media Support
Pen American Centre
People in Need
Platform
Solidarity with Belarus Information Office
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 