Thailand:  Free Somyot, arbitrarily detained for 2,000 days
October 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / OctoberThailand: Free Somyot, arbitrarily detained for 2,000 days





Paris-Geneva, October 20, 2016: Thai authorities must
immediately and unconditionally release human rights defender Somyot
Phrueksakasemsuk, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
(an FIDH-OMCT partnership) reiterated today.

 “Somyot’s arbitrary deprivation of liberty is in
blatant contravention of Thailand’s obligations under international law. It’s
time to end Somyot’s unfair persecution and immediately return him to his
family”, said FIDH President
Dimitris Christopoulos.
 
Having spent 2,000 days behind bars, Somyot, 55, is
currently the longest-serving lèse-majesté detainee. Somyot remains
incarcerated in Bangkok Remand Prison, where he is serving a 10-year sentence
following his conviction on charges of lèse-majesté under Article 112 of
Thailand’s Criminal Code. Article 112 states that “whoever defames, insults or
threatens the King, the Queen, the Heir to the throne or the Regent shall be punished
with imprisonment of three to 15 years.” Somyot is also serving an additional
year in prison as a result of an earlier sentence for defamation in connection
with another case.
 
“Somyot has been detained for more than five years
only for exercising his legitimate right to freedom of expression. Thai
authorities should free him immediately and stop using restrictive legislation,
including Article 112, that is inconsistent with international human rights
standards”, said OMCT Secretary
General Gerald Staberock.
 
The Observatory condemns the flaws and delays in the
judicial proceedings against Somyot, and the courts’ repeated refusals to grant
him bail. Somyot unsuccessfully petitioned for bail 16 times – the last time
being in November 2014 - and has been waiting 700 days for a Supreme Court
hearing.
 
Several UN human rights monitoring bodies have voiced
concern over Somyot’s deprivation of liberty. In an opinion issued on August
30, 2012, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) affirmed that
Somyot’s detention was arbitrary, and called on Thai authorities to release
Somyot and award him adequate compensation.
 
Background information
 
A former labour rights activist and magazine editor,
Somyot was arrested on April 30, 2011, five days after he launched a petition
campaign to collect 10,000 signatures required for a parliamentary review of
Article 112. On January 23, 2013, the Bangkok Criminal Court sentenced him to
10 years in prison on two counts of lèse-majesté. Somyot was convicted for
allowing the publication of two satirical articles in the now-defunct magazine Voice of Taksin, of which he was the
editor. The articles were authored by someone else and deemed by the Thai
authorities to have insulted the late King Bhumibol Adulyadej.
 
On September 19, 2014, the Court of Appeals upheld the
Bangkok Criminal Court’s lèse-majesté conviction of Somyot. The Court of
Appeals failed to notify Somyot, his lawyer, and his family members that the
hearing would take place on that day. On September 23, 2014, the UN Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) voiced its disappointment over
the Court of Appeals’ ruling that upheld Somyot’s conviction. On November 19,
2014, Somyot filed an appeal to the Supreme Court against his conviction.
 
Somyot’s conviction and his detention do not comply
with Thailand’s international legal obligations. Article 19 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which Thailand
is a state party, provides that everyone has the right to freedom of
expression. This right includes the “freedom to seek, receive, and impart
information and ideas of all kinds.”
 
In its General Comment on Article 19, the UN Human Rights
Committee (CCPR), the body that monitors state parties’ compliance with the
provisions of the ICCPR, affirmed that, “all public figures, including those
exercising the highest political authority such as heads of state and
government, are legitimately subject to criticism and political opposition.”
The CCPR specifically expressed concern regarding lèse-majesté laws and stated
that “imprisonment is never an appropriate penalty” for defamation.
 
On August 11, 2015, OHCHR urged
Thailand to amend the “vague and broad” lèse-majesté law to bring it in line
with international human rights standards. OHCHR also called for the immediate
release of all those who had been jailed for the exercise of their right to
freedom of expression.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society. 