Iran:  Iran: trial of child who could face the death penalty
April 12, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2000 / AprilIran: Iran: trial of child who could face the death penaltyIran: trial of 16 year old boy  Case IRN 120400.CC CHILD CONCERN  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Iran.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that Navid Balazadeh, 16, arrested and transferred to Shiraz, faces trial on 13th April 2000 with 20 other Iranians (12 Jews and 8 Muslims) on charges of spying for Israel and the United States.  If convicted, he could face the death penalty.  The International Secretariat of OMCT stresses that it is strongly opposed to the death penalty as an extreme form of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and a violation of the right to life, as proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international human rights instruments.  The International Secretariat of OMCT recalls Article 37a) of the Convention on the Rights of the Child which states that “No child shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.  Neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without possibility of release shall be imposed for offences committed by persons below eighteen years of age;”  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Iran urging them to:  take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Navid Balazadeh and order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times, taking into account inter alia the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, particularly Articles 3, 37 and 40; guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, particularly the Convention on the Rights of the Child, ratified by Iran.  Addresses  Leader of the Islamic Republic His Excellency M. Khatami, The Presidency. Palestine Ave. Azerbaijan Intersection. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Fax: Iran 011 98 21 64 66 415   His Excellency The Minister of Culture, Mr. Mohajarani, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Fax 98 21 87 57 845  His Excellency The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Abdolmajid Keshk-e Mesri Avenue, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: 98-21 674 790  Geneva, April 12, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 