European Parliament/DROI Mission to Mexico - February 2016: Joint briefing by Civil Society Organisations
February  9, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / European Union (EU) / 2016 / FebruaryEuropean Parliament/DROI Mission to Mexico - February 2016: Joint briefing by Civil Society Organisations2016.01.26 CSOs main concerns on Mexico 20164 pages / 284 KB1. Human Rights Defenders (HRDs) and journalists at riskFacts:- Several Human Rights organizations agree on the fact that during the 6-year mandate of President Enrique Peña Nieto, the number of human rights violations against HRDs has increased.- Mexico is considered to be the most dangerous country in Latin America for journalists.- Civil society and international organizations as the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights (IACHR) highlight that those attacks remain systematically unpunished.- With regards to the situation of HRDs, the situation in the State of Oaxaca is particularly concerning, where the number of attacks has increased by 300% between 2012 and 2015. Therefore Oaxaca is the State where the inaction of authorities reaches the highest level.Concerns and main recommendations of the Civil Society:- Such a worrying situation requires a decisive response to solve the problem of systematic impunity for attacks against HRDs.

→ To take concrete actions to guarantee the independence of the judiciary 
and the specific training of judicial officers, ensuring that the 
prosecutions and investigations are carried out with impartiality and 
that direct as well as indirect perpetrators are duly prosecuted and 
convicted.- The Federal Mechanism for the Protection of HRDs and Journalists still has significant failures and the coordination between the different authorities responsible for the implementation of the protection measures is deficient.

→ To strengthen the Federal Mechanism for the Protection of HRDs and 
Journalists and supply it with enough resources to ensure an effective 
protection, also including a gender- and ethnicity-based approach, 
ensuring the physical and psychological integrity of the HRDs and 
journalists under its protection.- Some public policies contribute to reinforce and aggravate the worrying situation of HRDs. If this is not addressed, none of the Mexican authorities’ responses will be reliable.

→ To ensure that HRDs can safely carry out their duties within a national 
legislative framework that does not criminalize social protest and to 
guarantee the repeal of those laws restricting social protests, which 
were adopted for instance in the Federal District and Quintana Roo.

→ To raise more awareness about the legitimacy of the work of HRDs, by 
publicly supporting them through public declarations and campaigns 
recognizing their contribution to the rule of law and democracy.

→ The militarization of the institutions and the territory as part of a 
security strategy has a direct link with the increasing of violence and 
attacks against HRDs. A timetable should be adopted to remove the 
military from public security functions, in line with the 
recommendations of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.2. Widespread and systematic torture in MexicoFacts:- Several international human rights mechanisms have raised their concerns on the practice of torture in Mexico and the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture defined torture in Mexico as widespread and systematic.- The Mexican Parliament is currently discussing the draft of the future General Law against Torture, that will be mandatory at all three governmental levels.Concerns and recommendations of Civil society:- The current discussion over a General Law against Torture is an historical opportunity to make progress to achieve its eradication. Nevertheless, the draft text sent by the President Peña Nieto shows several shortcomings, since among other measures, it opens to the possibility for perpetrators to benefit from amnesties or pardons, and it does not investigate the chain of command. If the draft text does not improve and remains as it is, it is very likely that impunity will continue. Furthermore, instead of creating only one definition and sanction for the crime of torture and ill-treatment, as required by international standards, the draft establishes a difference between these two concepts and does not establish the exclusion of evidence obtained through cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. Additionally, the definition of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment is too narrow, since it excludes that such crime can be committed by others than public servants appointed for security tasks.

→ To include the highest international standards in the fight against 
torture with special focus on the definition of torture, the absolute 
prohibition of evidence obtained under torture, the correct 
implementation of the Istanbul Protocol, the end of impunity for 
perpetrators, the elimination of the concept of “arraigo” since it 
constitutes a form of arbitrary detention, the reform of the Military 
Code of Justice in line with the judgments of the Inter-American Court 
of Human Rights, ensuring that human rights violations are an exclusive 
competence of the civil or ordinary jurisdiction, and the establishment 
of guarantees for an effective redress of victims.

→ To ensure that the General Law against Torture establishes the 
competence of the Federal Attorney General’s Office (Procuraduría 
General de la República) to investigate cases that have not been duly 
investigated by the State Attorney’s Offices.

→ To respect the time required by human rights organizations to coordinate
 themselves to provide commentaries on the draft law, rather than impose
 an “express process”. The State shall provide all necessary means to 
facilitate the effective participation of families, victims and the 
collectives representing them in the debates and the effective inclusion
 of their contributions to the law.3. Enforced disappearances in MexicoFacts:- Official statistics registered 24.812 disappearances until December 2014. Impunity remains almost absolute for this grave crime.- The Mexican Parliament is currently discussing the General Law on Disappearances, that will be mandatory at all three governmental levels. We welcome the fact that some spaces for dialogue have been facilitated between the Senate and civil society organizations in order to discuss the content and the format of the new Law.- Fifteen months after the enforced disappearance of 43 students of the Rural Normal School Raul Isidro Burgos (Ayotzinapa), the facts remain still unclear and the relatives keep searching for their whereabouts.- The Interdisciplinary Group of Independent Experts (GIEI) presented its report highlighting deficiencies in the investigation as well as rejecting the official line of investigation presented by the Attorney General’ s Office. Its mandate has been extended and the President has compromised to fully implement its recommendations and to answer the GIEI’s requests.Concerns and recommendations of Civil Society:-The UN Committee on Enforced Disappearances and the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntarily Disappearances have highlighted the need to categorize disappearances in their broader definition under the Mexican Law.

→ To incorporate the highest international standards in the fight against 
enforced or involuntarily disappearances and to guarantee its practical 
implementation effectively by different means, among which the creation 
of a specialized unity within the Attorney General’s Office.

→ To establish a national registry of disappeared persons gathering 
information on whether there are signs of intervention of the State’s 
security forces and to guarantee an efficient coordination at Federal 
and State level, which would allow to include all cases of enforced 
disappearances in a single comprehensive database.

→ The recent decision of the UN Committee against Torture condemning 
Mexico for the first time, after analyzing an individual complaint, 
shows the importance of opening the access to justice at international 
level in order to redress failures at national level. Against this 
background, Mexico should recognize the competence of the UN Committee 
against Enforced Disappearances to examine individual complaints.

→ To respect the time that human rights organizations may require to 
organize and coordinate themselves and avoid an “express process”. The 
State shall provide the necessary means to facilitate the effective 
participation of families, victims and the collectives representing them
 in the debates and the effective inclusion of their contributions to 
the Law.- After the events in Iguala, and despite the lack of investigations, groups of relatives and friends of the victims searching for their beloved ones have succeeded in finding several graves with the remains of dozens of disappeared people. Due to this search, they are exposed to great risk, facing continuous threats, defamation and even a case of killing.

→ To implement the recommendations of the GIEI.

→ To fulfill the agreements reached with the relatives of the 43 students.

→ To Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the relatives 
of the disappeared persons and of the human rights organizations and to 
investigate the aggressions perpetrated against them.4. Recommendations on the format of the DROI Mission

→ To ensure the active participation of civil society, including human rights organizations and victims' organizations.

→ To ensure that the EU Delegation and the representatives of DROI meet the families from Ayotzinapa.

→ To request the EU Delegation in Mexico to be more proactive in following
 up human rights issues in Mexico and publicly show the EU concerns.5. Follow-up measures to the DROI Mission

→ To ensure that the EU is making progresses in its joint work with Mexico
 as agreed in the Human Rights Dialogue 2015, including the 
strengthening of the work on HRDs, torture and disappearances.

→ To organize a public debate in the European Parliament with the GIEI 
experts in 2016, providing MEPs with information on the case of 
Ayotzinapa and more generally on enforced disappearances in Mexico. This
 will represent a clear message on the EP’s commitment on this issue.

→ To promote the adoption of a new resolution as a follow-up to this 
Mission and to the resolution of the European Parliament from 2014. 