Uruguay:  Children abused in Uruguayan Prison
August 11, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Statements / Uruguay / 2015 / AugustUruguay: Children abused in Uruguayan Prison




URUGUAY: Children abused in Uruguayan Prison:
 How
many more children must suffer?
 
Geneva, 10 August 2015 - Last week a video was released in the Uruguayan media showing a group of Prison officers violently
containing unarmed children in a juvenile detention centre in Montevideo. Some
of the children were beaten while handcuffed, and others had respiratory
problems after being forced out of their cells with the use of a fire
extinguisher. 
The officials on the video
are members of the Uruguayan syndicate of the Instituto del Niño y Adolescente
de Uruguay (SUINAU). They operated in the presence of the president of the syndicate
who described the approach publicly declared as “usual practice”.
“We
have raised repeated concerns of what appears to be SUINAU’s connivance to
practices of violence and reprisals including against those that who have
reported and denounced abuses. The depiction in the video is just an
illustration of disproportionate use of force. It reaffirms an urgent need to
address the bigger issues of violence and impunity against children in
detention.” declared Gerald Staberock; OMCT Secretary General.
In Uruguay, cases of
torture and ill-treatments of children in detention have been widely documented
by IELSUR and the OMCT. Indeed, last year IELSUR and the OMCT contributed to
the prosecutions of 8 prison officers who had allegedly tortured and abused children
in custody.
“Children
should be safe in prison. Acts of torture or any form of ill-treatment must be
eradicated from all juvenile detention centres in Uruguay and elsewhere.
The only way forward is that any credible allegation is independently investigated
and those responsible are held to account.” stated Gerald Staberock,
OMCT General Secretary.
In light of the recent
evidence, the OMCT urges the state of Uruguay to:(1) Follow-up on the
criminal charges that were presented and ensure that all those responsible for
committing acts of torture and ill-treatment or any other human rights
violation in juvenile detention centres are held accountable.
(2) Conduct a comprehensive
independent inquiry into policies and practices within SUINAU’s to prevent
future violations and to ensure accountability for abuse. This should include allegations
that employees accused of having committed torture or other abuses, resort to
acts of reprisals and that there are attempts to cover-up cases of torture and
ill-treatment.
(3) Implement as a matter
of priority the recommendations from the Committee Against Torture issued to
the authorities in 2014 to create mechanisms of effective civilian oversight
and accountability in juvenile detention centres.
(4) Conduct a structural, and comprehensive legal and
policy reform on the juvenile justice system, prioritizing non-custodial
measures for children in conflict with the law.
 
For further information
please contact:
 
Astrid Salcedo Pinzon, OMCT Communication
advisor, asp@omct.org,
+41 22 809 49 39
Carolina Barbara, OMCT child rights coordinator, cb@omct.org, +41 22 809 49 38 