Syrian Arab Republic:  Arrest and incommunicado detention of the President of the Syrian League for Human Rights
August 12, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2011 / AugustSyrian Arab Republic: Arrest and incommunicado detention of the President of the Syrian League for Human RightsTHE OBSERVATORY FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS - 
EMHRN 
 
PRESS RELEASE
  
SYRIA: Arrest and 
incommunicado detention of the President of the Syrian League for Human 
Rights
 
 
Paris-Geneva, August 12, 2011. The Observatory for the Protection 
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for 
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), and the 
Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) vehemently condemn the arrest 
and incommunicado detention of prominent Syrian human rights defender Abdel 
Karim Rihaoui, amid ongoing harsh and general repression in the 
country.
 
On August 11, 2011, Mr. Abdel Karim Rihaoui, President of the Syrian League for Human Rights, was arrested by a 
patrol of the Air Intelligence, at the Havana Cafe in downtown Damascus, where 
he was meeting with a journalist. His whereabouts have remained unknown since 
then.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and the 
EMHRN firmly condemn the incommunicado detention of Mr. Abdel Karim Rihaoui, and 
strongly fear that his arbitrary arrest merely aims at sanctioning his human rights activities, and in particular his mobilisation on 
cases of political prisoners.
 
"This arrest provides further evidence of the continued repression of 
dissenting voices in Syria. We call upon the Syrian authorities to guarantee 
the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Rihaoui, to disclose 
his whereabouts and to release him immediately and 
unconditionally", FIDH President Souhayr Belhassen said today.
 
"We are all the more concerned that Mr. Abdel Karim Rihaoui’s arrest takes place amid the current violent repression of peaceful protests in the country, 
in the framework of which several human rights defenders remain detained today, in 
conditions of detention that often do not respect their human 
dignity. Accordingly, we call upon the Syrian authorities to stop the systematic repression 
of all human rights defenders in the country”, added Eric Sottas, OMCT Secretary General.

 
Kamel Jendoubi, EMHRN
President, said “we denounce the use of arbitrary detention and enforced
disappearance of human rights defenders and peaceful activists, which appears
to be part of a deliberate strategy aimed at silencing critics on gross human
rights abuses”.
 
The Observatory and the EMHRN urge the Syrian authorities to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of people detained and to release Mr. Abdel Karim Rihaoui immediately and unconditionally, in conformity with the provisions of 
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders.
 
For further information, please contact:
·         FIDH: Karine Appy, Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
·         OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39
·         EMHRN: Shaimaa Abu Elkheir: +20 101077207 