Iraq:  Ongoing concerns for the 3, 400 PMOI members living in Camp Ashraf
July 28, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Iraq / 2010 / JulyIraq: Ongoing concerns for the 3, 400 PMOI members living in Camp AshrafGeneva, 28 July 2010. A year after the Iraqi forces raided Camp Ashraf, home to the 3, 400 members of the People's Mojahedin Organisation of Iran (PMOI), an Iranian opposition movement, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) reiterates its deep concern about the safety of its residents.
On 28 and 29 July 2009, despite guarantees by the United States (US) forces and the Iraqi Government, the Iraqi forces raided the camp in view of expulsing its residents to Iran, which left 11 residents dead and 500 injured. Furthermore, 36 residents were arbitrarily arrested and later released in poor health condition. The camp has since been under control of the Iraqi forces.
In recent months, Camp Ashraf residents have reportedly been subjected to various types of harassment, including a blockade carried out by the Iraqi Government, depriving the residents of free access to medical services, fuel and supplies needed for the infrastructure of the camp. Moreover, family members and lawyers of Camp Ashraf residents have been prevented from entering the camp.
More importantly, on 2 July 2010, in the framework of its policy to gradually withdraw from Iraq, the US forces evacuated Camp Ashraf which also resulted in the closing-down of UNAMI’s monitoring office[1] in Ashraf since it depended on the protection provided by the presence of US forces. In light of the internal situation in Iran and the setbacks faced in Iraq and worldwide by the Iranian regime, OMCT is gravely concerned about the possible retaliation against the camp and its residents.
OMCT recalls that it has been recognised from the beginning of the conflict that PMOI members are not involved in the confrontation between Americans and Iraqis. In addition, since PMOI members living in the camp have been disarmed, they have been designated as “protected persons” under Article 27 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, of which guarantees were clearly stipulated in various protocols signed with US forces.
Accordingly, OMCT calls upon the United Nations and the Unites States to live up to their responsibilities in effectively protecting Camp Ashraf and its residents in order to avoid a repetition of the events of July 2009.

Contact:
Eric Sottas, Secretary General, OMCT, Tel. +41 22 809 49 39
 

[1] United Nations Assistant Mission for Iraq. 