Russian Federation:  The Observatory deplores the adoption of the bill on “undesirable foreign organisations”
May 20, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Russian Federation / 2015 / MayRussian Federation: The Observatory deplores the adoption of the bill on “undesirable foreign organisations”Russia_2015.05.20_English1 page / 124 KBRussian Federation: The Observatory deplores the 
adoption of the bill on “undesirable foreign organisations”
 
Paris-Geneva, May 20, 2015. The Observatory for the Protection 
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint FIDH and OMCT programme, is deeply alarmed by 
the adoption of the bill on “undesirable foreign and international 
organisations” in third reading of the Russian Parliament on May 19, 2015. The 
bill criminalizes work for foreign non-profit organisations that “threaten the 
constitutional order, security of the State or its defence capacity”. 

 
Although the bill was significantly amended before the second reading, the 
Observatory deplores that it remains a tool to harassnon-profitentities with 
foreign origin and Russian nationalscooperating with them, hereby further 
isolating Russia and igniting xenophobia and nationalism. The lawlacks clear 
definition of what “threatening the constitutional order, security and defence 
capacity” means. Moreover, it entitles the Prosecutor General with powers 
exceeding his authority, since he and his deputies are assigned to compile alist 
of undesirable organisationsin cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs.Such a unilateral procedure is not only political in nature but it does 
not allow the organizations listed as undesirable the right of appeal 
norestablishesanyindependent judicial review of the decision.
 
Needless to say that one of the main goals of the bill is to undermine the 
cooperation of Russian human rights defenders and civil society activists with 
foreign NGOs thatmaketheir voices heard inside and outside the country. They now 
face a fine up to 900 euros for working for an "undesirable organisation". The 
repeated violation of the law wouldlead to the criminal responsibility of the 
NGO's directorsand is punished by up to six years of deprivation of 
liberty.
 
If labelled as "undesirable", the activity of suchanorganisation will be 
banned on the territory ofRussia. Banks and other financial institutions are 
prohibited from authorizing any financial operation originating from or destined 
to such an organisation.
 
The Observatory reminds that this bill follows and complements the 
restrictive legislative arsenal Russia adopted in the course of the last years 
to silence all forms of criticism against the regime in contradiction with 
international human rights standards. Many local experts and lawyers as well as 
the Council on Human Rights, an institution under the President of the Russian 
Federation have raised their criticism about the content of this new piece of 
legislation.
 
The work of human rights defenders in Russia has already been significantly 
restricted after the closing down of numerous foreign and local organisations 
that used to promote freedom of expression, assembly and association as well as 
civicactivism. Along with the so-called “foreign agents” law obliging NGOs to 
register as such if they engage in “political activity” and receive foreign 
funding and the laws restricting the registration and funding of NGOs, the bill 
on "undesirable organisations" is the last in Russia's legislative arsenal used 
to get rid of any critical voices. The Observatory strongly opposes the adoption 
of this bill and calls on the international community to condemn its 
enactment.
 
For more information, please contact:
·       FIDH: Lucie Kroening/Arthur Manet: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 
25 18
·       OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 
24 