Egypt:  Joint Press Release: Unprecedented crackdown on NGOs. Human rights activists risk prosecution, asset freezes
March 23, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / MarchEgypt: Joint Press Release: Unprecedented crackdown on NGOs. Human rights activists risk prosecution, asset freezesIn recent
weeks, the Egyptian
authorities have summoned human rights workers for questioning, banned them
from travel and attempted to freeze their personal funds and family assets.
These steps indicate that a five-year-old investigation into the funding and
registration of independent human rights groups could soon result in criminal
charges, 14 international organizations said today.
The
authorities should halt their persecution of these groups and drop the
investigation, which could threaten human rights defenders with up to 25 years
in prison, the organizations said.
“Egypt’s civil
society is being treated like an enemy of the state, rather than a partner for
reform and progress,” said Said Boumedouha, Deputy Director of Amnesty
International’s Middle East and North Africa Programme. 
The
investigation into the funding of local and foreign groups began in July 2011, five
months after the toppling of former president Hosni Mubarak, and has already
led to convictions and the closure of the Egypt offices of five international
nongovernmental organizations. It is currently being conducted by a panel of
three judges chosen by the Cairo Court of Appeals at the request of the Justice
Ministry. 
Under
Egyptian law, prosecutors could charge leading human rights defenders for
working without official registration or accepting foreign funding without
government authorization. An amendment to the penal code passed in September
2014 by President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi provides for a sentence of up to life
imprisonment (which equates to 25 years in prison in Egypt) for the latter
charge.
“The Egyptian
authorities have moved beyond scaremongering and are now rapidly taking
concrete steps to shut down the last critical voices in the country’s human
rights community,” said Nadim
Houry, deputy Middle East director at Human Rights Watch.
Asset
freezes and travel bans tools to restrict dissent
The crackdown on Egypt’s human rights
defenders has gathered pace in recent months. On March 22, 2016, Mozn Hassan, founder
and director of Nazra for Feminist Studies,
was summoned for questioning as a defendant in the foreign funding case. She is
due to appear before the investigating judges on March 29, 2016.
On March 19,
a Cairo criminal court heard a request from the investigating judges to freeze
the assets of Hossam Bahgat, a journalist and founder of the Egyptian
Initiative for Personal Rights who currently writes for the Egyptian news
website Mada Masr, and Gamal Eid, a lawyer and the director of the Arab Network
for Human Rights Information. The judges’ request also extended to the assets
of Eid’s wife and 11-year-old daughter. The court postponed the hearing to
March 24, and on March 21, the investigating judges also imposed a gag order
preventing local media from reporting on the case.
A Cairo
criminal court had already issued an order in February, at the investigating
judges’ request, to bar Bahgat and Eid from travelling outside Egypt. 
Courts,
prosecutors and security agencies have barred at least 10 human rights activists from travel in recent weeks,
including Mohamed Lotfy, director of the Egyptian Commission for Rights and
Freedoms, and four employees of the Egyptian Democratic Academy.
Between
March 13 and 15, three employees of Nazra for Feminist Studies, two employees
of the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies, and one employee of the United
Group, a law firm that has published reports on torture, were asked to appear before
the investigating judges for questioning. The summoned employees included
finance officers from each group.
Previously,
on March 3, an investigating judge had interrogated the director of the United
Group, the lawyer Negad al-Borei, on the allegation of establishing an
unlicensed entity and “pressuring” the president to issue an anti-torture law.
In February,
following an investigation, government tax authorities demanded that some of
the independent groups under investigation pay several million Egyptian pounds
in back taxes. On February 17, Health Ministry officials also issued an order
to close the Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and
Torture, Egypt’s leading center for such treatment, on the basis that it was
performing unlicensed work. The Center has been licensed as a medical clinic
since 1993 and has provided hundreds of torture victims with vital services,
including counselling and legal assistance.
Foreign
funding investigation
The first
phase of the investigation into independent groups’ funding—known as case 173
of 2011—concluded in June 2013 when a Cairo criminal court sentenced 43 foreign and Egyptian employees of five international organizations to
between one and five years in prison, on charges of operating unlawfully in the
country and receiving foreign funding without permission. 
All of the sentences
were either suspended or issued in absentia, but the decision forced the
closure in Egypt of the National Democratic Institute, the International
Republican Institute, Freedom House, the International Center for Journalists
and the Konrad Adenauer Foundation.
Following
the conclusion of the first investigation into international groups, the authorities
turned their attention to local organizations.
The three
investigating judges resumed their work in 2014, when the Social Solidarity
Ministry gave local groups an ultimatum to register under an onerous associations
law dating to Hosni Mubarak’s presidency. The law empowers the government to
shut down any group virtually at will, freeze its assets, confiscate its
property and reject nominees to its governing board. 
Many of the
targeted groups are licensed in some fashion, including as non-profit groups,
law firms or medical clinics. Still, some have relocated their staff outside
Egypt or curtailed their operations rather than register under the Mubarak-era
law. But even registered groups have not escaped investigation: The Egyptian
Democratic Academy had successfully registered in January 2015, and Nazra for
Feminist Studies has been registered since 2007.
Both the
National Security branch of the Interior Ministry and the General Intelligence
Service, Egypt’s external spy agency, have been gathering information on local groups’
activities for some time. Their findings were contained in a September 2011 fact-finding
report, parts of which were leaked to the media, that named 37 groups under
investigation, including all of those affected by the recent summonses and
travel bans. 
Calls on the
Egyptian authorities 
The Egyptian
authorities should withdraw the order to close the Nadeem Center and lift all
travel bans and asset freezes against human rights workers, whose activities
are protected by Egypt’s constitution and international law, the organizations
said. 
The
authorities should also lift the gag order, which prohibits media outlets from
publishing anything on the case other than statements issued by the presiding
judges until the investigations are complete. This violates the right to
freedom of expression, enshrined in Egypt’s constitution and international law.
Egypt should
abide by its March 2015 pledge at the conclusion of its Universal Periodic Review before the United
Nations Human Rights Council to “respect the free exercise of the associations
defending human rights.” This should include allowing groups to register under
a new associations law that parliament should draft following consultation with
independent groups, and which should abide by article 75 of the constitution,
which protects groups from interference by the government. The law should
comply with international standards on freedom of association.
The Human
Rights Council and its member states should condemn the current crackdown and
demand concrete measures to improve respect for fundamental human rights.
“Instead of shutting
down the last vestiges of civil society, Egypt should welcome scrutiny of its
human rights record and take on board the constructive criticisms of local
NGOs. The authorities should engage in an open and genuine dialogue with its
rights movement,” said Michel Tubiana, President of EuroMed Rights.
The
organizations expressing concern are: 
Amnesty
International
Article 19
Association
for Women’s Rights in Development
CIVICUS
Committee to
Protect Journalists
Euromed
Rights 
FIDH, within
the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Front Line
Defenders 
Human Rights
Watch
IFEX
International
Service for Human Rights
Project on
Middle East Democracy 
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Tahrir
Institute for Middle East Policy
For more Amnesty International’s research on Egypt see: https://www.amnesty.org/en/countries/middle-east-and-north-africa/egypt/

For more information or to arrange an interview, please contact:
Human Rights Watch Nadim
Houry in Beirut (Arabic, French,
English): +961-3-639-244 (mobile); or houryn@hrw.org. Twitter: @nadimhoury
Amnesty International Sara Hashash, MENA Press Officer, Amnesty
International – International Secretariat in London: + 44 (0) 20 7413 5511 or +44
(0) 7831640170 Email: sara.hashash@amnesty.org
Twitter: @sarahashashFIDH: Arthur Manet
/ Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT): Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui / Chiara Cosentino: +32 2 218 37 19 