Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: Release of Normagan Arkabaev
July 25, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2001 / JulyKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: Release of Normagan ArkabaevURGENT APPEAL – THE OBSERVATORY  New information KGZ 003  /0106/ OBS 059.1 Release KYRGYZSTAN 24 July 2001  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH and OMCT venture, would like to inform you about the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  New information:  The Observatory has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) of the release, under the condition that he does not leave the country, of Mr. Normagan Arkabaev, the co-ordinator of the KCHR office in Osh on 18 July 2001.   Mr. Arkabaev was arrested and placed in detention on 27 June 2001. He is charged with "public appeals to forceful seizure of power and to the demolition of the existing constitutional system", based on article 297 of the Criminal code for an article he wrote about the illegal appropriation of land by the Director of the National Security Service in the Osh region and the corruption of officials. However, his article has not been published due to pressure exerted on the media by the authorities.   According to the information received, the Office in Osh has reopened but several documents have been confiscated. Mr. Arkabaev is currently ill and unable to work after carrying out a hunger strike from 3 July 2001 until his release. On 13 July, he produced a letter through his lawyer, Mr. Sadykzhan Makhmutov, in which he asked for assistance in restoring justice. Further investigations are to be carried out on his case before his trial opens.  Altough the Observatory welcomes the news of his release, it wishes to express that it remains concerned about the situation of Human Rights defenders in Kyrgyzstan. The Observatory will carefully continue to follow developments concerning Mr. Arkabaev, and in particular that his trial takes place before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and that his procedural rights are guaranteed at all times.   Geneva-Paris, 24 July 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken, quoting the reference number given above.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.  The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line Tel : FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 ; OMCT : +41 22 809 49 39 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 