China:  Acts of ill-treatment against Mr. Hu Jia, under residential surveillance
November 12, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2007 / NovemberChina: Acts of ill-treatment against Mr. Hu Jia, under residential surveillanceCHN 009 / 1107 / OBS 141 Ill-treatments / Residential surveillance / Harassment People’s Republic of China November 12, 2007 The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention on the following situation in the People’s Republic of China (PRC). Brief description of the situation: The Observatory has been informed by “Chinese Human Rights Defenders” (CRD) that Mr. Hu Jia, a Beijing-based HIV/AIDS activist and cofounder and former director of the Beijing Aizhixing Institute for Health Education, a grassroots organisation that aims at educating the public about the HIV/AIDS virus and at advocating for the rights of persons suffering from AIDS, was beaten by police officers while under residential surveillance. According to the information received, on November 9, 2007, at 9 pm, Mr. Hu Jia was stopped at the stairway of his building by plainclothes officers from the National Security Unit (Guo Bao) of the Beijing Public Security Bureau (PSB) while on his way to visit his pregnant wife at Zhaoyang Hospital. Mr. Hu tried to ignore the officers, who have been assigned to watch him (Mr. Hu has been under residential surveillance by the PSB since May 18, 2007, without any legal basis[1]), and kept walking. One officer then grabbed the collar of Mr. Hu’s shirt and hit him on the mouth. Mr. Hu’s lips cracked and his gums bled. The officer further tried twisting Mr. Hu’s arms behind his back to keep him under control. After two minutes, the officer left to make a phone call while the other two officers (who did not participate in the fight) prevented Mr. Hu from leaving. Mr. Hu was then allowed to go to the hospital but the National Security Unit continued to follow him while he drove to the hospital. They also kept a close watch on Mr. Hu and his wife by staying outside their room at the hospital. The Observatory expresses its deepest concern about these acts of ill-treatment against Mr. Hu Jia, which take place in the context of a violent wave of repression against Chinese human rights defenders, and recalls that he has been subjected to repeated acts of harassment in the past due to his human rights activities (See background information). Furthermore, the Observatory wishes to recall that the National People’s Congress amended the Chinese Constitution in 2004 to include that “the State respects and safeguards human rights” and that in April 2006, China submitted a document to the UN in order to support its candidacy to the Human Rights Council’s first election[2], in which it affirmed that the amendment to the Constitution was aiming at “defining the position of human rights in the overall national development strategy”. The Observatory further wishes to point out that, as a member of the Human Rights Council, China “shall uphold the highest standards in the promotion and protection of human rights”[3]. The Observatory insists on the fact that democracy and the respect for human rights go hand in hand with the existence of a free civil society and urges the Chinese authorities to implement their policies in favour of human rights and democracy and to refrain from resorting to any form of harassment against human rights defenders. Background information: From February 16 to March 28, 2006, Mr. Hu Jia was arrested for having participated in a hunger strike organised by human rights defenders and lawyers to protest against the unlawful detention of human rights activists. During his detention, authorities repeatedly stated that they did not know Mr. Hu’s whereabouts and denied him the right to have access to the medication he requires to treat Hepatitis B. Furthermore, since July 17, 2006, Mr. Hu Jia has been under house arrest and has been unable to leave his home without the prior consent of the Tongzhou Unit (Beijing suburb). His wife, Mrs. Zeng Jinyan, has also been under surveillance and her movements have been restricted. According to the police, these measures were taken to prevent them from going to Linyi, Shandong, to protest against the detention of Mr. Chen Guangcheng, a lawyer. On September 7, 2006, Mr. Hu was arrested by 20 plain-clothes policemen and detained for 12 hours for no official reason. On September 26, 2006, he was taken once again to the local PSB. Among other issues, the police interrogated him on his relationship with Mr. Gao Zhisheng and Mr. Chen Guangcheng, as Mr. Hu Jia had started an Internet campaign for their defence. Actions requested: Please write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China, urging them to:  Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Hu Jia and his relatives; Put an end to Mr. Hu’s residential surveillance, as it seems to merely aim at sanctioning his human rights activities; Conduct a fair, impartial and independent investigation into the allegations of ill-treatment above-mentioned, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; Guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to him, as a victim of abuses; Put an end to the harassment against all human rights defenders in the People’s Republic of China; Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, its article 9, which states that “[...] everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to benefit from an effective remedy and to be protected in the event of the violation of those rights” and Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by the People’s Republic of China.  Addresses:  President Hu Jintao, People’s Republic of China, c/o Embassy of the People’s Republic of China; 2300 Connecticut Ave., NW, Washington, D.C., 20008, USA, Fax: +01 202 588-0032; Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, Wu Aiying, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345; Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Waijiaobu, Mr. Yang Jiechi, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn; Ambassador Sha Zukang, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int; Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Brussels, Avenue de Tervuren, 463 1160 Auderghem, Belgium, Tel: + 32 2 663 30 10 / + 32 2 663 30 17 / +32 2 771 14 97 / +32 2 779 43 33; Fax: +32 2 762 99 66 / +32 2 779 28 95; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn.  Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country. *** Geneva - Paris, November 12, 2007 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic. To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29   [1] During sensitive times, such as the 17th Party Congress in mid-October 2007, Mr. Hu and his wife were prohibited from leaving their residence. When they are allowed to go out, they are either followed closely by the police or they have to travel in police officer’s car. The current residential surveillance started after the couple returned from a visit to Hong Kong and were about to set off for a tour to Europe to promote their documentary film “Prisoners of Freedom City”. [2] See http://www.un.org/ga/60/elect/hrc/china.pdf. [3] See OP9 of the General Assembly Resolution A/RES/60/251. 