Kazakhstan:  Ongoing arbitrary detention of Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov
February 13, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2017 / FebruaryKazakhstan: Ongoing arbitrary detention of Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
KAZ 001 / 1016 / OBS
085.4
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment
Kazakhstan
February 13, 2017
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and
FIDH, has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Kazakhstan.
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing arbitrary
detention of Mr. Max Bokayev[1],
Head of the NGO “Arlan”[2] and a human rights defender working
for the protection of the environment, freedom of expression and the fight
against torture, and Mr. Talgat
Ayanov, a lawyer and activist from Atyrau, Western Kazakhstan. Both human rights
defenders played a crucial role in organising peaceful protests that took place
last April and early May 2016 against the amendments to the Land Code of
Kazakhstan.
                  

According to the information received, on January 30, 2017, relatives of Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov received two separate letters
issued from the pre-trial detention centre in
Atyrau. The first one, dated January 25, 2017, was informing them that the two
would be transferred to the Penal Colony in Atyrau. This was subsequently
confirmed verbally to both Messrs.
Bokayev and Ayanov. The second letter, dated January
30, 2017, was informing the relatives of the two defenders that Messrs. Bokayev and Ayanov would be transferred to the Penal Colony of Petropavlovsk, Northern
Kazakhstan, which is 1,500 km from Atyrau, their home city,
to serve their sentence. This is in violation of
Kazakhstan’s domestic law, which requires keeping convicts near their place of
residence. 
 
On
January 27, 2017, Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov were transferred from
Atyrau pre-trial detention centre to a
pre-trial detention facility in Aktobe, more than 500 km away from Atyrau,
their home city, where they remained detained as of February 9, 2017, before
being transferred to the Penal Colony of Petropavlovsk. The relatives of Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov have not been
informed on a possible date for the transfer of Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat
Ayanov to the Penal Colony of Petropavlovsk, as according to Article 91.7 of the Criminal
Executive Code, authorities are requested to take
measures on security and confidentiality during transfer process. 
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing
arbitrary detention and harassment of Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov. Moreover, the Observatory fears
that imprisonment in the Penal Colony of Petropavlovsk where conditions of detention are
known to be particularly harsh and where they would be cut from regular visits
from their family members and lawyers would place them at risk of torture and
ill-treatment, in violation of Kazakhstan’s obligations under the
United Nations Convention Against Torture.
 
The Observatory urges authorities in
Kazakhstan to release Messrs.
Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov immediately and
unconditionally as their detention is arbitrary since it only seems
to aim at sanctioning their human rights activities.
 
Background information:
 
Between April and May 2016, several protests were
held in Kazakhstan, gathering hundreds of citizens calling for the abolition of
amendments to the Land Code that were introduced in November 2015[3].
During these protests many were detained and sentenced to administrative
detention for “preparation of illegal rallies” or “hooliganism”.
 
On April 24, 2016, Mr. Max Bokayev participated in
a peaceful assembly for which no authorisation had been obtained. On May 6,
2016, Mr. Max Bokayev requested to hold a peaceful assembly on May 21, 2016,
but the authorities refused on May 16. The next day, on May 17, Messrs. Max
Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov were arrested in Atyrau in retaliation for their
critical statements posted on Facebook and for making public their intention to
participate and encouraging others to take part in the May 21 protests. On the
same day, an administrative court sentenced them to 15 days of administrative
detention for “organising an unsanctioned assembly” (Article 488 of the
Administrative Offences Code) although the rally of May 21 had not yet happened
at the time of the arrest.
 
On May
31, 2016, one day before the end date of their administrative
detention, the National Security Committee issued an order
charging Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov with the offense of
“propaganda or public calls for seizure of power or retention of power or
violent change of the constitutional order” under Article 179.1 of
the Criminal Code. On July 21 this charges was replaced with “institution of
social discord” (Article 174 of the Criminal Code), “dissemination of knowingly
false information” (Article 274) and “violation of the procedure of organisation
and holding of meetings, rallies, pickets, street processions and
demonstrations” (Article 400).
 
On June 3, 2016, the Investigation Judge of
Atyrau Court No. 2 remanded Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov for two
months in pre-trial detention. Mr. Bokayev’s request for house arrest due to
his critical health condition given that Mr. Bokayev suffers from a
chronic hepatitis C and needs constant medical care was rejected. On August 27,
2016, the Judge decided to extend the pre-trial detention. The Prosecutor
argued that “Max Bokayev has a lot of friends inside and outside of Kazakhstan
and so there’s a fear that he will leave the country”.
 
On October 12, 2016, the trial against Messrs. Bokayev and Ayanov
started before Atyrau’s City Court No. 2. 
 
On November 28, 2016, Judge Gulnara
Dauleshova of Atyrau’s City Court No. 2 found Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov guilty
under Articles 174, 274 and 400. They were sentenced to five years in prison under
Article 174 Part 2, five years under Article 274 Part. 4, and to a fine of 250
MCI (530,250 tenge, approx. 1,466 EUR) under Article 400. They were also
prohibited to engage in social activitiesfor three years. By the rule of
absorption of less severe punishment by more severe punishment, the final punishment
of the two defenders is of five years' imprisonment in a penal colony of
ordinary regime. The court also ordered the defendants to pay an
amount of 259,000 tenge (approx. 716 EUR) as procedural costs. On December 9,
2016, Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov's lawyers appealed the sentence.
 
On January 20, 2017, after four
hearings, the Criminal Division of the Atyrau Regional Court upheld the verdict
and confirmedg the sentencing in first instance by the Atyrau’s City Court No.
2 of Mr. Bokayev and Mr. Ayanov to five years in prison and three years of ban
to engage in social activities after their release for “institution of social discord”, “dissemination of knowingly false
information” and “violation of the procedure of organisation and holding of meetings,
rallies, pickets, street processions and demonstrations”.
Messrs. Max Bokayev and algat Ayanov's lawyers intend to file an appeal
against the decision before
the Supreme Court.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Kazakhstan asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov, as well as of
all human rights defenders in Kazakhstan;
 
ii. Release Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov, immediately
and unconditionally, as their detention is arbitrary since it only aims at
sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment, including
at the judicial level, against Messrs.
Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov as well as of all human rights
defenders in the country so that they are able to carry out their work without
hindrance;
 
iv. Conform in any circumstances with
the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the UN General Assembly, in
particular its Articles 1, 6, 8, 9 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Kazakhstan.
 
Addresses:
 
·     Mr. Nursultan Nazarbaev, President of the Republic
of Kazakhstan. Fax: + 7 3172 32 61 82, 007 / 3172 / 32 40 89
·     Mr. Kalmukhanbet Kassymov, Minister of Internal
Affairs of Kazakhstan. Email: Kense@mvd.kz
·     Mr. Zhakip Assanov, Prosecutor General of
Kazakhstan. Fax: +7 7172 506 402
·     Mr. Askar Shakirov, Human Rights Commissioner of
Kazakhstan. Fax: +7 7172 74 05 48
·     Ambassador Ms. Zhanar Aitzhanova, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Kazakhstan to the UN Office and other
international organizations in Geneva. Fax: +41 (0) 22 788 66 02. Email: mission@kazakhstan-geneva.ch
·     Ambassador Mr. Almaz KHAMZAYEV, Embassy of
Kazakhstan in Brussels. Email: brussels@mfa.kz.
·     Permanent Delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan
to the OSCE in Vienna. Fax: +43 1 890 80 08 20. Email: kzosce@kazakhstan.at
 
Please also write to the
diplomatic mission or embassy of Kazakhstan in your respective country.
***
Geneva-Paris, February 13, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting
the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency
line:
·       E-mail: Appeals[at]fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22
809 49 29
·       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]                 Mr. Max Bokayev is a member of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) since 2011, a member of
the “Zhanaozen-2011” International Committee under the “Journalists in Trouble”
Public Foundation, the initiator of the “Azat” Coalition (freedoms and
liberties on the Internet), and an active participant in the National Preventive
Mechanism (NPM) on the prevention of torture in prisons. In 2016, he was
appointed as head of the NPM regional group in Atyrau oblast.


[2]                 Arlan focuses on public scrutiny over
governmental actions and the right of citizens to participate in public life,
environmental protection especially in the context of the operation of oil
companies, and various social issues both at the local and national levels.


[3]                 In November 2015, draft
amendments to the Land Code, aiming at facilitating the lease of agricultural
land by foreigners were presented to the Parliament in Kazakhstan. The
amendments were adopted and should have entered into force in July 2016.
Protesters contended that the changes infringed upon the rights of Kazakh
citizens and landowners. 