Philippines:  Philippines: Alternative Report to the CESCR 'Addressing the Economic, Social and Cultural Root Causes of Torture and other forms of Violence in the Philippines'
November  3, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Reports and Publications / Philippines / 2008 / NovemberPhilippines: Philippines: Alternative Report to the CESCR 'Addressing the Economic, Social and Cultural Root Causes of Torture and other forms of Violence in the Philippines'Download full article61 pages / 497 KBThis report seeks to reduce and eliminate torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, and other forms of violence in the Philippines by proposing to the Committee recommendations for action by the Government to address their economic, social and cultural root causes. In the Philippines, poverty and inequality marginalise large sectors of society, rendering them vulnerable in their daily lives to many forms of violence, including state-sponsored violence. Persons peacefully claiming their economic, social and cultural rights or defending the rights of others are often subjected to violent attacks, killings and disappearances. And further, as a UN report has pointed out, desperation and hopelessness at their situation can lead some to resort to armed rebellion. Tragically, this violence and lack of security, in turn, severely impedes these people from escaping from poverty.  The Government of the Philippines has implemented a policy of trade liberalisation in order to attract foreign capital and to accelerate domestic economic development. Policies in mining, land reform and export economic zones have very direct links with violence. In addition, low priority has been given to social services in the national budget where severe cutbacks have been made to enable continued debt servicing. This has rendered certain groups particularly vulnerable to violence, including indigenous people, the Muslim population in Mindanao, women living in precarious conditions (indigenous women and women living in rural and conflict-prone areas) and disadvantaged and marginalised children. Policies promoting investment in mineral extraction that do not take into account the rights of the people affected provoke demonstrations that are often met with violent reactions by private security forces. Conflict over land is also a root cause of violence in the Philippines as landowners are increasingly converting agricultural land to agro-business or other forms of economic activity to the detriment of the lives of rural communities. And similarly, the urban population is subject to violent evictions to make way for economic development projects. 