Colombia:  On Human Rights Day, International Organizations deplore the conviction on appeal of David Ravelo Crespo
December 10, 2013
Human rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2013 / DecemberColombia: On Human Rights Day, International Organizations deplore the conviction on appeal of David Ravelo CrespoThis article is available in:English (main language)Spanish

Today,
the 10th of December, international Human Rights Day, the international
organizations and networks whose signatures appear below deplore the 220
month-prison sentence of human rights defender David Ravelo Crespo, member of the Regional Corporation for the
Defense of Human Rights in Magdalena Medio (CREDHOS) in the city of
Barrancabermeja (Colombia). Once again we reiterate our concern for the variety
of irregularities that have been denounced throughout David Ravelo ́s trial,
which ended with his being convicted in the first instance. This conviction was
upheld in its entirety in the second instance by the Bucaramanga High Court (el
Tribunal Superior) on the 8th of October 2013.
 
We
believe that respect for the guarantees of due process, including the right to
a legitimate defense are fundamental to the Rule of Law. According to the
denunciation such guarantees have been repeatedly violated throughout this
trial. According to David Ravelo ́s lawyers, these irregularities have
undermined the defense and call into question the legitimacy of his conviction
in both instances of the process.
 
On the
4th of September 2013, the Bar Human Rights Committee (BHRC) of England and
Wales presented an amicus curiae[1] report in relation to David Ravelo ́s trial and
conviction before the High Court (el Tribunal Superior) of Santander
(Colombia). The amicus curiae was endorsed by the
Law Society`s Human Rights Committee, the Colombian Caravana Lawyer’s Group,
the Chartered Institute of Legal Executives and other lawyers interested in the
reality of human rights in Colombia. According to Kirsty Brimelow QC, president
of the BHRC, the irregularities in this case not only effect David Ravelo, but
also impact the exercise of due process in Colombia and its adherence to
international law, the purpose of which is to promote the administration of
justice.
 
In
addition to the variety of irregularities denounced during the trial, David
Ravelo ́s lawyers have proven that the illegitimacy of the prosecutor who
directed the investigation. The prosecutor William Pacheco Granados, of the
22nd Prosecution Office in the National Anti-Terrorism Unit, was a lieutenant
with the National Police in Armenia (Quindío, Colombia) prior to becoming a prosecutor.
Mr. Pacheco Granados was investigated by the Attorney General of Internal
Affairs (Procuraduría) and
subsequently removed from office because of his supposed involvement in the
forced disappearance of Guillermo Hurtado Parra in Armenia (Quindío, Colombia)
in 1991[2].
Later, in November 1993, Mr. Pacheco Granados was sentenced to a year in prison
by a Superior Military Court (Tribunal
Superior Militar). According to Colombian legislation, these convictions
disqualify him from holding any position in the State Prosecution Office (Fiscalía)[3].
 
In line
with this, the amicus curiae concludes that the trial is invalid because of the role that prosecutor William Gildardo
Pacheco Granados ́ played, adding that in any case, David Ravelo should be
absolved given the fact that “Mr. Ravelo was convicted despite the weight of
evidence that in this case demonstrated his innocence”[4].
 
Since
David Ravelo has been detained, national and international agencies have called
attention to his case and the lack of compliance with national and
international standards of due process. In particular, in March 2011, the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers,
Gabriela Knaul, and the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Situation of
Human Rights Defenders, Margaret Sekaggya, sent a joint communiqué to the
Colombian government following David Ravelo ́s arrest in which they expressed
their concern that «the criminalization of Mr. Ravelo Crespo falls within a context of
increased cases of prosecution against human rights defenders in Colombia»[5].
 
As
non-governmental organizations and international networks, we will continue to
monitor the next phases of this process and the eventual appeal (casación). We urge that appropriate
measures are taken to guarantee the fundamental rights of David Ravelo and to
address the irregularities that have been denounced since his
imprisonment so that the trial is compliant with Colombian law and international
standards of due process.
 
Signing:
-  ABColombia 
-  ASK! - Arbeitsgruppe
Schweiz-Kolumbien 
-  Associació Catalana per la Pau – ACP 
-  Asociación Paz con Dignidad 
-  Christian Aid 
-  Colombian Caravana UK Lawyers Group 
-  Comité Oscar Romero 
-  Cooperacció 
-  Front Line Defenders 
-  Iniciativa Solidaria Internacionalista 
-  Justicia por Colombia España 
-  Kolko - Derechos Humanos por Colombia 
-  MISEREOR 
-  Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture - OMCT and
the International Federation for Human Rights - FIDH) 
-  Oficina Internacional de Derechos Humanos
Acción Colombia – OIDHACO 
-  Peace Brigades International - PBI - Proyecto
Colombia 
-  Rete Italiana di solidarietá Colombia Vive! 
-  Solicitors’ International Human Rights Group -
SIHRG 
-  Taula Catalana per la Pau i el Drets Humans a
Colòmbia 
-  United Church of Christ Justice and Witness
Ministries 
-  United Steelworkers - USW 
-  US Office on Colombia - USOC 



[1] Amicus curiae (literally “friend of the court” or “friend of the tribunal”) is
information offered by third persons not party to a case who voluntarily offer
their opinion with regard to some point of law or other important related
aspect in order to assist the court in the resolution of the case.


[2] Attorney General of Internal Affairs,
Representative for the Defense of Human Rights (La Procuraduria Delegada para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos):
Resolution 015 of July 10th 1992, Resolution 017 of November 22nd 1993. 


[3] Last 23rd of April, a criminal complaint
was filed against William Gildardo Pacheco Granados for his responsibility in a
case of forced disappearance. He subsequently resigned from his role as
prosecutor in July 2013. While he was still prosecutor, Pacheco ordered that
David Ravelo be linked to this case and created the formal accusation. The
defending attorneys have denounced that among other irregularities, Pacheco
closed the investigative stage of the case without accepting the majority of
the evidence presented by the defense. Citing laws that prohibit persons with
disabilities or criminal convictions from exercising positions in the State
Prosecution Office (fiscalía) or in
the judicial branch, the letter of appeal submitted by the defense argues that
the entire court process is invalid given Pacheco ́s legal inability to perform
as prosecutor, the active role he adopted in David Ravelo ́s case and his
failure to investigate all of the favorable and unfavorable elements of the
case. It highlights the gravity of the fact that a person accused of committing
a crime against humanity is in charge of a process against a human rights
defender and the lack of objectivity this entails. The appeal also references
the numerous procedural and evidentiary irregularities that took place during
the trial. With respect to these procedural irregularities, the defense
highlights the fact that the current process amounts to a reformulation of
previous charges that David Ravelo was already absolved of in first and second
instance in 1995. Additionally, he later won a lawsuit for damages against the
State, which was sentenced to compensate him for arbitrary detention.


[4] The Bar Human Rights Committee of England
and Wales (BHRC), Amicus Curiae before the Superior Tribunal (el Tribunal Superior) of Santander in
relation to the trial and sentence dictated by the First Criminal Court of the
Specialized Circuit-Attached-(Providence n° 151, filed:. 2011-0049-01 the 16th
of November 2012. Case against David Ravelo Crespo), Paragraph 72. 


[5] The UN General Assembly ́s Human Rights
Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and
lawyers, Gabriela Knaul, A/HRC/17/30/Add.1, May 2011. 