Cameroon:  Ongoing judicial harassment targeting members of the Organic Farming for Gorillas (OFFGO)
June 19, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2017 / JuneCameroon: Ongoing judicial harassment targeting members of the Organic Farming for Gorillas (OFFGO)


URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

 
CMR 001 / 0317 / OBS 033.1
Judicial harassment
Cameroon
June 19, 2017
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Cameroon.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the ongoing judicial harassment targeting several
members of the Organic Farming for Gorillas (OFFGO), a group of farmers founded
in September 2015 to promote organic farming, environmental protection,
opposing land grabbing and working for the protection of the cross-river
gorilla in Mbengwi, in the North-West Region of Cameroon. 
 
According to the information received,
following a complaint filed on March 23, 2017, by Mr. Prince Vincent Awazi,
Regent of Tudig and board member of OFFGO denouncing the illegal arrest,
detention and expulsion of Mr. Jan Cappelle, founder of OFFGO, as
well as the subsequent harassment of several OFFGO members, the National
Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms (CNDHL) carried out an investigation
into the abuses and judicial harassment targeting OFFGO members (see background
information). To date, despite the conduct of two field visits to Tudig and
Mbengwi on April 17 and 19, 2017, the conclusions of the CNDHL are yet to be
made public.
 
The Observatory is concerned by the
delays in the publication of the report and recommendations by the CNDHL. Although
there are no formal delays in which the CNDHL has to publish its reports,
common practice usually sees the publication of report within a month. Such
delay entail further harassment of OFFGO members and impunity for those
responsible. Consequently, the Observatory urges Cameroonian authorities to
ensure that the investigation is carried out in a comprehensive manner, without
any hindrance and delays.
 
Furthermore, on May 17, 2017, Mr.
Vincent Awazi, an OFFGO member, was summoned before the Mbengwi Court of First Instance,
although to date he has not been notified of any charges pending against him.
On that day, the judge failed to appear and no further hearing date had been
scheduled as of publication of this Appeal.
 
This is not the first time that Mr.
Vincent Awazi has been summoned to appear before a court without being informed
of any charges pending against him (see background information). 
 
In addition, two other OFFGO members
Messrs. Matthias Awazi and Humfred Manjo are still facing charges
and if convicted, they could face
up to three years in prison (see background information).
 
Moreover, since May 29, 2017, the
Mbengwi Court of First Instance has repeatedly requested both the defendants
and the plaintiff to respectively pay 150,000 FCFA (approx. 229 euros) and
100,000 FCFA (approx. 153 euros) in order to visit the community farm (locus fee). The Observatory expresses
its concerned over this practice, illegal under Cameroonian law[1].  
 
The Observatory is equally concerned by
the judicial harassment targeting OFFGO members and calls upon Cameroonian
authorities to put an end to any form of retaliation of their human rights
activities.
 
Background information:
 
The village of Tudig, in Mbengwi, where
OFFGO has its headquarters, as well as its members, have been since 2016 the
target of intimidation and harassment from the Divisional Officer of Mbengwi
Sub-division and from Mr. Baba Danpullo, a billionaire businessman, cattle
rancher, tea plantation owner and a member of the Central Committee of the
ruling Cameroon People’s Democratic Movement (CPDM) party, who has been
involved in several cases of land grabbing in the country[2].
 
In September 2015, OFFGO submitted a
report to the Governor of the North-West region on the conflict opposing
farmers and cattle ranchers[3]. In October 2015, the
Senior Divisional Officer of the Momo Division opened an investigation into the
irregularities revealed in the report with respect to land attribution. In
November 2015, a letter was sent to the Senior Divisional Officer of Momo and
to the Governor of the North-West region to add up to the report submitted in
September 2015.
 
On January 21, 2016, during a
meeting regarding the above-mentioned reports, the Divisional Officer of
Mbengwi Sub-Division declared that he had requested an investigation on Mr. Jan
Cappelle and on allegations of “support to the communities in Tudig”. Allegedly
the support provided would encourage communities to take their land back.
Following this meeting, the Regent of Tudig’s representative sent a letter to
the Governor of the North-West region, to share his concerns regarding this
investigation, perceived as an act of intimidation against Mr. Cappelle and the
local community.
 
Summoned to the Mbengwi gendarmerie
on February 19, 2016, Mr. Cappelle went to the station on February 27, 2016 for
interrogation with his lawyer. As there was no evidence against him, he was not
arrested.
 
In March 2016, the Divisional
Officer of Mbengwi Sub-Division, again, asked for an investigation to be
carried out into Mr. Cappelle’s activities, but this time to the Mbengwi
police. This investigation led to a report, stating that no threat to security
could be reported with respect to Mr. Cappelle’s activities.
 
On April 25, 2016, Mr. Jan Cappelle
was summoned to the Momo gendarmerie, without any explanation. On May 5, he was
interrogated by the gendarmerie and another interrogation was scheduled on May
11.
 
On May 10, 2016, a day before the
second interrogation, Mr. Cappelle was arrested in Bamenda by the police and
transferred to Yaoundé where he was placed in detention and given no access to
his lawyer until May 12, 2016. On May 13, 2016, Mr. Cappelle was expelled from
Cameroon to Belgium without any legal justification[4].
An investigation into the
expulsion was launched in July 2016 by the National Gendarmerie of the North
West Region, concluding that the accusations were not justified. As of the
publication of this Appeal, no further actions were taken following the
issuance of the Gendarmerie report, which was sent to the Presidency in August
2016.
 
Furthermore, in May 2016, the
Divisional Officer of Mbengwi Sub-Division informed verbally the villagers that he issued an injunction
for the destruction of the organic community farm developed by OFFGO in Tudig. The Divisional Officer’s
communication resulted in a peaceful protest by hundreds of OFFGO members and
villagers, opposing the destruction order, which led to the arrest of two OFFGO
board members, Messrs. Matthias Awazi and Humfred Manjo on July 16, 2016 on charges of
violating “Sub Prefectural Decision No
053/SPD/BALPA/2015 placing an injunction order on a grazer area under dispute
in Tudig Village” and “illegal retention” of two goats under Section 322(3) of
the Penal Code. They were transferred to the Mbengwi Tribunal of First Instance
and provisionally released on the same day.
 
On February 22, 2017, the hearing in the
case against OFFGO board members Matthias Awazi and Humfred Manjo, scheduled
before the Mbengwi Court of First Instance, was postponed due to the ongoing lawyers’
strike in the Anglophone region of Cameroon. As of publication of this Appeal,
not further hearing date had been scheduled.
 
Messrs. Matthias Awazi and Humfred Manjo
are being prosecuted under trumped-up charges of violation of “Sub Prefectural
Decision No 053/SPD/BALPA/2015 placing an injunction order on a grazer area
under dispute in Tudig Village” and “illegal retention” of two goats under
Section 322(3) of the Penal Code. If convicted, they face up to three years in prison.
 
In addition, the village of Tudig, has
been the target of several security incidents since mid-2016. Specifically,
destructions and damages to the farmers’ huts, destruction of property, theft
of crops as well as theft and killings of farm animals by armed civilians were
reported respectively in September 2016, November 2016 and February 2017.
Following these incidents, villagers went to the police station, respectively
on November 22, 2016 and February 9, 2017, to file and update a complaint in
relation to the damages resulting from the intrusion of armed civilians within
the village of Tudig. The complaint has been filed on grounds of death threats,
destruction of property, intimidation and illegal possession of arms. As of
publishing this Appeal, police investigation within the complaint was ongoing,
but no investigation into the destructions has yet been undertaken. On March
13, 2017, the village Regent of Tudig, Mr. Prince Vincent Awazi, a board member of OFFGO, received a message on his phone from one of the attackers, warning the
villagers to be vigilant and that they “will suffer”.
 
On February 18, 2017, armed elements of
the army entered the village of Tudig and tried to arrest villagers[5].
Besides, on February 2, 2017, the Mbengwi Prosecutor (State Counsel[6])
briefly detained the village Regent Mr. Vincent Awazi for unknown reasons to
later free him on a 500,000 FCFA (approx. 762 Euros) bail. Although he was
notified his summons to court for February 8, 2017, when he presented himself
to court no charges were brought against him - nor have been to date - as the
State Counsel failed to transfer Mr. Awazi's file to court. Yet, Mr. Awazi got
informed that the State Counsel is still investigating potential charges
against him.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities of Cameroon and ask them to:
 
i. Put an end to all acts of
harassment - including at judicial level - against OFFGO members and all human
rights defenders in Cameroon;
 
ii. Guarantee in all circumstances
the physical and psychological integrity, and security of OFFGO members and all human rights defenders in Cameroon;
 
iii. Ensure in all circumstances
that OFFCO and its members as well as all human rights defenders in Cameroon
are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and
fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Conform in any circumstances
with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the UN General Assembly, in
particular its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
international human rights instruments ratified by Cameroon.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Paul
Biya, President of the Republic of Cameroon, Fax +237 222 22 08 70
·   H.E. Mr. Philémon Yang, Prime Minister and Head of
Government of Cameroon, Fax: +237 222 23 57 35 / + 237 222 23 57 65. Email: spm@spm.gov.cm
·     Mr. Laurent Esso, Minister of Justice of Cameroon,
Fax: + 237 222 23 00 05 / + 237 222 23 55 59
·     Mr. René Emmanuel SADI, Minister of Territorial
Administration of Cameroon, Fax: + 237 22 22 37 35
·  James Mouangue Kobila, President of the National
Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms, Fax: +237 222 22 60 82, E-mail: cndhl@iccnet.cm / mouangue2001@yahoo.fr
·   H.E. Mr. Anatole Fabien Nkou,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cameroon to the United Nations
Office in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 736 21 65, Email: mission.cameroun@bluewin.ch
·     H.E. Mr. Daniel Evina Abe'e, Cameroon Ambassador to the European Union,
Embassy of the Republic of Cameroon, Brussels, Belgium. Fax: + 32 2 344 57 35;
E-mail: ambassade.cameroun@skynet.be
 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Cameroon in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, June 19,
2017
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an FIDH
and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of human rights defenders and
aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. FIDH and OMCT are both
members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax
FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80
·       Tel and fax
OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29



[1]            Sub-Chapter II of the Cameroonian Code of Criminal Procedure
which provides for visit to the locus in quo, searches and seizures does not
include any locus fee that should be paid by the parties.


[2]          In 1986, Mr. Baba
Ahmadou Danpullo established two cattle ranches in the Boyo and Menchum
divisions of the North-West Region. He allegedly forced farming communities
from their lands without compensation, which made him the largest single private
landowner in the region. Since then, the landowner, who has close links with
the authorities, has been involved in land disputes with local farmers who
peacefully defend the right to use their land. See the Observatory’s Urgent
Appeal CMR 001 / 0716 / OBS 056.2 of
January 13, 2017.


[3]            The report is available at the following address: http://capacityfordevelopment.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/21092015_Report-to-Governor_r2.pdf


[4]            However Mr. Danpullo’s direct involvement into Mr. Jan
Cappelle’s expulsion has been verbally reported to OFFGO members by the
National Gendarmerie of Momo as well as by the National Gendarmerie of the
North West region, and sources at the Presidency. In addition, a leaked report
from the National Gendarmerie of the North West region accuses Mr. Jan Cappelle
of defamation and attempted murder against Mr. Danpullo. Another document in
the file alleged that Mr. Jan Cappelle was in possession of GPS, trackers and
bombs as so-called “instruments” to kill Mr. Danpullo.


[5]           On February 18, 2017, the army entered the village of
Tudig as an independence flag appeared in the village. Villagers denied hosting
the flag in the village and it is believed, considering the current political
situation in the anglophone region of Cameroon, that the flag was in reality
put in the village of Tudig to provoke arrests by the army. However, no arrest
eventually took place on that day.


[6]             Under Cameroonian law, the State Counsel is the office of
the Prosecutors, constituting the legal department/prosecution department. 