Russian Federation:  Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against Mr. Philip Kostenko
January  3, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2012 / JanuaryRussian Federation: Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against Mr. Philip KostenkoURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
RUS 001 / 0112 / OBS 001Arbitrary detention / Judicial
harassment
Russian Federation
January 3, 2012
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in the Russian Federation.
Brief description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the continued arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment against Mr. Philip Kostenko, a member of the Anti-Discrimination
Centre (ADC) “Memorial”, Saint Petersburg, who was due to be released on January
5, 2012 following his sentencing to 15 days of administrative detention (see background
information).
According to the information received, on
January 4, 2012 at 11.30 am, the Vasileostrovsky District Court will decide on
new measures of restraint against Mr. Kostenko in relation to new criminal
proceedings started against him on “vandalism” charges under Article 214 p. 2 of
Criminal Code of Russia for allegedly damaging an All-Russia People's Front
poster during the parliamentary electoral campaign in autumn 2011 in St.
Petersburg. The court may order his detention pending trial. In this case, he
will be transferred from the administrative detention centre where he is now
detained to a criminal pre-trial detention centre.
The Observatory condemns the continuing
judicial harassment of Mr. Philip Kostenko since it seems to merely aim at
sanctioning his human rights activities and expresses its deep concern about
the ongoing attempts to hinder the peaceful activities of human rights defenders.
The Observatory further recalls that it is
the third set of charges brought against Mr. Philip Kostenko since his arrest
on December 6, 2011 (see below).
Background information:
On December 6, 2011, Mr. Philip Kostenko
was arrested in Saint Petersburg on accusation of “disobeying the orders of the
police officers” and of “refusal to put an end to his participation in the
rally” following his participation in a peaceful demonstration to denounce electoral
irregularities and called for fair, free and independent electoral processes
following the elections results on December 4, 2011.
On December 7, he was sentenced to the
maximum sentence of 15 days of administrative detention. On December 10, the
appeal lodged by his lawyer was rejected. On December 12, his lawyer lodged a
complaint before the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR), as both decisions
(that of December 7 and December 10) were issued following serious procedural
irregularities.
As of issuing this Urgent Appeal, Mr.
Kostenko is still detained in the special detention centre No. 6 of
“Zakharievskaya” street, where he started a hunger strike on December 6, then joined
by another detainee, in order to protest against the arbitrary detention of demonstrators
and bad conditions of detention.
Moreover, on December 22, the 153rd court
department sentenced Mr. Kostenko to an additional 15 days of detention for
“disorderly conduct” under Article 20.1.1 of the Criminal Code after he
allegedly swore before police officers on October 16, 2011. This decision was handed
out a few minutes before Mr. Kostenko's expected release.
After the new court decision Mr. Kostenko
ceased his hunger strike as all people arrested during the protests against
electoral fraud in St Petersburg had then been released. 
The Observatory also recalls that Mr.
Philippe Kostenko had already been arrested along with Ms. Anna Udyarova,
another member of the ADC “Memorial”, on November 26, 2011, as they were
picketing near the Embassy of Belarus to request the release of Mr. Ales Bialiatski,
FIDH Vice-President and President of the Human Rights Centre “Viasna” in Belarus,
and, more generally, all political prisoners in the region. They were later
finally released during the night after eight to nine hours of detention
following mobilisation in their favour, both at the national and international
level. They were released under the condition that they appear before the
police on November 28, 2011, at 11 am. At that time, they were informed by the
police that they had been charged of two  administrative offences, “illegal picketing” and “disobeying the
police”, punishable by fines and administrative detention[1].
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Russian
Federation, urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Philip Kostenko as well as of all
members of the Anti-Discrimination Centre “Memorial” and all human rights
defenders in the Russian Federation;
ii.                  
Put an end to any act of harassment
- including at the judicial level - against Mr. Philip Kostenko as well as
against all human rights defenders in the Russian Federation, and ensure in all
circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate activities
without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
iii.                 
Comply with the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially:
-        
its Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”,
-        
its Article 5, which provides that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the
national and international levels (a) to meet or assemble peacefully”;
-        
its Article 6 (b) and (c), which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others [...] as provided for in human rights and other applicable international
instruments, freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information
and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms and [...] to study,
discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice,
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate
means, to draw public attention to those matters”,
-        
and Article 12.2, which provides
that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”;
iv.                
Comply with the provisions of the
Declaration of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on the
protection of human rights defenders and the promotion of their activities, and
in  particular With Article 2.i), in
which the Committee calls on member States to “create an environment conducive
to the work of human rights defenders, enabling individuals, groups and
associations to freely carry out activities, on a legal basis, consistent with international
standards, to promote and strive for the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms without any restrictions other than those authorised by the European Convention
on Human Rights;
v.                  
More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international
and regional human rights instruments ratified by the Russian Federation.
Addresses:
Mr. Dmitri Medvedev, President of the Russian Federation, Ilinka
     Str, 23, Moscow, 103132, Moscow, Russian Federation, Faxes:+ 7 495 606
     5173 / 630 2408Minister of Internal Affairs, Mr. Rashid Nurgaliev, ul. Zhitnaya,
     16, 117049 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Rossiia, 117049, Moskva,
     Fax: + 7 495 637 49 25 Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Smolenskaya-Sennaya
     pl, 32/34, 121200 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Fax:+ 7 495 644
     2203Mr. Alexander Ivanovich Bastrykin, Chairman of the Investigations
     Committee of the Russian Federation, Building 28, house 15, Naberezhnaya
     Akademika Tupoleva, Moscow, 105005, Russian FederationAmbassador Mr. Valery Loshchinin, Permanent Mission of the Russian
     Federation to the United Nations in Geneva, Avenue de la Paix 15, CH-1211,
     Geneva 20, Switzerland, E-mail : mission.russian@vtxnet.ch, Fax: +4122 734 40 44Ambassador Mr. Alexandra Romanov, Embassy of the
     Russian Federation in Brussels, 66 avenue de Fré, 1180 Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26
     13. E-mail: amrusbel@skynet.be
Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of the Russian Federation in your respective country.
***
Paris-Geneva, January 3, 2012
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29


[1] See Observatory Urgent Appeal RUS
005/1111/OBS 130, issued on November 28, 2011. 