Bahrain:  Bahrain: further information on Halima Hassan Sdeif Ahmed
January 10, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2000 / JanuaryBahrain: Bahrain: further information on Halima Hassan Sdeif AhmedCase BHR 231299.1 Follow-up to case BHR 231299  Geneva, 10th January 2000  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention regarding the following situation in Bahrain.  Brief reminder of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed by the Bahrain Human Rights Organization (BHRO), member of the OMCT network, of the arrest of a number of following persons in waves of arrests carried out in November and December 1999.   According to the information, on 16th December 1999, the house of Haji Hassan Sdeif (Kharjeyah-Sitra) was attacked and his 20-year old daughter, Halima Hassan Sdeif Ahmed, a student at a private Islamic school, was dragged out by her hair in front of her family and beaten allegedly by members of the Security Intelligence. No information was known about Halima.    New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received further reports from the Bahrain Human Rights Organisation (BHRO), a member of the network, that Halima is now detained at Isa Town Detention Centre in a condition described as “miserable”.  Furthermore, it is claimed that she has been subjected to physical and mental abuse.   It is reported that Halima Hassan Sdeif was told that she would be kept in detention for three months.  She is still in incommunicado detention but was allowed to meet her parents for five minutes.  Two other women, Fatima Salman Maki Salman (aged 24) and Asia Abdul Aziz Ismael (aged 20), from Kharijya-Sitra, were detained and tortured on 20 December in connection with this case. (see case BHR 100100)  According to reports, they were interrogated to extract confessions against Halima.  This case is part of the ongoing political unrest and the widespread popular movement calling for political reforms and the restoration of democracy.   On 26 August 1975, Amiri Act No. 14 was issued dissolving the National Assembly. Subsequently, Amiri Act No. 4 /1975 was issued suspending Article 65 of the Constitution and other articles relevant to the organization of parliamentary life. These two Acts, which are still in force, constitute a violation of Articles 65, 32/a, and 42 of the Constitution. The constitution establishes that in such an event elections for a new assembly must be held within two months. The ruling family has steadfastly refused to do it, and this refusal is one major factor underlying the current unrest.  These persons were arrested under the 1974 State Security Law which allows for the detention of a person without charge or trial for up to three years and sets a special court system "the State Security Court", a procedure of which falls short of International standards for fair trial.    OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Halima Hassan Sdeif.     Actions requested  Please write to the Bahrain authorities urging that they :   i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Halima Hassan Sdeif, and those arrested and tortured in connection with her case, and order her immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring her before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee her procedural rights at all times;  ii.	carry out a full and impartial investigation into this alleged arbitrary detention, ill-treatment and mental and physical abuse, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iii.	put an immediate end to the use of arbitrary detention of  people by the police and abrogate 1974 State Security Law and all national laws which are not in compliance with international human rights standards.   iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses:  His Highness Ilamad Bin Issa Al Khalifa, Office of His Highness the Amir, P.O. Box 555, The Amiri  Court, Rifa’a Palace, Bahrain. Fax : + 973 668884. Telex : 8666 Qasar BN; 8500 Qasar BN  His Excellency Al-Shaikh Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa, Prime Minister, P.O. Box 1000, al-Manama, Bahrain. Telex : 9336 PROM BN or 7889 PMPO BN. FAX: + 973 533033.  His Excellency Al-Shaikh Mohammed Bin Khalifa Al Khalifa, Minister of Interior, P.O. Box 13, al-Manama, Bahrain. Fax : + 973 276765 or 290526 or 754303. Telex : 9572 PSMKT BN OR 8333 ALAMAN BN  Geneva, 10th January 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 