Controversial bill targeting international funding for NGOs passes the first reading in Parliament
February 15, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2016 / FebruaryControversial bill targeting international funding for NGOs passes the first reading in ParliamentIsrael_PR_1502161 page / 135 KB
Paris-Geneva,
February 15, 2016 – The “Transparency Bill”, a cabinet-sponsored legislation
that would require Israeli NGOs to publicly state the funding they receive from
abroad was recently adopted in first reading at the Israeli Parliament. The
Knesset must immediately suspend the vote to prevent violation to the rights to
freedom of association, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (a joint FIDH-OMCT programme) declared today.
On February 8, 2016,
the Knesset (Israeli Parliament) approved a bill in first reading, that would
require non-governmental organisations that receive 50% or more of their
funding from foreign governments to publicly detail those sources. Two more
readings of the bill by the Parliament are required for it to become law. If
passed, the legislation introduced by Justice Minister Ayelet Shaked and
supported by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu will severely undermine the work
of many Israeli organisations which monitor, among other issues, human rights
violations against Palestinians. Under the pretext of increasing transparency,
this law would also require Israeli NGOs receiving international funding to
indicate it in all official letters and publications.
“This NGO Bill clearly targets peaceful dissent groups.
If passed, the new legislation
would severely restrict the legitimate activities of civil society and human
rights defenders in Israel. We call on the Knesset not to
approve the Transparency Bill into law, as it clearly violates international human rights
standards of freedom of association enshrined in the International Covenant for
Civil and Political Rights, ratified by Israel”, said Karim Lahidji, FIDH President. 
Israeli NGOs have
become over the last decades vital in denouncing the detrimental human rights
impact of the occupation of the Palestinian Territories and in promoting the
respect of the human rights of the Palestinians. They conduct advocacy
activities towards the Knesset, undertake legal initiatives before the Supreme
Court aiming at overturning detrimental government policies, and denounce human
rights violations in the media. 
“This bill is not about financial transparency. Israeli human rights
organisations do already publish their accounts in a transparent and
accountable manner for anybody to see. This law is about stigmatizing people
who represent the voices of victims of violations of international and Israeli
law”, added Gerald Staberock, Secretary
General of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). “One would wish that the energy going into passing legislation that would
be expected from repressive regimes would rather go into investigating and
preventing human rights violations”.
The motion, which has
sparked international criticism, especially from the European Parliament, comes
during a time of heightened tensions between Israelis and Palestinians, and
amid repression against Israeli organisations denouncing the occupation. 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy to situations
of repression against human rights defenders.
For more information, please contact:
FIDH: Audrey Couprie - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 /
Arthur Manet - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)OMCT: Chiara Cosentino - Tel: +32 2 218 37 19
(Brussels) / Delphine Reculeau - Tel: +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva) 