Russian Federation:  Arson of the office of the Human Rights Center (HRC) Memorial in Nazran, Ingushetia, Chechenya
January 19, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2018 / JanuaryRussian Federation: Arson of the office of the Human Rights Center (HRC) Memorial in Nazran, Ingushetia, Chechenya

URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

RUS 001 /
0118 / OBS 004.1
Arson of the
office
Police
surveillance
Russian Federation
January 19, 2018
 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in the Chechen Republic, Russian Federation.
 
New
information: 
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the arson of the office of the Human Rights Center (HRC) Memorial in
Nazran, Ingushetia, resulting in serious damage to three of the office’s six
rooms. 
 
According to the information received, on January 17,
2018, at 3.35 am, the CCTV camera of the HRC Memorial office recorded two young
men, wearing masks and gloves, one of whom was carrying a canister. The
arsonists put a ladder to the roof of the building and climbed to the second
floor of the office. The attackers also attempted to break one of the CCTV
video cameras installed on the building on their way to the window of HRC
Memorial’s office. The camera also recorded the rapid departure of the two
arsonists. Fortunately, the two attackers could only access three of the six
rooms. The fire brigade arrived quickly at the scene and extinguished the fire
but not before three of the office’s six rooms were burnt, destroying
electronic equipment and documents. The remains of a melted plastic bottle with
the smell of kerosene were found in the office of HRC Memorial Ingushetia
office’s Head Mr. Timur Akiev. 
 
Furthermore, it has been reported that on January 15
and 16, 2018, Mr. Oleg Orlov, Chairman of HRC Memorial Council, lawyer
Pyotr Zaikin, who defends the Head of HRC Memorial in Chechnya, Mr. Oyub Titiev who is currently detained,
and journalists who have arrived to Chechnya to investigate the case brought
against Mr. Titiev are under constant surveillance of the local law-enforcement
bodies. For two days, the group was detained five times allegedly for
verification of their involvement with illegal armed groups. 
 
The Observatory believes that the arson attack on the
office of HRC Memorial in Ingushetia is part of a larger campaign against the
organisation in the North Caucasus, aimed at pushing the human rights defenders
out of the region. Indeed, these events come at a time when the Head of HRC
Memorial in Chechnya, Oyub Titiev, has been detained, put in pre-trial
detention and falsely charged with the possession of drugs on January 9, 2018.
The defender and his family were threatened by law enforcement authorities in
an attempt to extract a confession. The arson attack indicates an escalation of
threats against HRC Memorial in the North Caucasus.
 
According to reliable sources, Mr. Oyub Titiev is no
longer detained at the police station but at the temporary detention center
(IVS). He has been able to meet with his lawyers several times. The next
hearing will be held before the Supreme Court of the Chechen Republic which
will decide upon the appeal against the order for pre-trial detention issued by
the Municipal Court of Chali. The date has not yet been set but the hearing
will take place before February 16, 2018. 
 
The Observatory condemns the arson attack against the
office of HRC Memorial in Ingushetia as well as the fabricated case against Mr.
Oyub Titiev as it believes they are directly linked to the legitimate human
rights work of HRC Memorial in the North Caucasus. 
 
Background
information:
 
In
the morning of January 9, 2018, Mr. Oyub
Titiev left his home in the
village of Kurchaloi, in the Chechen Republic, to head to a meeting with
a friend scheduled at 9am and subsequently to the office of HRC
"Memorial" in Grozny. Mr. Titiev being more than hour late for the
meeting with a friend whose identity is not being revealed on purpose, the latter
spotted Mr. Titiev on a road between the villages Kurchaloi and Mairtup, next
to the bridge on the river Khumyk. Next to Mr. Titiev were 5-6 traffic police
officers inspecting his car. Mr. Titiev gave his friend a sign not to approach
him, and after the both cars left - that of Titiev and the second belonging to
the traffic police - he headed to the Kurchaloi District Department of Internal
Affairs supposing Mr. Titiev would be taken there. Although he was not allowed
to enter the District Department of Internal Affairs, Mr. Titiev's car present
outside and unofficial sources allowed him to assume Mr. Titiev's detention. 
 
Despite repeated calls, the District
Department officially kept denying Mr. Titiev's presence. Several hours later,
Mr. Titiev's lawyer confirmed that his client was charged under Art. 228 of the
Criminal Code of the Russian Federation possessing drugs in large amounts. If
convicted, he risks up to ten years of imprisonment. Up to date, Mr. Titiev was
denied access to his lawyer while his detention had not been officially
confirmed by the authorities until 7 hours after his detention when
Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Interior of the Chechen Republic Apti
Alaudinov confirmed to the Russian Ombudsman Tatiana Moskalkova that Mr. Titiev
was being kept in Kurchaloi police station. Alaudinov promised to Moskalkova
that his lawyer would be able to meet him "soon".
 
In the context of appalling human rights
violations in Chechnya, such as the right to access to a lawyer, widespread use
of torture and ill-treatment, regular enforced disappearances and summary
executions, murders of human rights defenders, journalists and lawyers and
life-threatening risks they take by continuing their work, the Observatory
fears that the abduction of Mr. Titiev and charges against him are a
retaliation for his work. 
 
This
is the third time Chechen law enforcement use trumped up charges of drug
possession to silence critical voices.
 
In
2014, the Urus-Martan Town Court of the Chechen Republic found the historian
and head of an independent Chechen group Mr. Ruslan Kutaev guilty on dubious drug possession charges and
sentenced him to four years in prison. In 2016, Chechnya-based Caucasian Knot
journalist Mr. Zhalaudi Geriev was sentenced to three years in
prison on trumped up of drug possession. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities of Russia, urging them to: 
 
i. Carry out an
immediate, thorough and impartial investigation into the arson attack on
the  office of HRC Memorial in Ingushetia with a view to publishing the
results and bringing those responsible to justice in accordance with
international standards;
 
ii. Take all
necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity and
security of Oyub Titiev, the staff of HRC Memorial in Ingushetia and all
journalists legitimately carrying out investigative work in Chechnya, including
by putting an end to all forms of surveillance of their activities by local
enforcement officials;
 
iii. Release Mr. Oyub Titiev immediately and
unconditionally, and put an end to all forms of harassment, including at the
judicial level, against him that seem to merely aim at sanctioning his human rights
activities;
 
iv. Publicly
recognise at the level of the President of the Russian Federation the crucial
role of human rights defenders
as pillars of democracy and watchdogs of the rule of law and publicly condemn
all attacks against human rights defenders, particularly in the Chechen
Republic;
 
v. Comply with all the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with
Articles 1, 12.1 and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights standards and international instruments ratified by the Russian
Federation.
 
Addresses :
 
Vladimir Putin, President, Fax: + 7 495 606 3602; + 7 495 625 3581
 
Dimitri Medvedev, Prime
     Minister, Twitter: @MedvedevRussia
 
Sergueï Lavrov, Minister of
     Foreign Affairs, Fax: + 7 495 644 2203
 
Permanent Mission of the
     Russian Federation to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41
     22 734 40 44, E-mail: mission.russian@vtxnet.ch
 
Embassy of the Russian
     Federation in Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26 13. E-mail: amrusbel@skynet.be
 
Permanent Representation of the
     Russian Federation to the Council of Europe, France. Fax: (+33) (0) 3 88
     24 19 74. Email: russia.coe@orange.fr
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Russia in your respective countries.
 
 ***
 
Paris-Geneva,
January 19, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and
fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22
809 49 29 