Thailand:  Reprisals against Human Rights Defenders, Ms. Pornpen Khongkachonkiet, Ms. Anchana Heemmina, and Mr. Somchai Homlaor
June 12, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / JuneThailand: Reprisals against Human Rights Defenders, Ms. Pornpen Khongkachonkiet, Ms. Anchana Heemmina, and Mr. Somchai HomlaorThailand_120616_JS8 pages / 434 KB
June 12, 2016 - We, the undersigned civil society groups, are gravely 
concerned about the legal action taken by the Royal Thai Army for criminal 
defamation and Computer Crimes Act violations against Woman Human Rights 
Defenders (WHRD) Ms. Pornpen Khongkachonkiet, Ms. Anchana Heemmina, and HRD 
Mr. Somchai Homlaor.  Ms. Pornpen, is the Director of the Cross 
Cultural Foundation – an organization which monitors and documents 
cases of torture and ill-treatment in Thailand. Mr. Somchai, is the 
President of the Cross Cultural Foundation, and Ms. Anchana is director of 
Duay JaiGroup (Hearty Support Group) – a local organization based in 
Thailand’s ‘Deep South’, which supports people who suffer 
from the justice system in national security cases. All three are co-editors 
of a report, Torture and ill treatment in The Deep South Documented in 
2014-2015[1] documenting 
54 cases of inhumane treatment in detention, launched on 10th 
February 2016. The research and report was partly funded by the United 
Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, established under the General 
Assembly resolution 36/151 in 1981, thus under the United Nations (UN) Human 
Rights Council Resolution 12/2 these HRDs and their colleagues are 
“individuals who cooperate with the United Nations, its 
representatives and mechanisms in the field of Human Rights.”

 

On 8th June 2016, Internal Security Operations Command Region 4 
(ISOC 4) gave information to Ms. Pornpen through a phone conversation that 
ISOC 4 sought the power of attorney from the Royal Thai Army and submitted a 
complaint to Yala Mueang Police Station on 17th May 2016 for 
criminal defamation and computer-related violations by the three HRDs. The 
charges are for alleged criminal defamation under Article 328 of the Thai 
Criminal Code, and violation of the Computer Crimes Act (2007), Article 
14(1)[2]. We are disturbed 
regarding information that authorities have already interrogated six 
witnesses. The Police case file is No. 704/2559.

 

This judicial action has been taken despite the Human Rights 
Defenders’ best efforts to engage authorities on the evidence of 
torture and ill-treatment presented in the report. Namely, the report was 
sent to Army Lt Gen Wiwat Pathompak, Commander of the 4th Army Region, on 
8th January 2016, one month before its publication. However, high-ranking 
military government officials have publicly dismissed the accuracy of the 
report and questioned the intentions of the civil society organisations who 
compiled the report. Furthermore, Ms. Anchana, WHRD working in 
Thailand’s ‘Deep South’, faced summons to an Army camp, 
lengthy questioning by Army officers, and close physical surveillance and 
intimidation by unidentified, uniformed men[3].

 

We deem this action by the Royal Thai Army to be a prompt reprisal against 
civil society groups seeking to bring to the authorities’ attention 
the continued abuse of power and ill-treatment of detainees in Thailand. The 
Royal Thai Army has taken these actions at a time when it the Thai military 
government has renewed the Thailand’s international commitments to 
abolishing the use of torture. On 11th May 2016, at the United 
Nation’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of Thailand 12 UN member 
states issued recommendations directly relating to the prevention of torture 
and access to justice for survivors of torture. Furthermore, on 24 
th May 2016 the Thai military government issued a Cabinet Resolution 
stating that they will pass a Prevention of Torture and Enforced 
Disappearance Act. It is troubling that the Royal Thai Army has ordered the 
legal pursuit of HRDs who have been supporting victims of torture as well as 
pushing at many levels for policy reform and state action to prevent torture 
and provide justice to survivors.

 

We deem the Royal Thai Army’s action to be an unreasonable, 
arbitrary, and heavy-handed attempt to silence all complaints of allegations 
of torture against the authorities. By quashing Ms. Pornpen, Ms. Anchana, 
and Mr Somchai’s efforts to support torture victims to publicly 
complain about Human Rights violations by authorities, the Royal Thai Army 
is seeking to make it more than impossible for torture victims to voice 
their complaints. Moreover, this is a deplorable act by the Royal Thai Army 
as it aims to further intimidate existing and potential victims of human 
rights violations to not report these violations. Instead of suppressing the 
work of Human Rights Defenders, such as Ms. Pornpen, Ms. Anchana, and Mr. 
Somchai, the Royal Thai Army should, as New Zealand recommended at the UPR, 
“Promptly investigate and prosecute all allegations of torture and 
extrajudicial killings,” and as Canada recommended, “Create an 
independent body to investigate all torture allegations, including in 
Thailand’s Deep South, and bring perpetrators to justice.”

 

This judicial harassment constitutes a direct infringement of Ms. Pornpen, 
Ms. Anchana, and Mr. Somchai’s right to work as a Human Rights 
Defender in Thailand. As stated in Article 1 of the UN Declaration on Human 
Rights Defenders “Everyone has the right to (individually and in 
association with others) promote and to strive for the realization of Human 
Rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international 
level.” We believe that the filing of this criminal legal case against 
Ms. Pornpen, Ms. Anchana, and Mr. Somchai was undertaken with the purpose of 
retaliation and that it is in response to the three HRDs peaceful and 
legitimate activities to hold authorities to account for cases of human 
rights violations, including torture, in Thailand’s ‘Deep 
South.’

 

We call on the Royal Thai Army to:

-      Immediately and unconditionally withdraw 
the legal action against Ms. Pornpen, Ms. Anchana, and Mr. Somchai. Such 
legal action against the legitimate work of HRDs is against the public 
interest.

-      Ensure that no further retaliation is 
carried out or allowed to happen in the future against HRDs, ill-treatment 
and torture victims, their colleagues and families.

 

We call on the Thai military government to:

-      Respect the universally recognized rights, 
duties and obligations of everyone and organizations to highlight 
information about Human Rights violations and injustices to the public, as 
stated in the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders;

-      Ensure that all persons affected by 
torture and other human rights violations receive justice, including first 
and foremost the right to complain which must be respected at all 
times.

-      Ensure the implementations of 
recommendations it accepted during the recent UPR with regard to HRDs.

 

 

(See attachment for signatory organisations and individuals)

 


ANNEX 1 - Human Rights Defender Profiles 

Ms. Pornpen is a leading Human Rights Defender in Thailand who has been 
involved in various Human Rights issues both in Thailand and the region, 
including women’s rights, indigenous rights and preventing forced 
disappearances. Her work serves the public interest by ensuring that 
authorities are held accountable and pressuring authorities to 
unconditionally respect the Human Rights of all. As Director and President 
of the Cross Cultural Foundation, Ms. Pornpen and Mr. Somchai have 
constantly been monitoring and documenting cases of torture and Human Rights 
violations in Thailand’s southernmost provinces and other parts of the 
country

 

Mr. Somchai is a seasoned and respected Human Rights lawyer in Thailand, 
who has been fighting to defend people’s Human Rights for the past 25 
years. He was a Commissioner for the Law Reform Commission of Thailand until 
it was disbanded by the current military regime. Furthermore, as president 
of the Cross Cultural Foundation he has been a key figure forging bridges 
across Thai society. Cross Cultural Foundation organises educational 
activities, as well as research and legal support to promote people’s 
Human Rights, especially in Thailand’s southernmost provinces which 
are in a state of prolonged armed conflict. In September 2014, both Ms. 
Pornpen and Mr. Somchai, as well as their organization, faced a criminal 
defamation and computer-related crimes charge filed by Army Task Force 41. 
The case was eventually dropped by decision of the state prosecutor in June 
2015 following an international campaign denouncing the Thai Army’s 
harassment and intimidation of these HRDs for their legitimate and crucial 
Human Rights work.

 

Ms. Anchana is Director of Duay Jai Group which has been working with 
victims of ill-treatment in national security cases since January 2010, in 
Thailand’s southernmost, conflict-affected regions. Following the 
release of the report on torture cases, on 14th February, Col. 
Suratep, Head of the Civil Society Organisations unit under the Internal 
Security Operations Command ('ISOC'), contacted Ms. Anchana and 
other activists who were involved in compiling the report and summoned them 
for a discussion. Ms. Anchana presented herself at Sirinthon Army Camp in 
Yala Province for the discussion with seven security officers. The meeting 
lasted two and a half hours, during which the officers questioned Ms. 
Anchana about the cases in the torture report. The officers expressed their 
discontent with the report and requested the human rights defender to 
henceforth submit all of her publications to the ISOC prior to their 
release. Ms. Anchana refused to do so. Thai Lawyers for Human Rights 
(TLHR)[4] reported that 
at about 5 pm on Friday, 19th February 2016, a group of ten men 
in green uniforms visited the home of Ms. Anchana, in Songkhla Province, but 
only Ms. Anchana’s mother was home. Without presenting any warrant, 
they claimed to be border police officers and asked about Ms. 
Anchana’s work and her personal information. The activist’s 
mother reported that the men took pictures of her and the house. She added 
that before they left they told her to inform Ms. Anchana not to use Line, a 
chat application, or Facebook.

 

For more information, please contact:

In Thai: Anucha Wintachai +66 830796411 and eakucl@gmail.com

In English: +66 831 887600 and  
indefenceofcrcf2014@gmail.com

 

 


 



[1] 
           
https://voicefromthais.files.wordpress.com/2016/02/torture-report-english-as-of-10-feb-2016-realeased-version.pdf
[in English]



[2] 
            
Computer Crimes Act, Article 14.1
“Whoever commits the following offences, shall be punished with 
imprisonment not exceeding five years and fin not exceeding on hundred 
thousand baht or both:
(1) input, into computer system, forged computer data in whole or in 
part or false computer data in a manner likely to cause injury to another 
person or the public;”



[3] 
           See Annex 1 
– Human Rights Defender Profiles for more details.



[4] 
           Source:  
https://tlhr2014.wordpress.com/2016/02/20/south_threaten/ 