Kyrgyzstan:  Open Letter to the authorities: Concerns over draft laws and amendments considered by the Parliament of Kyrgyzstan, Jogorku Kenesh
June  5, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2014 / JuneKyrgyzstan: Open Letter to the authorities: Concerns over draft laws and amendments considered by the Parliament of Kyrgyzstan, Jogorku Kenesh

To:
Mr. Almazbek Atambayev
President of the Kyrgyz
Republic
E-mail: psp@adm.gov.kg; oip@adm.gov.kg
 
Mr. Jeenbekov
A.Sh.
Speaker of the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrgyz
Republic
 
All Members of Parliament
 
Paris-Geneva, June 5,
2014
 
Re: Concerns
over draft laws and amendments considered by the Parliament of Kyrgyzstan, Jogorku
Kenesh
 
Excellencies,
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), is
writing to you to express concern regarding the introduction of three
legislative proposals last month in Parliament: a bill on so-called “foreign
agents”, another on so-called “homosexual propaganda”, as well as proposed
amendments to the law on “non profit organisations”, which could all be voted
by the end of the month, during the current parliamentary session. If adopted,
they will severely restrict freedoms of association and expression in the
country.
 
The bill on “foreign agents” largely draws
inspiration from a drastic Russian legislation on the same matter. According to
the information received, it provides that non-governmental organisations
(NGOs) receiving funds from abroad shall register as “foreign agents” and be
subjected to tougher reporting requirements, the violation of which is
punishable by a up to six-month suspension. This text also provides for the criminalisation
of NGO leaders “inciting citizens to disobey their civic duties or commit other
unlawful acts”, a vague wording that could allow for the repression of the
legitimate expression of dissent or criticism. Offenders charged under this provision
risk up to three years in prison.
 
In addition, on May 19, 2014, the
Ministry of Justice proposed legislative amendments to the law on non-profit
organisations in Parliament, which include a provision requiring all non-profit
organisations to register.
 
The Observatory is concerned that
such proposed legislative reforms are contrary to international law as well as
the Constitution and laws of the Kyrgyz Republic regulating the right to freedom
of association, as they would establish a set of harsh restrictions towards
NGOs which would go far beyond what is permissible under international law as
well as under the Kyrgyz legislation. We recall that Article 35 of the
Constitution of the Kyrgyz Republic reads that “everyone has the right to
freedom of association”, and that the Law of the Kyrgyz Republic on
Non-commercial Organizations explicitly provides citizens with the right to
establish unregistered public organisations.
 
We also recall that the right of
NGOs to freedom of association is a fundamental and universal right enshrined
in numerous international treaties and standards, especially Article 22 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). While this right may
be restricted, especially for purposes of transparency and good governance, as
in any other sector of society, any restrictions must always be “prescribed by
law” and “necessary in a democratic society”, and respect the primacy of the
general interest and the principle of proportionality (Article 22.2 of ICCPR
and case-law of the United Nations Human Rights Committee). It should be
emphasised that freedom shall remain the rule, while restrictions should always
be an exception admissible under the above-mentioned conditions. 
 
We are finally extremely concerned
with the bill on “homosexual propaganda”, which would, for its part,
impose administrative and criminal penalties on the media and on any group or
individual expressing “a positive attitude towards “non traditional sexual
relations” through the media or information and telecommunication networks”.
The vagueness of this wording could, here again, allow for the repression of
any action carried out in defence of LGBT rights and/or persons. Worryingly, in
March 2014, the Vice-Speaker of Parliament Torobay Zulpukarov met with the
leader of the “Kalis” LGBT movement, Mr. Zhenish Moldokmatov, to inform him
that such a bill was being tabled in Parliament to forbid so-called “homosexual
propaganda”, as “the absence of such legislation was the cause of increased
quantity of homosexuals” likely to spread “immorality in the future”.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns
the three above-mentioned legislative initiatives likely to further restrict
the space of NGOs working for the defence of human rights in Kyrgyzstan, in a
context where human rights defenders, in particular LGBTI rights defenders,
have been increasingly harassed over the past months. 
 
Accordingly, the Observatory urges
the members of the Kyrgyz Parliament not to adopt the three above-mentioned
bills and amendments on so-called “homosexual propaganda”, “foreign agents”,
and registration of non-profit organisations, and calls upon the Kyrgyz
authorities to ensure that all human rights defenders can pursue their
legitimate work without any further hindrances or reprisals.
 
We sincerely hope that you will take these elements into account.
 
Yours sincerely,
 
Karim LAHIDJI                                              Gerald
STABEROCK
FIDH President                                             OMCT
Secretary General 