Egypt:  Egypt: serious deterioration of the state of health of two victims of arbitrary detention
July  8, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2003 / JulyEgypt: Egypt: serious deterioration of the state of health of two victims of arbitrary detentionCase EGY 070703 Arbitrary detention / Risk to personal integrity   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Egyptian Organisation of Human Rights (EOHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the deteriorating health of two detainees, which requires their immediate release in order to receive appropriate medical assistance, in Egypt.  According to the information received, the health conditions of Mahmoud Abdel Hamid Shokry (aged 83) and Mahmoud Abdel Hadi (aged 48), who are currently being held in pre-trial detention, have seriously deteriorated. Both men are accused of being affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood, a group that has been banned in Egypt.  Mahmoud Abdel Hamid Shokry was arrested on April 22nd, 2003, and interrogated by the State Security Prosecution. He was held in pre-trial detention in Mazraet Tora prison while investigation into his case (no 814/2003) was pending. Mr. Hamid Shokry's health has deteriorated during his detention - he is unable to walk and had to be transported by ambulance to his investigation and then carried by police officers.   Mahmoud Abdel Hadi was arrested on June 20th, 2003, in Talhka in the Governate of Dakahlia. Information received regarding his health indicates that his condition is unstable. Mr. Abdel Hadi reportedly suffers from several heart-related illnesses, giving rise to fears for his personal integrity should he continue to remain in detention and not receive appropriate medical assistance.  According to the information received, both men have been held in pre-trial detention despite a lack of  a valid legal basis for their arrests and detention.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mahmoud Abdel Hamid Shokry and Mr. Mahmoud Abdel Hadi, and believes that their health conditions and the fact that there is insufficient legal evidence against them justifies their being released immediately. OMCT therefore calls on the Egyptian government to order their immediate release on medical grounds and to ensure that they receive appropriate medical assistance as a matter of urgency. Additionally, OMCT calls on the Egyptian government to end the use of pre-trial detentions by the state security authorities against political opponents in cases lacking adequate legal foundation and/or evidence.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Hamid Shokry and Mr. Abdel Hadi; ii.	intervene with the proper authorities to ensure that they are provided with adequate medical assistance as a matter of urgency; iii.	order their immediate release in the absence of legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg, Fax: + 202 390 1998 ·	His Excellency General Habib al-Adeli, Ministry of the Interior, Al-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: + 202 579 2031 ·	His Excellency Mr Faruq Sayf al-Nasr, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: + 202 795 8103  ·	Counsellor Maher 'Abd al-Wahid, Public Prosecutor, Dar al-Qadha al-'Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: + 202 577 4716 ·	Ambassadeur, Gabr, Naéla, Av. Blanc 49 (2ème), CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail : mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 738 44 15  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.  Geneva, July 7th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 