Bahrain:  Continued ill-treament of Mr. Nabeel Rajab
April 24, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2018 / AprilBahrain: Continued ill-treament of Mr. Nabeel RajabNew information
BHR 006 / 0812 / OBS 048.32
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment /
Ill-treatment
Bahrain
April 24, 2018
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continued judicial
harassment, arbitrary detention and ill-treatment of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, co-founder and President of the Bahrain Center for
Human Rights (BCHR), founding Director of the Gulf Center for Human Rights
(GCHR), FIDH Deputy Secretary General and a member of the Middle East advisory
committee at Human Rights Watch. Mr. Nabeel Rajab has been one of the country’s
most vocal human rights defenders, denouncing human rights violations within
the country’s Jaw prison, and denouncing Bahrain’s participation in bombings of
the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen.
 
According to
the information received, on April 20, 2018, Mr. Nabeel Rajab’s family reported
that he had not been allowed to drink for more than 24 hours. He was finally
given water after another inmate collapsed because of dehydration. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that since the beginning of his detention on June 13, 2016,
Mr. Rajab has been held under particularly harsh detention condition, including
solitary confinement, and is regularly prevented from accessing his lawyers.
Locked in his cell 23 hours a day, prison authorities regularly deprive Mr.
Nabeel Rajab of basic commodities and health treatments needed. Mr. Nabeel
Rajab was also reportedly subjected by prison guards to degrading treatment,
including humiliating and degrading body searches, forcibly shaving his hair,
arbitrarily raiding his cell at night and confiscating his personal items[1].
 
In addition, on April 4, 2018, Mr. Nabeel Rajab
was briefly transferred to Bahrain military hospital
because of continued feelings of dizziness and loss of conscience, his blood
was taken for further examinations. During the transfer, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was
strip searched and shackled in a bus which had a small cell inside and resulted
in him begging his head on the iron bars every time the bus driver stopped. Later,
on the same day, officers at the hospital received orders to take him back to
Jaw prison.
 
Two weeks before his transfer, he was
transferred to the Ministry of Interior hospital, where he underwent
pre-surgery procedures. However, he was later informed that he would only be allowed
to undergo the surgery at the military hospital. Mr. Nabeel Rajab refused
because of acts of ill treatment previously received there. He was supposed to
undergo a pilonidal sinus excision, abscess incision and drainage surgery which
he has already received last year. Prior to the new surgery, Mr. Nabeel Rajab’s
doctor recommended that he should go to a laser clinic to remove his hair in
order to ease the surgery, but the doctor’s recommendation was ignored by
prison authorities. 
 
The Observatory expresses its outmost concerns
over reports of ill-treatment of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, whose health has severely
degraded since the beginning of his detention. The Observatory thus urges the
Bahraini authorities to guarantee Mr. Nabeel Rajab’s physical and psychological
integrity.
 
In its
concluding observations on Bahrain published on May 12, 2017, the United
Nations Committee Against Torture (UN CAT) drew attention to the fact that
“excessive use of solitary confinement constitutes cruel, inhuman or degrading
punishment or, depending on the circumstances, even torture (...)”[2].
The UN CAT added that it was “deeply concerned” by the arbitrary imprisonment,
torture and ill-treatment of detained human rights defenders, including
Mr. Nabeel Rajab.
 
The
Observatory recalls that Mr. Nabeel Rajab is currently serving a seven years
prison sentence following two separate sentences. On April 23, 2018, the first appeal hearing in Mr. his so-called “Twitter
case” took place before Bahrain Court of Cassation, which was then postponed to
May 8, 2018 (see background information).
 
The Observatory denounces
the continued arbitrary detention of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, which seems to be yet
another evidence of a long-standing pattern of harassment against him to
sanction his legitimate human rights activity.
 
The Observatory calls
upon the Bahraini authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr.
Nabeel Rajab, to put an end to any act of harassment against him and, in the
meantime, to ensure that all judicial proceedings against him are carried out
in full compliance with the right to due process, the right to a fair trial and
the right to be presumed innocent, as protected under international law.
 
Background information[3]:
 
Mr. Nabeel Rajab is currently serving a seven
years prison sentence following two separate sentences:
 
On July 10, 2017, the Manama’s
Lower Criminal Court handed down a two years’ prison sentence against Mr.
Nabeel Rajab under charges of “deliberately spreading false information and
malicious rumours with the aim of discrediting the State” in relation to
television interviews he participated to. This sentence was upheld on November
22, 2017 by the Court of Appeals. Mr. Nabeel Rajab faces additional charges in
at least two other cases related to articles published in foreign newspapers
about Bahrain’s human rights record.
 
In the so-called
“Twitter case”, on February 21, 2018, the High Criminal Court of Bahrain sentenced
him to 5 years in prison on charges of “insulting
a statutory body” (Article 216 of the Penal Code), “disseminating false rumours
in time of war” (Article 133) and “offending a foreign country [Saudi Arabia]”
(Article 215), which carries up to 15 years in prison. Those charges are
related to tweets he posted denouncing the torture of detainees in the
Kingdom’s Jaw Prison, where he is now being detained, and the human rights
violations perpetrated by the Saudi-Arabia led coalition air strikes in Yemen.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities of Bahrain urging them to: 
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel
Rajab and that of all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
ii. Release
Mr. Nabeel Rajab immediately and unconditionally, as his detention is arbitrary
and its conditions amount to ill-treatment and are endangering his life; 
 
iii. Put an
end to any act of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr.
Nabeel Rajab and against all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
iv. Conform
in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular its Articles 1, Article 6 (c), 9, 11 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in
all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Bahrain. 
 
Addresses: 
 
·       Cheikh Hamad
bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·       Cheikh Khaled
Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax : 00973 17 21 05 75; ofd@mofa.gov.bh
·       Cheikh Khalid
bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Fax: +973 175 31
284
·       Lt. Gen.
Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·       H.E.
Mr. Yusuf Abdulkarim Bucheeri, Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
·       H.E. Ahmed
Mohammed Yousif Aldoseri, Embassy of the Kingdom of Bahrain to the Kingdom of
Belgium, Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail: Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, April 24, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
Tel and fax FIDH: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 /
+ 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                 See BCHR’s timeline harassment
of Mr. Nabeel Rajab: http://bahrainrights.org/en/updates-arrest-and-detention-bchrs-president-nabeel-rajab?_ga=2.212874194.755018715.1494506593-1099758628.1494506593


[2]                See CAT Concluding observations on the second and
third periodic reports of Bahrain, adopted by the Committee at its sixtieth
session (18 April to 12 May 2017), par. 20. See also Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention, Opinion A/HRC/WGAD/2013/12 No. 12/2013, July 25, 2013, par. 20.


[3]                For more information, see the
Observatory’s urgent interventions previously published on the case. 