Turkey:  Press release :  Turkey -   Dr. Alp Ayan Trial: State sponsored harassment of Human Rights Defender
April 25, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2003 / AprilTurkey: Press release :  Turkey -   Dr. Alp Ayan Trial: State sponsored harassment of Human Rights DefenderPRESS RELEASE  TURKEY Dr. Alp Ayan Trial: State sponsored harassment of Human Rights  Defender   Izmir / TURKEY, April 25, 2003. In the framework of their joint program, the Observatory for the  Protection of Human Rights Defenders, the FIDH and the OMCT, sent a  judicial observer to attend the third hearing of the case against Dr  Alp Ayan, a Turkish psychiatrist and member of the Izmir Center for  the Rehabilitation of the Torture Victims of the Human Rights  Foundation of Turkey (TIHV), charged both for having "insulted  Turkish Armed Forces" and for having "insulted the Ministry of  Justice" under article 159 of the Turkish Penal Code.  Other international observers were present at the hearing before the  Izmir Penal Court of First Instance, on April 24 at 9.50 am: Mr  Torben Lund, Danish member of the European Parliament and  representatives of various international organisations, including  IRCT, Amnesty International, the International Physicians for the  Protection of Nuclear War, and the Berlin Centre for the Treatment of  torture victims.  The Observatory is once again alarmed to note that Dr Ayan has been  charged for his activities to promote human rights, in this instance,  for participating in a protest meeting on February 10, 2002 where he  read a press release denouncing torture and inhuman detention  conditions in Turkish prisons. This press release criticized not only  the inhuman detention conditions in F-type prisons, but also  condemned the actions of the police during a transfer of political  prisoners into F-type prisons on December 19, 2000, which resulted in  32 deaths.  The Court ruled yesterday that the case was beyond its jurisdiction,  arguing that the amendments to article 159 of the Penal Code were  adopted after the crime was committed . The Heavy Penal Court,  previously in charge of the case, had also decided that the case was  beyond its jurisdiction according to the same above-mentioned  amendments. The Penal Court therefore decided to send the case to the  Court of Cassation to solve the conflict of competences.  The Observatory remains concerned that this trial is another  manifestation of State sponsored harassment of members of the Turkish  Human Rights Foundation (See Observatory International and Legal  Observation Mission Report - Turkey - Judicial Harassment Against  human Rights Defenders - December 2002). This procedure against Dr  Alp Ayan forms part of a larger set of criminal proceedings against  members of TIHV who have been relentlessly harassed and currently  face criminal charges over their involvement in the prison crisis in  Turkey.  Background information on F-type prison in Turkey The Turkish Parliamentary Human Rights Commission has repeatedly  concluded that excessive and disproportionate use of force had been  used on the occasion of military operation in the prisons since 1995  in Turkey.   In the early morning hours of December 19, 2000, over 10.000 members  of the Turkish security forces commenced a simultaneous military raid  into twenty prisons across Turkey. "Operation Return to life", as  this planned military intervention was called, aimed to enforce the  transfer of over a thousand prisoners into Turkey's newly constructed  "F-type" prisons and halt the widespread hunger strikes and "death  fasts" of political prisoners who had been protesting against the  introduction of F-type prisons since October 2000.   FIDH and OMCT are deeply concerned by the absence of thorough and  independent inquiry aiming at clarify the use of disproportionate and  excessive use of force, and in  particular the allegations of use of tear gas grenades and gas with a  neurological effect used by the security forces in the course of the  operation. Rather than initiating  investigations into the actions of the security forces, the Turkish  State has instead commenced investigations against the prisoners  themselves and increase pressure on  all NGOs that have voiced concerns about "Operation Return to Life"  and have expressed their disapproval of the F-type prison's regime of  isolation and the increased  likelihood of torture and ill-treatment in these prisons.  The European Commission has recently proposed a "road map" to Turkey,  which, if followed, would allow it to join the European Union. In  this context, Turkey is notably  urged to put into practice measures to fight against the use of  torture and guarantee "in practice" prisoners' defence rights.  In  addition, on 12 March, the European  Parliament issued a draft report on "Turkey's application for  membership of the European Union" urging, amongst other requests,  that an amnesty be granted to those  imprisoned for their opinions who are serving their sentences in  Turkish prisons for expressing non-violent sentiments".   The Observatory urges the Turkish authorities to:  -   Ensure that the charges against Dr Alp Ayan and the other  defendants be dropped;  -   Put an end to judicial harassment against human rights defenders  and in particular ensure that similar charges against activists for  having protest against the poor  detention condition in the country be dropped, since they only aim is  to sanction their activities as human rights defenders;  -   Abide by the provisions of the Declaration on the Protection of  human Rights Defenders adopted on the 9th of December 1998, by the UN  General Assembly  ("Declaration on the right and responsibility of individuals, groups  and organs of society to promote and protect universally recognized  human rights and fundamental freedoms") particularly, Article 1  "Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,  to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human  rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international  level".  -   To comply with the provisions of all human rights instruments  ratified by Turkey as well as with the Copenhagen criteria allowing  for membership in the European Union.   Contacts : FIDH : 00 33 1 43 55 25 18 / OMCT : 00 41 22 809 49 39 