Azerbaijan:  Appeal dismissed: Investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova to remain in jail for 7.5 years
November 30, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2015 / NovemberAzerbaijan: Appeal dismissed: Investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova to remain in jail for 7.5 years

Paris-Geneva,
November 30, 2015 – The appeal filed by prominent
investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova to contest her 7.5-year jail
sentence was struck out on November 25 by the Baku Court of Appeal, deplores
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint FIDH-OMCT
programme).
 
On September
1, 2015, the Baku Court of Grave Crimes had sentenced Ms. Khadija Ismayilova to 7,5 years imprisonment on charges of
“embezzlement”, “illegal entrepreneurship”, “tax evasion”, and “abuse of
office”. This sentence therefore remains in force.
 
Internationally
recognised independent reporter[1]
and journalist of the Azerbaijani radio Azadliq (“Radio Freedom”), Ms.
Ismayilova was arrested on December 5, 2014 on charges of "inciting"
her ex-partner "to commit suicide". Although in April 2015 the
alleged victim retreated his accusations, claiming his testimony was given
under pressure, blackmail and torture, the prosecution did not take it into
account and maintained the charges. In February 2015, Ms. Ismayilova was
further accused of embezzlement, illegal entrepreneurship, tax evasion and
abuse of office. During the hearings in first instance, no evidence of these
accusations was presented. 
 
“We are extremely concerned by the dismissal of Khadija
Ismayilova's complaint by the Court of Appeal. This development adds to the
series of violations of free and fair trial standards suffered by Ms.
Ismayilova and other human rights defenders in Azerbaijan”,
denounced FIDH President Karim Lahidji.
 
“It is time for the international community to strongly take a stand
against this systematic repression and harassment of human rights defenders in
Azerbaijan, and
for the Azeri authorities to immediately and unconditionally release all those
arbitrarily detained”, said Gerald Staberock, Secretary
General of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
 
Ms.
Ismayilova’s first instance trial, which opened on July 24, 2015, had already
fallen short of international human rights standards. The hearings were held in a semi-closed format, denying access to
journalists, observers and diplomats. She was kept in glass cage during the
hearings and all the motions filed by the defence were denied. Hereby the
principles of equality of arms and the presumption of innocence were violated
along with the independence of the judiciary and transparent judicial
proceedings. The same pattern characterised all trials against human
rights defenders over the past months.
 
The crackdown on civil society, going on in Azerbaijan since last year,
has indeed recently seen other prominent human rights defenders sentenced on
similar trumped up charges: Mr. Rasul Jafarov
and Mr. Intigam Aliyev sentenced in
appeal respectively to 6.3 and 7.5 years of jail, and Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif
Yunusov sentenced by a lower court respectively to 8.5 and 7 years in
prison. Even though on November 12, Mr. Yunusov was conditionally released for
health reasons for the period of his appeal trial, the Baku Grave Crimes Court
could review its decision anytime in case of a positive change in the health of
Mr. Yunusov.



[1]
She won several international prizes, among which the Gerd Bucerius Free Press
of Eastern Europe Award by Zeit-Stiftung on May 24, 2012, the Courage of
Journalism Award by the Washington-based International Women’s Media Foundation
on October 24, 2012, and the Global Shining Light Award on October 14, 2013. 