Russian Federation:  Judicial harassment against Mr. Igor Kalyapin
April  4, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2011 / AprilRussian Federation: Judicial harassment against Mr. Igor Kalyapin

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

RUS
002 / 0411 / OBS 057
Arbitrary arrest / Release
Judicial harassment
Russian Federation
April 4, 2011
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in the Russian Federation.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the arbitrary arrest and judicial harassment against Mr. Igor Kalyapin,
head of the Inter-Regional Committee Against Torture of Nizhny Novgorod. 
According to the information received, on March 31,
2011, Mr. Igor Kalyapin was arrested by the police along
with other 53 peaceful protesters, at 6 p.m. at Freedom Square in the city
center of Nizhny Novgorod. The arrests occurred during a public rally aiming at
defending and promoting the freedom of assembly guaranteed by Article 31 of the
Russian Constitution, within the framework of the Strategy 31[1]. 
Mr. Igor Kalyapin was taken to the Nizhny
Novgorod police station and detained for approximately 4 hours before being
released. During his custody, he was informed that he was charged of
“participation in an unsanctioned demonstration”. The first hearing was planned
on April 1, 2011 before the Supreme Court of Nizhny Novgorod but was finally
postponed to an unknown later date.
The Observatory is deeply concerned about the ongoing
attempts to hinder the right of the human rights defenders to freedom of
assembly. The Observatory also condemns the arbitrary arrest and judicial
harassment against Mr. Igor Kalyapin and urges the Russian authorities to drop
the charges against him since they aim at sanctioning his human rights
activities. 
Actions
requested:
Please write to the authorities of Russian Federation, urging them to: 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Igor
Kalyapin as well as of all members of the Inter-Regional Committee Against
Torture and all human rights defenders in the Russian Federation;
ii. Immediately and unconditionally drop
the charges pending against Mr. Igor Kalyapin as they are
arbitrary and seem to only aim at sanctioning his human rights activities;
iii. Put
an end to any act of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr.
Igor Kalyapin as well as against all human rights defenders in the Russian
Federation, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out
their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals; 
iv. Comply
with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially:
-      
its Article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
-       its
Article 5, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, at the national and international levels (a) to meet or assemble
peacefully”;
-       its Article 6 (b) and (c),
which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others [...] as provided for in human rights and other applicable international
instruments, freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views,
information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms and
[...] to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law
and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through
these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters”,
-      
and Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”; 
v. Comply
with the provisions of the Declaration of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on the protection of human rights defenders and the promotion
of their activities, and in particular With Article 2.i), in which the
Committee calls on member States to “create an environment conducive to the
work of human rights defenders, enabling individuals, groups and associations
to freely carry out activities, on a legal basis, consistent with international
standards, to promote and strive for the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms without any restrictions other than those authorised by
the European Convention on Human Rights;;
vi. More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
the Russian Federation. 
Addresses: 


·        
Mr.
Dmitri Medvedev, President of the Russian Federation, Ilinka Str, 23, Moscow, 103132, Moscow, Russian Federation, Fax:+ 7 495 606 5173 / 630 2408.
·        
Minister
of Internal Affairs, Mr. Rashid Nurgaliev, ul. Zhitnaya, 16, 117049 Moscow,
Russian Federation, Telegram: Rossiia, 117049, Moskva, Fax: + 7 495 637 49 25
·        
Minister
of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Smolenskaya-Sennaya pl, 32/34, 121200
Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Fax:+ 7 495 644 2203
·        
Permanent
Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations in Geneva Av. de la
Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland, e-mail : mission.russian@ties.itu.int, Fax: +4122 734 40 44
·        
Embassy
of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 31-33 boulevard du Régent, 1000
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 513 76 49.
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or
embassy of the Russian Federation in your respective country. 
***
 Paris-Geneva,
April 4, 2011 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·        
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1
43 55 20 11 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·        
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0)
22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]              The strategy 31 is a series of
civic peaceful protests in support of the right to freedom of assembly in
Russia. Since July 31, 2009, the protests are held in Moscow on the 31st of
every month with 31 days. Each action undertaken in the framework of Strategy 31
has been refused permission by the Russian authorities. 