Statement of OMCT to the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights - Item 4 - ESCR
August 21, 2006
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Statements / 2006 / AugustStatement of OMCT to the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights - Item 4 - ESCRAugust 2006 Mr/Mme Chair,  This Sub-Commission has been a pioneer in the promotion of economic, social and cultural rights and has initiated and nurtured many of the important steps forward by the United Nations. As many of the Sub-Commission members know, the OMCT also has been a pioneer in this field issuing in 1985 a seminal report on the right to development.   For over 20 years, OMCT has fought to eliminate torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, all absolutely prohibited by international law; applicable to all States without exception. Further, we have learned over the years in working with the now 280 members of our network that, for the effective elimination of torture and other forms of violence, it is essential to effectively protect economic, social and cultural rights.   Addressing the economic, social and cultural root causes of torture Guaranteeing economic, social and cultural rights can eliminate powerful root causes of violence. This was demonstrated in a recent study carried out by OMCT and in the conclusions of an international conference called to consider that study.  The study, entitled “Poverty, inequality and violence: the economic, social and cultural root causes of violence, including torture, a human rights perspective”, contains an extensive academic analysis of the correlations between violence and socio-economic inequalities based on ILO data, a chapter on access to resources and domestic violence in South Africa and one examining the relationship between economic recession and violence in the developed economy of Sweden.  It also contains in-depth analyses of the situation in five countries (Argentina, Egypt, Nepal, South Africa and Uzbekistan) along with case studies examining specific instances in those countries prepared in collaboration with national human rights partners. Finally, there are chapters on the approach adopted to these issues by selected international organs and organizations. The unedited version is available here on the OMCT website and the Study will be published next month.   The study was considered by the International Conference “Poverty, Inequality and Violence: Is there a human rights response?” organized by OMCT in Geneva last October in which some 100 participants, including human rights defenders from over 40 countries, took part. We are grateful to Ms. Louise Arbour, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, for having delivered the Conference’s keynote address which provided an important overall human rights framework for the Conference’s work.   The Study and Conference were made possible by the support of by the Geneva International Academic Network, Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, ICCO Foundation Netherlands and the Fondation des droits de l’homme aux travail.  The study concluded, and the conference agreed, that there is a clear link between economic, social and cultural factors and violence. We now have a solid foundation for actions aimed at preventing violence by acting on the root causes found in failures to respect economic, social and cultural rights. The question is no longer, “is there a link?”, but “how do we address that link to prevent violence?”  What does this mean for us? The Conference charged OMCT with supporting members of the OMCT network in their activities to address the economic, social and cultural root causes of violence and with developing new methods and approaches.   OMCT thus has strengthened is work in issuing urgent appeals in cases of violations of economic, social and cultural rights which lead or risk leading to torture or other forms of violence brought forward by network members. OMCT has also addressed governments and submitted reports to the European Union in these matters. Further, and in support of OMCT network members, information on the root causes of violence is being included in alternative reports to United Nations Treaty Bodies.   New approaches to encouraging concrete action to address these root causes are also under study by OMCT. These activities are guided by a high level Scientific Council consisting of four UN special procedures mandate holders, a member of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, a senior official of UNICEF, a former senior ILO economist, a former Secretary-General of the Economic Commission for Europe/Deputy Secretary-General of UNCTAD and three academics two of whom have experience in the United Nations human rights system at senior levels. Members come from all continents.   A challenge for United Nations human rights organs 	United Nations human rights organs are also challenged to find ways of addressing the economic, social and cultural root causes of torture and other forms of violence. Here, the Sub-Commission can play an important role in exploring new and more effective ways of preventing torture by acting on its root causes.  Draft guiding principles on human rights and extreme poverty The OMCT study I just mentioned contains extensive information from OMCT’s national partners on the human rights violations of the very marginalized, the excluded, the extremely poor. The Study shows that without addressing the specificities of the situation of the extremely poor, progress on elimination violence will not be possible. We must begin by recognizing their inherent human dignity, their right to enjoy all human rights and they must be able to see their own dignity in our eyes.  OMCT thanks the members of the ad hoc working group and other involved Sub-Commission members for their path-breaking work over the last few years. We welcome the report of their convenor, Professor José Bengoa.   OMCT urges the Sub-Commission and in its turn the Human Rights Council to examine and adopt the guiding principles. We do this on the understanding that those living in extreme poverty have the right to enjoy all human rights, that it is crucial to success that we declare this clearly and unequivocally, that we recognize the specificities of the situation of extreme poverty and that those specificities should shape all our efforts.     OMCT also wishes to recognize the important leadership support over the years given by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to the work on extreme poverty and human rights and believes that OHCHR has a crucial contribution to make as we go forward.   Finally, OMCT wishes to thank the members of the Sub-Commission for their attention.  Geneva August 2006 