Uzbekistan:  Uzbekistan: Arbitrary arrest of several human rights defenders in Andijan region
June  3, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2005 / JuneUzbekistan: Uzbekistan: Arbitrary arrest of several human rights defenders in Andijan regionURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  New information UZB 001 / 0505 / OBS 036.1 Arbitrary arrests and detentions / Ill-treatment Uzbekistan  June 3, 2005  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.   New information :  The Observatory has been informed by the Russia-based Human Rights Center Memorial and the Uzbek human rights NGO Ezgulik that several human rights defenders working in Andijan region have been arrested since May 28, 2005.  According to the information received, on May 21, 2005, Mr. Saidjahon Zaynabitdinov, member of the Human Rights Group in Andijan, was arrested. He is currently detained incommunicado and charged with libel (article 139 of the Criminal Code) for his denunciation and declarations to the international media concerning the violent events of May 13, 2005 that took place in Andijan (See press releases by FIDH and OMCT, and below). Mr. Zaynabitdinov was authorised to call at his home on May 29 and 30, 2005 and said he would probably be released within a few days. However, he still remains detained as of June 3, 2005.  Moreover, on May 28, 2005 in Markhamat (region of Andijan), Mr. Dilmurad Muhitdinov, President of the Markhamat section of Ezgulik, Mr. Muhammadkodir Otahonov, President of the local section of Andijan of the International Society of Human Rights and Mr. Mussajon Bobojanov, a member of Ezgulik and chief of the local organisation of the political party “Birlik”, were arrested. The Markhamat chief of Administration promised to release them on May 30, 2005 in the evening, but they still remain detained as of June 3, 2005. In addition, their computers, CDs and other documents were confiscated.  Moreover, during the night of May 29-30, 2005, the police arrested 12 members of Ezgulik, who were staying at the Hotel Olympia in Tashkent. They had come from several regions of Uzbekistan, including Fergana and Djizak, in order to participate in a seminar organised by Ezgulik, titled “Legislation and its principles”. After being provocated at the hotel by police members, they decided to spend the night at the house of Mr. Hussan Yussupov, a member of Ezgulik. They were arrested there by 30 armed policemen, and some of them were beaten, before being forcibly sent back to their residence places.   Following these events, Mrs. Vassila Inoiatova, President of Ezgulik, her husband and Mr. Hussan Yussupov were arrested at Mrs. Inoiatova’s house at around 2 a.m. and detained in Sobir-Rakhimovskii Regional Center of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. They were released on May 30, 2005 at mid-day. Afterwards, Mrs. Vassila Inoiatova went back to Mr. Hussan Yussupov’s house, where she saw members of the Ministry of Internal Affairs forcing his neighbours to sign false testimonies, in order to prove that “suspect” people meet regularly at Mr. Yussopov’s house and that on the eve of the event there was a meeting of “terrorists-wahhabits” from Andijan.    On May 30, 2005, Messrs. Vakhid Karimov and Ilkhom Ashurov, members of the Center of Humanitarian Law, were detained during three hours in Bukhar. Their papers were confiscated and they had to sign a document indicating that they would not leave the city. Moreover, human rights defenders working in the Valley of Ferghana reported to be regularly spied, called for “a conversation” with the police and warned not to participate in demonstrations.  Finally, on June 2, 2005, in the evening, Mr. Muzaffarmirzi Iskhakov, Chairman of Ezgulik for Andijan region, Mr. Azizov Nurmuhammad, Chairman of the section of the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan (HRSU), were arrested in Andijan along with Mr. Akbarali Oripov, Chairman of Birlik for Andijan region. Their arrests took place during searches at their houses conducted by some of officers of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Markhamat. Some documents about human rights defenders, the program and charter of the political party “Birlik” and computers of the section of Ezgulik of Andijan were confiscated at Mr. Iskhakov’s house. They were allegedly still detained as of June 3, 2005.  The Observatory is deeply concerned at the arrests of those human rights defenders in Andijan region, which seem to be part of an attempt to sanction their monitoring activities in human rights abuses, in particular in the Andijan tragedy that occurred on May 13, 2005.   Background information :   The Observatory had been informed by the Legal Aid Society (LAS) of the arbitrary arrests, detentions and physical attack of human rights defenders who have been denouncing and investigating into the disproportionate use of force against civilians, on May 13, 2005, during peaceful demonstrations in Andijan, resulting in the killing of hundreds of them, including women and children.  Following these events, two members of the human rights organisation Ezgulik, Messrs. Ulugbek Bakirov and Fazleddin Gafurov, were beaten up and harassed by law enforcement agents in Andijan as they were going to interview witnesses of the May 13 events. On May 21, 2005 Mr. Saidjahon Zaynabitdinov, member of the Human Rights Group in Andijan was arrested. On May 22, 2005, Mr. Sobitkhon Ustabaev of the Namangan Group for Protection of Human Rights was arrested and sentenced to 15 days in detention on the basis of the administrative code of Uzbekistan after taking part in a peaceful protest against the above-mentioned events in Andijan.    Action requested: Please write to the Uzbek authorities, urging them to: i. guarantee physical and psychological integrity of Uzbek human rights defenders in all circumstances;  ii. release immediately and unconditionally all human rights defenders detained;  iii. put an end to all acts of harassment against human rights defenders in the country in conformity with the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular above-mentioned article 1, article 5 (a) which states that “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and international levels: (a) To meet or assemble peacefully”; and article 6 which guarantees the rights: “(a) To know, seek, obtain, receive and hold information about all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including having access to information as to how those rights and freedoms are given effect in domestic legislative, judicial or administrative systems; (b) (…) freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms; [and] (c) To study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to these matters”;  iv. more generally, conform with the provisions of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, and with all other international human rights instruments binding Uzbekistan.  Addresses: Mr. Islam Abduganiyevich Karimov, President of Uzbekistan, ul. Uzbekistanskaya 43, Rezidentsia prezidenta, 700163 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 133 7258, E-mail: presidents_office@press-service.uz  Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sodiq Solihovich Safoyev, Respublika Uzbekistan; 700029 g. Tashkent; pl. Mustakillik, 5; Ministerstvo inostrannykh del RU, S.S., Uzbekistan, Fax: + 998 71 139 15 17  Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights, Sayora Rashidova, ul. Xalqlar Dostligi 1, 700035 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 139 85 55, E-mail: office@ombudsman.gov.uz   Chairman of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Ubaydulla Mingbaev, Respublika Uzbekistan; 700183 g. Tashkent; ul. Abdulla Kodiri, 1; Verkhovny Sud Respubliki Uzbekistan  General Procurator of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Rashidjon Hamidovich Kodirov, ul. Gulyamova 66, 700047 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 133 39 17, E-mail: prokuratura@lawyer.com  Ambassador of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Uzbekistan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 1853, 1215 Geneva 15, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 799 43 02, E-mail: uzbekistan@bluewin.ch  Please also write to the embassies of Uzbekistan in your respective country.  ***** Geneva-Paris, June 3, 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, a joint FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders, and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.  To contact the Observatory, call the Emergency Line: E-mail: observatoire@iprolink.ch Tel and Fax FIDH: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / + 33 1 43 55 18 80 Tel and Fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 