Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Violent acts against student protesters and their leaders who are calling for amendments to the National Education Law
March 12, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2015 / MarchMyanmar (ex-Burma): Violent acts against student protesters and their leaders who are calling for amendments to the National Education LawMMR
001 / 0315 / OBS 016Obstacles
to freedom of peaceful assembly /Obstacles
to freedom of movement / Excessive use of force / Arbitrary arrestsBurma
/ MyanmarMarch 12, 2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Burma / Myanmar.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed of violent acts against student protesters and
their leaders who are calling for amendments to the
National Education Law. Nationwide peaceful protests
led by the Action Committee for Democratic Education (ACDE), which includes the
All Burma Federation of Student Unions (ABFSU), began in November 2014.
 
On March 2,
2015, police surrounded hundreds of student protesters at a monastery in
Letpadan Township, Pegu Division, preventing them from continuing a march from
Mandalay to Rangoon that began on January 20, 2015. An estimated 200 police
officers manned barricades blocking the road.
 
The student
protesters at Letpadan set a March 10, 2015, 10 AM deadline for authorities to
allow the group to proceed by car to Rangoon. On March 10, 2015, the agreement
broke down when authorities refused to permit the student protesters to leave
as a group, wave banners or chant slogans. When students attempted to break
through police barricades, the police responded with force. Police officers
attacked students, supporters, and journalists with batons, injuring an
estimated 70 people. Police officers also attacked medical workers carting
injured protesters into ambulances and smashed students' vehicles. Police
arrested 127 people on the scene, including 20 women, among them Ms. Phyoe
Phyoe Aung, former political prisoner and All Burma
Federation of Student Unions Secretary. An estimated 65 were
students. At the time of publication of this urgent appeal, a large group of
protesters remained in detention.
 
Authorities
used excessive force against student protesters in the days leading up to the
10 March violence. On March 5, 2015, police and hired thugs used force to break
up a solidarity protest of more than 200 near Sule Pagoda in Rangoon, beating
protesters with batons and dragging them into trucks. Police detained eight
individuals —five students and Ms. Nilar Thein, Ms. Nu Nu Aung,
and Mr. Myo Thant of the 88 Generation Peace and Open Society, and held
them overnight. On March 6, 2015, police and plainclothes men broke up a small
demonstration in Letpadan near the protest site, detaining five more students
and accosting a journalist in the process. All five were released the next day.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the disproportionate and unjustified use of force
against peaceful protesters, medical workers, and journalists and calls upon
authorities to end restrictions on protesters’ freedom of assembly and movement
and to refrain from using force against them.
 
The
Observatory urges the Burmesa government to release unconditionally without
delas all those who were detained in Letpadan on March 10.
 
Background
information:
Proposed
changes to the National Education Law include: more autonomy for educational
institutions, an increase in the national education budget, and mother-tongue
language instruction. From November 14-17, 2014, the ACDE,
comprising members of the ABFSU, the Confederation of University Student
Unions, and the University Student Union – Myay Latt held demonstrations in
Rangoon and other areas of Burma calling for a quadripartite meeting between
the ACDE, the National Network for Education Reform (NNER), the government, and
Parliament. Protests restarted in January, including a Mandalay to Rangoon
march, after the government failed to respond within the 60-day period mandated
by the students.
In February,
student protesters halted their protest march toward Rangoon, as multi-party
talks led to an 11-point agreement forwarded by the students and an amended
bill submitted to Parliament. Some student protesters restarted protests and
vowed to continue until Parliament passed the agreed upon amendments.
 
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities in Burma, urging them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of all student protesters, as well as of all other human rights defenders
in Burma;
 
ii.             
Release immediately and
unconditionally all individuals detained on March 10, including Ms. Phyoe Phyoe Aung,



 as their detention is
arbitrary and merely aimed at sanctioning their human rights activities;
 
iii.           
Put an immediate end to all acts of
police violence and police and judicial harassment against peaceful protesters;
 
iv.            
Comply with all the provisions of
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with
its: 
-       
Article 1, which provides that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-       
Article 12.1, which foresees that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”;
-       
Article 12.2, which provides that
“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to
in the present Declaration”;
 
Addresses:
 
·      
U Thein Sein, President
of Myanmar, President Office, Office No.18, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: + 95 1 652
624
·      
Lt. Gen Ko Ko, Minister
for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No. 10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR;
Fax: +95 67 412 439
·      
U Win Mra, Chairman of
the Myanmar National Human Rights Commission, 27 Pyay Road, Hline Township,
Yangon, Republic of the Union of Myanmar; Fax: +95 1 659 668
·      
Dr. Tun Shin, Attorney
General, Office of the Attorney General, Office No. 25, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR;
Fax: +95 67 404 146/ 106
·      
U Tun Tun Oo, Chief
Justice, Office of the Supreme Court, Office No. 24, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: +
95 67 404 059
·      
U Kyaw Kyaw Htun,
Director General, Myanmar Police Force, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No.
10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: +951 549 663 / 549 208
·      
H.E. Mr. Maung Wai,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative to the
United Nations in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 47, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41
22 732 89 19, +41 22 732 73 77, Email: mission@myanmargeneva.org
·      
Embassy of Myanmar in
Brussels, Boulevard Général Wahis 9, 1030 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 (0)32 2
705 50 48, Email: mebrussels@skynet.be
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Burma in your respective
countries. 