Turkey:  WHRDIC Statement: Solidarity with resilient women in Turkey
November 17, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Turkey / 2016 / NovemberTurkey: WHRDIC Statement: Solidarity with resilient women in Turkey 
​The
 Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC), of which
 OMCT is a member, is a resource and advocacy network supporting women 
human rights defenders worldwide. 
Women Human Rights Defenders International
Coalition (WHRDIC) is in solidarity with resilient women in Turkey 
We,
the undersigned organisations, recognise that the Turkish government has the
right and responsibility to investigate the violent events of the July 2016
coup attempt and to bring all those responsible to justice. We also recognise
that the immediate aftermath of the attempted coup is the type of exceptional
circumstance in which a government could legitimately invoke a state of
emergency but still has to comply with their human rights obligations.
We
are however increasingly concerned that the far-reaching, almost unlimited
discretionary powers exercised by the Turkish authorities during the first
three months of the state of emergency – extended for a further three months on
19 October - endanger the general principles of rule of law and human rights
safeguards.
Ayla Akat a leading woman
human rights defender and Kurdish political activist in Turkey, who also served
as an elected Member of Parliament between 2007 and 2015, was
taken into custody on 26 October in Diyarbakir/Amed. Partners in Diyarbakır informed the WHRDIC that
during her arrest, Ayla was dragged across the floor, physically abused and
harassed. The police also raided her house and office and confiscated all
equipment pertaining to her human rights work, including laptops.  Ayla has been moved to Kandıra Prison, an
F-type (high security) prison over a thousand kilometers from her home. Akat
was charged with “being a member of a terrorist organization” on 31 October 2016. 
Since the
breakdown of the ceasefire between the Turkish State and the PKK, those
speaking out on abuses in the SouthEast of the country have faced threats,
intimidation, persecution and sometimes imprisonment   Kurdish women human rights defenders are
amongst those bearing the brunt of the State crackdown. . 
On 15-16 July
2016, a faction of the military in Turkey attempted a coup d’état. At least 260
citizens and security personnel were killed during a night of violence in the
clashes. The government of Turkey declared a state of emergency following the
attempted coup, which is now being used as an excuse to curb civic freedoms,
target human rights defenders and suppress dissent. 
Ayla’s detention follows a wave of arrests targeting Kurdish
activists in Turkey. Co-mayors of Diyarbakır, Gültan Kışanak and Fırat Anlı,
were also imprisoned on terrorism charges on 30 October, having been
taken into custody on 25 October. Gültan Kışanak
is a symbolic figure of the Kurdish women's movement and after the last
military coup in September 1980 experienced the most brutal forms of threats, restrictions and violence, including
torture and sexual assault in prison. Other arrests
include that of renowned novelist, columnist and human rights activist Aslı Erdoğan and writer and
linguist Necmiye Alpay.
On 3 November
2014, twelve deputies from the Democracy Party (HDP) including party’s co chair and WHRD Figen
Yüksekdağ were detained and accused of
“making propaganda for a terrorist organization”, a provision routinely used to
suppress independent voices in Turkey. Additionally, on 11 November 2015, the Ministry of Interior announced it
suspended activities of 370 associations, 9 of which are grassroots women’s
rights organizations including Adıyaman Women Life Association, Anka Women Research Association, Bursa
Panayır Women Solidarity Association, Ceren Women Association, Gökkuşağı Women
Association, Kongreya Jinen Azad (Free Women Congress), Muş Women Association,
Selis Women Association and Van Women Association. All associations are a vital
part of the gender struggle in Turkey. 
A
Kurdish woman, who prefers to remain anonymous, said “It must be emphasized that the pioneering role that women play in this
process has been perceived as a threat by the patriarchal state.” There is no
doubt, Ayla, Gültan, Figen and other Kurdish women human rights defenders are vital
members of a global community who work peacefully and committedly for rights,
justice and equality.
The Women Human
Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC), express our solidarity with
the Kurdish women human rights defenders and their allies in their efforts to
ensure gender and the full enjoyment of human rights in the country.   The WHRDIC calls for the: release of Ayla Akat as well as, Gültan Kışanak, Aslı Erdoğan, Figen Yüksekdağ and
other imprisoned human rights defenders. We further demand that the Turkish
authorities lift all restrictions targeting women human rights defenders and
their organizations in Turkey.
WHRDIC is a global network which provides solidarity and support to women
human rights defenders worldwide. 