Sri Lanka:  Sri Lanka: release on bail to a refugee camp of Mrs Thurairaasaa
October 11, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2001 / OctoberSri Lanka: Sri Lanka: release on bail to a refugee camp of Mrs ThurairaasaaCase LKA 060701.1 Follow-up of Case LKA 060701  Release on bail / Charge under Prevention of Terrorism Act / Detention in a refugee camp   Geneva, October 11, 2001  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Sri Lanka.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the release on bail of Mrs Thurairaasaa.  According to the information received, 29-year old Mrs Amirthanayaki Thurairaasaa was released on July 12th 2001 on bail until the trial takes place. She has been charged under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) for carrying two batteries, which are banned items, to the Liberation Tamil Tiger-held (LTTE) area of the country.   After her arrest on June 30th 2001, on the road to Madhu, she was reportedly remanded at Anurathapura prison and was detained there for 13 days. She was pregnant at the time and has now reportedly given birth.  According to the latest news, she has now been tranferred to an “Open Refugee Rehabilitation Camp” located at Pesalai. The Camp is reportedly guarded by the police. Anyone wanting to make a visit there needs permission to be granted by the Governement Secretariat. Furthermore, the people inside the camp also need permission if they want to leave, for example to go to work during the day. For some detainees who are not allowed to leave the camp or receive visits, the stay in this camp could be compared to incommunicado detention, in that they have no access to their families or legal counsel.  The living conditions in the camp are reported to be very poor. The basic facilities (running water, toilets etc.) are not available, which could constitute a risk to Mrs Thurairaasaa’s health considering the fact that she has recently given birth. No medical assistance of any kind is provided in the camp, and the detainees have to walk several kilometers to have access to water.  The International Secretariat of the OMCT welcomes Mrs Thurairaasaa’s release on bail, but remains gravely concerned about her detention in a “rehabilitation” camp, as the conditions of detention prevalent in such camps are known to be very poor, which could pose a serious threat to her health. OMCT is also gravely concerned about the restrictions on her movement and the lack of access to medical and legal assistance, as well as family visits. She requires access to legal counsel as she still faces a trial concerning the charges against her. OMCT also believes that restrictions on family visits should be lessened as Mrs. Thurairaasaa is the mother of young children.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, Mrs. Thurairaasaa, who was seven months pregnant at the time, was arrested while traveling with her husband and children by guards at a checkpoint on the road leading to Madhu. The police have accused her of carrying batteries, which are banned items, although they did not charge her with any crime at the time of her arrest. The batteries were reportedly for her personal use, to power a radio so that she and her family could keep informed about developments in the conflict, so as to not get caught up in it.  Action requested :  Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mrs Thurairaasaa ; ii.	ensure that she be granted access to medical and legal assistance and to family visits; iii.	order their immediate release from the Rehabilitation Camp in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses :  ·	Her Excellency President Chandrika B. Kumaratunga, Presidential Residence, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka Fax: 94 - 1 - 333 - 703  ·	Mr. Mangala Samaraweera, Minister of Posts, Telecommunications and Media, Old CTO Building Lotus Rd, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka  ·	Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, New Secretariat, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka ·	Hon. Ambassador, Permanent Mission and Consulate General of Sri Lanka, 56, Rue De Moillebeau,  5th Floor, 1 209, Geneva 19, Switzerland, Fax: (41-22) 734 9084, E-mail: mission.srilanka@itu.ch ·	Hon. High-Commissioner, The High Commission of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 13 Hyde Park Gardens London W2 2LU United Kingdom Fax: (0171) 262-7970, E-mail: lancom@easynet.co.uk  Please also write to the embassies of Sri Lanka in your respective country.  Geneva, October 11, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 