Egypt:  Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of LGBTI+ defender Malak Al-Kashif
March 18, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2019 / MarchEgypt: Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of LGBTI+ defender Malak Al-Kashif
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
EGY 001 / 0319 / OBS 025
Arbitrary detention / 
Ill-treatment
Egypt
March 18, 2019
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in Egypt.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment of Ms. Malak Al-Kashif, a LGBT+ human rights defender, after calling for peaceful protests to
denounce how the Ramses Station Accident[1]
was handled by the authorities.
 According
to the information received, on March 6, 2019, at dawn, members of the National
Security forces arrested Ms. Malak Al-Kashif from her home in Giza. She was
held for three days in incommunicado detention, until her whereabouts were
finally revealed on March 10, 2019. It was then revealed that following more
than 24 hours of detention in an unknown location, on March 7, 2019, Ms. Malak
Al-Kashif appeared before the National Security Prosecution, where she was
charged with “aiding a terrorist organisation” and “misusing social media to
commit a crime punishable by law”. The Prosecution then ordered that she be
remanded in pre-trial. The renewal of
her pre-trial detention is expected to be announced on March 19, 2019. At the moment of publication of this appeal, she was kept in solitary
confinement in Al-Haram Police Station and has now access to her lawyer and
family. In order to arrest her, it appears that the national security forces
forced Ms. Malak Al-Kashif’s mother to call her pretending to be very ill, in
order to lure her into going to her apartment. 
 
The
Observatory is particularly concerned by the fact that on March 10, 2019, Ms.
Malak Al-Kashif was subjected to forced anal examination, which amounts to a
form of torture or cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment[2].
Moreover, according to the same information a police officer sexually harassed
her on that same day.
 
Ms.
Malak Al-Kashif’s arrest is reportedly related to her calls for peaceful
protests in solidarity with the victims of the Ramses Station Accident and
their families. In particular, she has been asking for those responsible of the
accident to be held accountable. 
 
The Observatory considers that Ms. Malak Al-Kashif’s arbitrary detention
and ill-treatment is particularly concerning in light of the general climate of
discrimination and human rights violations against LGBT+ individuals and
defenders of their rights in Egypt and fears that she may be subjected to
sexual harassment during her detention because of her gender
identity.  
 
The
Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities to immediately and unconditionally
release Ms. Malak Al-Kashif’s, as her detention is arbitrary and only aims at
silencing her human rights work and her freedom of expression. In the
meanwhile, the Egyptian authorities should ensure the physical
and psychological integrity of Ms. Malak Al-Kashif and take all necessary
measures to ensure that, during her detention, she will not be subjected to any
form of sexual abuse, ill-treatment or discrimination because of her gender
identity or to any other form of ill-treatment. As her official documents are
still stating her gender as male, it is feared that the authorities will place
her in male’s detention centers. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities of Egypt asking them to:
 
i.       
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Malak Al-Kashif, and all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
ii.    Immediately
and unconditionally release Ms. Malak Al-Kashif as her detention is arbitrary and merely
aimed at punishing her for her human rights activities;
 
iii.    Put
an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Malak Al-Kashif and all human
rights defenders in Egypt, and ensure that they are able to carry out
their activities without hindrance or fear of reprisals; 
 
iv.    Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially
Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2; and
 
v.    More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
Egypt.
 
Addresses:
 
· President of the Arab Republic of
Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Fax: +202 2391 1441. Email: p.spokesman@op.gov.eg,
Twitter: @AlsisiOfficial
· Prime Minister, Mr. Mustafa Kemal Madbouly
Mohamed. Email: pm@cabinet.gov.eg 
· Minister of the Interior, Mr. Mahmoud Tawfik, Email: center@iscmi.gov.eg
· Minister of Justice, Mr. Mohamed Hossam Abdel-Rahim, Fax: +202 2795 8103  
· Minister of Social Solidarity, Mrs. Ghada Wali, Tel: +202 333 75420
· Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Nabeel Sadek, Fax: +202 2577 4716Head of the
Egyptian parliament’s Human Rights Committee, Mr. Alaa Abed, Email:
humanrightscomplaints@parliament.gov.eg
· Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National Council For Human Rights,
Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
· H.E. Mr. Alaa Youssef, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@bluewin.ch
· Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email:
embassy.egypt@skynet.be
 
Please also write to
the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in your respective country. 
 
***
 
Geneva-Paris, March 18,
2019
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line:
·         
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org  
·         
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·         
Tel
and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]            During this accident, at least 25
people were killed and 47 injured in a train crash at Cairo’s main station. 


[2]                  UN Human Rights Council, Report of
the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, 5 January 2016, A/HRC/31/57. 