Sudan:  Sudan: 45 executions and the torture of 14 other persons
April 29, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2004 / AprilSudan: Sudan: 45 executions and the torture of 14 other personsCase SDN 290404 Executions / Ill treatment / Torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, of the attacks on villages resulting in the execution of 45 persons. Separately, OMCT has been informed of the continuing detention in violation of the ceasefire agreement and alleged torture of 14 persons, in Nyala, Darfur, Sudan.  According to the information received, on April 17th 2004, the armed forces and Janjaweed (Arab militias) attacked Hillat Ibraheam village near Kassar Bouram, 10 kilometres south of Nyala and also attacked Abu Ajoura village, 35 kilometres south west of Nyala. 45 civilians were reportedly executed and 312 houses were burnt during these attacks.   The names of the persons that have were executed in Abu Ajoura are as follows: 1. Hussain Adam Haroun; 2. Alhadi Omer Abaker; 3. Ibraheam Osman; 4. Alsayir Osman Omer; 5. Issa Mohamadain Mohamed; 6. Jido Mohamadain; 7. Abdella Abaker Ahmed; 8. Mustafa Altaj; 9. Meryem Omer Ali (f); 10. Soumaya Mohmed Musa (f); 11. Hammad Adam Musa; 12. Basheer Haroun Mohamed; 13. Altayib Ibraheam; 14. Ishag Abdel Kaream Bosh; 15. Hassan Ibraheam; 16. Haroun Mohamed Ibraheam; 17. Alfaki Hussain Ramadan; 18. Abaker Ahmed Abboh; 19. Adam Abaker Mohamed; 20. Yagoub Dogoul; 21. Yousif Zakrea; 22. Alfadil Hessain; 23. Mohamed Omer; 24. Alfaki Altahir Abdel Gadir; 25. Abdella Alhaj Abaker; 26. Yousif Ahmed Ramadan; 27. Alzain Ibraheam Abdella; 28. Abaker Musa; 29. Ahmed Omer Ali; 30. Abdella Musa; 31. Fatima Ali Ahmed (f); 32. Altahir Abdel Gadir; 33. Musa Abdella Ahmed; 34. Abdella Habeeb Adam; 35. Kamal Hassan Abdel Jebbar; 36. Mohamed Haroun Mohamed; 37. Mohamed Ibraheam Abdel Ghani; 38. Alsadig Mohamed Musa; 39. Alfaki Hassan Haroun Adam. The names of those executed from the Dinka tribe include: 40. Daing Gevic; 41. Bag Daing; 42. Dawood Dot; 43. Malog Bail, Sultan; 44. Daing Dall, Sultan; 45. Abdella Majwan Mawak, Sultan.  Separately, 14 persons remain in detention the security forces detention centre in Nyala in spite of the ceasefire agreement that stipulates that prisoners of war are to be released. The fourteen men were arrested two months ago under the accusation of supporting Sudan Liberation Army / Movement (SLA/M). All the detainees are being held in Security Forces Detention Centre. Their names are as follows: 1. Dr. Ali Ahmed Dawood; 2. Alfadil Abdella Tambour; 3. Abdella Yousif Mohamed Abdella; 4. Ali Mansour Hasabella; 5. Altayib Mohamed Dafa alla; 6. Abdel kaream araka tibin; 7. Alfadil Adam Mohamed Nourain; 8. Abdel mannan Abdel mawla; 9. Adam Abaker Hamid; 10. alyan Ali Mohamed; 11. Haroun Idreas Hassan; 12. Ibraheam Musa Ahmed; 13. Mohamed Abdel Kaream Abdella; 14. Mohamed Alhafiz Ali.  These detainees have reportedly been subjected to torture and require urgent medical assistance. They are being detained in a very narrow and crowded cell without ventilation or sun light; they receive only one or two reportedly inadequate meals per day. Two weeks ago the Minister of Foreign affairs and an accompanying delegation of European diplomats visited Nyala city And to Nyala prison but not to the Security Forces Detention Centre where these detainees are being held.   Background information  OMCT is seriously concerned about the situation in Darfur, which has been characterised as being the worst humanitarian situation in the world (please see our recent press release on this situation at: http://www.omct.org/base.cfm?page=article&num=4786&consol=close&kwrd=OMCT&grp=Press. Following international pressure and demands for humanitarian access, a ceasefire agreement was signed on  April 8th 2004 in N'Djamena between the Governement of Sudan and the two main rebel groups, the Sudan Liberation Army/Movement (SLA/M) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM). The ceasefire has been effective since April 12th 2004. The parties had agreed to cease hostilities within 72 hours, for a renewable period of 45 days. They had also agreed to guarantee safe passage for humanitarian aid to the region, to free prisoners of war, and to disarm militias 'Janjaweed' who have been blamed for much of the "ethnic cleansing" and "atrocities" against civilians.  These concerns were demonstrated in the Report of the Office of the High Commission for Human Rights mission to Chad, April 5-15, 2004 which reports on a "reign of terror" which includes the following elements: repeated attacks on civilians by Government of Sudan military and its proxy militia forces with a view to their displacement; the use of systematic and indiscriminate aerial bombardments and ground attacks on unarmed civilians; the use of disproportional force by the Government of Sudan and the Janjaweed forces; that the Janjaweed have operated with total impunity and in close coordination with the forces of the Government of Sudan; the attacks appear to have been ethnically based with the groups targeted being essentially the following tribes reportedly of African origin: Zaghawas, Masaalit, and Furs - men and young boys appear to have been particularly targeted in ground attacks, and; the pattern of attacks on civilians includes killing, rape, pillage, including of livestock, and destruction of property, including water sources.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the 14 detainees that are being held in the Security Forces Detention Centre in Nyala; ii.	intervene with the proper authorities to ensure that they are provided with adequate medical assistance as a matter of urgency; iii.	order their immediate release in the absence of legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iv.	immediately halt all practices by the armed forces and Janjaweed militias against villages in Darfur that were highlighted in the Report of the Office of the High Commission for Human Rights mission to Chad, April 5-15, 2004, notably the pattern of attacks on civilians that includes killing, rape, pillage, including of livestock, and destruction of property, including water sources; v.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; vi.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victims of these abuses; vii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan , Fax: + 24911 783223 ·	Mr Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan ,   Fax: + 24911 788941 ·	Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 779383 ·	Mr Yasir Sid Ahmed, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 770883 ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, , Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Geneva, April 29th, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 