Syrian Arab Republic:  Continued secret detention of Mazen Darwish and other human rights activists and prosecution of part of SCM staff before military court
April 23, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2012 / AprilSyrian Arab Republic: Continued secret detention of Mazen Darwish and other human rights activists and prosecution of part of SCM staff before military court
PRESS RELEASE
 
SYRIA: Continued secret detention of Mazen Darwish and other human rights 
activists and prosecution of part of SCM staff before military 
court

23 April 2012. The undersigned organizations strongly condemn the ongoing secret 
detention of Mr. Mazen Darwish, President of the 
Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM), and four of his 
colleagues, more than 65 days after they were arrested in violation of domestic 
and international law. The organizations also express their deepest concern for 
the criminal procedure triggered by the Military Prosecutor of Damascus against 
seven human rights activists working with the SCM and one visitor. 

 
Since 16 February 2012, when the Air Force Intelligence (AFI) 
conducted a raid at SCM premises in Damascus during which they arrested 16 
persons, the Syrian authorities have refused to reveal the whereabouts of eight 
of them, after seven other persons were conditionally released with the 
obligation to report every day to the intelligence for further interrogations. 

 
On 22 April, three of the detainees who have been held incommunicado, 
namely Messrs. Bassam Al-Ahmad, Joan Farso and Ayham 
Ghazzoul, were presented to the Military Prosecutor in Damascus, who 
informed them that they will be prosecuted by a military court for “possessing 
prohibited materials with the intent to disseminate them”, a criminal offense 
that is punishable by six months of imprisonment according to Article 148 of the 
Syrian Criminal Code. The same day, four of the SCM staff members who had been 
released on bail, namely Mrs. Yara Bader, Mrs. Razan Ghazzawi, 
Mrs. Mayadah Khaleel, Mrs. Sana Zetani and a visitor to the SCM, 
Mrs. Hanadi Zahlout were informed that they will also be prosecuted on 
the same legal grounds. The eight individuals were transferred to the central 
prison of Adra in Damascus. Until now, it has not been possible to obtain information regarding 
the fate of Messrs. Mazen Darwish, Abdelrahman Hamada, Hussein 
Ghareer, Mansour Al Omari and Hani Zetani, who are detained 
incommunicado by the AFI.
 
According to information received, the Military Prosecutor referred 
to “recorded material” which was in the possession of the detained activists 
with the intent to “call for protests” against the Government. The SCM, which 
enjoys UN ECOSOC consultative status since 2011, played a key role in getting 
out information about daily developments in 
Syria at a moment where international observers and journalists were 
virtually banned from the country. The arrest, detention and prosecution of SCM 
staff member appear to be aimed at stifling their voice while the Syrian 
Government continues to commit human rights violations that amount to crimes 
against humanity.   
 
The undersigned organizations remind that the Syrian authorities are 
responsible and accountable under international law for guaranteeing the 
physical and mental integrity of all detainees, including Mr. Mazen Darwish and 
his colleagues. Furthermore, the organizations call on the Syrian authorities to 
end the military criminal proceedings launched against members of the SCM, who 
are all civilians. The Syrian government should immediately release all persons 
arbitrarily detained.
 
Alkarama Foundation
Arab organization for human rights 
Syria
ARTICLE 19: Global Campaign for Free Expression
Cairo Institute for human rights studies
Committee for the defense of democracy freedoms and human rights in 
Syria (CDF)
Damascus center for human rights studies
Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network
FRONT LINE DEFENDERS 
Humanist Institute for Development Cooperation 
Hivos
IKV Pax Christi
International Media Support
International Press Institute 
Kurdish Committee for human rights (Rased)
Kurdish Organization for the defense of human rights and public 
freedoms (DAD)
National organization for human rights in 
Syria (NOHR-S) 
Observatory for the protection of Human Rights Defenders, joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
Reporters Without Borders
Syrian organization for human rights - Sawasyah 

Syrian human rights organization MAF 