Thailand:  Killing of human rights defenders and members of Southern Peasants Federation of Thailand Ms. Montha Chukaew and Ms. Pranee Boonrat
December 21, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2012 / DecemberThailand: Killing of human rights defenders and members of Southern Peasants Federation of Thailand Ms. Montha Chukaew and Ms. Pranee BoonratTake Action!Please copy the enclosed letter and send it to the address provided. Please put your own name and address on the letter. If you receive a reply, please forward it to us.H.E. Yingluck ShinnawatraPrime MinisterOffice of the Prime MinisterGovernment HouseThanon Phitsanulok, DusitBangkok 10300, ThailandYour Excellency,I am writing to you to raise my concerns about the killing of two women human rights defenders. On 19 November 2012, members of the Southern Peasants' Federation of Thailand (SPFT) Ms. Montha Chukaew (50) and Ms. Pranee Boonrat (54) were shot and killed while they were on their way to a local market.The SPFT is a people's network formed in 2008 campaigning for the right to agricultural land in the Khlong Sai Pattana community in Chaiburi District, Surat Thani Province and other areas in the region.The two women human rights defenders were shot at around 7am while they were riding their motorcycle to the market. Soon after the women had left Khlong Sai Pattana, a daughter and neighbour heard gunshots. When they went out to see what had happened, they found Ms. Montha Chukaew and Ms. Pranee Boonrat lying dead at a location 800 meters from the community. Ten bullet cases of assault rifles were found lying near the scene.One leader of the Khlong Sai Pattana community stated that these killings are likely related to the work of the SPFT in demanding rights over land the community has been using for agriculture since 2008. The SPFT has been active in supporting the Khlong Sai Pattana community in a land dispute involving Jiew Kang Jue Pattana Co. Ltd., a palm oil company. The governmental Agricultural Land Reform Office (ARLO), who claims to be the rightful owner of the land, sued the company for illegal land encroachment in 2007 and won the case in the first instance and appeal courts. The case is currently before the High Court.In 2009 and 2010 two Cabinet decisions were issued allowing the villagers to remain in their settlement until the dispute is resolved and granted them community land entitlement. The total disputed area covers 1355 Rai (535 Acres), 200 (70 acres) of which have been used by the community. Several members of the SPFT are currently facing legal suits filed by the company on allegations that their work and campaigns are affecting their business interests.Mounting violence has been used against the community. In 2009, tractors, allegedly sent by the company, invaded the area and destroyed 60 of 120 houses in the community. In 2010, human rights defender Mr. Somporn Pattaphum, who was a SPFT affiliate, was shot and killed in the area.In October 2012, a woman farmer from the community was threatened by an unidentified man in a truck carrying a gun saying that the community should get out of the area. According to community members, since 19 November 2012, gunshots have been fired regularly near the community during nighttime. The perpetrators of the killings remain at large and police investigations have so far been inconclusive.The National Human Rights Commission visited the province and held meetings with local authorities, including the Governor of Surat Thani Province, on 11 December 2012. The Governor has employed four volunteer guards outside of the community to provide protection to the villagers, but given the fact that these guards receive no compensation and are situated outside of the disputed area, this measure is deemed insufficient and community members continue to live in fear. A representative of the community has reported that unidentified men continued to appear in the community.I urge the authorities of Thailand to:1. Ensure that the ongoing police and judicial investigation into the killing of Ms. Montha Chukaew and Ms. Pranee Boonrat be thorough and impartial, with a view to publishing the results and bringing those responsible to justice in accordance with international standards;2. Provide immediate and sufficient police protection to the members of SPFT and their family members, including for the Governor to provide police presence inside the community;3. Take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity and security of members of SPFT, their families, as well as other community activists; and4. In general, guarantee in all circumstances that all human rights defenders in Thailand are able to carry out their legitimate human rights activities without fear of reprisals and free of all restrictions including judicial harassment.Yours sincerely,Name:Address:

H.E.
Yingluck Shinnawatra
Prime
Minister 
Office of
the Prime Minister
Government
House
Thanon
Phitsanulok, Dusit 
Bangkok
10300, Thailand 
 
 
21 December
2012 
 
Re: Thailand
- Killing of human rights defenders and members of Southern Peasants Federation
of Thailand Ms. Montha Chukaew and Ms. Pranee Boonrat 
 
Your
Excellency, 
 
We write to
you to raise our concerns about the killing of two women human rights
defenders. On 19 November 2012, members of the Southern Peasants' Federation
of Thailand (SPFT) Ms. Montha Chukaew (50) and Ms. Pranee Boonrat
(54) were shot and killed while they were on their way to a local market.
The SPFT is a people's network formed in 2008 campaigning for the right to
agricultural land in the Khlong Sai Pattana community in Chaiburi District,
Surat Thani Province and other areas in the region. 
 
The two
women human rights defenders were shot at around 7am while they were riding
their motorcycle to the market. Soon after the women had left Khlong Sai
Pattana, a daughter and neighbour heard gunshots. When they went out to see
what had happened, they found Ms. Montha Chukaew and Ms. Pranee Boonrat lying
dead at a location 800 meters from the community. Ten bullet cases of assault
rifles were found lying near the scene. One leader of the Khlong Sai Pattana
community stated that these killings are likely related to the work of the SPFT
in demanding rights over land the community has been using for agriculture
since 2008. 
 
The SPFT has
been active in supporting the Khlong Sai Pattana community in a land dispute
involving Jiew Kang Jue Pattana Co. Ltd., a palm oil company. The governmental
Agricultural Land Reform Office (ARLO), who claims to be the rightful owner of
the land, sued the company for illegal land encroachment in 2007 and won the
case in the first instance and appeal courts. The case is currently before the
High Court. In 2009 and 2010 two Cabinet decisions were issued allowing the
villagers to remain in their settlement until the dispute is resolved and
granted them community land entitlement. The total disputed area covers 1355
Rai (535 Acres), 200 (70 acres) of which have been used by the community.
Several members of the SPFT are currently facing legal suits filed by the
company on allegations that their work and campaigns are affecting their
business interests. 
 
Mounting
violence has been used against the community. In 2009, tractors, allegedly sent
by the company, invaded the area and destroyed 60 of 120 houses in the
community. In 2010, human rights defender Mr. Somporn Pattaphum, who was a SPFT
affiliate, was shot and killed in the area. In October 2012, a woman farmer
from the community was threatened by an unidentified man in a truck carrying a
gun saying that the community should get out of the area. According to community
members, since 19 November 2012, gunshots have been fired regularly near the
community during nighttime. 
 
The
perpetrators of the killings remain at large and police investigations have so
far been inconclusive. The National Human Rights Commission visited the
province and held meetings with local authorities, including the Governor of
Surat Thani Province, on 11 December 2012. The Governor has employed four
volunteer guards outside of the community to provide protection to the
villagers, but given the fact that these guards receive no compensation and are
situated outside of the disputed area, this measure is deemed insufficient and
community members continue to live in fear. A representative of the community
informed us that unidentified men continued to appear in the community. 
 
The
undersigned organisations condemn the killing of Ms. Montha Chukaew and Ms.
Pranee Boonrat in the highest possible terms and believe that the killing is
directly related to their work in the defence of human rights, in particular
community and land rights. These two assassinations belong to a worrying
pattern of mounting harassment against members of the SPFT and we are extremely
concerned about ongoing threats against them. 
 
One month
after the assassination of Ms. Montha Chukaew and Ms. Pranee Boonrat, the
undersigned organisations urge the authorities of Thailand to: 
 
Ensure
     that the ongoing police and judicial investigation into the killing of Ms. Montha Chukaew and Ms. Pranee Boonrat be thorough and impartial, with a view to publishing the results and
     bringing those responsible to justice in accordance with international
     standards;Provide
     immediate and sufficient police protection to the members of SPFT and
     their family members, including for the Governor to provide police
     presence inside the community;Take
     all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological
     integrity and security of members of SPFT, their families, as well as other community activists; andIn general, guarantee in all circumstances that all human rights
     defenders in Thailand are able to carry out their legitimate human rights
     activities without fear of reprisals and free of all restrictions
     including judicial harassment.
 
We respectfully remind you that sections 66 and 67 of
the 2007 Constitution of Thailand protect community rights, including the right
to participate in the management, maintenance and exploitation of natural
resources. 
 
Furthermore, the United Nations Declaration on
the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to
Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, adopted by consensus by the UN General Assembly on 9 December 1998,
recognises the legitimacy of the activities of human rights defenders, their
right to freedom of association and to carry out their activities without fear
of reprisals.  We would particularly draw
attention to Article 12 (2): “The State shall take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration” and to Article 18 (2): “Individuals, groups,
and non-governmental organisations have an important role to play and a
responsibility in safeguarding democracy, promoting human rights and
fundamental freedoms and contributing to the promotion and advancement of
democratic societies, institutions and processes.”
 
Please inform us of any action taken on this
case. 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
Mary
Lawlor 
Executive
Director
Front
Line Defenders
 
Souhayr
Belhassen
President

International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
 
Arjan
van der Waal
Programme
Director
Protection
International
 
Gerald
Staberock 
Secretary
General 
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 