Israel:  Follow-up of case ISR 260712_Severe ill-treatment against two Palestinian hunger strikers
August 16, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2012 / AugustIsrael: Follow-up of case ISR 260712_Severe ill-treatment against two Palestinian hunger strikers
Case ISR
260712.1
Follow-up
of case ISR 260712
Ill-treatment/ Administrative detention/
Hunger strike/ Serious health concerns
The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) has
received new information and requests
your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Israel and the
Occupied Palestinian Territory.
New information 
The International
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Addameer
and Al Haq, two members of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, that Mr. Samer Al-Barq and Mr. Hassan Safadi, two administrative
detainees on hunger strike, were severely ill-treated by the Israeli Prison
Service (IPS), in the forms of physical brutality and psychological torture. 
According to the
information received, on 13 August 2012 at about 9:00 am, IPS guards entered
the isolation room that Mr. Hassan Safadi shares with Mr. Samer Al-Barq in
Ramleh prison medical clinic and announced their intentions to move the two
hunger strikers to a room with other prisoners in the medical clinic who are
not on hunger strike. Mr. Safadi and Mr. Al-Barq refused the transfer, as they
considered it an attempt to further pressure them to break their hunger strikes
by surrounding them with individuals who would be regularly eating in front of
them. 
According to the
same information, after refusing to be moved, the IPS guards attacked both Mr. Hassan
Safadi and Mr. Samer Al-Barq. Mr. Safadi’s head was allegedly slammed against
the iron door of the cell two times, causing him to fall to the ground, unconscious.
The guards then reportedly dragged him through the hall to be seen by all the
other prisoners. Later that night, at about 10:00 pm, Mr. Safadi and Mr.
Al-Barq were taken to a new isolation room with no mattresses. As a result, Mr.
Safadi, who is currently on his 57th day of hunger strike,
subsequently announced that he would no longer be drinking water. 
Mr. Safadi and Mr.
Al-Barq, who is currently on his 87th day of hunger, remain on
hunger strike in protest against their administrative detention orders being
renewed following the conclusion of Palestinian prisoners’ mass hunger strike
in May. Mr. Safadi had been explicitly included in the agreement ending the
hunger strike and had been guaranteed his release following the expiration of
his order at the time. A final decision regarding Mr. Safadi’s extension (which
was planned to take place on 6 August 2012) has been consistently postponed by
an Israeli military judge and has not been reached to date. 
According to the
same information, Mr. Ayman Sharawna
also remains on hunger strike. He is currently on his 47th day. OMCT
has been informed that a fourth Palestinian detainee, Mr. Samer Al-Issawi, is on his 16th day of hunger strike.
Both detainees were former prisoners who were released in last October’s
prisoner exchange deal and subsequently re-arrested. They are being held based
on secret information and view their hunger strikes as their only tool to
protest against their re-arrest. 
OMCT
expresses its deep concern about the situation of the four aforementioned hunger strikers and urges the competent authorities to take immediate
measures in order to ensure that they receive a proper medical treatment in an
adquate medical facility, and that they are treated humanly under all
circumstances. OMCT is gravely concerned that detainees carrying out a hunger
strike are getting punished, including by using physical brutality,
psychological torture and poor conditions of detention. 
OMCT is also concerned that
the procedure under which their administrative detention has been ordered does
not meet international human rights standards,
including their right not to be arbitrarily detained as well as their absolute
right at all times not to be subjected to any cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment. 
Background information 
OMCT had earlier
been informed by Addameer and Al Haq about the administrative
detention of Mr. Samer Al-Barq,Mr. Hassan Safadi and Mr. Ayman Sharawna, as well as their serious
health condition caused by their hunger strike in protest of their detention.
OMCT was also concerned about the health condition of Mr. Akram Rikhawi who ended
his hunger strike after 102 days[1].

Israel has been
holding hundreds of persons from the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT) in administrative detention. In the occupied Palestinian West Bank, the Israeli army
carries out administrative detention on the basis of Military Order 1651, which
empowers military commanders to detain an individual for up to six months if
they have “reasonable grounds to presume that the security of the area or
public security require the detention.” On or just before the expiry date, the
detention order is also frequently renewed and this process can be continued
indefinitely.
Administrative detention
deprives detainees of basic safeguards, including the right to challenge the
evidence on which the detention is based, warrants are not required, and the
detainee may be held in incommunicado detention for an extended period, subject
to renewal.
The
United Nations Committee Against Torture has expressed its concern
that administrative detention does not conform with article 16 of the
Convention[2].
This type of indefinite administrative detention, following manifestly unfair
proceedings, can amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. 
Action requested
Please write to the
authorities in Israel urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Samer Al-Barq, Mr. Hassan Safadi, Mr. Ayman
Sharawna and Mr. Samer Al-Issawi; 
ii.             
Guarantee their unconditional access to independent
physicians;  
iii.           
Order their immediate transfer to a public hospital
with adequate care that does not include being shackled while in the hospital; 
iv.           
Guarantee unconditional access to all members of their
families, and guarantee that the family members are provided with all
information concerning their medical condition;
v.             
Order their immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are consistent with international legal standards, or, if such
charges exist, bring them promptly before an impartial, independent and
competent tribunal that will ensure due process at all times; 
vi.           
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough,
independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned facts, notably
the aforementioned allegations of ill-treatment, the result of which must be
made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent,
independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative
sanctions as provided by law;
vii.          
Guarantee that adequate compensation is awarded to them for the violation of their human rights;
viii.        
At all times ensure strict respect for international
human rights and humanitarian law in the exercise of its jurisdiction,
including in connection with military operations in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory.
Addresses
Ø Mr. Benjamin
Netanyahu, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 3, Kaplan Street, PO Box
187, Kiryat Ben-Gurion, Jerusalem, Israel, Fax:
+972- 2-651 2631, Email: pm_eng@pmo.gov.il
Ø Brigadier General Danny Efroni, Military Judge
Advocate General, 6 David Elazar Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv, Israel, Fax:  +972 3 608 0366, +972 3 569
4526, Email: arbel@mail.idf.il, avimn@idf.gov.il
Ø Lieutenant General Aharon
Franco, Israel Prison Service Commissioner, Israel Prison Service, PO Box 81,
Ramleh 72100, Israel, Fax: +972 8 919 3800
Ø M. Ehud Barak,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defense, 37 Kaplan Street, Hakirya, Tel
Aviv 61909, Fax. + 972
3 691 6940 / 696 2757
Ø Permanent Mission
of Israel to the United Nations Office and Specialized Institutions in Geneva,
Avenue de la Paix 1-3, 1202 Geneva, Fax:
+41 22 716 05 55, Email: mission-israel@geneva.mfa.gov.il
Please also write
to the embassies of Israel in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 16
August 2012. 
Kindly inform us of
any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in
your reply.



[1] See OMCT urgent
appeal ISR 260712.


[2] CAT/C/ISR/CO/4, para 17. 