Kenya:  Harassment of Haki Africa and Muslims for Human Rights (MUHURI)
April 23, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2015 / AprilKenya: Harassment of Haki Africa and Muslims for Human Rights (MUHURI)KEN 001 / 0415 / OBS 034Harassment
Kenya
April
23, 2015
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Kenya.Description
of the situation:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the administrative
harassment of Haki Africa and Muslims for Human Rights (MUHURI),
two human rights organisations, which advocate for constitutional means to
counter terrorism while also observing human rights.
According
to the information received on April 20, 2015, at approximately 2 p.m.,
officers of the Kenyan Revenue Authorities (KRA) raided the premises of Haki
Africa in Mombasa and seized computers, hard disks, documents and financial
files. The officers, who presented a court order and were accompanied by at
least four policemen, declared to be investigating on allegations of tax
evasion.
The
same facts happened on April 21, 2015, at approximately 11 a.m., in the
premises of MUHURI, where officers of the KRA presented a warrant mentioning
criminal investigation on possible tax evasion. In addition to seizing
documents, they also dismantled the office server.
The
Observatory recalls that earlier on April 7, 2015, these two organisations had
their accounts frozen[1].
This followed their listing as “Entities Suspected to be Associated with
Al-Shabaab” by the Kenyan Government, in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks
in Garissa.
Furthermore,
the Observatory denounces the administrative harassment against Haki Africa and
MUHURI, which seems to merely aim at preventing them from carrying out their
legitimate human rights work, and calls on Kenyan authorities to put an end on
it.
Finally,
the Observatory reiterates its concern regarding the
shrinking space imposed by the Government to the Kenyan civil society,
following the inclusion of several organisations, among which also Haki Africa
and MUHURI, on the official list of terrorist entities as well as the freezing of their bank
accounts. Our organisations call for a prompt revision of such
list, in order to guarantee full freedom of association for NGOs that are
merely carrying out human rights activities.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of
Kenya, urging them to:
       
i.           
Put an
end to any kind of harassment – including at the judicial level – against Haki
Africa and MUHURI, their members, as well as all human rights defenders in
Kenya so that they are able to carry out their work without any hindrances;
      ii.           
Remove
immediately and unconditionally MUHURI and Haki Africa from the terrorism list
and lift immediately any freezing or restriction of the activities of these
organisations;
    iii.       
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of the members of
Haki Africa and MUHURI, as well as of all human rights defenders in Kenya;
    iv.       
Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, in particular with its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has
the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to
strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental
freedoms at the national and international levels”, as well as with Article
12.2 (“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de
jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”);
     v.       
 Acknowledge the important role played by civil
society in promoting tolerance in the struggle against violent extremism and
ensure an enabling environment in which human rights defenders and civil
society can operate free from hindrance and insecurity;
    vi.       
More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
Kenya.
Addresses
· Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the Republic of
Kenya, State House, Statehouse Road, P.O Box: 40530 00100, Nairobi, Kenya.,
Fax: +254-020-2436, Email: president@statehousekenya.go.ke
· Hon. William Ruto, Deputy-President of the Republic of
Kenya, Office of The Deputy President, Harambee Avenue, P.O. Box 74434 - 00200
Nairobi, Kenya., Tel: +254 20 3247000/1/2/3/4/5, Email:
dp@deputypresident.go.ke
· Hon. Joseph Nkaissery, Interior & Coordination of
National Government, Harambee House, Harambee Avenue, P.O Box 30510,00100
Nairobi, Tel: +254-20-2227411, Email: ps.interior@kenya.go.ke
·Commissioner of Police, Kenya Police Headquarters,
Vigilance House, Harambee Avenue, P.O. Box 30083, Nairobi, Kenya, Tel:
+254-020-341411/6/8, Email: commissioner@police.go.ke, complaints@police.go.ke
· Commissioner Kagwiria Mbogori, Chairperson, Kenya
National Commission on Human Rights, Fax: +254-020- 2716160 E-mail haki@knchr.org
· H.E. Mr. Stephen Ndungu Karau, Permanent Mission of Kenya to the United Nations in
Geneva, Av. de la Paix 1-3, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 731 29 05,
E-mail: mission.kenya@ties.itu.int
· H.E. Johnson
Weru, Embassy of Kenya in Brussels, 208 av. W. Churchill, 1180 Uccle, Belgium,
Fax: + 32 2 340 10 50 / + 32 2 340 10 68. Email: kenbrussels@hotmail.com
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Kenya in your respective
countries.



[1] See the Observatory's Joint Press Statement,
April 14, 2015. 