Enforced disappearance of Lhaten, a farmer from the Tibetan Autonomous Region
November 21, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / 2011 / NovemberEnforced disappearance of Lhaten, a farmer from the Tibetan Autonomous Region​CHN 211111Arbitrary arrest/ Enforced
disappearance/ Risk of torture and ill-treatment
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.

Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the
arbitrary arrest and disappearance of Lhaten,
a farmer aged about 44 years from Shingtsang Village, Taktse County, Lhasa Municipal, in the Tibetan
Autonomous Region (TAR).
OMCT fears that he may be at risk of torture and ill-treatment. 
According to the information received, on 1 November
2011 at around 3:00 pm, Lhaten received a phone call from a teacher from Taktse
County Primary School, where his son is studying, asking him to pick up his son.
When he arrived at the school, several policemen in plain clothes were
reportedly waiting for him. He was then taken away in a black car. His current whereabouts and fate remain
unknown. 
Lhaten was reportedly
suspected by the authorities of having “connection” with Dhondup Wangchen, a
Tibetan film maker who was sentenced, in December 2009, to six years imprisonment,
charged with subversion, for making a documentary entitled “Leaving Fear
Behind” ahead of the 2008 Olympic Games in China. However, the
authorities have reportedly disclosed no reason for Lhaten’s arrest and no
charges are known to have been brought against him. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is
gravely concerned about the safety of Lhaten, as his whereabouts and fate remain unknown.OMCT fears that he may be
subjected to torture or other ill-treatment. OMCT urges the competent authorities
to guarantee his physical and psychological integrity at all times, in
accordance with international human rights law, in particular the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, and to immediately locate and
disclose his whereabouts. Enforced disappearance and torture and other
ill-treatment constitute serious human rights violations and are strictly
prohibited under international law. 
OMCT further calls on the competent authorities to order his immediate
release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and
standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him promptly before an impartial,
independent and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all
times, including immediate and unconditional access to a lawyer of his choice. 
Actions
Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.                    
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of Lhaten; 
ii.                  
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, his physical and psychological integrity;  
iii.                 
Grant
him immediate and full access to a lawyer of his choice and his family, as well
as guarantee that he is examined by independent doctors and receives adequate
medical care if necessary, in accordance, inter
alia, with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iv.                
Order his immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring him before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee
his procedural rights at all times;
v.                  
Guarantee
the
respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
·  
   Mr. Wen
Jiabao, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The
State Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017,
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o
Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
·  
   Mr. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the
People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie,
Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529
2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·  
   Mr. Meng Jianzhu,
Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang,
Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s
Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
63099216

Director of the Sichuan Provincial
Department of Justice, Sifating, 24 Shangxiznglu, Chengdushi 610015,
Sichuansheng, People's Republic of China

·      Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Ch. De Surville, CP 85, 1213
Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse, e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22 793 70
14
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 21 November 2011
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 