Cambodia:  Continued judicial harassment against Mr. Ny Chakrya, Head of the Human Rights and Legal Aid Section of ADHOC
October 12, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2015 / OctoberCambodia: Continued judicial harassment against Mr. Ny Chakrya, Head of the Human Rights and Legal Aid Section of ADHOC

New information
KHM 002 /
0715 / OBS 056.2
Judicial harassment
Cambodia
October 12, 2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Cambodia.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the continued judicial harassment against Mr. Ny Chakrya, Head of
the Human Rights and Legal Aid Section of the Cambodian Human Rights and
Development Association (ADHOC).
 
According to the information received, on October 7,
2015, the wife of Mr. Ny Chakrya received a subpoena delivered to his home address,
requesting Mr. Ny Chakrya to appear in camera before the Investigating
Judge of the Phnom Penh Municipal Court on
October 21, 2015 at 9am.
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr. Ny Chakrya is facing
charges of “public defamation”, “acts of slanderous denunciation”, and
“publication of commentaries to put pressure on jurisdiction” (see background
information). Together,
the three accusations could lead to up to a year-and-a-half in prison, plus
fines[1].
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing judicial
harassment against Mr. Ny Chakrya, which only aims at sanctioning his
legitimate human rights activities, and calls upon the Cambodian authorities to
put an immediate end to it.
 
The Observatory also highlights that pursuant to
Article 188 of the Cambodian Criminal Procedure Code, a subpoena has to be delivered personally to the
concerned person, who in turn either signs or fingerprints the document, in order to confirm its
receipt. The fact that the subpoena was handed down to the wife of Mr. Ny
Chakrya is therefore a blatant violation of the Criminal Procedure Code.
 
Background information:
 
On July 1, 2015, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court
summonsed Mr. Ny Chakrya to appear for questioning before the Deputy Prosecutor
of the Phnom Penh Municipal Court on July 13, 2015.
 
On that day, Mr. Ny Chakrya was accused of “public
defamation” (Article 305 of the Cambodian Criminal Code), “acts of slanderous
denunciation” (Article 311 of the Cambodian Criminal Code), and “publication of
commentaries to put pressure on jurisdiction” (Article 522 of the Cambodian
Criminal Code). This followed a complaint filed by the investigating judge of
the Siem Reap Provincial Court and the Deputy Prosecutor of the Siem Reap
Provincial Court on the above-mentioned charges.
 
The complaint was related to a press conference
organised by ADHOC’s office in Siem Reap on May 12, 2015, during which Mr. Ny
Chakrya, along with one ADHOC lawyer, Ms. Pouk
Yarann, condemned the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Ven Lorn and
Mr. Beourn Sok, two residents of the Chup Romdeng Village (Phnom Sra Ngam area,
Kantout Commune, Svay Leu District, Siem Reap Province) involved in a high
profile land dispute in the Siem Reap Province.
 
On May 15, 2015, the Prosecution Office of the Siem
Reap Provincial Court published a statement threatening Mr. Ny Chakrya and Ms.
Pouk Yarann that it would initiate legal proceedings against them, alleging
that the “provocative comments” made during the press conference jeopardised
the effective functioning of the Cambodian judicial institutions and the
on-going proceedings in the concerned land dispute.
 
On May 20, 2015, Mr. Ny Chakrya filed a complaint with
the President of the Disciplinary Council of the Supreme Council of Magistracy,
claiming that the proceedings against Mr. Ven Lorn and Mr. Beourn Sok were not
conducted in accordance with fair trial standards because of the lack of
independence of the Deputy Prosecutor. No developments have been observed since
the complaint was filed.
 
On June 22, 2015, the Cambodian Bar Association lodged
a disciplinary complaint against Ms. Pouk Yarann, accusing her to provide Mr.
Ny Chakrya with legal advice when submitting the complaint to the Supreme
Council of Magistracy. She was summoned for questioning on July 3, 2015 by the
Investigating Committee of the Cambodian Bar Association, which subsequently
issued a report to the President of the Cambodian Bar Association. Since then,
there have been no developments.
 
On June 17, 2015, at 8:30am, Mr. Ven Lorn and Mr.
Beourn Sok were found guilty on charges of inciting a group of residents of
Chup Romdeng Village to destroy and intrude on the property of the agricultural
development company, Takhmao Community Industrial Development and Agricultural
Trading Company (TCIDA)[2]. They
were sentenced to six and eight months in prison respectively. 
 
On July 19, 2015, the Deputy Prosecutor of the Phnom
Penh Municipal Court decided to refer Mr. Ny Chakrya’s file on the above
mentioned charges to the investigating judge.

Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of the Kingdom of
Cambodia asking them to:
 
i. Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at
the judicial level, against Mr. Ny Chakrya as well as of all human rights
defenders in the country;
 
ii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Ny Chakrya as well as of all human rights
defenders in Cambodia;
 
iii. Comply with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular with its:
-       
Article 1, which states that "everyone has the right, individually
or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels", 
-       
Article 5 b) which stipulates that everyone has the right "to form,
join and participate in non-governmental organisations, associations or
groups", 
-       
as well as Article 12.2, which provides that "the State shall take
all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually or in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration";
 
iv. Guarantee the respect of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human
Rights and other international human rights instruments signed or ratified by
the Kingdom of Cambodia.
 
Addresses:
 
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister,
     Office of the Prime Minister, 41 Russian Federation Blvd, Phnom
     Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / 855 23 880624 (c/o
     Council of Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / cppparty@gmail.comMr. Sok An, Deputy Prime Minister, Fax: +
     (+855) 23 882 065, Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh,
     info@pressocm.gov.kh Mr. Sar Kheng, Minister of Interior,
     Ministry of Interior, 275 Norodom Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia.
     Fax: + 855 23 212708Mr. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of Justice,
     Ministry of Justice, 240 Sothearos Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia.
     Fax: + 855 23 364 119Mr. Hor Nam Hong, Minister of
     Foreign Affairs, 161 Preah Sisowath Quay, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia.
     Fax: + 855 23 216 144 / 855 23 216 141 Email: mfaic@mfa.gov.khMr. Om Yentieng, Minister & President of
     the Cambodian Human Rights Committee, Office of the Prime Minister, Phnom
     Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: +855 12 81 37 81 / +855 23 21 11 62 or
     +855 23 88 10 45 (c/o Council of Ministers)Ambassador Mr. Ney Samol, Permanent Mission of the
     Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva, Chemin de Taverney 3, Case
     postale 213, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 788 77 74, Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh / cambodge@bluewin.ch
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of
Cambodia in your respective countries.



[1] An English translation of
the provisions of the Criminal Code can be accessed at the following link: https://www.unodc.org/res/cld/document/khm/criminal_code_of_the_kingdom_of_cambodia_html/Cambodia_Criminal-Code-of-the-Kingdom-of-Cambodia-30-Nov-2009-Eng.pdf


[2] In 2014,
TCIDA started clearing plots of agricultural land owned by village residents,
affecting 31 families and a total of 90 hectares of land. A complaint has been
filed by the families affected, demanding the return of their land as well as
the continuation of the use of their land for cultivation purposes. 