Spain:  Human Rights Groups Welcome Spanish Court’s Decision to Acquit Judge Baltasar Garzón
February 27, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Spain / 2012 / FebruarySpain: Human Rights Groups Welcome Spanish Court’s Decision to Acquit Judge Baltasar Garzón

Human Rights Groups Welcome 
Spanish Court’s Decision
to Acquit 
Judge Baltasar Garzón and Call on Spain 
to secure effectively the right to truth, justice, and reparation for the 
victims of the Crimes committed during the Civil War and the Franco 
Regime
 
Madrid, 27 February 2012 
 
Today, the 
International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), the Center for Constitutional Rights 
(CCR), the European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights (ECCHR), Lawyers 
Rights Watch Canada (LRWC), the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, 
a 
joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the 
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), Asociación pro Derechos Humanos de 
España (APDHE), Asociación Española para el Derecho Internacional de los 
Derechos Humanos (AEDIDH), the Due Process of Law Foundation (DPLF) and Rights 
International Spain (RIS) all welcomed the Criminal Chamber of the Spanish 
Supreme Court’s decision, by a majority of its members, to acquit Judge Baltasar 
Garzón in the “Historic Memory” malfeasance trial. These organizations issue the 
following joint statement:
 
“Our organizations include Spanish and 
international observers who attended Judge Baltasar Garzón’s trial and followed 
the proceedings held during the past weeks with significant concern. We have 
previously issued a statement https://docs.google.com/file/d/0ByBM8_x9YdxiOTllZTE4YzYtNGQ1Mi00NGQ1LWJlNTgtMDhjNDliMDE4MzYx/edit?pli=1 warning the international community and Spanish society 
of the danger that the process posed to both judicial independence and access to 
justice for victims of crimes committed during the Spanish Civil War and the 
Franco regime. We welcome the Supreme Court’s decision to finally acquit Judge 
Baltasar Garzón of the malfeasance charges against him. However, at the same 
time, we strongly reaffirm that grave damage has been done to both Judge Garzón 
and judicial independence more broadly. Judge Garzón should never have been 
prosecuted for complying with the clear obligation under international 
law to investigate grave violations of human 
rights.
 
“Moreover, the critical question that 
motivated the prosecution of Judge Garzón has not been adequately answered: Who 
has the legal authority to investigate crimes committed during the Spanish Civil 
War and the Franco regime?
 
“We remind the Supreme Court of its obligation to rule on this issue of legal authority or competency 
raised before it. Determination of this pressing issue was inexplicably 
subordinated to the malfeasance prosecution against Judge Garzón and as a result 
has unjustifiably remained pending for over two years. Our organizations call on 
the Supreme Court to consider and determine, in accordance with its 
constitutional mandate and principles of international law, what courts have the 
authority to investigate and provide effective remedy for the 114,266 enforced 
disappearances and extra-judicial killings committed during the Civil War and 
Franco regime that followed. We also call on the Court to confirm the 
applicability of national and international law to the investigation and redress 
of these and other serious crimes against international law. 

 
Along with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human 
Rights and the UN Human Rights Committee, we call on Spain to repeal its 1977 
Amnesty Law as it violates the international law obligations Spain has assumed 
since that year and the Spanish Constitution itself (articles 1.1, 9, 10.2, 95 
and 96).  Our organizations also urge the 
Spanish authorities to comply with their international obligations and take 
effective measures to ensure accountability for enforced disappearances, 
extra-judicial killings and other serious crimes under international law that 
threaten our collective peace and security. In accordance with international 
law, they must act to secure truth, justice, and reparation for the victims of 
crimes committed during the Civil War and the Franco 
regime.” 