Egypt:  Joint open letter to the UN High-Commissioner on Human Rights on Egypt: Call for action to condemn the Egyptian authorities’ crackdown on freedom of expression
November 24, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Statements / Egypt / 2017 / NovemberEgypt: Joint open letter to the UN High-Commissioner on Human Rights on Egypt: Call for action to condemn the Egyptian authorities’ crackdown on freedom of expressionTo: His
Excellency Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights
Re: Call for
action to condemn the Egyptian authorities’ crackdown on freedom of expression
Mr High
Commissioner, 
We, the
undersigned organisations, are writing to express our great concern about the
current human rights situation in Egypt. 
Four years ago
today, Egypt’s anti-protest law was signed, restricting the right to free
assembly to such an extent that the mere planning of a demonstration has been
criminalised. 
This law remains
one element of a repressive legislative arsenal denying Egyptian citizens their
rights to freedom of opinion, expression, association, and peaceful assembly,
under the pretext of maintaining stability and countering terrorism.
The Media and
Press Law of 26 December 2016 constitutes an unprecedented attack on press
freedom, the NGO Law has made it impossible for civil society to operate safely,
while the Anti-Terrorism Law has been used to impose travel bans and asset freezes
on journalists, human rights defenders and other peaceful activists.
These laws act
as powerful tools in the hands of the security forces, which carry out the most
severe violations of human rights on a daily basis, and in a climate of
impunity: summary executions, abductions followed by secret detentions and
enforced disappearances, torture, rape, arbitrary arrests, unfair trials before
civilian and military courts leading to heavy prison sentences, including the
death penalty. 
The authorities
have been resorting to these severe violations in a systematic fashion in order
to instil fear within society and to silence any form of dissent by
discouraging individuals from speaking out. Those targeted include students, professors,
trade unionists, journalists, lawyers, human rights defenders, political
opponents and other peaceful activists. 
In addition to
these attacks against the liberty and physical integrity of its citizens, the
Egyptian authorities have imposed widespread online censorship and
surveillance. Since May 2017, more than 400 websites – including those of news
outlets and human rights organisations – have been blocked in an attempt to
suppress reports which contradict the state narrative on the human rights
situation in the country. 
We believe this
repressive apparatus, established under the pretext of ensuring stability, is
not only counter-productive, but its very existence permits abuses that go
against the human rights principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UDHR) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, the latter of which Egypt has been party to since 1982. 
Mr High Commissioner,
as we near the 70th anniversary of the UDHR, the Egyptian
authorities must be reminded of their commitment to ensure “freedom of speech
and belief and freedom from fear and want”. Such freedoms have been qualified
as the “highest aspiration of the common people” by the UDHR. The Egyptian
people are no exception, and they deserve your strongest support and attention.

Mr High
Commissioner, your mandate gives you the authority to engage in a dialogue with
all governments to secure respect for all human rights. We believe your support
is crucial to ensure that the people of Egypt enjoy “the equal and inalienable
rights of all members of the human family” proclaimed 70 years ago.
Given the
extreme gravity of these human rights abuses, we urge you to publicly and
strongly condemn these violations of the rights to freedom of opinion,
expression, association and peaceful assembly, as well as the attacks on the
liberty and integrity of Egyptian citizens. We kindly request that you call
upon the authorities to put an end to these violations and establish the
necessary prevention and accountability mechanisms to avoid their repetition. 
The
undersigned organisations:
1.    
Adalah Center for Rights & Freedoms 
2.    
Alkarama Foundation
3.    
Al Nadeem Center for Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence
4.    
ARTICLE 19
5.    
Committee for Justice
6.    
Egyptian Commission for
Rights and Freedoms 
7.    
EuroMed Rights
8.    
Front Line Defenders 
9.    
Index on Censorship
10. PEN International
11. World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 