Egypt:  State Security Emergency Court expected to reach a verdict in the trial of the 32 Nubian human rights defensers
February 21, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2018 / FebruaryEgypt: State Security Emergency Court expected to reach a verdict in the trial of the 32 Nubian human rights defensers

URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY



​













 
New information
EGY 005 / 1117 / OBS 114.2 
Judicial harassment /
Restrictions to freedom of assembly 
Egypt
February 21, 2018
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial
harassment of 32 Nubian human rights defenders actively involved in the defence
of minority and Nubian rights in the Aswan governorate, including Messrs. Mohamed Azmy, lawyer and President of
the General Nubian Union[1], Maysara Abdoun, Training
Coordinator at Border Center for Support & Consulting (BSC)[2], and Ms. Seham Osman[3].

 
According
to the information, on February 27, 2018, the Aswan Misdemeanour State Security
Emergency Court is expected to reach a verdict in the trial of Messrs. Mohamed
Azmy, Maysara Abdoun, Ms. Seham Osman and 29 other Nubian rights activists. The
32 Nubian activists will appear before the State Security Emergency Court under
charges of “participating in an unauthorised protest”, “inciting protests” and
“disrupting public order” on the basis of the 107/2013 protest law. If
convicted, they could face up to five years in prison and fines of EGP 100,000
(4,734 Euros approx.), with no possibility of appeal. Under the state of
emergency, a Cabinet decree now allows such citizens exercising their constitutional
right to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression, to be tried by State
Security courts whose verdicts are implemented immediately upon signature by
the President of the Republic.
 
Messrs.
Mohamed Azmy, Maysara Abdoun, Ms. Seham Osman and the 29 other Nubian rights activists were arrested and
detained throughout September and November 2017, during peaceful demonstrations
demanding the rights of the Nubian minority in Egypt to be upheld as well as
solidarity demonstrations following the death while in custody of Mr. Gamal Sorour, French-Egyptian resident
and prominent Nubian human rights defender (see background information).
 
The
Observatory expresses its concerns over the reprisals against rights activists
defending the constitutional Nubian right of return[4], as well as that the exercise of their right to peaceful protest is
being prosecuted by a State Security Emergency Court. 
 
The
Observatory calls upon the Egyptian authorities to put an end to the judicial
harassment of Messrs. Mohamed Azmy, Maysara Abdoun, Ms. Seham
Osman and the above-mentioned 29 other Nubian rights defenders.

 
The
Observatory further urges the Egyptian authorities to ensure that, until
charges are dropped, all the judicial proceedings are carried out in full
compliance with their right to a fair trial and due process, as protected under
international law and to ensure the physical and psychological integrity of all
32 Nubian rights defenders.
 
Background information:
 
Originally
spread over Southern Egypt and Northern Sudan, the Nubian people were subjected
to forced displacement from their ancestral land as a result of various
government-led projects such as the construction of the Aswan High Dam in the
1960s.
 
Article
236 of the 2014 Egyptian Constitution provides for the Nubian right of return
by stating that “the State works on developing and implementing projects to
bring back the residents of Nubia to their original areas and develop them
within 10 years in the manner organised by law”. Since then, Nubian people have
been demanding for their constitutional right of return to be upheld. 
 
However,
in October 2015, President el-Sisi announced a massive land reclamation
project, including Nubian ancestral land[5].
Later in October 2016, the Egyptian government put plots of Nubian land up for
sale to Egyptian and foreign investors, as well as farmers.
 
In
response, Nubian rights activists organized a series of peaceful activities to
protest the move by the Egyptian government and to demand their right of return
to be upheld, including a caravan driving towards their ancestral land in
November 2016.
 
In
early 2017, Egyptian intelligence in Aswan called in members of the General
Nubian Union threatening them with closure and asset freeze if Mr. Mohamed Azmy
was to remain President.
 
On
September 3, 2017, on the occasion of Eid al-Adha, Nubian rights defenders held
a peaceful demonstration, demanding the return of Nubians to their ancestral
lands. On that same day, Messrs. Gamal Sorour, Mohamed Azmy, Maysara Abdoun
together with 22 Nubian activists were assaulted by security forces, arrested
and taken into custody to Shallal Central Security forces camp. They were
reportedly being held in one cell with several sleeping on the floor.
 
Mr.
Gamal Sorour, who suffered from diabetes, was not given proper access to
medical care during his detention. As a result, on November 5, 2017, he entered
in a diabetic coma and died while in custody. Reportedly, the prison
authorities did not give him access to his medication for five days prior to his
death, allegedly because they could not understand the label on the medication,
which was written in French. In addition, prison authorities allegedly did not
immediately transfer Mr. Gamal Sorour to the hospital when he fell into a coma.
 
Subsequently,
other Nubian rights activists were arrested during peaceful solidarity protests
carried out in October and November[6],
and eight of them were added to the case. 
 
On
November 13, 2017, Messrs. Mohamed Azmy, Maysara Abdoun Ms. Seham
Osman and the other 29 Nubian human rights activists
were referred to a Misdemeanour State Security Emergency Court under charges of
“participating in an unauthorised protest” and “repeating chants against the
state for the purpose of harming public interest” [7].
 
On
November 15, 2017, the Aswan Misdemeanour State Security Emergency Court
ordered the release of Messrs. Mohamed Azmy, Maysara Abdoun, Ms. Seham
Osman and 29 other Nubian rights activists, pending
trial. The Court adjourned the trial to December 12, 2017.
 
On
December 26, 2017, an appeal procedure to have their case tried before a
regular procedural Court was rejected.
 
On
January 30, 2018, all 32 Nubian rights activists appeared before the Aswan
Misdemeanour State Security Emergency Court, who adjourned the trial to February
27, 2018.
 
Actions requested: 