Uzbekistan:  Petition on the situation of the Uzbekistani human rights defender Elena Urlaeva
April 17, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2012 / AprilUzbekistan: Petition on the situation of the Uzbekistani human rights defender Elena Urlaeva


PETITION OF THE CIVIL SOCIETY ACTIVISTS 
 
ON THE SITUATION OF THE UZBEKISTANI HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDER ELENA 
URLAEVA
10 April 2012 
 
On April 5 a well-known human rights activist Mrs Elena 
Urlaeva, a leader of the unregistered human rights group “The Human Rights 
Alliance of Uzbekistan” was placed into a psychiatric clinic # 1 in Tashkent. 
According to her family members and colleagues, Urlaeva started behaving in an 
absolutely inadequate way soon after she returned from a recent business trip to 
Turkey. It has been reported that the Uzbek court based on the appeal of 
Urlaeva’s family members has passed a decision on putting Elena Urlaeva into the 
local psychiatric clinic for an obligatory medical treatment. At present 
Urlaeva’s relatives and colleagues tell that her health condition has normalized 
and she is feeling better. 
 
We, the representatives of the civil society, are seriously concerned 
about Urlaeva’s fate, and hereby sign this petition in order to draw the 
attention of the international organizations and representatives of the 
democratic countries to the human rights activist’s situation and call on the 
following actions: 
                        
 
·         
The representatives of the regional office of the International 
Committee of Red Cross, embassies of the western democratic countries, in 
particular the Embassies of the European Union, the United States of America, 
Great Britain, Germany, France, Switzerland, Italy and others, should 
immediately visit Mrs Urlaeva in the psychiatric clinic to provide a moral 
support to her, her relatives and colleagues; 
 
·         
Take all possible measures to establish true reasons of unexpected 
psychiatric problems the human rights activist started facing; 

 
·         
Taking inquiries into what type of medical treatment Mrs Urlaeva is 
undergoing in the psychiatric clinic, to what degree such medical treatment is 
needed for improving her health and what consequences it might have for her 
health in the future; 
 
·         
Regularly visit and keep an eye on the health conditions and personal 
integrity of the human rights activist while she is kept in the psychiatric 
clinic if she will have to spend some time at this facility for improving her 
health; 
 
·         
In case of absence of a solid ground for keeping the human rights 
activist in the psychiatric clinic further assist in annulling the court 
decision which ordered her psychiatric treatment and in her immediate release. 



The following facts indicate that placing Elena Urlaeva into the 
psychiatric clinic might be used as a punishment for her human rights activity: 

 
Elena Urlaeva has been involved in defending the rights and interests 
of alleged human rights victims in Uzbekistan for more than 10 years. Obviously 
most of the perpetrators in the cases of victims Urlaeva represented are the 
government officials. Urlaeva has been one of the most outspoken critics of the 
Uzbek authorities for many years, known for her critical reports, interviews and 
statements from the international tribunes.
 
It can be suggested that as a result of her active civic virtue and 
human rights activity Elena Urlaeva has made enough enemies. She has been 
subjected to different forms of persecutions many times: e.g. beatings, threats, 
humiliations, denial of exit visas, etc. 
 
According to Urlaeva part of the persecutions are addressed to her 
close relatives: her adopted son Mukhammad and husband Mansur Mashurov. In 
January 2012 Mirzo Ulugbek district hokimiyat (the local executive power or 
administration) of Tashkent city attempted to take away her adopted son from her 
and place him into the orphanage. Only after a series of protests by Urlaeva and 
her colleagues the authorities have ceased their attempt to deprive the activist 
from her son. In March 2012 Urlaeva’s husband Mansur Mashurov was forcedly taken 
away to a meeting with the local police. He returned home afterwards very drunk 
and embarrassed, started demanding Urlaeva stop her human rights activity and 
going on the protests against the authorities. Then Mansur beat Urlaeva. Urlaeva 
thinks the city police has set her husband against her. 
 
Urlaeva has previously been placed into the psychiatric clinic for 
obligatory medical treatment for several times under the order of the Uzbek 
courts. Urlaeva and her colleagues are confident that the Uzbek authorities have 
used forced psychiatric treatment against her for her dissident views. In her 
recent interview in December 2011 the human rights activist has already warned 
that she might be placed into the psychiatric clinic (see. “Position. Without 
censorship – Forced psychiatry in Uzbekistan as a method of suppression for 
dissent”, December 2, 2011, http://www.uznews.net/news_single.php?lng=ru&cid=35&nid=18523). 

 
She mentioned in her interview that the Uzbek court has already 
prepared the draft decision on placing her into psychiatric clinic. According to 
her she would have to undergo a group of psychiatrists should watch her 
condition for six months and then present the results of their investigation to 
the court. The court then was expected to pass a decision on whether the 
activist should be under a forced psychiatric treatment or not. It should be 
mentioned that this is not the only case when forced psychiatric treatment is 
used against the representatives of the Uzbekistani civil society. 

 
We call on all stakeholders to whom this petition addressed not to 
ignore our suggestions and call on Elena Urlaeva’s situation. 

 
List of persons who signed this petition:
 
Sukhrobjon Ismoilov - leader of the Human Rights Policy NGO “Expert 
Working Group”, Tashkent, Uzbekistan 
 
Mutabar Tadjibaeva - leader of the international human rights NGO 
“The Club of Courageous Hearts”, Paris, France 
 
Yuriy Djibladze - president of the Center for Development of 
Democracy and Human Rights, a member of the Council for Development of Civil 
Society and Human Rights under the President of Russia, a member of Coordination 
Council of the Civic Forum of the European Union - Russia, Moscow, Russia 

 
Bakhodir Choriev - leader of public movement “Birdamlik”, the U.S.A 

 
Umida Niyazova - leader of the human rights NGO “Uzbek-German for 
Human Rights”, Berlin, Germany 
 
Bahadir Namozov - leader of the Committee for Release of Prisoners of 
Conscience, Tashkent, Uzbekistan 
 
Vasila Inoyatova - leader of “Ezgulik” Human Rights Society of 
Uzbekistan, Tashkent, Uzbekistan 
 
Souhayr Belhassen, President of the International Federation for 
Human Rights (FIDH),
and Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the World Organisation 
Against Torture (OMCT), 
in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human 
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of FIDH and OMCT
 
Mirvari Gahramanli - Chairperson Oil Workers' Rights Protection 
Organization Public Union Baku,Azerbaijan, AZ1060 
 
Arthur Sakunts, chairman of the Helsinki Citizens Assembly - 
Vanadzor, Armenia 
 
Steve Sverdlov - Human Rights Watch's researcher on Europe and 
Central Asia 
 
Olof Kleberg - Vice President of the Swedish OSCE Network 

 
Kamoliddin Rabbimov – Director, Center for political studies 
”LIGLIS-Center”, France 
 
Ulugbek Haydarov – independent journalist, Vancouver, Canada 

 
Hasan Temirov and Muhammadsolih Abutov – leaders of NGO “Tayanch”, 
Sweden, Germany
 
Bashorat Eshova – independent human rights activists, Switzerland 

 
Will Lacky – freelance journaliste 
 
Vokhid Karimov – NGO Leader, Bukhara Uzbekistan 
 
Sonya Zilberman - Founder and Executive Director for Eurasia Law 
Initiative 
 
Gulshan Karaeva – member of Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan, 
Karshi, Uzbekistan 
 
Toshpulatov Yuldashev – independent political scientist 


Farkhodhon Mukhtarov – independent human rights activists 

 
Bahodir Musaev – independent political scientist 
 
Gafur Yuldashev – independent journalist 
 
Bahodir Uzakov – independent human rights activist 
 
Abdujalil Boymatov – member of the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan 

 
Salomatoy Boymatova – member of the Human Rights Alliance of 
Uzbekistan 
 
Lutfullo Samsutdinov Amerika 
 
Togboy Abdurazzoq, Kanada 
 
Tulqin Karayev - Popular Movement of Uzbekistan, Sweden 

 
Said Kamol - human rights activist 
 
Pirmuhammad Holmuhammad - Kanada 
 
Shuhratjon Akhmadjonov - Chairman of the NGO "The Circle of 
democrats", Washington USA 
 
The list is open for signatures for all those who know and support 
Elena Urlaeva 
 
 
Contact information for this petition: 
 
Mutabar Tadjibaeva - Paris, France 
Email: mutabartadjibaeva@gmail.com 
Tel. mob. +33760183844, +33679233927 
Office: +33950147243 
 
Sukhrobjon Ismoilov - Tashkent, Uzbekistan 
Email: sukhrob.ismoilov@gmail.com 
Tel.mob. +99890 1895999 