China:  Fear for the safety of monk Geshe Tsultrim Gyatso whose whereabouts are unknown since his arrest
October 28, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2011 / OctoberChina: Fear for the safety of monk Geshe Tsultrim Gyatso whose whereabouts are unknown since his arrest​CHN 281011Whereabouts unknown/ Risk of
torture and ill-treatment
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.

Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the arrest
and disappearance of a monk of the Dhitsa Monastery in Gonghuo County, Tsolo Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture
(TAP), namely the 40-years-old monk
Geshe Tsultrim Gyatso. He was arrested by members of the Qinghai National
Security police in Trika County, Quinghai Province. OMCT fears that he may be at risk of torture and
ill-treatment. 
According to the information received, Geshe Tsultrim
Gyatso, originally from Gonghuo County, Changshey Township, Tsolo Tap, Qinghai Province, was arrested on 14
October 2011 in
the Tongchey National School, Trinka county in Quinghai Province. He was arrested by the police at the
school where he gave a talk. The charges
against him and his current whereabouts remain unclear. No arrest warrant was
issued and his family has not been informed about his whereabouts. According to
the source he could possibly be kept in Siling/Xining, a city in Qinghai. 
Geshe Tsultrim Gyatso
studied and earned his “Geshe” degree at the Dhitsa Monastery. He is the Vice
Chairman of “Tsong-kha Kiri Charitable Foundation” that provides care and
support to aged people and pays school fees for those children whose families
cannot afford it. Furthermore, he is the Vice President of the monastery’s
Democratic Management Committee (DMC)[1].
Concerning the Dhitsa
Monastery, in March 2010, the police arrested one Trulku (reincarnated Lama)
and two monks from the aforementioned Monastery based on suspicions of their
involvement in the dissemination of political pamphlets in and around the
Monastery. According to the information received Geshe Tsultrim Gyatso had no
involvement in political acts. But he is a well-known intellectual in the area
and has emphasized on the conservation of Tibetan tradition and language and
already many times he has been invited to lecture at various schools and
institutions. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is
gravely concerned about the safety of monk Geshe Tsultrim Gyatso, as his whereabouts and fate remains unknown.OMCT fears
that hey may be subjected to torture or other ill-treatment. OMCT urges the
competent authorities to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity
at all times, in accordance with international human rights law, in particular
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and to immediately locate and disclose his whereabouts.
Enforced disappearance and torture and other ill-treatment constitute serious
human rights violations and are strictly prohibited under international law. 
Actions
Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.                    
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of monk Geshe Tsultrim Gyatso; 
ii.                  
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, his physical and psychological integrity; 
iii.                 
Grant him
immediate and full access to a lawyer of his choice and his family, as well as
guarantee that he is examined by independent doctors and receives adequate
medical care if necessary, in accordance, inter
alia, with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iv.                
Order his immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring him before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee
his procedural rights at all times;
v.                  
Guarantee
the
respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
·  
   Mr. Wen
Jiabao, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The
State Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017,
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o
Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
·  
   Mr. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the
People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie,
Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529
2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·  
   Mr. Meng Jianzhu,
Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang,
Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s
Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
63099216

Director of the Sichuan Provincial
Department of Justice, Sifating, 24 Shangxiznglu, Chengdushi 610015,
Sichuansheng, People's Republic of China

·      Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Ch. De Surville, CP 85, 1213
Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse, e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22 793 70
14
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 28 October 2011
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] Members of the DMC are
nuns and monks who administer a monastery or a nunnery and who have to
implement the government’s regulations on religion. 