Kenya:  Joint Press Release: Human rights defenders should be protected during electoral processes
August  4, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2017 / AugustKenya: Joint Press Release: Human rights defenders should be protected during electoral processes Kenya_04 August 20172 pages / 307 KB

JOINT PRESS RELEASE
 
KENYA:
Human rights defenders should be protected during electoral processes
 
 
Geneva-Paris, August 4, 2017 – Four days ahead of
the Kenyan Presidential elections, as attacks against human rights defenders
have increased during the pre-electoral period, the Observatory (OMCT-FIDH) and
the National Coalition of Human Rights Defenders – Kenya (NCHRD-K) urge the
authorities to ensure their protection, and publicly recognise their role to
ensure transparent, fair, peaceful and human rights focused elections.
Authorities should prevent further escalation and improve the environment for
civil society in Kenya, especially ahead of, during and after the elections. 
 
During the pre-election phase from April to June 2017,
13 cases of attacks against human rights defenders linked to the electoral
context, were reported to NCHRD-K[1].

 
“Attacks occurred while human rights defenders were carrying
out monitoring, documenting, and observing activities linked to the upcoming
elections. This pattern of harassment and attacks aimed at silencing them does
not bode well”,
declared Kamau Ngugi, NCHRD-K Executive Director. 
 
According to NCHRD-K, several human rights defenders
involved in monitoring, documenting and observing the electoral campaign and
primaries were physically attacked or harassed, threatened, and even
arbitrarily arrested. Journalists and human rights defenders were also barred
from documenting, entering or forced to leave campaign meetings. Furthermore,
during these political rallies, intimidating statements and negative rhetoric
against human rights defenders have been used by politicians, government and
party officials, accusing them of influencing the outcome of the elections. 
 
“Human
rights defenders who educate voters, are working on electoral observation and
monitoring and call for accountability must be protected to allow them to carry
on their legitimate work. The lack of a conducive environment for civil society
can potentially jeopardise the fairness and democratic character of electoral
processes. The international community must keep a close eye on the electoral
process and more particularly the situation of human rights defenders”, declared OMCT
Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
The
Observatory recalls the findings of its mission report “Kenya: 2017 elections: Broken promises put human
rights defenders at risk”, published
in May 2017[2],
that denounced a widespread pattern of violence and
harassment aimed at silencing dissenting voices and perpetuating impunity, including a worrying increase in cases of police
brutality, extrajudicial killings[3]
and enforced disappearances, in an entrenched
culture of impunity for these violations[4],
as well as urges the authorities to implement the recommendations
formulated in this report. 

“Over the
past four years, human rights defenders in Kenya have worked under constant
pressure. Regardless of the outcome of next week's general elections, the
incoming authorities will have to commit to create an environment where
impunity of those responsible for human rights violations is not tolerated”, concluded FIDH Vice-President
Sheila Muwanga.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
For more
information, please contact:



·      
OMCT: Delphine
Reculeau (French/English) - +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva)
·      
FIDH: Audrey Couprie
(French/English) - +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris)
·      
NCHRD-K – Yvonne Wamari & Kamau Ngugi - + 254712632390
/ +254716200100 (Nairobi)

 
 



[1]                
See NCHRD-K’s report: “Human
rights defenders and journalists situation leading up to the 2017 elections.
Report for the period April to June 2017”, July 2017 


[2]                 See the Observatory’s report “Kenya: 2017 elections: Broken
promises put human rights defenders at risk”, May 2017 


[3]                 On April 3, 2017,
two unarmed boys were brutally killed by police in plain clothes. Three Commissioners of the African Commission on Human
and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) condemned the extrajudicial killing and asked for a
prompt investigation. See ACHPR ACHPR Joint Press-Release of April 5, 2017 on the alleged public killings of two persons in Eastleigh in Kenya. 


[4]                
See FIDH’s report
“Kenya’s Scorecard on Security and Justice : Broken Promises and Unfinished
business”, August 2017. 