Philippines:  detention and torture of Cesario Lebrilla
January 28, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2000 / JanuaryPhilippines: detention and torture of Cesario LebrillaCase PHL 280100  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention regarding the following situation in the Philippines.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a member of the OMCT network, concerning the detention and torture of Cesario Lebrilla, 40 years old, married with three sons, and community organiser of KOMPAS, (Katipunan ng mga Organisasyong Maralita para sa Pang-kaunlarang Simulain [Group of Urban Poor Organizations for Sustainable Development])  According to the information received, on the morning of January 8, Lebrilla was invited for a drink by a certain Dionisio "Jhunie" Cajandab, Lebrilla’s neighbour and a suspected police asset, also believed to be involved in the abduction/arrest of another community organizer Daniel Arca in December 9 1999 (see below).  While they were drinking, at around 2pm, Lebrilla noticed that Jhunie looked uneasy and kept going out of the house. When he followed Jhunie outside, he saw suspicious looking men lurking in the vicinity, another was already inside the house. Sensing imminent danger, Lebrilla excused himself and left the house using an alternative exit when he was accosted, hit on the back of the head and forced inside a van where armed, allegedly unidentified military, men with armalite rifles and short firearms tied him up and shoved him. On the way to the safe house, he was handcuffed, blindfolded with a packing tape, his face covered with a face towel and beaten up inside the van.  According to Lebrilla, he was still in handcuffs while being interrogated and tortured during the 16 days of his captivity. He said his captors wore bonnets every time they interrogated and tortured him. They were forcing him to admit that he was part of the ‘combat force’ who did the shell bombing in Makati last year. Gasoline was poured on his back and he was beaten without any provocation, sometimes using the barrel and butt of an armalite, a monoblock chair or a wooden drawer. His captors plucked his moustache one by one and banged his ears, which were still hurting when he was released.  He was likewise mentally tortured with constant threats of summary execution and that his wife will be killed. He was even shown the wire, sack and shovel to be used. He recounted of knowing at least one man and a woman who were also detained in the same building with him.  The windows inside the room were covered with newspaper. He surmised that he was inside Fort Bonifacio because he would often hear the sound of airplanes and one of the cabinets inside his room has ‘Philippine Army Reserve’ print.   According to the information, he was only released after he struck a deal in which he ‘agreed’ to become a police asset in their area. Before he was released at 11pm of January 24, Lebrilla was instructed to ‘report’ and meet with one of his captors on February 7, 2000 at Jollibee restaurant in Philcoa, Quezon City. Lebrilla recounted his ordeal to the TFDP on January 26. He said he fears for his life because even after he was released, he still notices some of his abductors roaming in their neighborhood.  This incident is thought to be connected to the abduction of Daniel Arca, of #13 Sta. Rita South, Bagong Silang, Caloocan City was also abducted on the evening of December 9, 1999 by unidentified armed men, and eventually found by his wife and other neighbours in Sangadaam Police Station. He was missing for three nights and four days.   During the interview with TFDP, Arca related that he was brought to a safe house. Unidentified ‘masked’ men interrogated him about his alleged participation in the shell bombing in Makati late last year. He said they covered his head with a packaging tape. Once, his body was suspended between two chairs while another man poured water in his mouth and nose. At another instance, he was made to kneel while a candle was lit under his outstretched hands carrying a heavy object. Arca repeatedly denied involvement in the bombing saying that he cannot do it since most of his fingers and some part of his hands has been wrecked by leprosy.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by these events.   Actions requested  Please write to the authorities of the Philippines urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Cesario Lebrilla and Daniel Arca and all other members, and their families, of KOMPAS;  ii.	order an immediate thorough and impartial investigation into the detention and allegations of torture of Cesario Lebrilla, as well as Danial Arca, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  iii.	guarantee adequate redress  to these two men;  iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President ERAP ESTRADA Malacañang Palace Manila, Philippines Fax #: [632] 731-1325 712-4100 e-mail: erap@erap.com  Gen. JOSELIN NAZARENO Chief of Staff Armed Forces of the Philippines Camp Aguinaldo EDSA, Quezon City Philippines Fax #: [632] 911-7783 911-7708  Sec. ORLANDO MERCADO Department of National Defense Camp Aguinaldo EDSA, Quezon City Philippines Fax #: [632] 911- 6213   Sec. SERAFIN CUEVAS Department of Justice Padre Faura, Manila Philippines Fax #: [632] 521-1614 e-mail: doj@erap.com  Sec. ALFREDO LIM Department of Interior and Local Government Francisco Gold Condominium II EDSA cor. Mapagmahal St. Diliman, Quezon City Fax #: [632] 925 – 0332  Comm. AURORA NAVARETTE-RECIñA Commission on Human Rights State Accounting and Auditing UP Complex Commonwealth Ave., Diliman, QC Philippines Fax # [632] 929-0102 e-mail: apnr@compas.com.ph   Gen. PANFILO LACSON Chief, Philippine National Police Camp Crame, EDSA cor. Santolan Rd. Quezon City Tel. # [632] 723 – 8108 722 – 0802 Fax # [632] 722 – 5443   Hon. MAMINTAL ADIONG Chairperson, House Committee on Justice and Human Rights Tel/Fax: [632] 951-4318  Senator RENATO CAYETANO Chairperson, Senate Committee on Justice and Human Rights Tel/Fax: [632] 818-7391 e-mail: companero@pacific.net.ph   Diplomatic representatives in your country.  Geneva, 28th January 2000.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 