UN General Assembly must act to strengthen treaty body system
August  7, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / 2013 / AugustUN General Assembly must act to strengthen treaty body systemJoint statement_UNTB strenghtening4 pages / 98 KB
JOINT STATEMENT         New
York, 7 August 2013.
As the current General Assembly
session draws to a close, the outcome of an inter-governmental process  to
 “strengthen”  the  treaty  bodies  remains
 unclear  as  negotiations  enter  a  third
 reading.This   is despite the grave challenges facing the treaty
body system, which in the words of the High Commissioner for Human Rights has
reached its limits both in terms of coherence and sustainable functioning within
currently available resources.
At best, the General Assembly
process to enhance the treaty bodies looks poised to adopt a resolution that
contains few helpful changes for the system. At worst it could seriously
undermine the  effective  functioning  of  the  treaty
 bodies  by  attacking  experts’  independence
 and  calling  for   measures that would only serve to
decrease efficiency, all the while ignoring important proposals that have
emerged from the last four years of consultations.
In April 2012, NGOs identified
seven issues to be addressed by States through the inter-governmental process[1]:
(1) universal ratification of the core international human rights
treaties and their optional protocols; (2) compliance with reporting
obligations; (3) implementation of recommendations and views; (4)
strengthening the annual meetings of States Parties; (5) enhancing the membership
of the treaty bodies; (6) providing adequate resources to the treaty
body system; and (7) preventing and addressing reprisals. Most of these
issues are at the core of what needs to be improved if the treaty body system
is to function well in the years ahead, especially as more States become
parties to the treaties and their optional protocols and more rights-holders
engage with these expert bodies.
As  the  General
 Assembly’s  discussions  enter  a  determining
 phase,  we  offer  the  following  assessment
  of and recommendations on the key issues that must be addressed to ensure
a successful outcome.
-   It is highly disappointing that States have
failed to devote any attention to developing strategies to achieve universal
ratification of, and removal of limiting reservations to, the core human rights
treaties and their optional protocols—commitments made exactly 20 years ago
at the World Conference on Human Rights that many States have yet to fulfil. States
should commit to ratifying all core human rights treaties without delay. 
-   While many States have emphasised the need for
technical assistance, too little focus has been placed on the lack of political
will of some States to implement their substantive treaty obligations and the
recommendations and views of the treaty bodies. States should commit to do
more domestically to improve implementation, for example, conducting open
consultations with civil society to build strong constituencies and
establishing high level focal points or other mechanisms within government
tasked with coordinating implementation. 
-   We regret that some States have sought through
the process to reinterpret their obligation to comply with reporting
requirements under the treaties by promoting longer reporting cycles. The
General Assembly should not change the periodicity of reporting as these are
legal provisions contained in the treaties and are outside  of  the
 General  Assembly’s  competence  to   change 
-   Rather than seize the opportunity to strengthen
the meetings of States parties to enhance and support implementation,
including through sharing best practices, there is little indication that
States will seek to add value to these meetings, and some indication that
certain States are attempting to use them as a forum in which to attack the
independence of treaty body members. States should use these meetings to
develop specific ideas and practices for improving implementation.  
-   The quality of treaty body membership is key to
their effectiveness, yet States have not been ambitious in supporting the High
Commissioner’s proposal for an open and public space through which candidates
could be assessed. Rather it appeard States will be left to merely consider
adopting national policies or processes for the nomination of expert as
candidates. States should support the
High Commissioner’s proposal for an open and public space as a minimal step
towards bringing greater rigour to the process of electing candidates who are
both independent and expert in the respective treaty areas.
-   Despite the widespread acknowledgement of the
chronic under-resourcing of the treaty system it is unclear at this stage
whether States will approve increases required for the treaty body system to
function effectively. Regretfully many States are blocking initiatives to save
resources which in turn could go towards bolstering the treaty bodies, such as
page limits, limits on translation and interpretation, and the replacement of
summary records with webcasts. The proposal for most of the committees to meet
in dual chambers is also an essential component of the overall package. This is
a cost-effective means for the treaty bodies to increase the number of reports they
can review without compromising the time devoted to each and ensuring that
unpaid treaty body experts can maintain their professional lives. 
-   Much has been made in this process of the need
for accurate costing of potential savings and new expenditures. However, this
should not be used as a delay tactic. While we understand the role of accurate
budgetary figures in decision making, it would appear that States have
sufficient information to proceed with the policy making aspect of their work
at this stage and demonstrate the political commitment necessary to infuse the
treaty body system with the resources needed for its effective and sustainable
functioning. States should take decisions to ensure adequate resources for
the treaty bodies. 
-   Finally, the expected result on reprisals falls
far short of what States might have committed to in order to adequately address
this crucial issue. States should go beyond abstract condemnation and should
take concrete steps themselves, and support the treaty bodies in developing
effective strategies to prevent and improve the response to intimidation and
reprisals.  
 We also regret the intentions of some States,
made clear from the start of the Intergovernmental process, to attack the
independence of the treaty body members through initiatives such as the Code of
Conduct and accountability mechanism. We strongly reject such initiatives not
only on their face but also on the polarizing effect they continue to have on
the discussions. From the start these attacks have been a distraction from the
real problems at hand and the search for real solutions.  Finally, we wish to
note our disappointment that the process has not turned out to be open,
inclusive and transparent, as promised in the resolution creating it. Far from
being meaningful and effective, opportunities for NGO participation have been
characterized throughout this process by unpredictability, poor planning, lack
of communication, disregard for our expertise, views and potential
contributions, and above all a fundamental lack of commitment and initiative to
include NGO stakeholders outside of New York and Geneva. It is also a discredit
to this process that it has not involved sustained, regular participation of
expert members of the treaty bodies. We fear this could have negative
repercussions on the ownership of the outcome of this process going forward.
As the discussions in the General Assembly are reaching a critical juncture,
we urge States to refocus their attention and efforts on the core goals of this
process. We urge all States to revisit and consider how the proposed outcome
might better strengthen and enhance the treaty body system and increase the
capacity of rights holders to enjoy their human rights. 



[1] http://bit.ly/1cbECAm 