Cambodia:  Judicial harassment against Mr. Ny Chakrya
July  7, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2015 / JulyCambodia: Judicial harassment against Mr. Ny Chakrya

 
KHM 001 /
0715 / OBS 056
Judicial
harassment / Arbitrary detention
Cambodia
July 7, 2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Cambodia.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the judicial harassment
against Mr. Ny Chakrya, Head of the Human Rights and Legal Aid Section
of the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC), an FIDH
member organisation in Cambodia. ADHOC, among others, provides legal assistance
to victims of human rights violations – including victims of land disputes,
engages in human rights advocacy, and monitors human rights violations.
 
According to
the summons received by his lawyers on June 26, 2015, and by Mr. Chakyra
personally on July 1, 2015, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court requested Mr.
Chakrya to appear before the Deputy Prosecutor of the Phnom Penh Municipal
Court on July 13, 2015. 
 
Mr. Ny
Chakrya has been charged with “public defamation”, “acts of slanderous
denunciation”, and “publication of commentaries to put pressure on
jurisdiction” (Art. 305, 311 and 522 of the Criminal Code respectively). 
 
This follows
a complaint filed by the investigating judge of the Siem Reap Provincial Court
and the Deputy Prosecutor of the Siem Reap Provincial Court.
 
On May 15,
2015, the Prosecution office of the Siem Reap Provincial Court made a public
statement in response to a press conference organised by ADHOC's main office in
Phnom Penh on May 12, 2015, during which Mr. Ny Chakrya, along with one ADHOC
lawyer, condemned the arbitrary arrest and detention of Mr. Ven Lorn and
Mr. Beourn Sok, two residents of the Chup Romdeng Village (Phnom Sra
Ngam area, Kantout commune, Svay Leu district, Siem Reap province) involved in
a high profile land dispute in the Siem Reap province. 
 
On June 17
at 8:30am, both were found guilty on charges of inciting a group of residents
of Chup Romdeng Village to destroy and intrude on the property of the
agricultural development company, Community Takhmao Development Agricultural
& Industrial[1], with
Mr. Ven Lorn sentenced to six and Mr. Beourn Sok, sentenced to eight months
imprisonment. Whereas Mr. Ven Lorn was released on July 3, 2015, upon serving
his sentence, Mr. Boeurn Sok has still two months to serve.
 
In its
above-mentioned public statement, the Office of the Prosecutor of the Siem Reap
Provincial Court threatened Mr. Ny Chakrya and the ADHOC lawyer defending the
two victims involved in the land dispute that it would initiate legal
proceedings against them, alleging that their “provocative comments” made
during the press conference jeopardised the effective functioning of the Cambodian
judicial institutions and the ongoing proceedings in the concerned land
dispute.
 
On May 20,
2015, Mr. Ny Chakrya filed a complaint with the President of the Disciplinary
Council of the Supreme Council of Magistracy, claiming that the proceedings
against Mr. Ven Lorn and Mr. Beourn Sok were not conducted in accordance with
fair trial standards because of the lack of independence and autonomy of the
Deputy Prosecutor. No developments have been observed since the complaint was
filed.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the judicial harassment against Mr. Ny Chakrya,
which only aims at sanctioning his legitimate human rights activities, as well
as the arbitrary arrest, detention and wrongful convictions against Mr. Ven
Lorn and Mr. Beourn Sok.
 
The
Observatory calls on the Cambodian authorities to drop all charges against Mr.
Ny Chakrya and to put an end to threats and harassment against human rights
defenders in the country.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities of the Kingdom of Cambodia asking them to:
 
i. Put an
end to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Ny
Chakrya as well as of all human rights defenders in the country;
 
ii.
Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Beourn Sok;
 
iii.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Ny Chakrya as well as of all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
iv. Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with:
 
article 1, which states that
     "everyone has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the
     protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
     national and international levels", 
 
article 5.b which stipulates
     that everyone has the right "to form, join and participate in
     non-governmental organisations, associations or groups", 
 
as well as article
     12.2, which provides that "the State shall take all necessary
     measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
     everyone, individually or in association with others, against any
     violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
     discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of
     his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
     Declaration";
 
v. Guarantee
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human rights
instruments signed or ratified by the Kingdom of Cambodia.
 
Addresses:
 
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime
     Minister, 41 Russian Federation Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of
     Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / 855 23 880624 (c/o Council of Ministers),
     Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / cppparty@gmail.com
 
Mr. Sar Kheng, Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior, 275
     Norodom Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23 212708
 
Mr. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 240
     Sothearos Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23 364 119
 
Mr. Hor Nam Hong, Minister of Foreign Affairs,
     161 Preah Sisowath Quay, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23
     216 144 / 855 23 216 141 Email: mfaic@mfa.gov.kh
 
Mr.
     Om Yentieng, Minister & President of the Cambodian Human Rights
     Committee, Office of the Prime Minister, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia,
     Fax: +855 12 81 37 81 / +855 23 21 11 62 or +855 23 88 10 45 (c/o Council
     of Ministers)
 
Mr.
     Sok An, Deputy Prime Minister, Fax: + (+855) 23 882 065, Email:
     leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh, info@pressocm.gov.kh 
 
Ambassador
     Mr. Ney Samol, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva,
     Chemin de Taverney 3, Case postale 213, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, Switzerland,
     Fax: + 41 22 788 77 74, Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh / cambodge@bluewin.ch
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective
countries.
 


[1]           
In 2014, TCIDA started clearing plots of agricultural land owned by village
residents, affecting 31 families and a total of 90 hectares of land. A
complaint has been filed by the families affected, demanding the return of
their land as well as the continuation of the use of their land for cultivation
purposes. 