Egypt:  Immediately release Alaa Abdel Fattah and Ahmed Abdel Rahman
February 19, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2015 / FebruaryEgypt: Immediately release Alaa Abdel Fattah and Ahmed Abdel RahmanEgypt_Alaa_201502181 page / 47 KB​Egypt: Immediately release Alaa Abdel
Fattah and Ahmed Abdel Rahman 
Paris-Geneva, February 19, 2015. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), calls on the Egyptian authorities
to immediately release Alaa Abdel Fattah and Ahmed Abdel Rahman, drop all
charges against them, and put an end to the continued judicial harassment
against them. 
 
On February 23, 2015, the Cairo Criminal
court is expected to announce the verdict against Mr. Alaa Abdel Fattah, civil and political rights activist, blogger and member of the “No to
Military Trials for Civilians” movement together with 24 other individuals,
including Mr. Ahmed
Abdel Rahman [1]. They are facing a
re-trial on charges of “blocking roads”, “assembling illegally”, “protesting
without a permit”, “acquiring weapons during a protest”, and “attacking and
injuring a public servant” and “stealing his personal wireless device”. They
had been sentenced in first instance to 15 years imprisonment, and they are
currently detained [2].
The charges relate to a protest held on November 26, 2013 by the « No to
Military Trials for Civilians Group » in front of the Shura Council
demanding that the constitutional drafting committee removes the provision
allowing military trials for civilians. 
 
“The
charges against Alaa Abdel Fattah are completely unfounded as they fall under
his legitimate right to freedom of assembly. The Egyptian authorities must
immediately end the sanction of fundamental rights, and stop misusing the
judiciary to settle political scores”, declared Karim Lahidji, FIDH
President. 
 
The Observatory recalls that the trial has
been marred by severe violations of the right to a fair trial including
procedural irregularities, violations of due process, violations of the right
to defence, all of which have been brought to the attention of the Court by the
defence lawyers.  This case is illustrative of a wider
repression campaign targeting human rights defenders opposing the current
regime in the country since the “Protest Law” was passed in November 2013. 
 
“We reiterate our concern about the continuing judicial harassment
against Alaa Abdel Fattah in particular, who has been arbitrarily detained in
numerous different cases as a result of his legitimate human rights activities”, added OMCT Secretary General
Gerald Staberock. 
 
The Observatory urges diplomatic missions
in Egypt and all relevant stakeholders to attend and monitor the hearing, and
calls on the Egyptian authorities to immediately drop all charges held against them in compliance with the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and other international human rights
instruments ratified by Egypt. 
 
For more information, please contact:
·        
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·        
OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41
(0) 22 809 49 24




[1]     Mr. Ahmed Abdel Rahman
is a passer by who was arrested by the police after he intervened to protect
female protesters.


[2]      For more information, see Urgent Appeal from the Observatory EGY 002 / 1113 / OBS 095.6 from November 19,
2014. See also
the campaign #ForFreedom launched by FIDH in 2014 to accelerate
the release of arbitrarily detained human rights defenders throughout the
world, including Alaa Abdel Fattah. 