Kenya:  Bank account of human rights organisations Haki Africa and Muslims for Human Rights (MUHURI) must be unfrozen
November 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2015 / NovemberKenya: Bank account of human rights organisations Haki Africa and Muslims for Human Rights (MUHURI) must be unfrozen

Paris-Geneva, November 10, 2015 - The Kenyan authorities must ensure an
enabling environment for human rights organisations including Haki Africa and
Muslims for Human Rights (MUHURI) and end discriminatory and abusive
restrictions to their rights to freedom of expression, association and
assembly, said the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
(joint FIDH-OMCT programme). 
 
On
November 12, 2015, the Mombasa High Court will decide on whether Haki Africa
and Muslims for Human Rights (MUHURI) bank accounts will be unfrozen so that
they can continue with their normal operations and work in the defence of the
rights of coastal communities in Kenya. Haki Africa and MUHURI are two human
rights organisations that advocate for constitutional means to counter
terrorism while also observing human rights. On May 28, 2015, the
Non-Governmental Organisations (NGO) Coordination Board attempted to
de-register them while previously on April 8 their banks accounts were frozen.
 
On
June 11, 2015, the Mombasa High Court ordered that the Kenyan State remove both
organisations from the list of terrorist organisations under the Prevention of
Terrorism Act. To date, that removal has not yet translated into the unfreezing
of their accounts, preventing the organisations from pursuing their human
rights work. 
 
“The two human rights organisations pursue legitimate human rights activities and work
openly and peacefully. Listing them as terrorist organisations was clearly politically
motivated. The Court must ensure the right to freedom of association of human
rights organisations and immediately and unconditionally unfreeze their bank
accounts and put an end to all form of harassment at the administrative and
judicial level,” said FIDH
President Karim Lahidji.
 
 “It is
especially in times of crisis and amidst legitimate security concerns that
human rights organisations must be able to address potential grievances of the
Muslim communities in Kenya. Silencing these voices is violating international
standards accepted by Kenya on freedom of association and assembly. This must
end. Importantly it risks exacerbating sentiments in society of the State
targeting communities - hence gravely damaging the fight against terrorism”,
said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
Lately, major obstacles to the right
to freedom of association have been reported in Kenya. On
October 28, 2015, 957 Kenyan organisations, including the Kenyan Human Rights
Commission (KHCR), were announced through the media to be de-registered by the
NGO Coordination Board for failing to account for KES 1.2B (approx. 10 million
Euros) should they fail to present audited accounts to the Board. Although our
organisations welcome the subsequent decision by the Government to suspend the
NGO Coordination Board notice, we remain concerned by the Governement’s attempt to muzzle
human rights through the use of restrictive legislation to legitimise the
harassment of human rights defenders and organisations. 
 
Accordingly, the Observatory calls
upon authorities in Kenya to ensure the respect of the rights to freedom of
expression, association and assembly, and to put an end to all form of harassment
against Haki Africa, MUHURI and other human rights organisations in Kenya.

The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in
1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The overall
objective of this programme is to strengthen the action of human rights defenders in defence of victims
and to reduce their isolation and vulnerability. It is also based on
the absolute necessity to establish a systematic response to the repression
they face. 