Azerbaijan:  Verdict against Leyla and Arif Yunus is outrageous and must be nullified
August 13, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / AugustAzerbaijan: Verdict against Leyla and Arif Yunus is outrageous and must be nullifiedAzerbaijan PR2 pages / 142 KB
AZERBAIJAN: Verdict against Leyla
and Arif Yunus is outrageous and must be nullified
Geneva-Paris, August 13, 2015 – The Observatory's trial observer in Baku reports that Leyla Yunus and
Arif Yunusov have been handed 8.5 and 7 year jail sentences, respectively. The Baku
Grave Crimes court pronounced the verdict after a speedy hearing of the
defence's final pleas. These sentences
are outrageous and aim purely at sanctioning the legitimate work of the two
Azeri human rights defenders, declared the Observatory. While these heavy
sentences are no surprise, they serve to further underline Azerbaijan's
complete disregard for the international standards of fair trial and due
process.
The trial against Leyla Yunus
and Arif Yunusov
opened less than one month ago. The couple faced charges of “large-scale fraud,”, “forgery,” “tax evasion” and “illegal
business.” The observer sent by our
organisations was present at the trial from Day One. However she was abruptly
denied entry to the courtroom today. Mr. Arif Yunusov fainted while making his
final plea and required immediate medical attention.The judge condemned the two
accused respectively to 8.5 years in jail
for Ms. Yunus and 7 for Mr. Yunusov,
directly following the end of the final hearing.
“The unprecedented speed with which
the Yunus trial was carried out is appalling and tells us a lot about its
quality. The judgement is full of inaccuracies due to a total lack of
examination of the evidence provided. Violations of international standards of
the right to a fair trial were obvious,” declared Gerald Staberock,
Secretary General of OMCT. “It is a
shameful verdict that was unfortunately foreseeable since the beginning of
their pre-trial detention one year ago” he added.
Leyla Yunus, Director of the Institute for Peace
and Democracy (IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly, and Arif Yunusov, Chief of IPD's
department of conflictology, were arrested in the summer of 2014 as part of a
large-scale crackdown against Azeri human rights defenders and civil society.
During the past year in detention, the deterioration of their health has been
appalling. Requests for access to the necessary medical treatment have been
denied multiple times. 
Leyla Yunus has lost at least 16 kg since her arrest. She also suffers from
a severe case of diabetes. In addition, her cellmate has violently accosted her
on a number of occasions. Nonetheless, no measures were taken by the
penitentiary authorities to ensure her physical integrity. Arif Yunusov suffers from high blood
pressure and has lost consciousness several times, including during the August
3 hearing which had to be adjourned when he had to be taken away in an
ambulance. His lawyer declared that his client’s health did not permit him to
participate in the hearings any longer. However, this did not prevent the trial
from continuing as scheduled.
The Observatory recalls that very similar and equally
politically motivated sentences were already upheld in July 2015 after the
appeal trials of human rights defenders Intigam Aliyev and Rasul
Jafarov, who are currently serving 7.5 and 6.3 years in prison,
respectively.
The Observatory also recalls that in addition to this trial,
Leyla Yunus and Arif Yunusov still face charges of “state treason,” which will
be the object of a separate, future trial.
“Our organisations
strongly condemn today’s sentences in the Yunus case, as well as all the
previous sentences against other human rights defenders in the country.They
only aimed to silence critical voices,” said FIDH Honorary President, Souhayr Belhassen. “We
will continue to call for the authorities in Azerbaijan to immediately and unconditionally
release the Yunus couple and all human rights defenders currently detained in
Azerbaijan for their work,” she added.
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is
to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders.
For more information, please contact :
OMCT
: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui (Spanish / English / French) - Tel: +41 22
809 49 39 (Geneva)FIDH
: Lucie Kroening (French / English / German / Arabic) - Tel: +33 6 48 05
91 57 (Paris) / Arthur Manet (French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72
28 42 94 (Paris) 