Intervention to the 62ND session of the African Commission on Human and Poeples' Rights
May  3, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2018 / MayIntervention to the 62ND session of the African Commission on Human and Poeples' Rights
WRITTEN INTERVENTIONAFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN
AND PEOPLES' RIGHTS
 62nd Ordinary Session
Nouakchott, Mauritania
April 25 – May 9, 2018
 Contribution of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and FIDH (the International Federation for Human Rights)
In the framework of their
partnership,
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
 
Madame Chairperson, Distinguished Commissioners and
State Delegates,
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, under the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory),
thank the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) for this
opportunity to raise some of the key issues with respect to the situation of
human rights defenders in Africa. 
 
While
States have the duty to protect human rights defenders and to ensure that they
operate in a safe and enabling environment, attacks, threats, judicial
harassment, restrictive laws, smear campaigns against them continue to
perpetuate an environment of hostility towards their activities. 
 
1. Pursuit
of criminalisation, threats and violence to silence human rights defenders
denouncing human rights violations
 
In
several countries, we are concerned that human rights defenders are
criminalised in relation to their legitimate human rights activities recognised
and protected under regional and international human rights instruments,
particularly for denouncing human rights violations and corruption perpetrated
by State authorities. 
 
In Angola, despite new
President Joao Lourenço’s promises to fight corruption and to open the
democratic space, award-winning investigative journalist, Mr. Rafael Marques de Morais continues to
be judicially harassed for his human rights activities. On March 19, 2018, Mr.
Rafael Marques de Morais appeared before the Criminal Court of the Province of
Luanda facing charges of “outrage towards a sovereign body” and “insult towards
public authority”. If convicted, he faces up to four years and six months in
prison. These charges come in retaliation to an article published on the
anti-corruption website Maka Angola
in November 2006, exposing the illegality of Angola’s former Attorney General,
Mr. João Maria Moreira de Sousa’s activities as a property and real estate
developer in addition to his legal duties. The article also reported that the
President, Mr. José Eduardo dos Santos, supported some of his subordinates who
had been accused of corruption.
 
In
Congo
– Brazzaville, Mr.  Noël Mienanzambi-Boyi, President of the Association for
the culture of peace and non-violence in Congo – Brazzaville has been detained since January 21, 2017, without access to his lawyer
for his role in establishing mediations between the authorities in Brazzaville
and rebel leader Bintsamou Frederic. After publicly denouncing ongoing
violations he observed during the process, he was arrested, detained without a
warrant and charged with “undermining the security of the state”.  
 
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), on January 9, 2018, Mr.
Paul Nsapu, President of the League
of Electors (LE), and FIDH Deputy Secretary General, received death threats
following the publication of a report on December 20, 2017, together with FIDH,
entitled “Slaughter in Kasai: Crimes
against humanity perpetrated to create chaos”, which gathers testimonies
from Congolese refugees who had fled slaughters perpetrated in the Kamonia
territory, Kasai province. The harrowing testimonies published reveal the scale
and seriousness of the crimes committed against the civilian population by the
Congolese defense and security forces and their auxiliaries. 
 
Most recently, on April 2, 2018, Mr. Eliezer Ntambwe Mposi, journalist and author of the online series Tokomi Wapo (“Where are we at?”) was arrested from his office by two
officers on charges of "defamation", "extortion through
blackmail" and "damaging allegations". These charges stem from a
complaint filed by the Governor of Kasai Oriental, Alphonse Ngoyi Kasanji,
after Mr. Eliezer Ntambwe reported on a case of diamond extortion which has led
to the assassination of the diamond holder. 
 
In Egypt, the Observatory remains concerned regarding the
arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Omar Mohamed Ali, an independent journalist and human rights
defender. Mr. Omar Mohamed Ali was arrested on June 1, 2015, in front of the
Nile City boat in Zamalek, Cairo by three men in civil clothing, and was held
incommunicado and tortured for 16 days in the State security building of
Lazoughly and in a military intelligence building in Cairo. On May 29, 2016,
Mr. Omar Mohamed Ali was sentenced to 25 years in prison by the West Cairo
Military Court following an unfair trial based on the confessions obtained
under torture. His sentenced was confirmed by the Military Court of Appeals on
March 26, 2018. In November 2017, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD)
published an opinion in which it considered Mr. Omar Mohamed Ali’s detention to
be arbitrary and urging his immediate release and his right to compensation. 
 
In Kenya, the Observatory fears that
the recent demolition of the Coalition for Grassroots Human Rights Defenders
(CGHRD)’s office on March 27, 2018 comes in reprisal against the organisation’s
peaceful and legitimate human rights activities, in particular against
land-grabbing and the arbitrary detention of local residents. Over the past
years, the Observatory has documented the shrinking space and the climate of
hostility in which civil society organisations operate in Kenya. This happens
under the same administration that has been undermining, for more than four
years since its signing into law on January 14, 2013, the commencement of the
Public Benefit Organisation (PBO) Act 2013, a law seeking to provide an
enabling environment for NGOs.
 
Mr. Zine El
Abidine Erradi, member of the Association
marocaine des droits humains (AMDH), a Moroccan national who took refuge in
France in 2015, was arrested upon his return to Morocco on April 4, 2018.
He is now detained at the Ait Melloul - Agadir prison where he is serving a
sentence handed down in absentia in
2016, on charges of “violent and unauthorized protest” and “civil
disobedience”. These charges stem from his participation to a 2014 protest in
Sidi Ifni when a popular upraise demanded the police to be held accountable for
the murder of a youth.
 
Furthermore, the Observatory has documented the
increasingly shrinking space in which civil society organisations are operating
in the country. In particular, the Observatory has documented three techniques
used by the Moroccan authorities to hinder their activities. Indeed, they face
particular hurdles during their registration process, in their access to
funding, as well as when implementing their peaceful and legitimate human
rights activities. In early 2017, AMDH reported that 125 of its meetings,
conferences and events had been banned by the authorities since 2014.
Particularly targeted by the authorities, AMDH is now facing a procedure aimed
at reversing its recognition as a public utility organisation. This comes in
retaliation to AMDH’s support to popular movements in the Rif region, its
regular denunciation of torture cases and its support to defendants in the
Gdeim Izik trial, targeting human rights defenders in Western Sahara.
 
In
addition, the Observatory reiterates its concerns regarding the ongoing
judicial harassment under charges of “threats to State security” of Messrs. Maâti Monjib, historian, journalist and
President of the association “Freedom Now” for freedom of expression in
Morocco, Hisham Almiraat, President
of the Association des droits numériques
(ADN), Hicham Mansouri, Project
Officer at the Association marocaine pour
le journalisme d’investigation (AMJI), Mohamed
Essabr, President of the Association
marocaine d’éducation de la jeunesse (AMEJ), Abdessamad Ait Aicha, former training project Coordinator of the
Centre Ibn Rochd, journalist and AMJI member. Furthermore, Mr. Rachid Tarik and Ms. Maria Moukrim, respectively President
and former President of the AMJI are accused of receiving foreign funding
without notifying the authorities. Hearings in the case against the seven human
rights defenders, which
usually last for a couple of minutes, have been postponed over 10 times and the
next one is scheduled on June 27, 2018. Charges
against them are intended to silence and discredit their work for the promotion
of freedom of expression and information.
 
In
Sudan,
following nation-wide demonstrations that began on January 6,
2018 and were set off by the announcement of Sudan’s 2018 budget and the
lifting of subsidies and measures, effectively tripling Sudan’s U.S. dollar
exchange rate and increasing the price of basic commodities, Sudanese
authorities have carried out a campaign of massive arrests and detentions,
including political party leaders, journalists, students, human rights
defenders and other individuals for their involvement in the protests. On April
10, 2018, Mr. Osman Salih,
lawyer, Mr. Salih Mahmoud Osman,
Vice-Chairperson of the Darfur Bar Association and Mr. Amjed Fareed, blogger and human rights defender were released after
nearly 3 months of arbitrary detention. Arrested in the same context, human
rights defenders, Mr. Mohamed Abdallah
Aldouma, Mr. Salih Mahmoud Osman,
Ms. Rawa Jaafar Bakhit, Mr. Ahmed Jadeen, Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim, Ms. Nahid
Jabrallah, Ms. Amel Habani and
Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa had also
been detained by Sudanese authorities. Acts of ill-treatment against Ms. Amel
Habani have been reported as she was allegedly beaten with an electric rod
during interrogation. 
 
In Uganda, on February 9, 2018, nine
unidentified individuals attempted to break-in into the Human Rights Awareness and Promotion Forum (HRAPF)’s premises, cut
power to the building, disabled parts of the security system and assaulted two
security guards on duty, who both sustained severe injuries, including a skull
fracture to one of them. It is the second time in less than two years that
HRAPF’s premises are suffering such gruesome attack, yet to date no effective
police investigation lead to those responsible being brought before a court of
justice.
 
The Observatory welcomes developments in two separate cases concerning
human rights defenders in Equatorial Guinea and in Zimbabwe.
On March 7, 2018 a court in Equatorial Guinea released Mr. Ramón Esono Ebalé, a cartoonist
whose work is often critical of the government’s policies, after nearly six
months of arbitrary detention. Mr. Esono Ebalé had been detained on trumped-up accusations
of “engaging in counterfeit”. During the trial, the police officer who had
accused him of counterfeiting admitted having made up the accusation following
orders from his superiors. In Zimbabwe, on November 29,
2017, Pastor Evan Mawarire, a prominent anti-corruption activist
who led last year’s #ThisFlag protests, was acquitted of charges of “inciting
public violence” and “attempting to overthrow a constitutional government”
which were linked to his role in the anti-government and anti-corruption
demonstrations.
 
2. Reprisals against human rights
defenders and civil society organisations under the premise of national security,
and against human rights defenders promoting democracy and electoral rights
 
A
significant number of the harassment and attacks documented by the Observatory
occurred in increasingly securitized states, or against defenders promoting
democracy or electoral rights.
 
In
Burundi,
since April 2015, following President Pierre Nkurunziza’s third term bid, human
rights defenders continue to face increased intimidation, harassment, physical
attacks and in the most worrying cases, enforced disappearance. Many have had
to flee the country and continue to face intimidation in their country of
relocation. 
 
The
Observatory is particularly concerned by the fate of Mr. Germain Rukiki, Association
des juristes catholiques du Burundi (AJCB) staff member, President of
Njabutsa Tujane, a community-based organisation fighting against poverty and
hunger, and former Action des chrétiens
pour l’abolition de la torture (ACAT-Burundi) staff member, who has been
arbitrarily detained since July 13, 2017. Since his arrest, several
infringements to his right to a fair trial have been documented, including the
addition of three counts of charges without procedural authority in the midst
of his trial. Mr. Rukiki is accused of “undermining State security”,
“rebellion”, “assassination of military and police personnel, and civilians”,
“degrading public and private premises” and “attempt to change the
democratically elected regime” for his cooperation with ACAT-Burundi. During
the last hearing of his trial, on April 3, 2018, the Public prosecutor
requested a life imprisonment sentence against Mr. Germain Rukuki. The tribunal
is expected to render its decision in early May. 
 
The
Observatory remains particularly concerned as on March 8, 2018,
the Muramvya court sentenced in absentia
Messrs. Aimé Constant Gatore, Marius Nizigama and Emmanuel Nshimirimana, spokespersons of
the organisation Parole et Actions pour
le Réveil des Consciences et l'Évolution des Mentalités (Parcem) to 10
years in prison and a 200,000 Burundian francs fine (about 90 euros) each for
"undermining state security". The three human rights defenders have
been arbitrarily detained since their arrest on June 13, 2017 while they were
organising a conference on the publication of a report on the detention
conditions in Muramvya. 
 
Furthermore Mr. Nestor Nibitanga,
former representative of the Association
Burundaise pour la Protection des Droits Humains et des Personnes Détenues
(APRODH) in Central-Eastern Burundi was arrested on November 21,
2017, after his home was surrounded by police and searched without a warrant.
The reason for his arrest was not specified to Mr. Nestor Nibitanga at the
time. On January 3, 2018 he was formally charged with "undermining state
security". He remains arbitrarily detained at the
Rumonge prison.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the context of widespread repression
targeting human rights defenders who are facing arbitrary detentions and
judicial harassment, particularly in retaliation to their peaceful and
legitimate human rights work with Burundian human rights organisations, now
banned by the government. Furthermore, the Observatory remains
particularly concerned about the fate of Ms. Marie Claudette Kwizera, Treasurer of the Ligue Burundaise des Droits de l’Homme ITEKA, who was forcibly
disappeared on December 10, 2015. To date, Burundian authorities have refused
to provide any information about her fate or whereabouts. Similarly, Mr. Jean Bigirimana,
a journalist who worked for IWACU,
one of the few independent media still active in Burundi, remains missing since
he was abducted by members of the national intelligence services (SNR) on July
22, 2016.
 
In
Cameroon,
the endless judicial harassment of six members of the organisation Dynamique Citoyenne, namely Mr. Jean Marc Bikoko, Ms. Bénédicte Jessie Bikoko,
Ms. Agnès Adélaïde Metougou, Mr. Yves Léonardo Ndjalla
Epangue,  Mr. Sévérin
Le Juste Bikoko, and Mr. François Fogno Fotso which started in 2015, continues. They are facing charges of "illegal demonstration and rebellion" after taking part in a peaceful meeting on democracy and electoral
rights on the international day of democracy. After eighteen hearings, their
trial has been postponed to June 27, 2018. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Mancho Bibixy’s
trial is ongoing before the Military Tribunal in Yaoundé, where he is facing
charges of “secession”, “terrorism”, “rebellion”, “inciting civil war”,
“spreading false information through social media”, “attempting to change the
constitutional regime”, “outrage to a public body” and “failure to hold his ID
card” under the 2014 terrorism law and which carry the death penalty. Since the
beginning of his trial on February 1, 2017, hearings have been postponed more
than fourteen times, for different reasons. Mr. Mancho Bibixy had been arrested
on January 19, 2017, while at a friend’s house in connection with the
Angolophone crisis, by armed soldiers who violently broke into and shot at the
house, and beat him. He is currently detained at the Kondengui central prison,
a maximum-security prison in Yaoundé, where he does not have regular access to
his family. He is currently sharing an overcrowded cell with fifteen other
inmates with poor access to hygiene facilities, and his health condition has
been deteriorating. 
 
Since 2017, the Observatory has documented a quasi-systemic pattern of
arrest, arbitrary detention, and judicial harassment by authorities in the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC) against human rights defenders and pro-democracy
movements including, the Lutte pour le
changement (LUCHA), Filimbi, Compte à
Rebours, Comité Laïc de Coordination (CLC), and Société Civile du Congo (SOCICO), who support the implementation of
the 2016 New Year’s Eve political agreement. 
 
Messrs. Timothée Mbuya,
lawyer, Justicia Asbl President and member of the NGO Coalition for the respect
of the Constitution, Jean-Pierre
Tshibitshabu, SOCICO member and journalist on Kasumbalesa radio-television, Jean
Mulenda, LUCHA member, Eric Omari
Omba and Patrick Mbuya Kwecha,
members of the Bomoko Foundation served sentences of six months in prison on
charges of “inciting civil disobedience”. Mr. Timothée Mbuya has also been
disbarred for 6 years.
 
Many human rights defenders and pro-democracy activists are being held
for weeks or months in secret detention, without charge and without access to
families or lawyers. Some have reported acts of mistreatment and torture, and
some are suffering serious health complications. Many are put on trial on
trumped-up charges. Amongst them, Mr. Carbone
Beni Wa Beya, Filimbi’s national director of operations, Mr. Mino Bompomi, coordinator of Filimbi’s Kinshasa
branch and Messrs. Grâce Tshiuza, Cédric Kalonji and Palmer Kabeya, members of Filimbi in Kinshasa have been arbitrarily
detained for over 4 months and facing charges of “undermining state security”
following their participation in the organization of a peaceful demonstration
on December 31, 2017. They do not have access to their lawyers.
 
Arrested in the same context and released on January 18, 2018, LUCHA
members Messrs. Jedidia Mabele, Zacharie Kingombe, and Andy Djuma, are still facing charges of
“inciting rebellion”. On April 13, 2018, the prosecutor requested a three-year
imprisonment sentence against them.
 
The harassment and smear campaign targeting members of the Comité Laïc de Coordination (CLC),
including Prof. Thierry Nlandu,
Prof. Isidore Ndawel, Prof. Justin Okana, Prof. Gerturde Ekombe, Mrs. Leonnie Kandolo, Messrs. Jonas Tshiombela, Franklin Mbokolo and Brother Julien Lukengu is another illustration
of the systematic repression targeting human rights defenders committed to the
respect of civil and political rights as well as the right to peaceful
assembly, in the DRC. In January 2018, the General Prosecutor of Gombe has
issued an arrest warrant against the aforementioned human rights defenders,
accusing them of organizing peaceful protests banned by the authorities, and
demanding presidential, parliamentary, and provincial elections to be held before
the end of 2017. 
 
In particular, the Observatory condemns in the strongest terms the
assassination of Mr. Rossy Thsimanga
Mukendi, founder of the Mouvement
Citoyen Collectif 2016 and CLC board member as he was taking part in a
peaceful protest on February 25, 2018. Several witnesses of his assassination
have since received death threats. Those threatened include his brother, Mr. Arsene Tshimanga, and Cocorico DRC
members Messrs. Bajik Mpoyi and Timplard Mandianga. All three are
currently living in hiding out of the fear of being arrested. 
 
In
Niger,
the Observatory is concerned about the arrest, arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment of Mr. Ali Idrissa,
national coordinator of the Réseau des
organisations pour la transparence et l'analyse budgétaire (ROTAB) and of Publiez ce que vous payez-Niger (PCQVP),
Mr. Moussa Tchangari, Secretary
General of Alternative espaces citoyens
(AEC), Mr. Nouhou Mahamadou Arzika,
chairman of the Mouvement patriotique
pour une citoyenneté responsable (MPCR) and Mr. Lirwana Abdourahmane, lawyer and MPCR member. On March 25, 2018, they
were arrested at their respective workplaces without a warrant, as a national
action day to protest the 2018 finance bill was organised by a number of civil
society organisations. Local authorities in Niamey had prohibited the protest
due to “recent terror attacks” in other parts of the country. On March 27,
2018, they were charged with "organizing and participating in an
unauthorized demonstration" and "destruction of property".
 
In
Uganda,
the premises of ActionAid Uganda (AAU) and Great Lakes Institute for Strategic
Studies (GLISS) in Kampala as well as the house of GLISS Executive Director,
Mr. Godbar Tumushabe have been
raided by the police on September 20, 2017, in retaliation to their human
rights activities and in particular their criticism against the constitutional
amendment to lift presidential age limit to allow President Yoweri Museveni,
73, to run for another term in 2021.
 
3. Economic,
land and environmental rights defenders particularly at risk
 
Throughout
the African continent, our organisations remain concerned by the gravity of
attacks against land and environmental rights defenders.
 
In
Cameroon,
on February 23, 2018, the trial against Mr. Musa Usman Ndamba, National Vice President of
the Mbororo Social and Cultural Development Association (MBOSCUDA),
was resumed for the 57th time since its opening in May 2013. The plaintiff Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo, a billionaire
businessman, cattle rancher, tea plantation owner and a member of the Central
Committee of the ruling Cameroon People’s Democratic Movement (CPDM) party, was
not present at the hearing and was represented by Mr. Sama Francis Asanga, a
senior official of the opposition Social Democratic Party (SDF). Mr. Ndamba has
been accused of, “being a party in a judicial proceeding on oath and making
false declarations”, “making a false report against Baba Ahmadou Danpullo
liable to lead to his prosecution” and “injuring the reputation of Baba Ahmadou
Danpullo by imputation of unprovable facts”. These offenses are punishable by
up to three years of prison and a fine. Mr. Ndamba’s lawyers have reported
several irregularities in the proceedings. These acts of harassment have
increased after MBOSCUDA and its members submitted in early May 2013 a report
in the framework of the United Nations Human Rights Council Universal Periodic
Review (UPR) of Cameroon in Geneva, outlining the various obstacles faced by
the Mbororo community. 
 
Additionally, several members of the Organic Farming for Gorillas (OFFGO), a group of farmers founded in
September 2015 to promote organic farming, environmental protection, opposing
land grabbing and working for the protection of the cross-river gorilla in
Mbengwi, in the North-West Region of Cameroon are still subjected to acts of
judicial harassment and threats. Since April 13, 2018, while the National
Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms (NCHRF) is meant to publish a report
following investigations carried out into the abuses and judicial harassment
targeting OFFGO members, several OFFGO members and their lawyer received
renewed death threats. 
 
In
Egypt,
Messrs. Mohamed Azmy, Maysara Abdoun,
Ms. Seham Osman and 29 Nubian rights
defenders were arrested and detained throughout September and November 2017,
during peaceful demonstrations defending the constitutional right to return of
Nubians to their ancestral lands, from where they were evicted in the 1960s and
protesting against the death in custody of Mr. Gamal Sorour, French-Egyptian resident and prominent Nubian human
rights defender. The 32 Nubian activists have appeared before Aswan State
Security Emergency Court under charges of “participating in an unauthorised
protest”, “inciting protests” and “disrupting public order” on the basis of the
Protest Law No. 107 of 2013. If convicted under these charges, they could face
up to five years in prison and fines of 100,000 EGP (approx. 4,734 EUR), with
no possibility to appeal.
 
In
South
Africa, Mr. Sibonelo Patrick
Mpeku, leader of ESCR-Net member Abahlali baseMjondolo, was reportedly
killed on November 19, 2017 in Sisonke Village, Lamontville, municipality of
eThekwini, province of KwaZulu-Natal. To date, no arrests have
taken place with respect to Mr. Mpeku’s murder. His murder is the most
recent in a wider trend of ongoing threats and attacks perpetrated against
community leaders in the informal settlements in and around Durban, in the
municipality of eThekwini. With particular concern at the apparent impunity
following these acts, various threats leveled against the human rights defender
had been reported to the area councilor, the ward
committee, the local police and offices of the governing political party, but
no notable response by local authorities or the media was received. 
 
In
Sudan,
the Observatory is concerned about the arbitrary detention of human
rights defenders, Messrs. Hashim Ali
Ahmed and Osman Albagir Osman, two community leaders
from Port Sudan, Red Sea state. On December 11, 2017, they
were summoned to National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS) offices
after leading a peaceful protest of the Bishareen tribe members against
activities of the Sudanese mining company “Abor Shirish” contracted by the
government to search for gold in a number of archaeological sites in Halayib
locality, Red Sea state. On
December 17, 2017, the two leaders were intercepted by
the NISS and arrested while they were travelling from Port Sudan to Halayib locality. The community leaders were then taken to the
NISS offices in Port Sudan where they remained in detention until they were
transferred to Khartoum on December 29, 2017. On March 6, 2018, the two leaders
were released without charges.
 
4.
Recommendations:
 
1)
In view of the above-mentioned elements, the Observatory reminds States Parties
of their obligation to comply with all the provisions of the African Charter,
in particular those relating to the protection of human rights defenders. In
that regard, States should immediately and unconditionally:
 
- Implement all the provisions of the 1998 United
Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, especially by guaranteeing
in all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity and their
capacity to operate in a safe and enabling environment;
 
- Release all defenders who are arbitrarily detained
for their activities of promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, in particular freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly
and association;
 
- Ensure that the application of counter-terrorism and
national security legislation is consistent with international human rights
standards and is not used against human rights defenders in retaliation to
their peaceful and legitimate human rights activities.
 
- Develop differentiated measures for the protection
of the most vulnerable groups of human rights defenders such as land and
environmental rights defenders, defenders working in rural areas, woman human
rights defenders or defenders working on LGBTI issues;
 
- Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at
the judicial level - against human rights defenders;
 
- Order immediate, thorough, transparent
investigations into allegations of violations of the rights of human rights
defenders, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
- Refrain from adopting any provisions that do not
comply with international and African standards with respect to the exercise of
the right to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association, and
abrogate or revise any such provisions that may be in force;
 
- Send a standing invitation to the UN and ACHPR’s
Special Rapporteurs on Human Rights Defenders and facilitate t 