Libya:  Release of of Mr. Ramadan Althoweeb and ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Essam Safar
May 23, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Libya / 2018 / MayLibya: Release of of Mr. Ramadan Althoweeb and ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Essam Safar

URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
LBY 001 / 0518 / OBS 067.1 
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment / 
Threats / Ill-treatment /
Release
Libya
May 23, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Libya. 
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the release of Mr. Ramadan
Althoweeb as well as the ongoing arbitrary detention by armed militias of Mr. Essam Safar, two bloggers who have denounced
corruption and the presence of armed militia groups in Libya via social media.
 
According
to the information received, on May 10, 2018, Mr. Ramadan Althoweeb was
released from Ain Zara prison under the conditions that he would never
criticise the municipality and militias again, and that he would offer an
official apology to the municipality on Facebook
in response to his previous post[1].
 
Mr.
Ramadan Althoweeb had been arrested and detained since April 9, 2018 in
relation to Facebook posts in which
he exposed the head of Ain Zara’s municipality, Mr. Abdulwahab Baloq, and
released documents proving acts of corruption and the transfer of money to
people who are not employed by the municipality. Mr. Ramadan Althoweeb also
called for accountability and transparency by the municipality (see background
information section below). 
 
In
addition, Mr. Essam Safar remains detained at Al Jawiya prison since March 31,
2018, despite very precarious health conditions, in connection to Facebook posts in which he had
criticised the religious current and armed militias controlling Libyan security
forces as well as the lack of rule of law in the country. He cannot contact his
family and does not have access to a lawyer.
 
The
Observatory expresses its utmost concern over the arbitrary detention of Mr.
Essam Safar and his physical and psychological integrity given the widespread
use of torture and ill-treatment by Libyan authorities and the diverse armed
militias controlling parts of the country, taking place in a context of total
impunity.
 
The
Observatory urges the Libyan authorities to immediately and unconditionally
release Mr. Essam Safar as his detention is arbitrary and aims at silencing his
peaceful and legitimate human rights activities, particularly his right to
freedom of expression, and to further put an end to all forms of harassment
against Mr. Ramadan Althoweeb.
 
In
the meantime, the Observatory calls upon the Libyan authorities to ensure his
physical and psychological integrity, to ensure he has unhindered access to his
lawyers and family as well as to conduct an immediate, thorough, impartial and
transparent investigation into the incidents mentioned below in order to
identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and
sanction them as provided by the law.
 
Background information: 
 
On
March 31, 2018, Mr. Essam Safar was arrested by armed militias in Misrata and
taken to Al Jawiya prison[2].
One day before his arrest, he was followed and shot in the leg by armed
militias, and subsequently hospitalised in Misrata. When his family tried to
visit him at the hospital that night, they were told he was not there. 
 
Mr. Essam Safar was transferred to Al Jawiya prison a day after he had
been shot in the leg and before being fully treated at the hospital. As as
result his injury was not treated adequately and is worsening. 
 
Mr.
Essam Safar’s arrest follows Facebook
posts in which he had criticised the religious current and armed militias
controlling Libyan security forces as well as the lack of rule of law in the
country. His Facebook page has since
been taken down. He is facing several accusations including “drug dealing”,
“armed attack on security forces” and “attempted murder”.
 
On
April 9, 2018, Mr. Ramadan Althoweeb was threatened by the Militia 42 Ain Zara,
an armed militia group controlling the Ain Zara municipality, to withdraw and
offer an apology for Facebook posts
in which he exposed the head of Ain Zara’s municipality, Mr. Abdulwahab Baloq,
and released documents proving acts of corruption and the transfer of money to
people who are not employed by the municipality. Mr. Ramadan Althoweeb also
called for accountability and transparency by the municipality. Mr. Ramadan
Althoweeb’s Facebook was temporarily
taken down.
 
Upon
his refusal, Mr. Ramadan Althoweeb was abducted from the street by the Militia
42 in Ain Zara. He was further detained at Ain Zara prison, a prison known for
his acts of ill-treatment on detainees, in the outskirts of Tripoli. He did not
have access to his lawyer and family. Additionally, on April 9, 2018, his
father was physically attacked by the Militia 42 in Ain Zara while he tried to
visit his son in prison. 
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write to the authorities in Libya,
urging them to:
 
i.   
Guarantee in all
circumstances Messrs. Ramadan Althoweeb and Essam Safar’s psychological and
physical integrity as well as of all human rights defenders in Libya;
 
ii.  
Immediately and
unconditionally release Mr. Essam Safar as his detention is arbitrary and only
aims at punishing him for his peaceful and legitimate human rights activities;
 
iii.
In the meantime,
guarantee the right to due process and fair trial of Mr. Essam Safar, including
the unhindered access to his lawyers and family;
 
iv.
Conduct
an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the
above-mentioned incidents in order to identify all those responsible, bring
them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law;
 
v.  
Put an end to all forms
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Messrs. Ramadan
Althoweeb and Essam Safar and all human rights defenders in Libya so that they
can carry out their work without hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
vi.
Comply with all the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the United Nations General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular with its Articles 1, 5(b), and
12.2;
 
vii.          
Ensure in all circumstances the respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human rights
instruments ratified by Libya.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Fayez al-Sarraj, Prime Minister, Tripoli, Libya, Twitter:
@FaiezSerraj
·    
Mr. Mohamed Abdelwahed Abdelhameed, Minister of Justice, Tripoli, Libya.
Fax: +218 21 480 4631
·    
Mr. Aref al-Khoga, Minister of Interior, Tripoli, Libya. Fax: +218 21
340 0461
·    
Mr. Adel Shaltut, Chief of the Permanent Mission of the State of Libya
to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Email: mission.libye@bluewin.ch,
Fax: +41 22 959 89 10
·    
Permanent Mission of the State of Libya to the United Nations in New
York, USA. Email: info@libyanmission-un.org, Fax: + 1-212-593-4787
·    
Embassy of Libya in Brussels, Belgium. Email: info@embassyoflibya.eu, Fax:
+3226492113
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
representations of Libya in your respective countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, May 23, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line:
• E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
• Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
• Tel and fax FIDH: +
33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1] See:
https://www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=100013113827963


[2]           
The Libyan Government's authority is challenged by nearly 2,000
operating militias across the country which have profited from and filled the
vacuum of Libya's political fragmentation. The “rouge” armed militia groups,
outside of government control and without government financing, control most of
the public bodies in Misrata. Their income comes from human trafficking and
smuggling of oil and arms. Libyan civilians are in fear of those militias and
if they speak out against them, they face imprisonment, enforced disappearance
and/or torture. During the 2011 uprising, Misrata became a stronghold for
Islamist militias with more than 200 militias and a total of 40,000 fighters.
Some receive funding from the General National Congress, one of Libya's three
rival governments, while others have links to Muslim Brotherhood politicians. 