Nepal:  Torture and ill-treatment in custody of Mr. Kedar K.C. to extract a confession_Fear for his safety
June 16, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2011 / JuneNepal: Torture and ill-treatment in custody of Mr. Kedar K.C. to extract a confession_Fear for his safetyNPL 160611
Torture and other forms of
ill-treatment in police custody with the purpose of
extracting a confession/ Critical health condition/
Fear for physical and psychological integrity/ Risk of impunity
The International Secretariat of the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the
following situation in Nepal.
Brief description of the
situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by a reliable source and Antenna International, a member organisation
of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the arbitrary detention, torture and the
subsequent critical health condition of Mr.
Kedar K.C., 34 years old and permanent resident of Imadol
Municipality-8, in Lalitpur District. 
According
to the information received, from 16 May 2011 to 18 May
2011, Mr. Kedar K.C. was subjected to
torture and ill-treatment by police officers with the purpose of extracting a confession.
His physical and mental health remains, to date, serious as he has not received adequate medical care.
On 16 May
2011, at around 4 am, Mr. Kedar
K.C. was reportedly arrested at his home by three plainclothes policemen
from the Metropolitan Police Crime Division (MPCD), Hanumandhok, Kathmandu district, under suspicion
of gang robbery. The MPCD officers were reportedly under the command of
the Assistance Police Inspector (ASI), Mr. Prushottam Poudel, and supported by
an additional police force of eight to nine policemen, including Police
Inspector (SI) Madhav Khana, who was under the command of Inspector Bhisma
Humagai[1].
The policemen handcuffed Mr. Kedar K.C. and
put black glasses on his face before taking him to the MCPD.
During his transfer to the MPCD, Mr. Kedar K.C. was reportedly
beaten up on various parts of his body and threatened with drug smuggling
charges. At the MPCD, he was taken to the topmost floor, where six policemen
were present, including ASI Prushottam Poudel and SI Madhav Khana, and at some
point the victim of the robbery. Until 12 pm, Mr. Kedar K.C. was allegedly tortured and ill-treated
to extract a confession about a stolen passport. The policemen rolled a wooden
stick on his thighs and legs for about 20 -25 minutes after he was forced to
lie down on the floor; he was beaten for about two hours on the soles of his
feet with plastic pipes; he was forced to stand upside down against a wall and
was beaten on the soles of his feet for about 15 minutes; then he was forced to
stand on his fours and was beaten on his back, bottom and tight with plastic
pipes for about 30 minutes; he also had to jump for about 45 minutes on the
floor where the policemen had disposed sticks and every time he felt on the
floor, he was beaten with sticks on his legs and arms; and he was threatened to
be killed. After being tortured, he was reportedly given some painkillers.
According to the same
information, on 16 May 2011, after 12 pm, the police took Mr. Kedar K.C. to his
house and started searching. The policemen seized several objects, including a
laptop, before bringing him back to the District
Police Office (DPO) in Hanumandhok, Kathmandu district, where he was detained[2].
At around 7.30
pm, Mr. Kedar K.C. was taken to the
Litigation Section, to a room where he was blindfolded and handcuffed and then
again allegedly tortured and ill-treated until 9.30 pm
by several police officers including ASI Prushottam Poudel and SI Madhav Khana to
get information about the alleged stolen passport. 
On 17 May 2011, Mr. Kedar K.C. was informed that he was charged with seven cases. He was also asked to
identify his alleged accomplices at the central jail and on the basis of some
pictures. When he said he could not identify them, he was reportedly kicked and
beaten with a plastic pipe and a stick on various part of his
body. He was also forced to jump on the floor for about 10 -15 minutes. Mr. Kedar K.C’s family, who went to the MCPD to
give him food, was not permitted to see him.
On 18 May 2011, Mr. Kedar K.C. was taken to Bir Hospital
where he was diagnosed with chest problems and was recommended further
examination. Despite his request and assurance that he would pay for all the
medical expenses, the policemen did not allow him to pass the tests and he was taken
back to the DPO.
According to the
same information, Mr. Kedar K.C. has been officially charged with gang robbery
and, on 4
June 2011, he was remanded for
the first time for four days. On 6 June 2011, he was taken to the
District Court in Kathmandu and, at his lawyers’ request, the judge issued an order for a physical
and mental check up. A medical report was reportedly presented to the court (however,
no further information is currently available). 
OMCT has also been
informed that Mr. Kedar K.C. was threatened with reprisals by Inspector Bhisma
Humagai for informing human rights activists about the torture. The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its
deep concern about the safety and the physical and psychological conditions of Mr.
Kedar K.C. and urges the competent authorities to guarantee his physical and
psychological integrity at all times.
OMCT recalls that
the authorities are legally bound to effectively ensure the physical and
psychological integrity of all persons deprived of liberty in accordance with
international human rights law, and in particular, the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
OMCT recalls that, in line with their obligations
under the abovementioned treaties, it is incumbent on the competent Nepalese
authorities to consider seriously any allegations of torture and other forms of
ill-treatment, and to undertake a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent
and impartial investigation in this
regard, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and
apply adequate sanctions. 
Background information
According to the same information received, Mr. Kedar K.C. had already been arrested in
August 2010 for public offence by the same aforementioned MPCD officers. He was
reportedly illegally detained in a private house in Sanepa Municipality, in Lalitpur District, for four days
before being released but under the obligation to report on due dates until
March 2011. In March 2011, during one due reporting, he was reportedly arrested
and illegally detained for four days, time during which he was allegedly tortured.
He was released on bail but he was only allowed to go in the evening after
being forced the whole day to accompany the police to identify alleged
criminals. After a few days, the District Administrator Officer (DAO) found him
not guilty. Nevertheless, Mr. Kedar K.C. had to report for almost one month during
which he was taken to various places to identify suspected criminals.
Action requested
Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Kedar K.C.;
ii.                  
Provide
urgent medical care to Mr. Kedar K.C and guarantee
full access to all members of his family and his lawyer;
iii.                 
Order
his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent
with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him
promptly before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee
his procedural rights at all times; 
iv.                
Carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned
facts, in particular the
circumstances of the detention of Mr. Kedar K.C. and the allegations of torture and ill-treatment,
in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must
be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law;
v.                  
Guarantee that no evidence obtained under torture
and other forms of ill-treatment, or threats thereof, be used in court
proceedings against Mr. Kedar K.C. as stipulated in Article 15 of the UN Convention
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
vi.                
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to
Mr. Kedar K.C.;
vii.               
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, in
particular ensure that all acts of torture, and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment and punishment are clearly defined in law as offences in accordance
with the provisions set out in Articles 1, 4 and 16 of the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and that they be
made punishable with appropriate penalties which take into account the grave
nature of the crimes as required;
viii.             
Ensure the respect of human
rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with
national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      Ministry of Home Affairs,
Singha Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: +977 1 4211211 /
4211264, Fax: +977 1 42 11 232
Ø      Inspector General of Police,
Ramesh Chand Thakuri, Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407, Fax: +977 1 4
415 593. Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø      Attorney General, Mr. Yuv Raj
Sangraula, Office of Attorney General Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +977
1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np, info@attorneygeneral@gov.np
Ø      DSP Bishwa Adhikari, Human
Rights Cell, Nepal Police, Kathmandu, Nepal PO. Box. No.: 407, Fax: +977 1
4415593 E- mail: hrcell@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø      Chairman of the National Human
Rights Commission, Mr. Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email:
nhrc@nhrcnepal.org and also complaints@nhrcnepal.org, Fax: +977 1 5547973
Ø      Permanent Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la
Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: +4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int 
Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 16 June 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] Inspector Bhisma Humagai was reportedly involved in the torture of
Ms. Indra Kala Gurung, Ms. Saraswoti Gurung and Mr. Chandra Gurung on 3 February 2010. See OMCT urgent appeal NPL 230210


[2] MPCD and DPO are
sharing the same building in Hanumandhok, Kathmandu district but detention falls under the DPO. 