China:  Arbitrary detention and disappearance since March 2014 of Mr. Choeying Kalden, a 20 years old Tibetan monk from Tsenden Monastery. OMCT fears for his safety
May 16, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2014 / MayChina: Arbitrary detention and disappearance since March 2014 of Mr. Choeying Kalden, a 20 years old Tibetan monk from Tsenden Monastery. OMCT fears for his safety
CHN 160514
Arbitrary Detention/ Disappearance/
Fear for the safety
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China. 
Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the arbitrary
detention and disappearance since March 2014 of Mr. Choeying Kalden, a 20 years old Tibetan monk from Tsenden
Monastery, in Sog County in Nagchu Prefecture, Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR). OMCT
fears for his safety since his fate and exact whereabouts remained unclear at
the time of writing this urgent appeal. 
According to the information received, on 16 March
2014, Mr. Choeying Kalden was arrested at the Tsenden Monastery by Public
Security Bureau officers of Sog County without any explanation about the
reasons of his arrest and he was taken to an unknown location. It is believed
that he was arrested after sending emails entailing his writings criticizing
Chinese rule, to Chinese officials stationed at Tsenden Monastery. In his
texts, he notably protests against the Chinese policies to silence and
violently repress Tibetan monks, and he condemns the repressive campaigns
carried out by the Chinese authorities in recent years such as the on-going
campaign of forcing Tibetans to fly the red-starred Chinese flags on rooftops
According to the same information received, Mr.
Choeying Kalden’s relatives tried to find information about his whereabouts but
in vain. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the safety of Mr. Choeying Kalden. OMCT urges
the competent authorities to guarantee his physical and psychological integrity
at all times, in accordance with international human rights law, in particular
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and to immediately locate and disclose his whereabouts.
OMCT further urges for his immediate
release since his arrest appears to be solely based on the peaceful exercise of
his right to freedom of expression. 
Background information 
In recent months, Sog County has witnessed a
concerning number of arbitrary arrests and arbitrary searches. Many monastic
and lay Tibetans have been detained and disappeared. 
OMCT has also been informed about the case of Mr.
Asang, Mr. Margong, Mr. Sisium Dorje, Mr. Lhakpa and Mr. Jamyang Gyatso, five
Tibetan youths from Village No. 3 in Trido Township, who were arrested on 3
February 2014 as police expanded their search for those responsible for writing
a message on a boulder near an iron bridge. Mr. Sisum Dorje, Mr. Lhakpa and Mr.
Jamyang Gyatso were released and ordered to report daily to the Trido Township
government office. The whereabouts and fate of the other two has remained
unknown despite persistent efforts by family members and local Tibetans to
locate them. 
On 17 March 2014, four monks, Tsangyang Gyatso, Twewant,
Atse and Gyaltsen, all from Drilda Monastery, were reportedly arrested and they
continue to be detained incommunicado. Six other monks approached the Trido
Township government to ask for their release, but instead, they were also
detained. Although, those last six monks were released on 20 March 2014, they were
reportedly severely beaten up during their brief detention. 
OMCT has also been informed about the situation of Mr.
Gawa Sangpo, a Tibetan man, who has been in police detention since January 2013
without being charged with a crime. He was arrested for penning a ‘three-point
note on Tibet’ expressing his faith in the Dalai Lama, recognising Lobsang
Sangay as the political leader of the Tibetan people, and requesting the
independence of Tibet. He has been held in Sog County Detention Centre since
his arrest. 
Actions Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.              
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of Mr. Choeying Kalden, Asang and Margong;
ii.             
Guarantee,
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Choeying
Kalden, Asang, Margong and of all the above mentioned individuals; 
iii.           
Grant them
access to a lawyer of their choice and their family, as well as guarantee that they
are examined by independent doctors and receive adequate medical care if
necessary; 
iv.           
Order their immediate release since
their arrests appear to be solely based on the peaceful exercise of their right
to freedom of expression;
v.             
Carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned facts in accordance with international
human rights standards, the result of which must be made public,in order to bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
vi.           
Guarantee
the
respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms, including the freedom of
expression, throughout the country in accordance with national laws and
international human rights standards.
Addresses
·      
Mr. Li Keqiang Guojiazhongli, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2
Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Email: notice@scio.gov.cn
·      
Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of
China, Wu Aiying Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi
100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, Emails: minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·      
Ambassador Wu Hailong, Permanent Mission of the
People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213
Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn 
                                                                   
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 16 May 2014
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 