Rwanda:  'Rwanda: Mr. Ignace Kanyabugoyi  released but closely surveyed
July  7, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Rwanda / 2000 / JulyRwanda: 'Rwanda: Mr. Ignace Kanyabugoyi  released but closely surveyedRwanda: release of Ignace Kanyabugoyi   Case RWA 231198.2 Second Follow-up to RWA 231198  Geneva, 7th July 2000  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention regarding the following situation in Rwanda.  Brief reminder of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT received information from Agir Ensemble pour les Droits de l'Homme, a member of the OMCT network, that Mr. Ignace Kanyabugoyi was allegedly under incommunicado detention at the Psychiatric Center of Ndera, Rubungo district (commune), prefecture of Kigali, suffering from psychological damage following alleged torture inflicted by members of the military Information Service (Service des Renseignements Militaires) of the Directorate of Military Intelligence.  There were unconfirmed reports according to which, although the authorities of Rwanda do not have any charges against him, they were unwilling to release him.  OMCT had previously been informed by Agir Ensemble pour les Droits de l'Homme that Mr. Ignace Kanyabugoyi, from Kigombe, prefecture of Ruhenri, disappeared on 21 August 1998 after leaving his home at about 7.15 a.m., to go to his office (he was administrative manager of a factory which produces soap).  It was also reported that on the 23 August 1998, at about 5 a.m., members of the Military entered his home, apparently without warrant.  One of them immediately went to the roof and found a rifle.  His wife has stated that Mr. Kanyabugoyi has never possessed such a firearm.  Furthermore, following Mr. Kanyabugoyi's disappearance, members of the military threatened foreign employees of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) who were living at his house as lodgers.  Agir Ensemble pour les Droits de l'Homme has informed the International Secretariat that Mr. Kanyabugoyi's wife had subsequently fled Rwanda fearing for her security.   New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed that Mr. Ignace Kanyabugoyi was released from the military prison of MULINDI-Rubungo on 22nd May 2000 at 6 pm.  However, on Monday 26th June, he received orders to present himself, on a regular basis to the Bureau Communal and it is reported that he is being followed closely by agents of the Service Central de Renseignements (Sûreté de l'Etat).  OMCT remains gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ignace Kanyabugoyi as his state of health is extremely poor.  Furthermore, there are grave fears for his security in light of reports that other prisoners, released in January 2000 from Mulindi, have been assassinated following their release.  The International Secretariat would like to thank all those institutions, organizations and individuals who intervened on his behalf.  Action requested  Please write to the Rwandan authorities urging them to :  guarantee the  physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ignace Kanyabugoyi;   carry out a thorough and impartial investigation into the allegations of torture and arbitrary detention in order to identify those responsible, bring them before a competent court and impose upon them the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions required by law;  guarantee in all circumstances the respect of human rights and fundamental liberties in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses   Major Général Paul Kagame, Président de la République, Présidence de la République, BP 15, Kigali, Rwanda. Fax: (+ 250) 84769 ou (+ 250) 84390  Colonel Emmanuel Habyarimana, Ministre de la Défense, Ministère de la Défense, BP 23, Kigali, Rwanda. Fax :(+ 250) 72431 ou (+ 250) 76969  M. Jean de Dieu Mucyo, Ministre de la Justice et des Relations institutionnelles, Ministère de la Justice, BP 160 Kigali,Rwanda. Fax: (+ 250) 865 09  M. Gasana Ndoba, Président de la Commission National des Droits de l'Homme, BP 269, Kigali, Rwanda. Fax:(+ 250) 82702  Diplomatic representatives of Rwanda accredited to your country.  Geneva, 7th July 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 