Iraq:  New violence in Camp Ashraf raises concerns for the safety of its residents
April 11, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Iraq / 2011 / AprilIraq: New violence in Camp Ashraf raises concerns for the safety of its residents​PRESS RELEASEIraq: New violence in Camp Ashraf raises concerns for the safety
of its residents
Geneva, 11 April 2011. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is deeply concerned about a new raid by the
Iraqi armed forces on Camp Ashraf, home to the 3, 400 members of the People's Mojahedin Organisation of Iran (PMOI), an Iranian opposition movement, which led to the death of at least 35
residents and leaving many others injured.
According to
the information received, on 8
April 2011, at around 4:40 a.m., around
2500 soldiers of the Iraqi armed forces entered Camp
Ashraf,
in Diyala province, north of Bagdad.
The soldiers reportedly fired indiscriminately at the residents, including
women and unarmed men, killing at least 35 residents, among them at least four
women, and leaving over 325 injured persons. Several residents are also
reported to have been abducted. The Iraqi armed forces remain, to date, in the
camp. The adviser on Camp
Ashraf
of the UN Secretary General Special Representative in Iraq was
allegedly prevented from entering the camp.
OMCT has
already expressed many times its concern over the security conditions for the
residents. In
July 2009, despite guarantees by the United States (US) forces
and the Iraqi Government, the camp was raided by Iraqi forces in view of
expulsing its residents to Iran. The raid left eleven dead and around 500
injured. The residents of Camp
Ashraf
have since reportedly been deprived of basic needs, such as medical care, fuel
and necessary supplies for the camp. In 2010, they were also subjected to
numerous acts of harassment, among others, family members or lawyers being
prevented from entering the camp and the use by Iraqi forces of powerful
loudspeakers to psychologically harass them. 
The
situation is particularly critical now that the United States has closed down
its Forward Operating Base at Ashraf (FOB Grizzly), leaving the facilities
entirely in the hands of the Iraqi authorities, who oppose the presence of Camp
Ashraf in Iraq. With this decision, the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) was on its turn forced to leave the camp as it relied on the
protection of the FOB Grizzly to carry out their work. 
OMCT recalls that, since PMOI
members living in the camp have been disarmed, they have been 
designated as “protected persons”
under Article 27 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, of which guarantees were
clearly stipulated in various protocols signed with US
forces.
In light of
these recent events, OMCT reiterates its previous call to set up an
international and permanent presence in Camp
Ashraf
to ensure the protection of its residents. 
Contact:

Eric Sottas,
Secretary General, OMCT, Tel. +41 22 809 49 39 