Pakistan:  Joint Press Release: UN Day for Victims of Torture - An urgent call to enact anti-torture legislation compliant with the UN Convention against Torture
June 26, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Pakistan / 2015 / JunePakistan: Joint Press Release: UN Day for Victims of Torture - An urgent call to enact anti-torture legislation compliant with the UN Convention against TorturePakistan_JointLetter_2015.06.26_English4 pages / 235 KBLahore–Geneva, 25 June 2015. On the occasion of the
International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, June 26, the World
Organization against Torture (OMCT) and the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan
(HRCP) call on the government of Pakistan to adopt anti-torture legislation and provide for effective remedies to victims of torture.
Five
years ago, Pakistan ratified the UN Convention against Torture committing itself to enacting an effective legal framework
preventing and criminalizing torture as well as protecting torture victims.
“This day should remind us all that torture
and other forms of cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment are still a sad
reality in our country”, said Zohra Yusuf, Chairperson of the HRCP.
“Five years on it is time to translate
commitment into reality and adopt an effective anti-torture law”, she
added.
In
an open letter submitted today to the National Assembly, OMCT and HRCP welcome the
draft Torture, Custodial Death and Custodial Rape Bill that is currently
pending before the National Assembly. While the draft bill provides for
important protections for torture victims, both organizations have set out key
amendments to render the law effective.
The
day commemorating torture victims reminds us that the very purpose of such laws
is to provide an effective framework for the protection of victims and their
right to a remedy and redress. Torture victims face an uphill battle to prove
torture committed typically outside the public spotlight by state officials.
Anti-torture legislation has to provide every possible means to make the right
to complain realistic and to protect victims and witnesses who take the courage
to do so.
Clauses
such as in the draft law that punish malafide complaints will have a grossly
intimidating effect and run counter to the very idea of the law to ensure
effective remedies. Our experience shows that such provisions not only discourage
victims from coming forward, they are also abused in cases in which a torture
complaint has been rejected for lack of evidence and not because of ill intent.
Likewise
important are prompt and impartial investigations. We are seriously concerned about the special protection extended to the
military and intelligence agencies. If the investigating body has to seek
instruction and direction from the Federal Government upon receiving a
complaint directed against the military or intelligence agency, remedies will
systematically fail.
“Our global
experience in Asia and beyond has shown over and over that these type of
provision produce a legacy of abuse. Military and intelligence agencies have
been in many parts of the world notorious for human rights violations. We have
to understand that protecting torturers or rapists from accountability is
neither good for the morale of the troops nor does it serve security”, said
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. “Provisions such as this one have
served in many places as licence for torture”.
An
effective protection of torture victims also requires meaningful redress
including compensation and rehabilitation. We therefore regret that compensation
is the sole form of redress in the Draft Bill and only available once a person
is found guilty which would limit the effect of such provision greatly. The
Committee against Torture has repeatedly stated that the Convention requires
member states to enact other forms of redress including restitution, access to rehabilitation,
satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition. Anti-torture legislation needs
to put the interests of the victims first. On the day dedicated to torture
victims it is time that Pakistan steps up to its responsibility and provides effective
remedies and protection to those who suffer pain and trauma. 
To
remind the government of its promises and international obligations, the HRCP
conducts a series of events, including rallies in several districts as well as
public awareness events. The events are also part of OMCT’s global campaign
‘nothing can justify torture’ with similar actions around the globe.
 
For further information please
contact:
-    Waqar Mustafa, OMCT-HRCP Project Coordinator,
wamust@hotmail.com, Tel: (92-42) 35838341, 35864994, 35865969
-    Gerald
Staberock, OMCT Secretary General, gs@omct.org, Tel: (0041) (0)22 809 49 23
 The open letter to the National Assembly Secretariat can be found here: Pakistan_JointLetter_2015.06.26_English
 
The OMCT wishes to thank the European Commission and the National Endowment
for Democracy for their financial support to the OMCT activities on June 26 that
are part of its campaign of “nothing can justify torture under any
circumstances”. 