Iran:  International Workers' Day: Release all trade unionists arbitrarily detained in the country
April 30, 2014
Human rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2014 / AprilIran: International Workers' Day: Release all trade unionists arbitrarily detained in the countryThis article is available in:English (main language)
Paris-Geneva,
April 30, 2014 - On the eve of May 1, 2014, International Workers’ Day, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT joint
programme, is drawing attention to the plight of Iranian trade unionists. The
number of independent unionists arrested and prosecuted or otherwise
ill-treated has been rising over the past few years. A large number of such
unionists have served prison terms in various cities, have been fined, have
lost their jobs or have occasionally been forced to flee the country to avoid
further persecution.
 
On early
morning of April 30, 2014, the Iranian authorities have detained two trade unionists,
Messrs. Jafar Azimzadeh and Jamil Mohammadi, and tried to detain
Ms. Parvin Mohammadi. All three are
members of the Board of Directors of the Free Union of Iranian Workers. Last
year, they organised a petition with 40,000 signatures protesting the worsening
conditions of workers and were among the unionists who tried to organise a May
1 demonstration. A number of other unionists were summoned for interrogations
last week when they were warned not to go ahead with the May 1 demonstration.
 
Moreover, at
least 12 other unionists and labour activists are currently in prison in Iran
and a number of others are facing long-term prison sentences merely for trying
to organise their colleagues in independent unions.
 
Messrs. Shahrokh
Zamani (serving a total of 11.5 years in prison) and Mohammad Jarrahi
(5 years) are founding members of the Painters’ and Decorators' Union as well
as members of the Committee to Pursue the Establishment of Labour Unions
(CPELU). Mr. Behnam (Assad) Ebrahimzadeh, another member of the CPELU
and a child rights activist, is serving 5 years in prison.
 
At least
three members of the Coordinating Committee to Help Form Workers’ Organisations
(CCHFWO) are serving prison terms in the Kurdistan province of Iran: Messrs. Yousef
Ab-Kharabat (2 years); 76 year-old Mohammad Molanaei (1 year); and Vahed
Seyedeh (2 years). 
 
Other
members of the CCHFWO who have been sentenced to prison terms ranging from one
year to 42 months and are appealing, include: Messrs Vafa Ghaderi,
Ghaleb Hosseini Khaled Hosseini, Mohammad Karimi, Jamal Minashiri, Ghassem
Mostafapour, Afshin Nadimi and Hadi Tanoumand.
 
At least
five members of the Teachers’ Association of Iran (TAI) are currently serving
long-term imprisonment: Mr. Mahmood Bagheri is serving 4.5 years
(commuted from the initial 9.5 years in an amnesty); Mr. Rassoul Bodaghi
(6 years); Mr. Mohammad Davari (6 years); and Mr. Mehdi
Farahi-Shandiz (3 years). Another member of the TAI, Mr. Abdolreza
Ghabari, is serving a 15-year sentence after his death sentence for
contacts with opposition groups abroad was commuted. 
 
Other
leading TAI members, Messrs. Ali-Akbar Baghani, Mahmoud
Beheshti-Langaroudi, and Alireza Hashemi, have been sentenced to
long-term imprisonment, which they have appealed. 
 
Mr. Reza
Shahabi, Treasurer of the Syndicate of Workers of United Bus Company of
Tehran, has been serving a 6-year prison term since June 2010, while a number
of other members of the Syndicate have served prison terms or faced other
sentences and persecution.
 
Messrs
Shahabi, Jarrahi and Molanaei are in pressing need of medical care, which they
have been consistently deprived of.
 
The Observatory is calling
on the Iranian authorities to release all those imprisoned and to stop
prosecution and persecution of all trade unionists, by dropping the charges
against them and putting an end to the practice of summoning and interrogating
unionists. These unionists are punished only for exercising their rights to
freedom of speech, assembly and association, as enshrined in the International
Covenant for Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International
Covenant for Civil and Political Rights to which Iran is a State party, as well
as the relevant conventions of the International Labour Organisation, by
endeavouring to form independent trade-unions and to promote rights of the
working people in Iran.
 
For more
information, please contact:
FIDH: Audrey Couprie/Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25
     18OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 