Turkey:  Judicial harassment of nine lawyers of the Association of Lawyers for Freedom
March 23, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2016 / MarchTurkey: Judicial harassment of nine lawyers of the Association of Lawyers for Freedom
TUR 003 / 0316 / OBS 025
Judicial harassment /
Arbitrary detentionRelease / Excessive use
of police force
Turkey
March 23, 2016

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Turkey. 

Description of the situation:

The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the judicial
harassment of nine lawyers, Messrs. İrfan Arasan, Hüseyin Boğatekin,
Şefik Çelik, Adem Çalışçı, Tamer Doğan, Ramazan Demir
and Mustafa Ruzgar as well as Ms. Ayşe Acinikli and Ms. Ayşe Gösterişlioğlu, members of the Association of Lawyers
for Freedom (Ozgurlukcu Hukukcular Dernegi – OHD).

According to the information received, in the early morning of March 16,
2016 Messrs. İrfan Arasan, Hüseyin Boğatekin, Şefik Çelik, Adem Çalışçı, Tamer
Doğan, Ramazan Demir and Mustafa Ruzgar, as well as Ms. Ayşe Acinikli and Ms.
Ayşe Gösterişlioğlu were arrested and saw their houses in Istanbul raided by
the police, within the framework of an anti-terrorism operation which targeted
at least 89 individuals in several cities (Aydın,
Diyarbakır, Bingöl, Ağrı, Konya, Bitlis, Erzurum, Mus, Mardin, Şırnak, Siirt,
Elazığ, İzmir, Muğla, Urfa, Antep, Maraş and Sakarya). 

The nine lawyers were arrested on charges of
“membership of an illegal organisation” reportedly for events that took place
between 2011 and 2014. During their interrogation, they were questioned about
interviews they gave in the media, complaints they lodged before the European
Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) and visits to their clients. According to our
information, the authorities have yet to disclose the reasons behind the
alleged offences that led to the searches and arrests. To date the case file on
the arrests remains confidential pursuant to the Article 153.2 of the Turkish
Criminal Code Procedure (No. 5271). 

On March 17, the lawyers were to plead the case
of the 46 lawyers tried for participating in the defence of Mr. Abdullah
Öcalan, one of the founding members of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK).
During the hearing, the lawyers who could be present said that they could not
defend adequately their clients whilst their colleagues were in custody. A
delegation of lawyers from France, the Netherlands, Switzerland and the United
Kingdom was also attending the trial. 

Moreover, as a civil society group attempted to
deliver a press statement outside the court to denounce the illegal arrest and
detention of the nine lawyers, the gathering was attacked by Turkish police in
riot gear, equipped with tear gas and water cannons.

On March 18, Istanbul First Criminal Court of
Peace, chaired by judge Mr. Bakır Altun ordered the release of Messrs. İrfan
Arasan and Mustafa Ruzgar.

On March 19, the Istanbul First Criminal Court of
Peace ordered the release of the seven remaining ÖHD lawyers arguing that the
evidence provided was insufficient and that detention was a disproportionate
measure of restraint under the circumstances. The public prosecutor, Mr. Orhan
Aydın, objected this decision in a hearing that lasted 13 hours. As the court
confirmed its decision, the public prosecutor objected the court's decision.

On March 21, the Istanbul First
Criminal Court of Peace rejected the public prosecutor’s objection a second
time. The public prosecutor filed an objection before the Istanbul Second
Criminal Court of Peace. 

On March 22, the Istanbul Second Criminal Court
of Peace, chaired by Judge Mr. Durmuş Karacalı, accepted the objection and
ordered the arrest of four lawyers, namely Hüseyin Boğatekin, Ayşe Acinikli,
Ramazan Demir and Ayşe Gösterişlioğlu,
together with 17 other individuals. The court argued that there was
enough evidence showing that they had committed the alleged crime, and that
they could run away or damage the evidence. The court did not inform the
defense lawyers of the hearing and failed also to ask for counter arguments.
The defense lawyers filed an objection against this order. 
The same day, Mr. Hüseyin Bogatekin and Ms. Ayse
Gösterişlioğlu were arrested and detained in the courthouse, while the police
could not find Ayşe Acinikli and Ramazan Demir. Over the night, the Istanbul
Eight Criminal Court of Peace, chaired by Mr. Atila Öztürk, heard Hüseyin
Bogatekin and Ayse Gösterişlioğlu. The court limited the number of defense
lawyers to three per accused. It decided to remand them to detention in Metris
Prison for males in Istanbul and Bakırköy Prison for females respectively. 

The Observatory recalls that this wave of
arbitrary arrests and detentions is part of wide-range anti-terrorism
operations, started in late July 2015. Such operations turned into a massive
crackdown on some civil society organisations depicted as “terrorist networks”.
This campaign has been targeting dozens of peaceful activists who have been
involved in the monitoring of human rights violations resulting from
anti-terrorism operations and who have been advocating for a peaceful
resolution of the Kurdish issue[1].
These peaceful activists include human rights defenders, particularly Human
Rights Association (IHD) members, lawyers, political party representatives and
journalists[2].

The Observatory draws the attention of the Turkish authorities on the
Principle of the United Nations Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers
(attached), in particular Principles 16, 18, and 20 on Guarantees for the
functioning of lawyers, and Principle 23 on Freedom of expression and
association.

The Observatory calls upon the Turkish authorities to immediately and
unconditionally put an end to the ongoing harassment, including at judicial
level, against human rights defenders, and in particular lawyers, since it only seems to aim at sanctioning their
legitimate human rights work.

Actions requested:

Please write to the authorities in Turkey, urging them to:

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Messrs. İrfan Arasan, Ayşe
Acinikli, Hüseyin Boğatekin, Şefik Çelik, Adem Çalışçı, Ayşe BaşarTamer Doğan,
Ramazan Demir and Mustafa Ruzgar, and Ms. Ayşe Acinikli and Ms. Ayşe
Gösterişlioğlu  as well as
of all human rights defenders in Turkey;

ii. Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at judicial level,
against Messrs. İrfan
Arasan, Ayşe Acinikli, Hüseyin Boğatekin, Şefik Çelik, Adem Çalışçı, Ayşe
BaşarTamer Doğan, Ramazan Demir and Mustafa Ruzgar, and Ms. Ayşe Acinikli and
Ms. Ayşe Gösterişlioğlu, as well as other human rights defenders in Turkey;

iii. Put an end to the crackdown on civil society under the pretext of
countering terrorism and publicly recognise the legitimate role of human rights
defenders in line with Turkey’s international commitments; 

iv. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:

- its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the
protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”;

- its Article 6(a), which foresees that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to participate in peaceful
activities against violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”;

- its Article 9, which provides that “in the exercise of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, including the promotion and protection of human
rights as referred to in the present Declaration, […] everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, inter alia: […] (c) to offer and provide
professionally qualified legal assistance or other relevant advice and
assistance in defending human rights and fundamental freedoms”.

- its Article 11, which provides that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to the lawful exercise of his or
her occupation or profession”. 

- its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;

v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Turkey.


Addresses:

President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip
Erdoğan, Cumhurbaşkanlığı Külliyesi 06560 Beştepe-Ankara, Tel: (+90 312) 525 55
55, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31, E-mail: contact@tccb.gov.trPrime Minister of
Turkey Ahmet Davutoglu tel: (0312) 422 10 00 ; Fax: +90 (312) 403 62 82Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, No:
8 Balgat / Ankara - Turkey 06100; Tel : +90 (312) 292 10 00Minister of Justice, Mr. Bekir Bozdağ, 06659 Kizilay,
Ankara; Tel: +90 (312) 417 77 70; Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33 70; E-mail: info@adalet.gov.trMinister of Interior, Mr. Efkan Ala; tel: +90 (312) 422 40 00; Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30; Email: ozelkalem@icisleri.gov.trAmbassador
Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the European Union in
Brussels, Avenue des Arts 36-38, 1000 Bruxelles, Belgium; Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50Ambassador
Mehmet Ferden Çarikçi, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in
Geneva, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28B 1211 Geneva 19, Tel: +41 22 918 50 80;
Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.intPlease also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Turkey in your
respective country.



[1]          
See among others the Observatory Urgent Appeals TUR
001 / 1015 / OBS 081 of October 1, 2015; TUR 001 / 1015 / OBS 081.1 of October
6, 2015; TUR 003 / 1215 / OBS 111 of December 21, 2015; TUR 001 / 0116 / OBS
010 of January 19, 2016; and TUR 002 / 0216 / OBS 017, of February 11, 2016. 


[2]               For more information
see FIDH Press Release of 21 September 2015. 