Sierra Leone:  Arbitrary detention and continued judicial harassment against several members of the Malen Land Owners and Users Association (MALOA) in three different criminal cases
February  9, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sierra Leone / 2016 / FebruarySierra Leone: Arbitrary detention and continued judicial harassment against several members of the Malen Land Owners and Users Association (MALOA) in three different criminal casesNew information
SLE 001 / 0315 / OBS
023.3
Judicial harassment /
Arbitrary detention
Sierra Leone
February 9, 2016
 
The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and 
the
 World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
 and 
requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Sierra Leone.


New information:
 
The
 Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary 
detention and continued judicial harassment against several members of
 the Malen Land Owners and Users Association (MALOA) in three different 
criminal cases. For the past three years, MALOA has been monitoring and 
denouncing the negative human rights impact of the activities of Socfin 
Agricultural Company Sierra Leone Ltd (SAC)
 in Malen's district, in particular acts of land grabbing[1].
 
According to the information received, on February 4, 2016, the verdict hearing of the six MALOA members, Messrs.
Shiaka Sama, MALOA Spokesperson, Sima Mattia, 
James Blango, Lahai Sellu, Musa Sellu and Foday Musa, on charges of “destruction of growing plants belonging to SAC”, “destruction of growing plants”,“conspiracy” and “incitement”[2]
 for allegedly brushing palm oil plants belonging to SAC took place before the Bo High Court.
 
The
 six anti-land grabbing activists were all found guilty to all of the 
above mentioned charges. As MALOA’s spokesperson, Mr. Shiaka Sama was 
sentenced
 to pay a fine of 60,000,000 Leones (approx. 13,000 Euros) or face six 
months of imprisonment. The five other activists were sentenced to pay a
 fine of 30,000,000 Leones (approx. 6,500 Euros) each or face five 
months of imprisonment. The six of them are currently
 in detention pending payment of the fine. 
 
The
 Observatory recalls that several other MALOA members also continue to 
face judicial harassment in two other criminal cases (see background 
information).

 
The
 Observatory fears that the judicial harassment of the MALOA members 
only aims at preventing their peaceful human rights activities. 
Therefore,
 the Observatory calls on the Sierra Leonean authorities to immediately 
and unconditionally release all the six activists and drop all charges 
against them and to put an end to all acts of harassment against them.

 
Background information:
On
 October 16, 2013, Messrs. Shiaka Sama, Sima Mattia, James Blango, Lahai
 Sellu, Musa Sellu and Foday Musa were arrested in Bo and Malen on 
charges
 of destruction of growing plants belonging to SAC”, “destruction of 
growing plants”, “conspiracy” and “incitement” for allegedly brushing palm oil plants belonging to SAC
and detained until October 24, 2013 in Pujehun and then Bo. 
Though the six denied all allegations and despite the absence of 
evidence, in July 12, 2014, the case was referred to the Bo High Court. 
The six were then again detained overnight in Bo and
 released on a 400,000 Leones (approximately 80 Euros) bail. On October 
30, 2014, the trial before the Bo High Court began and has been ongoing 
since then.

 
Several MALOA members also face judicial harassment in another criminal case. Between January 28 and February 26, 2015, Messrs.
Sylvester Kebbie and James Blango, together with nine MALOA supporters[3],
 were arrested in Malen on charges of “conspiracy, malicious damage”, 
“riotous conduct”, “destroying growing plants”, “stoning” and “carrying 
offensive weapons”. This followed an alleged shooting incident at the 
Bamba village in Malen's district on January
 14, 2015, involving two SAC personnel. Messrs. Sylvester Kebbie and 
James Blango deny having been present on the scene. Some of the 
activists spent more than 30 days in detention before being taken to 
court. The eleven persons were later granted bail and have
 been appearing in court since. It should be noted that the group does 
not have proper legal representation as the lawyers who represent them 
in court have been doing so on a voluntary and occasional basis. On 
October 6, 2015, the eleven MALOA members and supporters
 appeared before the Magistrates Court. The court dismissed three of the
 six charges against them, namely the charges of “conspiracy, malicious 
damage”, “riotous conduct” and “stoning”. Several hearings have taken 
place.

 
Finally, on September 8, 2015, seven other MALOA members, Ms.
Amie Faba, Messrs. Idrisa Fatorma, Mohamed Kebbie, Abu Kebbie,
Morie Margai, Luseni Tommy and Momoh Karimu, were 
arrested on charges of “writing down names of people in the town without
 the knowledge of the chiefs”. Ms. Amie Faba was responsible for the 
registration of MALOA members in the village,
 when she was summoned before the town Chief, who asked her to hand in 
the list of names. When she refused to do so, Ms. Amie Faba and six 
other MALOA members were then arrested. Despite the fact that bail in 
Sierra Leone is free, the detainees were asked to
 pay 100,000 Leones (approximately 20 Euros) each, before they can be 
allowed bail. On September 10, 2015, the seven MALOA members were 
released pending trial, after paying a total of 350,000 Leones.
 
On
 November 4, 2015, the trial of the six MALOA members, Messrs. Shiaka 
Sama, MALOA Spokesperson, and Sima Mattia, James Blango, Lahai Sellu, 
Musa
 Sellu and Foday Musa, resumed before the Bo High Court. Both the 
prosecution and the defence made their final submissions. The court 
judgement, which was scheduled for January 15, 2016, was adjourned to 
February 4, 2016.

 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Sierra Leone and ask them to:
 
i.
 Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
 of Messrs. Shiaka Sama, Sima Mattia, James Blango, Lahai Sellu, Musa
 Sellu and Foday Musa, as well as of all MALOA members and all human 
rights defenders in Sierra Leone;
 
ii.
 Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level -
 against Messrs. Shiaka Sama, Sima Mattia, James Blango, Lahai Sellu,
 Musa Sellu and Foday Musa, and all MALOA members as well as against all
 human rights defenders in Sierra Leone;
 
iii.
 Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on 
Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United 
Nations
 General Assembly, in particular:
-
 article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or 
in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of
 human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
 levels”,
-
 and article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities
 of everyone,
 individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, 
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her 
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
 present Declaration”;
 
iv.
 Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights instruments 
ratified
 by Sierra Leone.
 
Addresses:
 

·      
Mr.
 Ernest Bai Koroma, President of the Republic of Sierra Leone, State 
House, State Avenue, Tower Hill, Freetown, Sierra Leone, Email:
jkawusu-konte@statehouse.gov.sl,
jaramenajara@yahoo.comMrs. Francess P. Alghali, Secretariat
 of Human Rights Commission of Sierra Leone, NEC Building, OAU Drive, Tower Hill, Freetown

·      
Her
 Excellency Ms. Yvette Stevens, Permanent Mission of the Republic of 
Sierra Leone to the United Nations Office and other international 
organizations in Geneva Chemin Louis-Dunant
 15B (3rd Floor), 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 730 17 40, 
Email: 
mission@sierraleonegeneva.ch

·      
H.E.
 Dr. Christian S. KARGBO, Ambassador of the Republic of Sierra Leone to 
the Kingdom of Belgium and Head of Mission to the European Union, 
Embassy of the Republic of Sierra Leone
 avenue de Tervueren 4101150 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: 02/771.11.80, 
Email: 
sierraleoneembassy@brutele.be 

 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Sierra Leone in your respective countries. 