Kenya - OMCT statement to the 41st CAT session
November 12, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Statements / 2008 / NovemberKenya - OMCT statement to the 41st CAT sessionIntroductionThis report has been prepared by the Independent Medico-Legal Unit (IMLU) in conjunction  with the International Commission of Jurists-Kenya (ICJ-Kenya) and the Organisation  Mondiale Contre la Torture (OMCT). The report has benefitted from extensive support and  consultations from many other  non-governmental organizations, community-based  organisations, and the Kenyan public. BackgroundThis report aims at bringing to the Committee the voice of the many Kenyans who live in  poverty, and continue to fall victim to torture and other cruel inhuman and degrading treatment  and punishment. It is the product of an empirical assessment on understanding torture in  Kenya, between the years 2006 and 2007, authored by IMLU, along with group discussions  and public forums  hosted by the organisations mentioned above. The report describes the  extensive violence deriving from deep poverty, inequality in resource distribution, and other  socio-economic problems in Kenya. Justification In Kenya, torture typically occurs in four forms: firstly, torture against those critical of the  political establishment. There has been a paradigm shift in this scenario, with dissenters being  more identifiable along socio-economic rather than directly political lines. Secondly, torture  against those held in confinement, thirdly torture against the poor and marginalized, and lastly,  torture within the context of ethnic/land clashes. These dimensions are often intertwined, and  there is therefore in practice often no clear demarcation between them.  As concerns the issue of access to justice, this right has been seriously compromised by the  prohibitive costs of legal assistance, which therefore remains inaccessible, considering that  more than half the Kenyan population lives below the poverty line. Upon arrest and  arraignment in court,  the  majority of Kenyans are unable to raise the extremely high bail  typically imposed by the courts. Subsequently those facing trial who are unable to pay bail,  often end up being remanded in pre-trial detention. This has led to the overcrowding of penal  institutions, and inevitably exposes detainees to inhuman and degrading conditions. As for arbitrary arrests, the right to liberty and security of a person is de  facto systematically  challenged by police  illegal actions and other abuses of power carried out, in particular, in  overcrowded and poor urban neighbourhoods. Bribery on the part of police and other public  officials has become commonplace in Kenya. Payment  in exchange for liberty  is a means of  escaping torture and harassment during detention, or simply avoiding the higher costs of legal  assistance. Those who cannot afford to pay bribes are at serious risk of ill-treatment.    In Kenya, the economic one’s status defines how often one is likely to experience harrassment  and abuse at the hands of the police. There has been a growing tendency to institutionally  criminalize poverty in Kenya,  and this is particularly  notable as concerns  informal sector  workers and poor  residents of informal settlements.  These people are systematic victims of  extortion of bribes, destruction of property, theft of goods and personal effects, arbitrary  arrests and unlawful confinement in prison or police custody by the police and local authority  inspectorate personnel, including Askari  local authority guards. Due to the government’s lack  of recognition of the informal sector, right of association is hampered and any protest against  violation of rights is met with violence and brutality by the police. At the same time, those living  in Kenya’s informal settlements face inhuman living conditions characterized by overcrowding  and lack of basic services and are often victims of police brutality and other forms of arbitrary  action. Organised  criminal groups have also emerged within informal settlements and elsewhere in  Kenya due to inequitable distribution of resources, and failure by the state to provide sufficient  security. The government’s response to these groups has involved the excessive use of force,  torture, and extra-judicial killings by the police. A case in point is  the police operation in the  Mathare slums of Nairobi in June 2007 to stamp out members of the outlawed  Mungiki sect.  Unless this certainly worrying trend is immediately reversed, there is a well-founded fear that  other vigilante groups in the country may be similarly targeted. Historical injustices, marginalization and political manipulation are also among the factors that  have contributed to inter-ethnic conflict and violence rooted in the issue of land. Land clashes  have in turn worsened the already poor economic conditions of communities. The state’s use  of the military to end such conflicts has itself only led to further violations of human rights. An  example in this regard is the joint military and police operation in the Mt. Elgon District earlier  this year, which culminated in massive torture and summary executions of large numbers of  the local civilian population. We wish to now bring to the attention of the  Committee a similar  and currently on-going military operation in the Mandera District in the North-Eastern Province  of Kenya.   In conclusion, we wish to emphasize the linkage between torture and socio-economic factors,  and firmly believe that addressing these factors will greatly assist in the eradication of torture  in Kenya. Accordingly, we now invite the Committee to make the following practical  recommendations:  Call upon the Kenyan government to recognize that  torture and other forms of violence are  indirectly but causally linked to poverty and violation of social and economic rights Further call upon the government to stop the systematic use of the military to resolve internal  conflict in Kenya, and particularly to immediately halt military operations in Mandera where, as  in Mt. Elgon District, many civilians have been subjected to various forms of human rights  violations, including torture. Urge the government to establish the Office of Public Defender to provide legal aid to victims  of torture and other human rights abuses who are unable to raise legal fees.  Call upon the government to  address torture and violence deriving from land conflict and  immediately finilise and implement the draft National Land Policy. 