Mexico:  30th session of the Human Rights Council: Joint statement: Mexico must abolish arraigo
September 15, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Mexico / 2015 / SeptemberMexico: 30th session of the Human Rights Council: Joint statement: Mexico must abolish arraigo 
30th of the Human
Rights Council Session: Joint statement under Item 3 during the interactive dialogue with the Working Group on
arbitrary detention
Joint statement by the Mexican Commission for the
Defense and Promotion of Human Rights (CMDPDH), World Organization against Torture
(OMCT) and the Association for the Prevention of Torture (APT)
Mr.
President, 
The
Mexican Commission for the Defense and Promotion of Human Rights, the World
Organization against Torture and the Association for the Prevention of Torture, welcome
the Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention and share its concerns
regarding forms of detention to investigate, including “arraigo”, or
other that diminish a person’s ability to challenge his or her detention. We
agree that these forms of detention affect the presumption of innocence and
overwhelm the justice system.
In Mexico, while there have been improvements in the
criminal justice system as a result of a Constitutional amendment in 2008, such
as the transition to a adversarial criminal justice system, this amendment also
introduced an abusive and undemocratic practice:  the arraigo.
Arraigo is a federal
precautionary measure to deprive of liberty those persons suspected to be part
of organized crime. It is
supposed to be used as a means of investigating criminal suspects, but in
practice, it is used to give more time for the authorities, before bringing
formal charges before a judge. Arraigo is currently used for a period up
to 40 days, but can be extended to 80 days.
This measure is a form of arbitrary detention clearly
contrary to Mexican human rights’ obligations and violates, among others, the
rights of personal freedom, legality, presumption of innocence, due process and
judicial review. Moreover, the arraigo places detainees in a situation
of heightened vulnerability and in an increased risk of being subject to
torture or other form of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
Mr. President, 
Preventive detention in Mexico has therefore become
the systematic technique, most commonly used in criminal investigations in
Mexico. From 2009 – 2014 a total of
14,523 requests for arraigo were
issued from the Attorney General’s Office. From the 8,595
persons detained under arraigo in the
period from 2008 – 2011, only the 3.2 percent of them were sentenced. 7,943 detentions were for drug-related crimes. The high
numbers of people detained under arraigo at
the federal level lead us to conclude that there has been an abuse of this practice
at the detriment of the rights of the persons detained.
Mr. President,
We therefore call
on the members of the Council and the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, to
urge the Mexican State to immediately eliminate arraigo from law and
practice, as recommended by numerous UN human rights mechanisms.
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. 