Turkey:  Arbitrary arrest and conditional release of Ms. Gülseren Yoleri and Mr. Dogan Ozkan
August  9, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2017 / AugustTurkey: Arbitrary arrest and conditional release of Ms. Gülseren Yoleri and Mr. Dogan Ozkan
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

TUR 006 / 0817 / OBS 086 
Arbitrary detention / Conditional Release /
Judicial harassment /
Ill-treatment /
Turkey
August 9, 2017
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Turkey.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the
arbitrary arrest and the provisional release three days later of Ms. Gülseren
Yoleri, President of
the Istanbul Branch of the Human Rights Association (İnsan Haklari Derneği – İHD) and Executive Committee member of IHD,
and Mr. Dogan Ozkan, member of the IHD Istanbul executive board.
 
According to the information received, on August 5, 2017, around 8 pm,
the police arrested Ms. Gülseren Yoleri and Mr. Dogan Ozkan alongside with at least 39
demonstrators, including journalists and lawyers, following a protest, in the
Besiktas district. The protest was held in support of Ms. Nuriye Gülmen and Mr.
Semih Özakça, two dismissed teachers who have been in a
hunger strike for more than 150 days and are famous for their struggle
denouncing the mass layoffs initiated by the Turkish authorities after the
failed coup d’état in 2016.
 
The 41 arrested protesters were taken to
Eminyiet police station. Ms. Gülseren
Yoleri and Mr. Dogan Ozkan and other demonstrators were victims of
ill-treatment during the arrest. Ms. Gülseren
Yoleri was beaten at the police station and Mr. Dogan Ozkan was handcuffed and beaten during his arrest and at the police
station. Another imprisoned protester, Ms. Barkin Timtik, a lawyer, was
also beaten after she refused to give her finger prints at the police station.
 
Furthermore, the arrested protesters were denied proper access to their lawyers, who
were allowed a limited contact with their clients. The Public Prosecutor
rejected meeting requests of the lawyers without providing grounds. 
 
On August 8, 2017, the
Peace Criminal Judge ordered the provisional release of the 41 detainees,
including Ms. Gülseren Yoleri and Mr. Dogan Ozkan on condition of judicial control[1].
The 41 are still facing prosecution for allegedly “making
propaganda on behalf of an illegal organisation” (Article 7/2 of the
Anti-Terror Law – ATL) and participating in non-authorised demonstration
(Article 2911 of the Penal Code).
 
The Observatory
expresses its deepest concerns over this new wave of arbitrary arrests
targeting human rights defenders for the exercise of their freedoms of
association and peaceful assembly.
 
The Observatory strongly
condemns the judicial harassment of Messrs. Gülseren Yoleri and Dogan Ozkan,
which appears to only aim at sanctioning to their peaceful and legitimate human
rights activities. Accordingly, the Observatory calls upon the Turkish judicial
authorities to end all forms of harassment against Ms. Gülseren Yoleri and Mr.
Dogan Ozkan.
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please
write to the authorities in Turkey, urging them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee
Ms. Gülseren Yoleri and Mr. Dogan Ozkan the right to due process and a fair trial, including
adequate access to their lawyers and to information about the judicial
procedure against them;
 
ii.             
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Gülseren
Yoleri and Mr. Dogan Ozkan as well as of
all human rights defenders in Turkey;
 
iii.            
Put
an end to all forms of harassment, including at judicial level, against Messrs.
Gülseren Yoleri and Dogan Ozkan, as well as
all human rights defenders in Turkey;
 
iv.            
Order
an immediate, thorough, transparent, effective and impartial investigation into
the above-mentioned allegations of physical and psychological pressure of
Messrs. Gülseren Yoleri and Dogan Ozkan in order to identify all those responsible, bring
them before an independent tribunal, and apply the sanctions provided by the
law to them;
 
v.             
Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular
its Articles 1, 6(a), 9, 11 and 12.2;
 
vi.            
Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Turkey.
 
Addresses:
 
·               
President of Turkey,
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31
·               
Prime Minister of Turkey
Binali Yıldırım, Fax: +90 (312) 403 62 82 Email: ozelkalem@basbakanlik.gov.tr
·               
Minister of Justice,
Mr. Bekir Bozdağ, Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33 70; E-mail: ozelkalem@adalet.gov.tr
·               
Minister of Interior,
Mr. Süleyman Soylu; Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30
·               
Ambassador Izzet Selim
Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the European Union in Brussels, Belgium;
Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50
·               Ambassador Mr. Ali
Naci Koru, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of Turkey in your respective country.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, August 9, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line:
·        
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·        
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                
The judicial control includes a travel ban to leave the country and the
obligation to appear at the police station once a week on Saturdays. 