Syrian Arab Republic:  Mazen Darwish to commence his third year of pre-trial detention
February 14, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2014 / FebruarySyrian Arab Republic: Mazen Darwish to commence his third year of pre-trial detention

Paris-Geneva, February 14, 2014. February
16 will mark the two-year anniversary of the arrest of journalist and human
rights defender Mazen Darwish and two of his colleagues, who remain arbitrarily
detained without trial in Damascus Central Prison in Adra. FIDH and OMCT, within the framework
of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, reiterate on this occasion their solidarity with the human
rights movement in Syria and call for the release of all human rights defenders
detained or disappeared.
 
“Though, there is no greater happiness for a prisoner than
the knowledge that the outer world is remembering him, as devastation and
bloodshed has engulfed my homeland, happiness has become a kind of luxury for
which I feel ashamed.”
Mazen Darwish, June 10, 2013,
Damascus Central Prison in Adra 
 

Mazen Darwish, President of the Syrian
Centre for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM), together with two other SCM
members, Mohamed
Hani Al Zaitani and Hussein Hammad Ghrer, lingers in pre-trial detention since February 2012
for advocating for freedom of expression and for monitoring gross human rights
violations committed in Syria in particular since March 2011.
 
On February 16, 2012, Mazen Darwish was
arrested along with 15 other persons. During approximately nine months, Darwish
and some of his colleagues were assumed “forcibly disappeared” and subjected to
acts of torture. Yet the judges
have so far failed to open investigations into these allegations, contrary to
their obligation under international law. In February 2013, five of them,
including the three detained SCM members and two other colleagues, Mansour Omari
and Abdel Rahman Hamada, were informed that they would be prosecuted by the
Anti-Terrorism Court for “publicising terrorist acts”, charges which are
completely unjustified. If convicted, the activists could be imprisoned for up
to 15 years. The trial has been adjourned on numerous occasions. The next
hearing has been scheduled for March 10, 2014.
 
“Human rights defenders have been paying a very heavy toll in
Syria. Dozens of them are arbitrarily detained, sometimes incommunicado, or
have been 'forcibly disappeared'. Meaningful negotiation for an end to the
Syrian conflict requires that all peaceful advocates be immediately released”,
declared Karim Lahidji, FIDH President.
 
“The continuous detention
of Mazen Darwish, Hussein Hammad Ghrer and Mohamed
Hani Al Zaitani clearly forms part of a wider campaign of threats and
harassment against human rights defenders in Syria. We therefore call on
the Syrian authorities to release them immediately and unconditionally as well
as to order investigations into the above-mentioned allegations of torture and
ill-treatment”, further urged Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary
General. 
 


On the
occasion of the two-year anniversary of the detention of Mazen Darwish, Hani Al
Zaitani and Hussein Ghrer, the Observatory reiterates its call to the Syrian
authorities to immediately comply with the decision of the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention (WGAD), which recently declared the detention of the three
human rights defenders as arbitrary and asked for their immediate release. More generally, the
Observatory urges the Syrian authorities to release all human
rights defenders detained in Syria merely to
prevent them from carrying out their legitimate and peaceful human rights work. 