Viet Nam:  As trial begins, human rights groups call for the release of Nguyen Van Dai and other members of the Brotherhood for Democracy
April  4, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2018 / AprilViet Nam: As trial begins, human rights groups call for the release of Nguyen Van Dai and other members of the Brotherhood for Democracy 
JOINT PRESS
RELEASE
 
VIETNAM: As
trial begins, human rights groups call for the release of Nguyen Van Dai and
other members of the Brotherhood for Democracy 
 
Paris-Geneva,
April 3, 2018 - Vietnamese authorities must drop all charges against human
rights lawyer Nguyen Van Dai, his assistant Le Thu Ha, and seven other members
of the Brotherhood for Democracy and immediately release them, the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership) and the
Vietnam Committee on Human Rights (VCHR) urged today.
 
Brotherhood for Democracy founder Nguyen Van Dai, Le Thu Ha, and the
organisation’s members Truong Minh Duc, Nguyen Trung Ton, Pham Van Troi,
and Nguyen Bac Truyen will appear before the People’s Court in Hanoi on
April 5, 2018. If convicted, they could face from 12 years to life in prison or
the death penalty.
 
“The international
community must unequivocally condemn the Vietnamese Government’s relentless
crackdown on civil society and demand the immediate and unconditional release
of Nguyen Van Dai, his colleagues, and all other political prisoners in
Vietnam. The lengthy and arbitrary pre-trial detention of Nguyen Van Dai and Le
Thu Ha deserves a chorus of international outrage,”
said FIDH Secretary-General Debbie Stothard.
 
Nguyen Van
Dai and Le Thu Ha have been arbitrarily detained without trial since December
16, 2015. Truong
Minh Duc, Nguyen Trung Ton, Pham Van Troi, and Nguyen Bac Truyen were
simultaneously arrested
at their homes in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, and Thanh Hoa on July 30, 2017,
and have been arbitrarily detained since. Three other members of the
group, Nguyen Trung Truc, Nguyen Van Tuc, and Tran Thi Xuan, arrested between
July and October 2017, remain in custody. Nguyen Van Tuc is expected to stand
trial on April 10, 2018 in Thai Binh Province.
 
On
December 31, 2017, the Supreme People’s Procuracy in Hanoi announced that Nguyen
Van Dai, Le Thu Ha, Truong Minh Duc, Nguyen Trung Ton, Pham Van Troi, and and Nguyen Bac
Truyen were accused of “activities aimed at overthrowing the people’s
government” (formerly Article 79, now Article 109 in the amended Criminal Code).
Charges against them include advocating for the establishment of a free market
economy and a democratic government, calling on international organisations to
speak out against human rights violations, and giving legal support to dispossessed
farmers and victims of the Formosa pollution disaster.
 
Since his
arrest over two years ago, Nguyen Van Dai has not been allowed to meet with his
lawyer, and his wife has only been permitted to visit him three times. In
June 2017, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention declared Nguyen Van
Dai’s detention arbitrary and called for his release. Other members of the Brotherhood
for Democracy have also been denied access to their families and lawyers, and
have had no opportunity to prepare their defence.
 
“This trial
is a shocking display of Vietnam’s disregard of its binding obligations under
core international human rights treaties to which it is a state party. Dai and
his colleagues are facing execution for peaceful and legitimate human rights activities,
without being able to prepare their defence. This is a new low even for Hanoi’s
repressive regime,” said VCHR President Vo Van Ai.
 
Brotherhood
for Democracy is an independent civil society organization that promotes human
rights through online actions and coordinates the efforts of various
pro-democracy actors in the country. Its members have a long record of
harassment by Government authorities. Prior to the current detention, Nguyen
Van Dai, Truong Minh Duc, Pham Van Troi, and Nguyen Bac Truyen had been arrested and served
lengthy prison terms for their legitimate and peaceful human rights activities.
 
“We strongly
condemn the
harassment, arbitrary arrest, and trial of Nguyen Van Dai and the Brotherhood
for Democracy members, which illustrate the Vietnamese Government’s relentless
efforts to intimidate and silence human rights defenders for their legitimate human rights activities,” said
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
Since
December 2017, at least 24 activists and human rights defenders have been
sentenced to prison terms in Vietnam. The country holds at least 130 political
prisoners.
 
For more
information, please contact:
·    
VCHR: Penelope Faulkner
(Vietnamese/English/French) - Tel: +33 1 45 98 30 85
·    
FIDH: Andrea Giorgetta (English) -
Tel: +66 88 6117722 (Bangkok) / Audrey Couprie & Samuel Hanryon
(French/English) - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris)
·     OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau (French/English) - Tel: +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva)
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
program is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European
Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society. 