Syrian Arab Republic:  Concern following the enforced disappearance of human rights lawyer Khalil Maatouk
October  3, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2012 / OctoberSyrian Arab Republic: Concern following the enforced disappearance of human rights lawyer Khalil Maatouk

JOINT
PRESS RELEASE
 
 
SYRIA: Concern
following the enforced disappearance of human rights lawyer Khalil Maatouk
 
Copenhagen,
Geneva, Paris, October 3, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the
Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) and the Cairo Institute for
Human Rights Studies (CIHRS) fear for the safety and security of human rights lawyer Khalil Maatouk following his arrest in the
morning of October 2. 
 
Mr.
Khalil Maatouk, the Executive Director of the Syrian Center for Legal
Research and Studies and a human rights lawyer who has defended numerous
prisoners of conscience before Syrian courts, was arrested around 11 a.m. on
October 2, 2012 at a checkpoint in Sahnaya (in the countryside outside of
Damascus) while he was driving to his workplace in Damascus. He was reportedly
taken by armed men. Since then, his whereabouts
have been unknown.
 
The Observatory, the EMHRN and the CIHRS are deeply
concerned by this arrest and the subsequent enforced disappearance of Mr.
Maatouk. Our organisations fear for his physical and psychological integrity
and are all the more concerned that Mr. Maatouk suffers from a serious medical
condition, which requires specific and constant medical care[1].
The Observatory, the EMHRN and the CIHRS call upon the Syrian authorities to
disclose his whereabouts and release him immediately as we believe that his
arrest is related to his human rights activities. 
 
The
Observatory, the EMHRN and the CIHRS urge the Syrian authorities to put an end
to all acts of harassment against human rights defenders, to immediately and
unconditionally release all persons arbitrarily detained and to conform in all
circumstances with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders
(1998) as well as international human rights instruments ratified by Syria. 
 
For
further information, please contact:
•       FIDH: Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18
•       OMCT: +41 22 809 49 39
•       EMHRN: Shaimaa Abu Elkheir: +20 101077207
CIHRS: Sohair Riad: +202-27951112



[1]   Mr. Maatouk suffers from
lung problems and had just returned home from a long trip where he had to
receive urgent medical care. 