Bahrain:  Arbitrary detention, judicial harassment and torture of Mr. Hussain Jawad, Chairman of the European-Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR)
February 23, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2015 / FebruaryBahrain: Arbitrary detention, judicial harassment and torture of Mr. Hussain Jawad, Chairman of the European-Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR)​New informationBHR 001 / 0215 / OBS
011.1
Arbitrary detention /
Torture and Ill-treatment /
 Judicial harassment
Bahrain
February 23, 2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary
detention, judicial harassment and torture of Mr. Hussain Jawad, Chairman
of the European-Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR). On February 21,
2015, Mr. Jawad appeared before the Public Prosecution for another case brought
against him (see background information). He appeared to have suffered from
physical and psychological torture and ill-treatment. He was allegedly beaten,
threatened with death, and threatened that his wife would be harmed. He was
also reportedly blind-folded, deprived of sleep and drinking water, and forced
to constantly stand. He was forced to listen to the screams of other inmates
who appeared to have been electrically shocked, in order to scare him into
signing confessions. His hands appeared to be swollen and bruised as a result
of the hand-cuffs that were not removed since his arrest.
He was also
denied to go to the bathroom, and was beaten when he requested to do so. He was
denied contact with his family and lawyer. He only managed to call his wife
twice, and when he informed her in the first call that he was hurt, he suffered
retaliation. He was also sexually harassed by a female police officer, he was
stripped naked and groped.
During the
interrogation at the Public Prosecution, Mr. Jawad appeared to be not fully
conscious, hallucinating and falling asleep. His clothes were covered in urine.
He was forced to sign confessions obtained under torture. He is now facing new
charges based on these confessions, of “collecting funds from Bahrain and
abroad to support vandalising groups”. The Prosecution then ordered him seven
days detention pending investigation.
On February
23, Mr. Jawad was brought to the Public Prosecution for interrogation about the
complaint filed by his lawyers for allegations of torture. He was then taken
back to dry dock prison, where at the moment he remains detained.
The
Observatory calls on the Bahraini authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release Mr. Jawad, and drop all charges against him as he is
targeted solely for his legitimate human rights activities.
The
Observatory is further deeply concerned by the allegations of torture and ill-treatment
during detention, and urges the authorities to guarantee the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Jawad, as well as to open immediate, effective
and independent investigations into these allegations, in order to sanction all
those responsible.
The
Observatory more generally urges the Bahraini authorities to put an end to all
acts of harassment – including at the judicial level – against Mr. Jawad, and
to comply with the relevant international norms and standards, in particular
the United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, and international human rights
standards and instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Background
information:
 
On February
18, Mr. Jawad was taken to the Public Prosecution without informing his lawyer
or family. The Public Prosecution has ordered the release of Mr. Jawad pending
trial on charges of “illegal gathering” and “rioting”.
On February 16
2015, Mr. Hussain Jawad was arrested
by masked police officers in plain clothes, who searched his house and
confiscated his passport and mobile phone. Mr. Jawad was not informed about the
reason of his arrest. After 10 hours of incommunicado detention, Mr. Jawad
managed to call his wife and inform her that he was detained at the CID. He
also informed her that he was ill-treated in detention.
Mr. Hussain
Jawad was previously arrested on November 23, 2013, and was interrogated about
a speech he gave at a protest rally in 2013. He was released on bail on January
9, 2014. He is currently on trial for charges of “criticising
government institutions”, “insulting the flag and emblem of the country”,
“attempting to disrupt public security” and “illegal gathering”.  His next hearing is scheduled for February
25, 2015. 
 
Actions
requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to:
 

Guarantee the physical and psychological
     integrity of Mr. Hussain Jawad and all human rights defenders in Bahrain;

Immediately release Mr. Hussain Jawad and drop
     all charges against him, and against all human rights defenders in
     Bahrain;

Carry out an immediate, independent and effective
     investigation into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment against
     Mr. Hussain Jawad, in order to identify all those responsible and apply
     them the sanctions provided by law;

Put an end to any act of harassment, including at
     the judicial level, against Mr. Hussain Jawad and against all human rights
     defenders in Bahrain;


Conform in any circumstances with the provisions
     of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998
     by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular: 

its Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamentalfreedoms at
the national and international levels” ;its Article 6 (c) which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others to study,
discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice,
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other
appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters” ;and its Article 12.2 which states that
“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.
vi.
   Ensure in all circumstances respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 


Addresses: 
 
·        
Cheikh
Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·        
Cheikh
Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555;
Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·        
Cheikh
Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973
175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·        
Lt.
Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Tel: +973  17572222 and
+973 17390000.
Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·        
Permanent
Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville,
1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50.
Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your
respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
February 23, 2015. 
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, a FIDH and
OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims
to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line:

E-mail:
     Appeals@fidh-omct.org 

·     Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1
43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 

Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 