Azerbaijan:  Relief over the release of 15 political prisoners
March 18, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2016 / MarchAzerbaijan: Relief over the release of 15 political prisoners


 

Joint Statement
We, the undersigned members of the
Sport for Rights coalition, express our relief over the release of 15 political
prisoners in Azerbaijan. Human rights defender Rasul Jafarov, the founder of
the Sport for Rights campaign, stepped out from Baku’s Prison Number 10 into
freedom on 17 March after spending 593 days unjustly jailed. The same day, the
European Court of Human Rights issued a judgment in Jafarov’s case, acknowledging that his
arrest and detention were politically motivated. 
 
Jafarov was one of 14 political
prisoners included in a presidential pardon decree signed on 17 March. The other political prisoners pardoned through that
decree included journalists Parviz Hashimli, Hilal Mammadov, and Tofig Yagublu;
human rights defenders Taleh Khasmammadov and Anar Mammadli; NIDA civic
movement activists Rashadat Akhundov, Mahammad Azizov and Rashad Hasanov;
bloggers Siraj Karimli and Omar Mammadov; former government official Akif
Muradverdiyev; chairman of the National Statehood party Nemat Penahli; and
Musavat party activist Yadigar Sadigov.
 
A further political prisoner,
journalist Rauf Mirkadirov, was released on 17 March by the Baku Court of
Appeals, which commuted his six-year prison sentence into a suspended five-year
sentence. Mirkadirov had been unjustly jailed since April 2014 on politically
motivated treason charges.
 
“We are incredibly relieved for those released yesterday, including
Rasul Jafarov, who was arrested in August 2014 after launching our campaign to
draw attention to human rights abuses taking place in Azerbaijan. But none of
these 15 people ever should have been arrested in the first place, and dozens
more remain unjustly jailed now, neglected by this pardon decree. They must be
released, and this vicious cycle of politically motivated arrests must end”, said Rebecca Vincent, coordinator
of the Sport for Rights campaign.
 
While the release of these political
prisoners was the right step, we note that they never should have spent a
single day in jail. Further, dozens of other political prisoners remain in
Azerbaijani jails, including journalists Khadija Ismayilova and Seymur Hezi,
human rights lawyer Intigam Aliyev, youth activist Ilkin Rustemzade, and
opposition REAL movement leader Ilgar Mammadov, whose release has been ordered
by the European Court of Human Rights.
 
We reiterate our call for the
immediate and unconditional release of all political prisoners, and for an end
to the cycle of politically motivated arrests in Azerbaijan. We urge the international
community to continue to press for the release of the remaining political
prisoners as a matter of urgent priority, and for further concrete reforms to
improve the country’s dire human rights situation.
 
Supporting organisations:
 
ARTICLE 19
Civil Rights Defenders
Committee to Protect Journalists
Freedom Now
Front Line Defenders
Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights
Human Rights House Foundation
Index on Censorship
Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and
Safety
International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH)
International Media Support
International Partnership for Human
Rights
NESEHNUTI
Netherlands Helsinki Committee
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
PEN America
People in Need
Platform
Polish Green Network
Reporters Without Borders
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 