Bangladesh:  Open letter on Digital Media Security Bill
February  5, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Bangladesh / 2018 / FebruaryBangladesh: Open letter on Digital Media Security Bill
To 
The President of Bangladesh, H.E. Md Abdul
Hamid 
The Chair of the National Human Rights
Commission, H.E. Kazi Reazul Hoque 
Subject:
Open letter on Digital Media Security Bill 
Your Excellencies    
We write to you as international civil society
organisations engaged on human rights and sustainable development issues in
Bangladesh. We are concerned that in the current political climate in
Bangladesh, which is narrowing avenues for free debate and legitimate
democratic dissent in the country, the Bangladesh Digital Security Bill 2018,
likely to be introduced in the current session of Parliament, fails to protect
the right of the media, civil society and members of the general public to freely
express their opinions on policies and actions of decision makers.
Many of our organisations have closely
followed debates about this bill over the years. In the past we have raised
concerns about the existence of overbroad definitions and harsh punishments in
the bill which, if enacted, would severely undermine freedom of expression as
well as the freedom of the press. From available information, it appears that our
concerns about the bill’s provisions as likely to impinge on constitutional
rights and well as Bangladesh’s commitments under international law persist.
Both Article 29 of the Constitution of Bangladesh and Article 19 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights allow the imposition of restrictions
on the right to freedom of expression only in very limited and clearly defined circumstances.

In the present situation we recommend that the
bill’s provisions are carefully considered from a constitutional and
international law standpoint. Mr. David Kaye, the UN Special Rapporteur on the
Promotion and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression, has
done extensive work on the subject including on the exercise of the freedom of
expression in the digital age. We believe that the government would greatly benefit
from engagement with Mr. Kaye, who could advise on the permissible limits on
the freedom of expression under international law. 
Furthermore, we urge the government to seek
assistance from the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
on measures to strengthen the protection and promotion of human rights in the
country in line with constitutional and international standards. We are
concerned to hear that an official visit to Bangladesh by the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights, H.E. Zeid bin Ra’ad Al Hussein has been
postponed and request the facilitation of a such a visit at the earliest
opportunity. 
We believe that Bangladesh’s democracy and
commitment to human rights and sustainable development will be strengthened through
constructive engagement with UN human rights experts. We urge you to kindly consider
the above requests in the interests of the people of Bangladesh. 
Sincerely, 
List of signatories (in alphabetical order)  
Asian Federation Against
Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD)
Asian Forum for Human Rights and
Development (FORUM-ASIA)
Asian Human Rights Commission 
CIVICUS 
FIDH – International Federation
for Human Rights 
Human Rights Watch 
Odhikar 
People’s Watch 
Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights 
World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) 