Iran:  Incommunicado detention of human rights lawyer Zeinab Taheri
June 22, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2018 / JuneIran: Incommunicado detention of human rights lawyer Zeinab Taheri​IRN 002 / 0618 / OBS 088Incommunicado detention /
Ill-treatments
/ Judicial harassment
Iran
June 22, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in Iran. 
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the League
for the Defence of Human Rights in Iran (LDDHI) about the arbitrary arrest,
incommunicado detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Zeinab Taheri, a human rights lawyer.
 
According to the information received, on June
19, 2018, Ms. Zeinab Taheri was summoned to the Prosecutor’s Office for Culture
and Media in Tehran and detained on charges of “disturbing the public opinion”,
“spreading propaganda against the system” and “publishing lies”. Tehran
Prosecutor Mr. Jafari Dolatabadi subsequently said during a press conference organised
on the same day that Ms. Taheri had “incited the public opinion and mobilised
the counterrevolution against the judiciary”, and that “the hostile media used
her remarks to published reports against the judiciary”.
 
Later on the same day, Ms. Zeinab Taheri was
transferred to the Qarchack women’s prison in Sharhr-e Rey, southern Tehran,
where she has been detained incommunicado since. Ms. Taheri would allegedly
have been subjected to ill-treatments during her detention and subsequently
transferred to a hospital. She has also reportedly started a hunger strike to
protest her detention.
 
Ms. Zeinab Taheri’s arrest came a day after one
of her clients, Mr. Mohammad Salass, a Sufi dervish, was executed, for
allegedly driving a bus that killed three members of the security forces near
the house of a Sufi Order’s leader four months ago. Ms. Taheri took over the
case in its final stage and applied for a retrial at the Supreme Court.
However, the Supreme Court did not invite her to a hearing and did not seem to
take notice of her application. In the final week leading to the execution of
her client, Ms. Zeinab Taheri said that he had been coerced to confess under
torture and had voiced her objections and criticism of the unfair proceedings
against her client, including on Twitter,
where she had vowed to "reveal for public opinion all possible"
evidence of her client’s innocence. Ms. Taheri also wrote an open letter to Iran’s
Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei to ask him to intervene in the case. The
international community voiced its concerns about the judicial proceedings that
led to the execution of Mr. Mohammad Salass[1].
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern
about Ms. Zeinab Taheri’s incommunicado detention and urges the Iranian
authorities to immediately and unconditionally release her and to guarantee in
all circumstances her physical and psychological integrity.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Iran asking
them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
and psychological integrity of Ms. Zeinab Taheri, as well as of all human rights
defenders in Iran;
 
ii. Immediately and unconditionally release Ms.
Zeinab Taheri, as well as all human rights defenders detained in Iran, as their
detention is arbitrary as it is merely aimed at punishing them for their human
rights activities;
 
iii. In the meantime, guarantee her right to due process and fair trial, as protected under
international law, including the unhindered access to her lawyer and family;
 
iv. Put an end to all acts of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against Ms. Zeinab Taheri, as well as of all
human rights defenders in Iran and ensure that they are able to carry out
their activities without hindrance;
 
v.  Carry
out a transparent, impartial, immediate and thorough investigation into the
above-mentioned allegations of ill-treatment in order to identify all those
responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as
provided by the law;
 
vi. Conform in all circumstances to the
provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9,
1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular its Articles 1 and
12.2.;
 
vii. Ensure in all circumstances respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights instruments ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:
 
·    Leader of the
Islamic Republic, H.E. Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, Fax: + 98 21 441 2030,
Email: info_leader@leader.ir; Twitter: @khamenei_ir
·    President Hassan
Rouhani, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 644 54811; Email:
media@rouhani.ir; Twitter: @HassanRouhani (English) and @Rouhani_ir (Persian).
·    Head of the
Judiciary, H.E. Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21
879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: info@dadiran.ir /
info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
·    Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad Zarif, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax:
+98-21-66743149; matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
·   
Secretary General, High Council for Human
Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad Larijani, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email:
info@humanrights-iran.ir
·    H.E. Mr. Javad
Amin-Mansour, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email:
mission.iran@ties.itu.int
·   
H.E. Mr. Peiman Seadat, Ambassador, Embassy of
Iran in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email:
secreteriat@iranembassy.be
 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, June 22, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in
1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of
ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.




[1] See for instance EEAS
Statement on an execution carried out in Iran on June 19, 2018. 