Cambodia:  Independent radio station Director sentenced to 20 years in prison
October  2, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2012 / OctoberCambodia: Independent radio station Director sentenced to 20 years in prison


THE OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE

 
CAMBODIA: Independent
radio station Director sentenced to 20 years in prison
 
Paris-Geneva, October 2, 2012. The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), strongly condemns the conviction and harsh sentencing
of Mr. Mam Sonando, Director and Owner of the FM station 105 (Beehive Radio),
one of the few independent media outlets in Cambodia. Mr. Sonando is an
outspoken critic of the Government's human rights record, including serious and
systematic violations of land and housing rights. 
 
Yesterday, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court found Mam Sonando
guilty on charges of insurrection and inciting people to take up arms against
the state under six articles under the Penal Code[1]
and sentenced him to 20 years’ imprisonment and a fine of 10 million riels. On
July 16, 2012, he was formally charged by the Phnom Penh Municipal Court. Nine
other co-defendants were also found guilty and sentenced to between 2 to 30
years’ imprisonment and fines. The Court suspended the prison sentences of five
co-defendants who had confessed. The co-defendants are all villagers from an
area in Kratie province which has been embroiled in a long-running land
conflict with a private company.
 
Throughout the trial from September 11 to 14, the government dispatched
hundreds of police to block off the roads leading to the Phnom Penh Municipal
Court to prevent Mr. Sonando’s supporters from gathering in front of the court.
This heavy police presence also curtailed the presence of international trial
observers. Security guards removed an FIDH representative who attempted to
observe the trial on the ground that he did not receive an ‘admission ticket’
to enter.
 
In his latest report to the United Nations Human Rights Council, the
Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation in Cambodia, Mr. Surya Subedi,
observed that human rights defenders and journalists “continued to encounter
harassment, intimidation and the threat of a defamation or incitement lawsuit[2].”
Such harassment and intimidation of human rights defenders have intensified in
2012, characterised by arbitrary arrests and detention, judicial harassment,
and, in some cases, assassination. 
 
“The
conviction and sentencing of Sonando and other Kratie representatives is
another major blow to the rule of law in Cambodia”,
said Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH president. “In the continuing absence of
credible evidence in Sonando’s case, this guilty verdict is also an indictment
of the Cambodian judiciary which has all but lost any trace of independence and
has become instead a tool of repression of critics and human rights defenders”.
 
“Mam Sonando has been convicted
for his legitimate human rights activities. The Appeal Court should reverse
this verdict and uphold the respect of the rule of law in Cambodia in
accordance to international human rights standards”,
said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary-General.
 
Background
 
Mr. Sonando is 70-year-old and holds both Cambodian and French
citizenships. The Beehive Radio Station which he runs regularly
broadcasts reports that are critical of government polices. He is also the
President of the Democrats Association, a non-governmental organisation duly
registered with the Ministry of Interior with a mission to advocate for
democratic freedoms and to raise awareness of civil and political rights,
including the right to vote. Mr. Sonando was arrested on July 15 at his
home in Phnom Penh and has been in remand detention since. 
 
The charges against Mr. Sonando stem from accusations by the Government
that Mr. Sonando was responsible for instigating villagers inhabiting an area
of farmland in Kratie province marked for development by the Russian company Casotim,
which has been granted a 15,000 hectare economic land concession. On May 16,
the Government sent in hundreds of armed security personnel, supported by
helicopter, to evict the villagers, killing Heng Chantha, a 14-year-old girl,
during the crackdown. Government officials later justified the operation by
claiming the villagers, some of whom are members of the Democrats Association,
were part of an attempt to secede from Cambodia. The authorities have so far
failed to initiate an investigation into the military siege and the killing of
Heng Chantha. Authorities have also failed to release any evidence of the
so-called secessionist movement. 
 
On June 22 2012, Mr. Sonando was in the Hague, the Netherlands, to cover
the presentation of a communication to the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) containing allegations of crimes against
humanity committed by the Cambodian Government. The communication was submitted
by the Khmer People Power Movement (KPPM), which is headed by prominent
government critic Sourn Serey Ratha. On June 22, the ICC  acknowledged in writing the receipt of KPPM’s
communication. Mr. Sonando’s report on KPPM’s communication to the ICC was
broadcast by Beehive Radio on June 25. A day later, on June 26, Cambodian
Prime Minister Hun Sen urged in a nationally broadcasted public speech that Mr.
Sonando be arrested for masterminding “a plot to overthrow the Government
and attempting to establish a State within a State”. No evidence has been
presented to substantiate this claim. 
 
Mr. Sonando has been imprisoned twice before. In 2003, he served two
weeks in prison after being charged with giving "false" information
and inciting people to commit crimes and to discriminate, in connection to a
telephone call made to a program broadcast by Beehive radio in January 2003. In
2005, he was again arrested and imprisoned for three months on charges of
incitement and defamation for giving an interview over the radio in which
criticism of a border treaty between Cambodia and Vietnam was discussed.
 
For further information, please contact:
FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie:
+ 33 1 43 55 25 18 (Paris)
OMCT: Isabelle Scherer: + 41 22 809
49 39 (Geneva)
 
 



[1]                 Article 28 defines the crime of instigation of felony or a misdemeanor
(felony is punishable by life imprisonment or by more than five years but no
more than 30 years, while a fine may also be imposed in addition to
imprisonment; a misdemeanor is punishable by imprisonment between six days to
five years, while a fine may also be imposed in addition to imprisonment);
Articles 456 and 457 define the crime of insurrectionary movement (punishable
by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years); Article 464 defines the crime of
inciting people to take up arms against state authority (punishable by
imprisonment from fifteen to thirty years if effective); Article 504 defines
the crime of obstruction of public officials (punishable by imprisonment from
six months to one year and a fine from one million to two million Riels);
Article 609 defines the crime of unlawful interference in the discharge of
public functions (punishable by imprisonment from one to three years and a fine
from two million to six million Riels).


[2]                 A/HRC/21/63. http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session21/A-HRC-21-63_en.pdf 