Iran:  Follow-up of case IRN 040311_Whereabouts of Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi located_ Arbitrary detention
March 24, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2011 / MarchIran: Follow-up of case IRN 040311_Whereabouts of Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi located_ Arbitrary detentionCase IRN 040311.1
Follow-up of the case IRN 040311
Whereabouts located/ Arbitrary detention/ Fear for the
physical and psychological integrity
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) has received new information on the
following situation in Iran.
New information
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source
that Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, two opposition leaders[1], who had disappeared around
24 February 2011 along with their wives, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and
Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi,were
returned to their homes, approximately beginning/mid of March 2011 (the exact
dates are unknown). No information is currently available on the places
where they have been held. 
According to the same information received, Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr. Mehdi
Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi are currently
detained with no arrest
warrant, summons or charge in their respective homes which are surrounded
by security forces.
OMCT welcomes the fact that Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms.
Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi were returned to their respective
homes, but OMCT reiterates its grave concern about their safety and
arbitrary detention. OMCT urges the
competent authorities to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity
at all times, in accordance with international human rights law, in particular
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which also states that no
person shall be subjected to arbitrary detention. 
Background
information 
OMCT had earlier been informed about the enforced
disappearances of Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mr.Mehdi Karroubi,along with their wives, Ms.Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi around 24
February 2011. OMCT was gravely concerned about their safety given the Iranian intelligence and security services
well-established track record of using torture against opponents.
According to the information
received by the International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, the
aforementioned persons were confined, on 14 February 2011, in their homes, in Teheran, under an
illegal “house arrest”, with no arrest warrant, summons or charge, after Mir
Hossein Mousavi and Mr. Mehdi Karroubi had called for public demonstrations in
solidarity with Egyptian and Tunisian pro-democracy activists[2].
Their homes were reportedly surrounded by uniformed and plain-closed security
forces. Family members and associates were not allowed to their homes and
communication, including the phone, was cut off. 
According
to the same information, around 24 February 2011, Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr.
Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi were transferred
from their homes to an unknown location, reportedly a “safe house”[3].
Some reports indicated that they may have been moved to Heshmatiyeh
Prison, in Tehran. Authorities had, on their side,
denied any transfer and stated that the four were still confined in their homes
prohibited from communication. However, according to the same information
received, their homes were empty at that time. Despite numerous requests from
their families to the authorities for information on their whereabouts, the
families were unable to receive any information. 
Action
requested
Please write to the authorities in Iran urging them to: 
i.              
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr Mehdi
Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi as well as of their
families;
ii.            
Grant Mir Hossein
Mousavi, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra
Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi prompt and unconditional access to a lawyer of their choice and their families, as
well as guarantee that they are examined by independent doctors and receive
adequate medical care, in accordance, inter alia, the UN Standard Minimum Rules
for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iii.           
Order
their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring them before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and
guarantee their procedural rights at all times;
iv.          
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the enforced
disappearances of Mir Hossein Mousavie, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard
and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi, the results of which must be made public, in order
to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law; 
v.            
Ensure that an effective remedy, including
the right to full redress with compensation and rehabilitation be granted to
the victims concerned; 
vi.          
Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental
freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and
international human rights standards.
Addresses 
Ø     
Leader of the Islamic Republic, His Excellency
Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of the Supreme Leader, Shoahada
Street, Qom, Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21 649, + 98 21 649 / 21 774
2228, Email: info@leader.ir / istiftaa@wilayah.org / webmaster@wilayah.org /
info_leader@leader.ir
Ø      President
Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue,
Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran, Islamic
Republic of Iran, Fax: +
98 21 649 5880. Email: dr-ahmadinejad@president.ir
Ø     
Head of the Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah
Sadeq Larijani, Ministry of Justice, Park-e Shahr, Tehran, Islamic Republic of
Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: Irjpr@iranjudiciary.com / bia.judi@yahoo.com
Ø     
Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Abdolmajid Keshk-e Mesri Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic
of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 390 1999, Email: matbuat@mfa.gov
Ø     
Permanent Mission of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax:
+41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
Ø     
Embassy of Iran in Brussels, 15 a
avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: +
32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com
Please also write to the
diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective countries.
***
Geneva, 24 March 2011
Kindly inform
OMCT of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your
reply



[1] Both were unsuccessful candidates to the disputed 2009 presidential
elections. 


[2] Demonstrations that took place on 14 and 20 February 2011 were reportedly violently repressed by the security forces. 


[3] A “safe
house” is considered a location for secret detention of high security
detainees, which is not under the control of the Judiciary or any other
monitoring mechanisms. The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and the Iranian
intelligence agencies are known for using “safe houses” in order to get forced
confessions from detainees without scrutiny or pressure from other legal
bodies. 