Bahrain:  Bahrain: arrest of children in Bahrain
August 10, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2000 / AugustBahrain: Bahrain: arrest of children in BahrainCHILD CONCERN Case BHR 100800.CC  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Bahrain Human Rights Organisation (BHRO), a member of the OMCT network, that the detention and torturing of citizens continues on a regular basis despite all the claims by the Bahrain authorities.  In the first week of August the following teenagers were arrested in Daih:  Ahmed Abdulla Al-Khair, 16, Hussain Ali Rustom, 17, Ali Eid Saeed, 15, Mohammed Hassan, 13, Mahmood Hassan, 15, Talib Ali Al-Asfer, 13, Hamza Ali Al- Asfer, 12.  These citizens were transferred to Al-Khamis for interrogation and they are reportedly under high risk of torture.  According to the information received, police stations have been empowered to detain and ill-treat citizens, including minors, in a vastly decentralized structure that is aimed at diluting responsibility for torturing citizens. This policy followed the decision by the government to divide the country into 5 regions and appoint high security officer as a governors of these regions. For example, Abdul-Azia Atteyatollah Al-Khalifa, appointed as the governor of the capital Manama, was the head of a special committee formed in 1995 to deal with the then ongoing unrest and was allegedly responsible for the torture and death of many citizens between 1995-1997. Abdul-Rahman bin-Saqher Al-Khalifa, appointed as governor for the Northern region, was reported responsible for the torture of detainees and prisoners when he was at the investigation department.  Both governors are members of Al-Khalifa ruling family. It is worth noting that the Capital and Northern regions of Bahrain are the most populated, and include most areas and villages witnessing unrest and arrests.  The International Secretariat of OMCT recalls that Bahrain is a state party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Article 37b) which states that "The arrest, detention or imprisonment of a child shall be in conformity with the law and shall be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time."  Furthermore, that "No child shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment."  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Bahrain urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons and order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; ii.	put an immediate end to the use of arbitrary detention of  people by the police and abrogate 1974 State Security Law and all national laws which are not in compliance with international human rights standards; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, particularly the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  Addresses  His Highness Ilamad Bin Issa Al Khalifa, Office of His Highness the Amir, P.O. Box 555, The Amiri Court, Rifa'a Palace, Bahrain. Fax : + 973 668884. Telex : 8666 Qasar BN; 8500 Qasar BN  His Excellency Al-Shaikh Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa, Prime Minister, P.O. Box 1000, al-Manama, Bahrain. Telex : 9336 PROM BN or 7889 PMPO BN. FAX: + 973 533033.  His Excellency Al-Shaikh Mohammed Bin Khalifa Al Khalifa, Minister of Interior, P.O. Box 13, al-Manama, Bahrain. Fax : + 973 276765 or 290526 or 754303. Telex : 9572 PSMKT BN OR 8333 ALAMAN BN  Geneva, August 10, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 