China:  Alleged torture and subsequent death in detention of Karwang, a 36-year-old Tibetan monk at Nyagrong Monastery
June 21, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2012 / JuneChina: Alleged torture and subsequent death in detention of Karwang, a 36-year-old Tibetan monk at Nyagrong Monastery
CHN 210612
Death in detention/ Allegation
of torture/ Extrajudicial killing
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China. 
Brief description of the situation
The International
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the torture
and subsequent death in detention of Karwang,
a 36-year-old Tibetan monk at Nyagrong Monastery, in Nyagrong (Chinese:
Xinlong) County, Kardze (Chinese: Ganzi) Tibetan Autonomous Prefectures,
Sichuan Province. 
According to the information received, in May 2012,
Karwang was arrested on suspicion of having put up posters calling for freedom
on the walls of a Chinese government building in Nyagrong County a few days
earlier. He was taken to Dartsedo (Chinese: Kangding) County where he was
detained for about eight days. The authorities reportedly tried to force him to
confess to having put up the posters but Karwang denied. He was allegedly
tortured (including beatings). 
According to the same information received, Karwang
died a few days later in detention. His relatives received a call from Dartsedo
police telling them to come to collect his body. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the alleged torture to which Karwang was subjected, which
allegedly led to his death. OMCT calls upon the competent authorities to carry
out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation into the circumstances of these events, notably the
allegations of torture and resulting death of Karwang, in accordance with international human rights standards, such as
the UN Principle on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal,
Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of which must be made public, in
order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law.
Actions Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.              
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events,
notably the allegations of torture and resulting death of Karwang, in
accordance with international human rights standards, inter alia, with the UN
Principle on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal,
Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of which must be made public,
in orderto bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
ii.             
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation, is granted to the victim’s family;
iii.           
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses

 Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General
Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) 
Ms. Wu
Aiying, Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang
Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s
Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn 
Mr. Dai
Bingguo,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang
Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn; 
Mr. Meng
Jianzhu, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China,
Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741,
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216 
Permanent
Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box
85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int; 

Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 21 June 2012
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 