Turkey: arbitrary detention and forced deportation of more than 205 Africans
August  2, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2001 / AugustTurkey: arbitrary detention and forced deportation of more than 205 AfricansCase TUR 020801   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Turkey.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the collective arbitrary detention and forced deportation of more than 205 Africans in Istanbul, Turkey.   According to the information received, on the 7th of July 2001, Istanbul police forces arrested more than 205 Africans, including refugees, without charging them with any offence. It is thought that they were arrested solely because of the colour of their skin. According to the IHD (Turkish Human Rights Association), the arrested Africans were detained for several days under conditions that represent cruel treatment. The detainees were deprived of food, water and medical treatment during their detention and deportation. Several detainees also claim they were beaten and sexually harassed by Turkish policemen, and three women and a man were allegedly raped. One refugee women died two weeks after her release, reportedly because of the harsh detention conditions that she was subjected to.   During their detention, prisoners were allegedly forced to sign a paper in Turkish stating they came from Greece and wanted to return to that country. Out of 123 complaints filed at IHD, 116 state violation of their passport and travel documents. Turkish authorities have allegedly destroyed the pages of their passports where legal entry visas were to be found (mainly pages 7 to 9). 7 persons are reportedly still detained for not having signed the statement. On the 18th of July, Ms Eren KESKIN, Chairwoman of the IHD and Turkish lawyer, went to the Alien Police Station to visit the detainees but her request was rejected by the authorities.  On the 14th of July, after seven days of detention, most (between 205 and 290 persons) were deported to the Ipsala border zone between Turkey and Greece and forced to go to Greece, reportedly having been threatened with death by the Turkish security forces if they attempted to cross the Turkish border again. They were left in a swamp area, where minefields reportedly still exist, without any food or assistance. It has been reported that 3 persons died on their way to the Greek border (between 7 and 12 hours long), yet no bodies have been found to date. The Africans were then arrested at the Greek border where they were detained for one night before being sent back to Turkey again, from whence they were sent back to Greece. Some of them managed to sneak back into Turkey and went back to Istanbul.   The Greek authorities decided to cooperate with the UNHCR in order to conduct a search for immigrants and refugees who might still be trapped at the border zone. However, no such agreement has been reached with the Turkish authorities, who still refuse to allow any organisation to reach the area and bring humanitarian assistance to those who need it.   OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the persons still trapped at the border zone and urges the Turkish Government to comply with International humanitarian standards and assist in the search for the persons in question.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Turkey urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons; ii.	order the immediate release of the persons still being detained in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their physical and psychological integrity at all times; iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these arrests and deportations, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law. iv.	authorise the UNHCR and local NGOs to carry out research missions in the border zone and bring humanitarian assistance to those who need it; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights and humanitarian standards.  Addresses  ·	Minister of Interior, Mr Rüstü Kazim Yücelen, Içisleri Bakanligi, 06644 Ankara, Turkey. Fax: + 90 312 418 17 95. ·	Minister of Justice, Prof Hikmet Sami Türk, Ministry of Justice, Adalet Bakanligi, 06659 Ankara, Turkey. Fax: + 90 312 417 3954 / 418 5667 ·	State Minister with responsibility for Human Rights, Mr E. Safter Gaydali, Office of the Prime Minister, Basbakanlik, 06573 Ankara, Turkey. Fax: + 90 312 417 0476  Please also write to the embassies of Turkey in your respective country.  Kindly inform OMCTof any action undertaken, quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply  Geneva,  August 2nd, 2001 