Syrian Arab Republic:  Where is human rights lawyer Khalil Maatouk?
February 18, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2013 / FebruarySyrian Arab Republic: Where is human rights lawyer Khalil Maatouk?


THE OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE

 
SYRIA: Where is human
rights lawyer Khalil Maatouk?
 
Paris-Geneva,
February 18, 2013. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), expresses its utmost
concern for the physical and psychological integrity of human rights lawyer
Khalil Maatouk after his enforced disappearance 139 days ago.
 
Mr.
Khalil Maatouk, a human rights lawyer who has defended numerous
prisoners of conscience before Syrian courts, was arrested with a friend by
armed men on October 2, 2012 at a checkpoint in Sahnaya (in the countryside
outside of Damascus). Since then, no further information could be obtained
regarding his situation and whereabouts. Neither of the men has been seen
since, although even the extensive period of legal custody of 60 days elapsed.
Despite repeated requests by his relatives and lawyers, the Syrian authorities
have failed to provide information on Mr. Khalil Maatouk’s fate and whereabouts
and did not allow him to contact his family and lawyers. 
 
While
two witnesses claimed having seen Mr. Maatouk in a detention centre, the
judicial authorities have recently denied holding him in custody. Thus being
placed outside the protection of the law, there are serious concerns for his
physical and mental integrity, accentuated by his need of medical treatment for
a chronic disease. Indeed, Mr. Maatouk suffers from a serious medical condition,
which requires specific medical care. 
 
The Observatory calls upon the Syrian authorities to
immediately disclose Mr. Maatouk’s whereabouts and release him as it believes that
his arrest is related to his human rights activities. 
 
In
addition, the Observatory urges the Syrian authorities
to put an end to all acts of harassment against human rights defenders, to
immediately and unconditionally release all persons arbitrarily detained and to
conform in all circumstances with the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders (1998) as well as international human rights instruments
ratified by Syria. 
 
For
further information, please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39 