Mauritania:  Mauritania: torture
May  3, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Mauritania / 2000 / MayMauritania: Mauritania: tortureMauritania: torture   Case MRT 030500  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Mauritania.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Agir Ensemble pour les Droits de l'Homme, member of the OMCT network, of the alleged torture suffered by Mr Yedaly Ould Cheikh, former Minister of Justice and Federal Secretary of the opposition party Union des Forces Démocratiques/Ere Nouvelle (UFD/EN) in Nouadhibou and Mr Mohamed Mahmoud Ould Ematt, a lawyer member of the Bar Association of Mauritania.  According to information received, on 27 April 2000 in Nouadhibou, the forces of order led by the Commissaire Mohammed Abdallahi Ould Adde, Regional Director of the police, invaded the UFD/EN headquarters, chased away militants and sympathisers, and detained Mr Yedaly Ould Cheikh and Mr Mohamed Mahmoud Ould Ematt. It is reported that they were tortured during their detention at the UFD/EN headquarters.  Intimidated by the police, doctors in Nouadhibou refused to draw up a report and to take care of them. A report on the torture suffered was written by two bailiffs in Nouadhibou and a doctor in Nouakchott who met Mr Mohamed Mahmoud Ould Ematt described, in a medical report, the torture suffered by him.  On 30 April 2000, complaints were registered in the name of Mr Yedaly Ould Cheikh and Mr Mohamed Mahmoud Ould Ematt, the National Bar Association and the UFD/EN.  These incidents are believed to be linked to the arrest on 24 April 2000 (released on 29 April 2000) of Mr. Ahmed Ould Daddah, Secretary General of the opposition party Union des Forces Démocratiques/Ere Nouvelle (UFD/EN) and President of the Front des Partis d’opposition FPO (See Case MRT 270400/1), as well as incidents between squadrons of police and a few hundred demonstrators calling for his release on 26th April.  Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Mauritania urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of of Mr Yedaly Ould Cheikh and Mr Mohamed Mahmoud Ould Ematt and guarantee adequate redress and medical care for the injuries sustained. ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into these allegations of torture and in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President of the Republic, Son Excellence Monsieur le Président Maaouiya Ould Sid 'Ahmed Taya, Président de la République, La Présidence -BP 184, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 52406 or +222 2 59801. Minister of the Interior, Monsieur Dah Ould Abdel Jelil, Ministre de l'Intérieur, des Postes et des Télécommunications Ministère de l'Intérieur, des Postes et des Télécommunications BP 195, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 53661 Minister of Justice, Monsieur Mohamed Salem Ould Merzoug, Ministre de la Justice, Ministère de la Justice - BP 350, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 57002 or +222 2 54995 Public Prosecutor, Mohamed Yeslem Ould Jidimou, Procureur de la République, Palais de Justice, Nouakchott - Mauritania Telegrams: Procureur République, Nouakchott, Mauritania.  Geneva, 3rd May, 2000 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 