Turkey:  Arbitrary arrest and subsequent release of ?HD Turkey President Mr. Ozturk Turkdogan, and three IHD executives and members.
November  9, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2017 / NovemberTurkey: Arbitrary arrest and subsequent release of İHD Turkey President Mr. Ozturk Turkdogan, and three IHD executives and members.

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
​













TUR 007 /
1117 / OBS 111
Arbitrary arrest /
Release
Turkey
November 9, 2017
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Turkey.
 
Description of the
situation:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary arrest and subsequent release of
Mr. Ozturk Turkdogan, President of
the national branch of the Human Rights Association (İnsan Haklari Derneği – İHD), Ms. Sevim Salihoglu and Ms. Derya
Uysal, two IHD Executive Committee members, as well as of Ms. Besra Varlı, İHD member.
 
According to the information
received, on November 9, 2017, Mr. Ozturk Turkdogan, Ms. Sevim Salihoglu, Ms. Derya Uysal and Ms. Besra Varlı were arrested
as they were demonstrating in front of the Human Rights Statue in Yüksel
Avenue, Ankara. The four human rights defenders were taken to Çankaya Police
Station in Ankara and subsequently released. The four would be accused of
violating the law 2911 on demonstration and marches.
 
The demonstration was held in support of Ms. Nuriye Gülmen and Mr. Semih
Özakça, two teachers who have been victims of the wave of dismissals of civil
servants which followed the 2016 failed coup in Turkey. They are known for
their struggle denouncing the mass layoffs initiated by the Turkish authorities
after the coup and have been in a hunger strike for more than 150 days.
 
The demonstration also called for the reopening to the public of the
space in front of Human Rights Statue in Ankara. The Human Rights Statue is a
popular place for demonstration and a symbol of Turkish people’s struggle against
repression; its access is currently closed by Turkish authorities. 
 
The Observatory recalls
that earlier in August 2017, Ms. Gülseren Yoleri, President of the IHD
Istanbul Branch and IHD Executive Committee member, and Mr. Dogan Ozkan,
member of IHD Istanbul executive board were arrested during another
demonstration in support of Ms. Nuriye Gülmen and Mr. Semih
Özakça[1].
Both were allegedly victims of ill-treatment during their arrest and arbitrary detention.
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concerns over
this new wave of arbitrary arrests targeting human rights defenders for the
exercise of their legitimate and peaceful human rights activities and
increasing restrictions to freedoms of association and peaceful assembly in
Turkey.
 
Since the 2016 failed coup, Turkish authorities
have especially targeted human rights defenders and other critical voices by
means of arbitrary arrests, detentions, investigations and prosecutions on
often spurious charges. Allegations of ill-treatment and torture during arrest
and detention have also been brought. 
Although purportedly aimed at combating terrorism and seeking
accountability for the attempted coup, these actions have disproportionately
affected human rights defenders and seriously hindered their work and
restricted civic space. They run contrary to Turkey’s obligations under
international human rights law and must be severely condemned. 
 
Accordingly,
the Observatory calls upon the Turkish judicial authorities to put an end to
all forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Ozturk Turkdogan, Ms. Sevim Salihoglu, Ms. Derya Uysal and Ms. Besra Varlı.
 
Actions
requested: 
 
Please write to the authorities in Turkey,
urging them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
and psychological integrity of Mr. Ozturk Turkdogan, Ms. Sevim Salihoglu,
Ms. Derya Uysal and Ms. Besra Varlı as well as of all human rights defenders in
Turkey;
 
ii.             
Put an end to all forms of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against Mr. Ozturk Turkdogan, Ms. Sevim Salihoglu, Ms. Derya Uysal and Ms. Besra Varlı, as well as all human
rights defenders in Turkey;
 
iii.            
Comply with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular its Articles 1, 6(a), 9, 11 and
12.2;
 
iv.            
Ensure in all circumstances respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Turkey.
 
Addresses:
 
·               
President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58
31
·               
Prime Minister of Turkey Binali Yıldırım, Fax: +90 (312) 403 62 82
Email: ozelkalem@basbakanlik.gov.tr
·               
Minister of Justice, Mr. Bekir Bozdağ, Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33
70; E-mail: ozelkalem@adalet.gov.tr
·               
Minister of Interior, Mr. Süleyman Soylu; Fax: +90 (312) 425
61 30
·               
Ambassador Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the
European Union in Brussels, Belgium; Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50
·            Ambassador Mr. Ali Naci Koru, Permanent Mission of Turkey to
the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email:
mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Turkey
in your respective country.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva,
November 9, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply. 
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and OMCT The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·        
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18
/ +33 1 43 55 18 80
·        
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 /
+ 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                    See
the Observatory Urgent Appeal TUR 006 / 0817 /
OBS 086 published on August 9, 2017. 