Macedonia:  Smear campaign and administrative harassment against the Macedonian Helsinki Committee (MHC)
February 28, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Macedonia / 2017 / FebruaryMacedonia: Smear campaign and administrative harassment against the Macedonian Helsinki Committee (MHC) 





MKD 001 / 0217 / OBS 020
Smear
campaign / 
Administrative
harassment
Macedonia
February 28,
2017
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Macedonia.
 
Description of the
situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the smear
campaign and administrative harassment against the Macedonian Helsinki
Committee (MHC) in the context of a broader attack against civil society
organisations, including human rights organisations, in Macedonia.
 
According
to the information received, on December 6, 2016, the Public Revenue Office
(PRO) informed the MHC about the launch of a financial inspection of its activities
on December 14, 2016. This took place in the context of the run-up to the
parliamentary elections that took place on December 11, 2016, during which
financial inspections on 2016 activities targeted around 20 civil society
organisations that received funds from the Foundation Open Society - Macedonia
(FOSM). At the end of December 2016,
the financial inspections were discontinued with an indication that they would
continue in 2017. Some of these inspections resumed after January 29, 2017, but
with an extended scope of five financial years rather than focusing on 2016. 
 
Moreover,
according to the MHC, PRO would have illegally leaked private financial
information gathered during past inspections to the Civil Movement for the
Defense of Macedonia (GDOM)[1]
and some state media officers who used the information to substantiate smear
campaigns against the MHC and other human rights organisations and defenders. 
 
The
Observatory notes that this wave of financial inspections follows political
tensions that culminated with an anti-civil society campaign conducted by
members of the incumbent governing political party VMRO-DPMNE, targeting
especially foreign funded civil society organisations.
 
Indeed,
on December 9, 2016, GDOM, circulated leaflets in Skopje listing more than 40
civil society leaders including journalists, professors, opposition party
members, as well as MHC leaders Mr. Gordan
Kalajdziev, Ms. Uranija Pirovska,
and Mr. Kocho Andonovski with
mentions of their respective salaries. In the leaflet, the GDOM alleged that “people who do not have good intentions
towards our country are behind everything that has happened in our country in
the past two years and that these people are shamelessly paid for every
incident they instigate”. Moreover,
the leaflet stated that FOSM had spent six million USD granted by foreign
donors to create an army to “terrorise
the state” and “spit on, throw colour
against, or destroy monuments of the Macedonian culture, history, identity,
and the buildings of the state institutions”. Prior to this, on April 21, 2016,
GDOM had publicly called for the Constitutional Court to temporarily ban all
non-governmental organisations and some political parties, which are “paid and
working to destroy the Government and the State”.
 
Furthermore,
on December 17, 2016, during a media interview, VMRO-DPMNE’s leader and former
Prime Minister of Macedonia, Mr. Nikola Gruevski called for “de-Sorosoization”
as part of a process aimed at regulating the work of foundations and NGOs
operating in Macedonia. Mr. Gruevski portrayed civil society organisations as
destabilizing elements that corrupt entire sections of the society and should
be neutralized with specific measures. After this interview, several VMRO-DPMNE
high-ranked officials publicly reiterated the same messages. The smear campaign
reached its climax on January 17, 2017 with the establishment of a citizen
movement supported by the ruling party “Stop Operation Soros”. This movement
declared the de-Sorosoization of the civil society sector in Macedonia as its
primary goal.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing smear campaign targeting the MHC in
the context of a broader smear campaign against civil society organisations in
Macedonia. This runs contrary to Macedonia’s international obligations to
create an enabling environment for civil society, including human rights
defenders. Moreover, the Observatory recalls that the right of NGOs to funding,
including foreign funding, is an integral and vital part of the right to
freedom of association and must therefore be respected.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities of Macedonia asking them to:
 
i.
Put an end to all forms of harassment and smear campaigns against all human
rights defenders in Macedonia as they only aim at sanctioning their legitimate
human rights activities;
 
ii.
Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of members of the MHC and
more generally that of all human rights defenders in Macedonia;
 
iii.
Immediately issue a public statement on behalf of the highest level of the
State authorities to express full support for the work of human rights
defenders in Macedonia, including when they express criticism;
 
iv.
Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998,
especially Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
v.
More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
Macedonia.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Gjorge Ivanov, President of the Republic of Macedonia.
E-mail: contact@president.mk
·     Mr. Agim Nuhiu, Minister of Internal Affairs. E-mail: kontakt@moi.gov.mk
·    
Mr. Valdet Dzaferi,
Minister of Justice. E-mail: cabinet@mjustice.gov.mk, publicrelation@mjustice.gov.mk
·     Mr. Nikola Poposki, Minister of Foreign
Affairs. E-mail: mailmnr@mfa.gov.mk, vizencentar@mfa.gov.mk
·    
Mr. Idzet Memeti, Ombudsman of the Republic of Macedonia.
E-mail: contact@ombudsman.mk
·    
Ms.
Anastasija Ilieska, Acting Director, Public Revenue Office. E-mail: info@ujp.gov.mk
·     Mr. Ljupcho Gjorgjinski, Permanent Mission of
the Republic of Macedonia to the United Nations in Geneva. E-mail: geneva@mfa.gov.mk 
·     Mr. Petar Pop-Arsov, Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Macedonia to the Council of Europe in Strasbourg.
E-mail: strasbourg@mfa.gov.mk 
·     Dr. Andrej A. Lepavcov,
Ambassador of the Republic of Macedonia to the EU in Brussels. E-mail: brussels@mfa.gov.mk,
mission.eu@mfa.gov.mk 
·     Dr. Kire Ilioski, Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Macedonia to the International Organizations in
Vienna. E-mail: mission.vienna@mfa.gov.mk 
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Macedonia in your respective
countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
February 28, 2017
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH partnership, is dedicated to the protection of
human rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of
need. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:

·      
E-mail: Appeals[at]fidh-omct.org

·      
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41
22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH: +33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80




[1] An
organisation that openly supports the incumbent governing political party
VMRO-DPMNE. 