Pakistan:  Dismay after assassination of Ms. Sabeen Mahmud in Karachi
April 27, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Pakistan / 2015 / AprilPakistan: Dismay after assassination of Ms. Sabeen Mahmud in KarachiPakistan PR2 pages / 50 KB

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
Pakistan: Dismay after assassination of Ms. Sabeen 
Mahmud in Karachi
Paris-Geneva, April 27, 2015 – The 
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint programme of 
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture OMCT) expresses its dismay over 
the assassination of Ms. Sabeen Mahmud on April 24, 2015 in Karachi, and calls 
upon Pakistan authorities to investigate and bring the perpetrators of this 
hateful crime to justice.
 
On April 24, 2015 at around 9 pm, 
the car of Ms. Sabeen Mahmud came under fire from unidentified gunmen. 
Ms. Sabeen Mahmud, who was driving together with her mother, was shot and died 
some time later in the hospital from her injuries. Her mother, who was also shot 
twice, after receiving medical treatment, is said to be out of immediate 
danger.
 
Ms. Sabeen Mahmud was the Director 
of “The Second Floor” (T2F), a café cum bookshop set up in Karachi in 
2007, as part of a non-profit umbrella called PeaceNiche. T2F holds public 
talks, discussions, exhibitions, pioneering events (Pakistan's first hackathon, 
stand-up comedy acts) with prominent local and international artists, writers 
and human rights activists on various social matters. A prominent outspoken 
critic of the human rights situation in her country, she was a voice of 
pluralism and secularism.
 
“The murder of Ms. Sabeen Mahmud 
constitutes yet another example of the silencing of any dissenting voices in 
Pakistan and of the shrinking of public space for civil society within the 
country,” said FIDH President, Karim 
Lahidji.
 
On the same day of her 
assassination, Ms. Sabeen Mahmud had organised a round-table on the human rights 
situation in the province of Balochistan, a province which has over the past 
decade witnessed severe violations of 
human rights, included systematic involuntary disappearances[1]. She and some of her colleagues 
had reportedly been concerned about the possible backlash from holding such an 
event, since a similar public event on Balochistan had been scheduled on April 
9, 2015 at the Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS), but had been 
forcibly cancelled by State agencies[2].
 
While at this stage there is no 
direct evidence linking her murder to the Balochistan debate, the Observatory is 
appalled by the assassination of Ms. Sabeen Mahmud and is concerned by the 
threats and attacks directed at those speaking out about the human rights 
situation in Pakistan.
 
The day after the killing, FIDH, 
together with its member organisation the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan 
(HRCP), sent official communications to the relevant UN Special Rapporteurs[3] calling for an 
independent and impartial investigation into the murder of Ms. Sabeen Mahmud to 
be carried out.
 
The Observatory recalls that over 
the past two years, Orangi Pilot Project (OPP) Director, Perween Rahman, 
who was advocating land rights of the poor populations, and HRCP 
Coordinator Rashid Rehman, who publicly defended a person accused of 
blasphemy, were both killed, and that no investigation has led to the conviction 
of their murderer so far.
 
“The Pakistani 
authorities must promptly and independently investigate the circumstances 
leading to Ms. Sabeen Mahmud's murder, in order to end this long-lasting climate 
of impunity, by bringing the perpetrators of this hateful crime to 
justice”, added OMCT Secretary General, 
Gerald Staberock.
 
The Observatory for the Protection 
of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to 
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights 
defenders.
 
For more information, please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur Manet/Lucie 
Kroening: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Miguel Martín 
Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24



[1]             An HRCP mission to Balochistan in 2011 found 
strong evidence of the complicity of security forces in killings and enforced 
disappearances, which have yet to be properly investigated.

[2]     
FIDH and HRCP have called on the United Nations to look into the Pakistani 
government’s repression of freedom of expression and of assembly, in response to 
the forced cancellation of the academic discussion on Balochistan and enforced 
disappearances. For more information, see FIDH Press release of April 14, 2015, 
available at https://www.fidh.org/International-Federation-for-Human-Rights/asia/pakistan/pakistan-government-silences-academics-speaking-about-balochistan

[3]     
The full list is: Mr. Christoph Heyns, UN Special Rapporteur on extra-judicial, 
summary or arbitrary executions; Mr. Michel Forst, UN Special Rapporteur on the 
situation of human rights defenders; Mr. David Kaye, UN Special Rapporteur on 
the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression; 
and Mr. Maina Kiai, UN Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful 
assembly and of association. 