China:  Ongoing arbitrary detention, judicial harassment, slandering campaign and ill-treatment of Mr. Wu Zeheng and more than 20 of his followers
March 12, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2015 / MarchChina: Ongoing arbitrary detention, judicial harassment, slandering campaign and ill-treatment of Mr. Wu Zeheng and more than 20 of his followersNew informationCHN 001 / 0814 / OBS 071.1Arbitrary
detention / Ill-treatment / SlanderPeople’s Republic of ChinaMarch
12, 2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention on the following situation in the People’s Republic of China (PRC).
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the ongoing arbitrary detention, judicial harassment, slandering campaign
and ill-treatment of Mr. Wu Zeheng and more than 20 of his followers.
Mr. Wu Zeheng is a prominent Buddhist leader, also known as Buddhist Zen Master
Shi Xingwu, committed to promoting greater respect for human rights and the
rule of law and to fighting against corruption. He has been detained with some
of his followers since July 29, 2014 (see background information).
 
According
to the information received, since the arbitrary arrest of Mr. Wu Zeheng and
several of his followers on July 29, 2014, Mr. Wu Zeheng has not yet been
brought before a judge. On September 5, 2014, the police authority charged all
the detainees with “organising and making use of evil cults to destroy the
implementation of law.” On October 28, 2014, the evidence gathered by the
Police Authority regarding this case was sent to the Zhuhai Procuratorate,
which on December 19, 2014, determined that there was insufficient evidence and
ordered the Police Authority to re-investigate the case. On January 19, 2015,
the new evidence for this case was sent to the Zhuhai Procuratorate; on March
4, 2015, the case was returned by the Procuratorate to the Zhuhai Police Authority
for the second time because of insufficient evidence. The Police Authority was
again ordered to re-investigate the case.
 
In addition,
Mr. Wu’s followers
are being persecuted both judicially[1]
and through a slander campaign. On August 5
and 15, 2014, three major newspapers - the Southern Metropolis Daily,
the Yangcheng Evening News, and the Guangzhou Daily - launched a
defamatory campaign against Mr. Wu Zeheng, accusing him of raping his female
students and laundering money through the Hua Zang Dharma discipline, which is
considered a fraud by the Chinese authorities. From August 29, 2014 onwards,
several other defamatory articles were published in the official media
including by CCTV. The Zhuhai Intermediate People's Court refused to
investigate the allegations presented by Mr. Wu’s lawyers on October 19, 2014
in relation to this slander campaign. These false reports recklessly slandered
Mr. Wu Zeheng and the Hua Zang Dharma discipline, seriously damaging his
reputation as a human rights defender, the reputation of his followers under
arrest, as well as that of all members of the Hua Zang Dharma discipline. The
Observatory is seriously concerned about this defamatory campaign, which
violates the principle of presumption of innocence established under the criminal
law of the PRC. 
 
Furthermore,
the Observatory expresses its deep concern about the conditions in which Mr. Wu
and his followers remain detained in Zhuhai No. 2 and No. 1 Detention Centres,
as the detention Centre which has the capacity to accommodate 20 prisoners is
currently holding 50-60 persons, depriving them of enough space to sleep, and
forcing some of them to sleep on the floor or on corridors, or to take turns
sleeping. In addition, the Observatory was informed by Mr. Wu’s lawyer, Mr.
Lin Qilei, who went to visit his client on February 15, 2015, that the food
provided to Mr. Wu is not sufficient, that he is forced to undertake extra
duties and that he is deprived of communication with his family. Also, during
the visit no mobile phone nor video or audio recording devices were allowed,
nor were Mr. Wu and his lawyer allowed to pass written notes to each other,
which violates regulations concerning prisoner visits and communication between
prisoners and their lawyers. After denouncing these restrictions to the Zhuhai
Procuratorate, Mr. Lin Qilei was informed that, despite the variety of
regulations throughout China concerning the matter of visits with prisoners, at
the very least audio recordings should be allowed.
 
More generally, the Observatory condemns
the slander campaign and judicial harassment against Mr. Wu Zeheng and his
followers, as it seems merely aimed at sanctioning  Mr. Wu Zeheng's peaceful human rights
activities, and calls upon the authorities of the People’s Republic of China to
put an end to all acts of harassment against him as well as against all human
rights defenders in the country. 
 
Finally, the
Observatory urges the Chinese authorities to guarantee the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Wu and all his
followers, and to immediately and unconditionally release them. 
 
Background information[2]:
 
Mr. Wu Zeheng served an 11-year prison term,
based on spurious accusations of economic crimes that followed a letter he sent
in 1998 to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and State
Council, and in 1999 to the Chinese President Jing Zemin and then Prime
Minister Zhu Rongji, denouncing human rights violations and calling for reform.
During this time in prison, Mr. Wu Zeheng faced repeated and extensive torture.
Since his release on February 28, 2010, Mr. Wu Zeheng has been subjected to
close surveillance by the Chinese authorities as well as various forms of
persecution (stalking, beatings, insults, theft, travel restrictions, etc.).
 
On May 9, 2011, in front of several witnesses,
Mr. Wu Zeheng was beaten, threatened and forcibly arrested by officers
belonging to the Zhuhai police. At 9:00 pm that day, eight policemen forcefully
entered Mr. Wu's residence and seized him, his young sister and two other
students and searched all rooms, without presenting any search warrant or any
other legal documentation authorising their action. Double-handcuffed, Mr. Wu
was forcefully taken to the police station for questioning. Along the way and
during the interrogation, which went on until 10:00 am the following morning,
the police beat him and yelled offensive comments. He was told that he would
not be allowed to do anything and he would not be bothered again only if he
remained in his hometown. He was also warned not to participate in Buddhist
ceremonies or to have his students visit him. He was held in detention for 24
hours before being released without charges and without being provided any
legal document explaining or justifying the police actions.
 
According to the police interrogators, Mr. Wu
and his followers were detained on May 9, 2011, on suspicion of intending to
organise an illegal assembly. Despite complaints filed on May 16, 2011 with the
Xiangzhou Public Security Bureau (PSB) of Zhuhai city, these acts of harassment
have remained unpunished. According to a written notice in response to the
complaints, bearing the seal of the Xiangzhou PSB of Zhuhai and dated July 4,
2011, the Bureau stated no illegal enforcement of the law had occurred during
the police intervention of May 9, 2011. 
 
On July 29, 2014, Mr. Wu
Zeheng and some of his followers
(including children) were taken into custody, after the police staged a
coordinated raid on a number of businesses and living compounds run by his
group, Hua Zang Dharma. They were arrested for “using cult activities to
undermine law enforcement, to defraud, to commit sexual assaults, and to engage
in other criminal activities.” The
Public Security office of Guangdong Province was the investigative authority in
this case while the Public Security Bureau of Zhuhai was involved in the
enforcement and interrogation. No search warrant nor any official documents
were presented to justify the raid and the arrests. In
the first 24 hours of his detention, Mr. Wu was kept awake for 16 hours, denied
all food and water, and consecutively questioned by four different groups of
police officers.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China, urging them to:
 
i.              
Release Mr. Wu Zeheng
and his followers immediately and unconditionally since their detention is
arbitrary, and seems only aimed at sanctioning Mr. Wu's human rights
activities.
 
ii.             
Guarantee in all circumstances
the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Wu
Zeheng and his followers, as well as of all human rights defenders in
the People’s Republic of China;
 
 
iii.           
Put an end to the
harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr. Wu Zeheng, his
followers, as well as against all human rights defenders in the People’s
Republic of China;
 
iv.            
Conform with the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, and Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall
take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v.             
Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by the People’s Republic of China.
 
Addresses: 
 
Mr. LI Keqiang, Prime Minister
     of the People’s Republic of China: Guojia Zongli, The State Council
     General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s
     Republic of China; Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs)Ms. WU Aiying, Minister of
     Justice of the People’s Republic of China: Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen
     Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China; Fax:
     +86 10 6529 2345; Email: minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cnMr. YANG Jiechi,
     Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China: Buzhang
     Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of
     China; Fax: +86 10 6588 2594;
     Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cnMr. GUO Shengkun, Minister of
     Public Security of the People’s Republic of China: Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14
     Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s Republic of
     China; Fax: +86 10 63099216 Ambassador WU Hailong,
     Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the United Nations:
     Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva,
     Switzerland; Fax: +41 22 7937014; E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int;Embassy of the
     People’s Republic of China in Brussels: Avenue de Tervuren, 1150 Woluwe
     Saint-Pierre, Belgium; Tel: +32-2-7711497, +32-2-7711495; Fax:
     +32-2-7792895; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the People’s Republic of
China in your respective country.
 



[1]            Only
arrestees holding foreign passports were released, while many of the other
followers who were arrested on July 29 were heavily sentenced. Some of them
were condemned without a court hearing, and without their families being
informed. Moreover, although Chinese law allows lawyers to access and copy the
case file of their clients during the scrutiny prosecution period,
the Procuratorate has been obstructing the work of the lawyers of the
detained followers. Furthermore, all the information about the events
of July 29 written by the lawyers involved in the case and published on the
Internet, has been suppressed, allegedly by the authorities. Moreover, at least five other followers have been arrested
since the beginning of September 2014. In October 2014, all of these cases
were transferred to the People´s Procuratorate of Zhuhai by the police
authorities of Zhuhai.
 


[2]            For more information, see
Observatory Open Letter of December 16, 2011 as well as Urgent Appeal of August
27, 2014. 