Philippines:  Philippines: Ill-treatment of Ms. Luisa N. Encomio and her child
January 26, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2005 / JanuaryPhilippines: Philippines: Ill-treatment of Ms. Luisa N. Encomio and her childCase PHL 260105.VAW Ill-treatment/ Violence Against Women   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Philippines.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a member of the OMCT network, that Ms. Luisa N. Encomio, 28 years of age, currently detained in Mamburao Provincial Jail with her four-month old child, has not received adequate medical care for her and her child.  Ms. Luisa N. Encomio was arrested without a warrant on May 6th 2004 for being an alleged New People’s Army (NPA) member and her involvement in a foiled attempt to ambush a convoy of police officers and soldiers in Brgy. Quiriron, Calintaan, Occidental Mindoro in May 2000. At the time of her arrest she was eight months pregnant and gave birth on September 22nd 2004. According to TFDP, she was not provided medical facilities to attend to her pre and post-natal needs. Her health has reportedly deteriorated since she was detained and her child has suffered from intermittent cold and fever. She was formally charged with attempted murder on May 13th 2004.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Luisa N. Encomio and her child.   Action requested Please write to the authorities in the Philippines urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Luisa N. Encomio and her child and intervene with the proper authorities to ensure that adequate medical assistance is provided as a matter of urgency;  ii.	order her immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges, or, if such charges exist, bring her before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee her procedural rights at all times;  iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses: H.E. Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Republic of the Philippines, Malacañang Palace, J.P. Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, Philippines Fax: (+632) 742 1641 / 929 3968 Email: corres@op.gov.ph / opnet@ops.gov.ph  Hon. Teresita Deles, Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process,7F Agustin Building I, Emerald Avenue,Pasig City, Philippines Fax: (+632) 638 2216  Hon. Avelino Cruz, Jr., Secretary, Department of National Defense, Camp Emilio, Aguinaldo, E. delos Santos Avenue, Quezon City, Philippines Fax: (+632) 911 6213  Hon. Purificacion Valera Quisumbing, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC Bldg., UP Complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines; Fax: (+632) 929 0102; Email: drpvq@chr.gov.ph  Please also write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country.   Geneva, 26 January 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 