Mexico:  Side Event at the 28th Session of the Human Rights Council - The context of violence on Mexico and its impact on Women Human Rights Defenders
March  6, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Events / Mexico / 2015 / MarchMexico: Side Event at the 28th Session of the Human Rights Council - The context of violence on Mexico and its impact on Women Human Rights DefendersMonday, 9 March
from 10h00 to 11h30
Palais des Nations, Geneva, Room XXIII
 Mexico has attracted international attention in recent
months due to the forced disappearance of 43 students and activists in one of
the most marginalised regions of the country. This case, which is one of the
worst tragedies that has been seen in the country, unfortunately is not an
isolated incident, but in contrast, it reflects a broader pattern of gross and
systematic human rights abuses and the impunity thereto.
The risk of defending human rights in Mexico, particularly,
has increased at an alarming rate. Both national and international civil
society organizations have documented numerous cases of murder, threats,
harassment and aggressions against human rights defenders. 
 
Land and women human rights defenders are particularly
vulnerable to intimidations and reprisals. 34 women human rights defenders have
been murdered and 82 land human rights defenders have suffered aggressions in
the country.
Additionally, the National Commission of Human Rights
reported 27 human rights defenders murdered and 8 enforced disappeared from
January 2005 to May 2011. On the other hand, civil society organizations
registered 104 cases of aggressions against them and human rights defenders.
Oaxaca and Guerrero are the states with higher levels of aggressions against
human rights defenders in the country.
Impunity has been the rule.
None of the aggressions reported have been sanctioned and the alleged perpetrators
of those crimes have not been brought to justice. 
Being 8th of March International Women’s
Day, a wide group of Mexican and international organizations organize a side
event within the framework of the 28th Human Rights Council session
with the aim to visibilize the situation of women human rights defenders in the
context of violence in Mexico.
After launching the campaign #MakeThemVisible women human rights defenders from Mexico will speak
up in Geneva to raise international awareness about human rights violations,
such as torture, enforced disappearance, extrajudicial executions, arbitrary
detentions and forced displacement committed against them.
The panelists will also discuss the
current failures of Mexico's Protection Mechanism for human rights defenders in
responding to the specific needs of women defenders. The Mechanism was created
by law in 2012, but has so far failed to live up to expectations due to
political and practical failures, as documented by WOLA and PBI recently.
This event is an opportunity to
discuss the impact of violent contexts upon human rights defenders, what the
Mexican State can do to ensure that this impact is mitigated in a way which
takes into account the specific needs of women defenders, and what is going on
with the Protection Mechanism. It is also a chance to discuss the
implementation the UN General Assembly resolution on women human rights
defenders, in contexts such as Mexico. 
The panel will also discuss
preliminary observations from November’s Civil
Society Observation Mission to Mexico, in which was organized by
the CMDPDH.
 

Structure 

 
Olga Guzmán, Advocacy Director of the Mexican Comission for Defense
     and Promotion of Human Rights (CMDPDH) - Moderator
Opening remarks by United Nations Special
     Rapporteur on on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders, Mr. Michel Forst (10 minutes). 
Each panellist will have up to 5 minutes for general opening
     comments. 
 
The moderator will then open the floor to questions and discussions
     and guide the discussion. English – Spanish interpretation will be provided 
 

Panellists:

 
Mr. Michel Forst, UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation
     of Human Rights DefendersYésica Sánchez Maya, Founder of the Mexican
     National Women Human Rights Defenders NetworkNorma Mesino, Mexican woman human rights
     defender, Organización Campesina de la Sierra del Sur (OCSS)Representative
     of the Permanent Delegation of the European
     Union to the UN Office in Geneva, To Be ConfirmedVideos from ‘Make them Visible’, a campaign for
     the recognition for Mexican human rights defenders.



Co-Sponsors:



 
Organizer of the side
event:
Mexican
Commission for the Defense and Promotion of Human Rights (CMDPDH)
Co-sponsors:
Federation Internationale des Droits de l’Homme (FIDH) 
Front Line
Defenders
International
Service for Human Rights (ISHR)
Peace Brigades
International (PBI)
World
Organization Against Torture (OMCT)
Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC)
Just Associates
(JASS)
Mesoamerican
Initiative of Women Human Rights Defenders
Consorcio
para el Diálogo Parlamentario y la Equidad Oaxaca A.C
Deutsche Menschenrechtskoordination Mexiko
Mexican National Women Human
Rights Defenders Network
Centro Robert F. Kennedy Para la Justicia y los Derechos Humanos (Centro
RFK) 