Viet Nam:  Pro-democracy blogger Dieu Cay is on hunger strike
July 19, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2013 / JulyViet Nam: Pro-democracy blogger Dieu Cay is on hunger strike

Paris-Geneva,
July 19, 2013. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,
a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), together with the Vietnam
Committee on Human Rights (VCHR), express deep concern for the health of human
rights defender Mr. Nguyen Van Hai (aka Dieu Cay) who has reportedly been on
hunger strike in prison for at least 25 days.
 
Mr. Dieu Cay, prominent blogger and founder of the “Club of Free
Journalists of Vietnam”, well known for his online writings calling for greater
respect for human rights and democratic reforms, is currently detained in
Prison Camp No. 6 in Thanh Chuong District, Nghe An Province in Central Viet
Nam. On July 16, 2013, Ms. Duong Thi Tan, the former wife of Mr. Dieu Cay, went
to visit him in prison, but was refused the right to see him. A senior prison
official (Lt.-Colonel of Security Police) told her that Mr. Dieu Cay was
currently being punished for “disturbing
order”. Mrs. Nguyen Thi Nga, the wife of political prisoner Mr. Nguyen Xuan
Nghia, who is detained in the same prison camp, visited her husband the same
day and asked for news of Mr. Dieu Cay. Prison wardens immediately intervened
and ordered her not to discuss this “sensitive
question”. As she was about to leave, Mr. Nguyen Xuan Nghia shouted out “Did you know that Dieu Cay has been on
hunger strike for the past 25 days?”.
Wardens swiftly gagged him and dragged him away.
 
Our organisations are extremely
concerned for the health of Mr. Dieu Cay. Prison Camp No. 6 has no adequate
medical facilities, and it is situated in a remote, mountainous region some 70
kilometres from Vinh, the nearest town. If Mr. Dieu Cay’s health suffers as a
result of a prolonged hunger strike, he would not have access to urgent medical
treatment.
 
“Mr. Dieu Cay has persistently claimed his innocence, but he found no
justice in Viet Nam’s legal system”,
said VCHR President Vo Van Ai. “So he is speaking out in the only way a
prisoner can - by putting his own safety on the line in an act of nonviolent
protest. His detention is shameless and unlawful - Viet Nam should set him free”.
 
“Mr. Dieu Cay’s situation
illustrates the widespread international and domestic protest over an ongoing
government crackdown on freedom of expression, both online and offline”
deplored FIDH President Karim Lahidji. “We call for the immediate and
unconditional release of Dieu Cay and of all human rights defenders and
cyber-dissidents in Viet Nam”.
 
“At
last, the authorities of Viet Nam should abide by the opinion issued by the United Nations Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention in 2009, declaring Mr. Dieu Cay’s arbitrary and in violation of international human
rights law, by immediately releasing him”, urged OMCT Secretary General
Gerald Staberock. “It is high time that the authorities of Viet
Nam finally put an end to their crackdown on Internet activists and
human rights defenders in the country as a way to silence critical voices”.
 
Scores of human rights defenders and
cyber-dissidents are currently serving long prison sentences or awaiting trial
in Vietnam[1].
Three bloggers, Dinh Nhat Uy, Pham Viet Dao and Truong Duy Nhat, arrested in the past two months alone, face prison
sentences of up to seven years for “abusing
democratic freedoms to infringe upon the interests of the State” (Article 258 of the Criminal Code).
Their blogs are aimed at informing people about human rights and advocating
ways to promote and protect them. On May 16, 2013, University student Ms. Nguyen Phuong Uyen, 21, and Mr. Dinh Nguyen Kha, 25 (the brother of
Dinh Nhat Uy) were sentenced respectively to six and eight years in prison and
three years house arrest for advocating for human rights.
 
Mr. Dieu Cay was first convicted in
2009 on trumped-up charges of “tax evasion” after a manifestly unfair and
closed trial. Instead of being released upon completing the sentence in 2010,
Mr. Dieu Cay was charged with a second offence of “propaganda against the Socialist Republic of Vietnam” (Article 88
of the Criminal Code). Article 88 is among several repressive provisions in
Vietnamese law that are routinely used to criminalise free speech and imprison
peaceful dissidents. He was detained incommunicado for over a year. In late
2011, Mr. Dieu Cay staged a 29-day hunger strike to protest his unfair
detention. 
 
On September 24, 2012, he was sentenced
to 12 years in prison and five years probationary detention at a trial in Ho
Chi Minh City that broadly violated fair trial standards and was widely
condemned by the international community. The verdict was upheld on appeal in
December 2012.
 
Our organisations strongly condemn
the crackdown that has been targeting Internet activists and human rights
defenders in Viet Nam for the past few years, and urge the authorities of Viet
Nam to abide by the resolution that was adopted by consensus in June 2012 by
the UN Human Rights Council, affirming that the right to freedom of expression
online must be protected, and calling on States to “promote and facilitate
access to the Internet”.

Our organisations further reiterate their call on the
Vietnamese authorities to ensure in all circumstances that human rights defenders are able to work without any fear of reprisals and to conform to
the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.



[1] For more information, see
FIDH-VCHR joint report, Bloggers and Netizens Behind Bars: Restrictions on
Internet Freedom in Vietnam, February 2013, and previous Urgent
Interventions by the Observatory (FIDH-OMCT) on Viet Nam. 