Israel: the killing of Murad Azaru, 24, a Shufat refugee camp resident, by an Israeli soldier
April 10, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2000 / AprilIsrael: the killing of Murad Azaru, 24, a Shufat refugee camp resident, by an Israeli soldierIsrael: shooting of refugee camp residents  Case ISR 100400  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Palestine Autonomous Areas (occupied by Israel).  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), a member of the OMCT network, of the death of Murad Azaru, 24, a Shu’fat refugee camp resident, by an Israeli soldier.  According to the information received, between 11:30 and 12:00 midnight on Thursday, 30 March 2000, Murad Azaru, 24, a Shu’fat refugee camp resident, was shot and killed by an Israeli soldier. The victim was killed in his white Fiat Uno car when a soldier opened fire from a makeshift checkpoint that was installed at the entrance of the camp.  According to information gathered by LAW from Murad¹s uncle, Abed Arazak Azaru, he stated that the victim and his friend in the car during the incident, Iyad Sadouqa were both transferred to the Russian compound detention centre after the shooting.  It is reported that on the following day, the Sandouqa family received a call from the Russian compound requesting them to report to the detention centre to complete the procedures of releasing on bail both detainees implying that both were in detention. When Murad’s brother, Mufid, and Iyad¹s father arrived at the detention centre, they were shocked with the news of the death of Murad. Meanwhile, the only witness to the incident, Iyad, was not allowed a visit. The family members saw the car while they were in the detention centre and confirmed to LAW that they saw a bullet that had penetrated the windshield of the car and added that they could not see any traces of another bullet.  LAW considers this to be a deliberate resent crime, part of a series of extra judicial executions carried out by members of the occupation forces on military checkpoints. The crime is similar to another one that had taken place a few days ago in Hebron, resulting in the death of Hilmieh Shrouf, 45.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by the use of excessive force and particularly fire arms which violates international human rights standards, in particular Articles 9, 10 and 11 of the United Nations Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Israel urging them to:  i.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the death of Murad Azaru and the detention of Iyad Sadouqa, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; ii.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Iyad Sadouqa and order his order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; iii.	ensure that all law enforcement agencies conform to international human rights standards; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Ehud Barak, Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan Street Hakirya, Jerusalem 91007, Israel, Faxes: +972 2 566 4838 and  +972 3 691 7915  Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah al-Din Street,  Jerusalem 91029, State of Israel.  Fax : + 972 2 6285 438  Minister of Defense, Ministry of Defense, 7 "A" Street, Hakirya,  Tel Aviv, Israel. Fax: +972 3 697 62 18.  Minister of Police, Ministry of Police, PO Box 18182, 3 Sheikh  Jarrah, Kiryat Hamemshala, Jerusalem 91181, State of Israel. Fax  : + 972 2 5826 769.  The Embassy of Israel in your respective countries.  Geneva, April 10, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 