Thailand:  United Nations Working Group declares detention of Thai human rights defender a violation of international law
December 10, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2012 / DecemberThailand: United Nations Working Group declares detention of Thai human rights defender a violation of international law

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders
Union for Civil Liberty (UCL)
 
Joint Press Release
 
Thailand: United Nations Working Group declares
detention of Thai human rights defender a violation of international law
 
Paris-Geneva-Bangkok,
December 10, 2012. The International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, together with the Union for Civil Liberty (UCL) in Thailand, welcome
the opinion issued by the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
(UNWGAD), which found the pre-trial detention of human rights defender Mr.
Somyot Prueksakasemsuk to be in contravention of international human rights law
and standards and called for his release. 
 
Somyot is in his 20th consecutive
month of pre-trial detention since he was arrested on April 30, 2011, five days
after he launched a petition campaign to collect 10,000 signatures required for
a parliamentary review of lèse-majesté
law. His applications for provisional release have been turned down repeatedly
by the court. Somyot is charged with violating article 112 of the Thai Criminal
Code (the lèse-majesté law) for
allowing, as editor, the publication of two articles written by another person
in the magazine Voice of Taksin,
which are alleged to be critical of the monarchy. As is usual in such cases,
the “offending” texts were not publicly revealed during the trial, making the
legal process non-transparent.
 
Danthong Breen, Chairman of UCL,
points out that Somyot remains a member of this human rights organization and
is a human rights defender whose defence of freedom of speech ill deserves
severe draconian legal procedure. 
 
Contemporaries of Somyot in UCL
have also expressed their support. “I have known Khun Somyot since we both
served in the Union for Civil Liberty. He has shown commitment to work for the
well-being of workers. Later on, he plays a greater role in the promotion of
political rights in general and those of Thai workers in particular. His
long career in human rights and democracy deserves praise not politically
motivated charge of lèse-majesté”, said Gothom Arya, Lecturer at
Mahidol University in Thailand.
 
“He shared the good and bad times of the workers, was
dedicated and fought sincerely against the violation of their rights. He
adhered to human dignity, believed in democracy, and disagreed with
dictatorship and coup d'etat. Somyot was accepted and trusted by workers while
he was acting as a workers' rights officer of the UCL”, said Jaturong
Boonyarattanasoontorn, former Chairman of UCL. 
 
On June 15, 2012, the UNWGAD sent a
communication to the Thai government, raising its concerns and questions
regarding Somyot. The Government replied on June 29, defending the lèse-majesté
law as “legitimate and indispensable for
national security”. It went as far as describing lèse-majesté offenses as an “imminent
threat to national unity and stability and, indeed, national existence”,
but apparently did not provide any concrete evidence to justify such sweeping
claims in general and in Somyot’s case in particular. 
 
In its opinion on Somyot’s case
rendered in August 2012, the UNWGAD agrees with the UN Special Rapporteur on
Freedom of Expression that the lèse-majesté
laws in Thailand “suppress important
debates on matters of public interests, thus putting in jeopardy the right to
freedom of opinion and expression”, which is protected by Article 19 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). 
 
“Thailand’s use of the lèse-majesté laws, including the
judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Somyot and other persons for the
peaceful exercise of their right to freedom of expression, flies in the face of
its binding obligations under the ICCPR to respect and protect free speech”, said Souhayr
Belhassen, FIDH president. 
 
The UNWGAD also stated that both
the launching of a petition to review the lèse-majesté
law and the publication of articles critical of the monarchy “fall within the boundaries of opinions and
speech protected by Article 19 of the UDHR and ICCPR”. The UNWGAD called
not only for his release but also for compensation to be provided to Somyot.
 
The UNWGAD opinion follows a series
of communications from the UN regarding the lèse-majesté
law. In June 2011, the UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights
Defenders, Ms. Margaret Sekaggya, and the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of
Expression, Mr. Frank La Rue, sent a joint
urgent appeal to the Thai government raising several lèse-majesté cases against human rights defenders, including
Somyot. In October 2011, Mr. Frank La Rue urged
Thailand to amend the Computer Crimes Act and Article 112 of the Criminal Code, stating that the laws
are “vague and overly broad, and the harsh criminal sanctions are neither
necessary nor proportionate to protect the monarchy or national security.” In
December 2011, the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) expressed
its concern about the extended periods that persons accused of lèse-majesté are being held in pre-trial detention. The UNWAGD,
together with three other UN Special Rapporteurs, sent another urgent
appeal
in December 2011 to the Thai government on Somyot, raising questions regarding
his treatment and the compatibility of the lèse-majesté
law with international human rights standards. 
 
In October, the Constitutional
Court ruled that the lèse majesté law
does not contravene the 2007 Constitution. Somyot is due to appear before the
Bangkok Criminal Court on December 19, 2012 when the Constitutional Court’s
ruling is read.
 
“We reiterate our call for Somyot’s immediate release
from detention and an end to the judicial harassment against him. We also call
on representatives of the UN, development partners, and embassies in Bangkok to
urgently raise their concerns with the Thai authorities on the treatment of
Somyot and to send observers to the hearing of December 19”, said Gerald
Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. 
 
Press
contact:
·       FIDH:      Audrey
Couprie / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT:   Delphine
Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39
·       UCL:        Danthong
Breen, +66 814502254
 
Please join the Facebook
campaign for the release of Somyot: 
https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.377638448989122.94336.122999694453000&type=3 