Viet Nam:  Dinh Dang Dinh's prison sentence suspended for 12 months
February 25, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2014 / FebruaryViet Nam: Dinh Dang Dinh's prison sentence suspended for 12 months 

Paris-Geneva,
February 25, 2014. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT joint programme, together with the
Vietnam Committee on Human Rights (VCHR), welcome the decision of the
Vietnamese authorities to temporarily suspend the prison sentence of human
rights defender Dinh Dang Dinh, who suffers from a terminal stomach cancer.
 
Dinh Dang Dinh is a prominent Vietnamese
human rights activist and blogger who has especially campaigned for
environmental rights. Arrested in October 2011, he was sentenced to six years'
imprisonment in August 2012.
 
While serving his prison sentence in
Phuoc prison, he was diagnosed with a stomach cancer metastasised to his lymph
nodes. Since January 2014, he has been treated in the Oncology Hospital of
Saigon, but was kept under constant surveillance.
 
On the evening of February 15, 2014,
he was informed by the authorities about their decision to suspend the
implementation of his prison sentence for 12 months. “Although he is not
exempted from the sentence which aimed at silencing dissident bloggers, we and
our three daughters [now] have opportunity to take care of him”, said his wife
Dang Thi Dinh.
 
“We share the relief of Dinh
Dang Dinh's family”, FIDH President Karim Lahidji commented, adding
that “nonetheless, the Vietnamese authorities should take a step further
and order the permanent release of Dinh Dang Dinh, who was detained for the
sole purpose of his human rights activities”.
 
“Dinh Dang Dinh should never have been detained at the first
place. It can now only be hoped that the Vietnamese authorities will start to take concrete
measures to stop the repression of human rights defenders, including by abolishing
the armada of broadly defined speech and national security offences that are
used against dissent voices and defenders”, OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock urged today.
 
“We welcome this decision”, said VCHR President Vo Van Ai. “But in order to merit its seat on the UN Human Rights Council, Vietnam
should fully release Dinh Dang Dinh and all other human rights defenders
detained for their peaceful actions to promote and protect human rights”.

 
Our
organisations reiterate their call on the Vietnamese authorities to ensure in all circumstances that human rights defenders are able
to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of
reprisals, in line with
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 