Syrian Arab Republic:  Joint appeal to help free Syrian human rights defender Razan Zaitouneh and her colleagues on her birthday
April 29, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2016 / AprilSyrian Arab Republic: Joint appeal to help free Syrian human rights defender Razan Zaitouneh and her colleagues on her birthdaySyria_Razan Zaitouneh Joint Statement_ARABIC3 pages / 2.45 MB

 

On 29 April, human
rights groups worldwide are marking the birthday of Syrian human rights
defender Razan Zaitouneh, who will be spending it in captivity for the
third time along with her three colleagues, her husband Wael Hamada,
Samira Khalil and Nazem Hamadi. Join the call to help free the four human rights defenders, who were
abducted in December 2013, and send messages of solidarity.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
On
9 December 2013, the four human rights defenders – collectively known as the
“Duma Four” - were
abducted by a group of armed men who raided the
offices of the Violations Documentation Centre
(VDC) in Duma, near Damascus. There has been no
news of their whereabouts in the past two and a half years but they are
presumed to be held by armed groups in control of the area. The family is
concerned for Zaitouneh’s health and well-being given the absence of any
information. 
 
To help bring attention
to their case, “we are hoping once again to shine a light on their
disappearance,” says Rana Zaitouneh, Razan’s sister. On 30 April, the
family is hosting a vigil on Parliament Hill in Ottawa, Canada, co-sponsored by
Amnesty International Canada. They
are also asking those who are unable to attend to post messages of solidarity,
photos, artwork, or anything else that may spread awareness over the next week.
For more information on the vigil, visit the Facebook page at https://www.facebook.com/events/624548577704940/. 
 
You can post a message
or a photo of yourself with the photo above at https://www.facebook.com/Celebrating-Razan-Zaitounehs-Birthday-1534775286818856/ 
 
One
of three finalists for the 2016 Martin
Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders, “Razan has dedicated her life to
defending political prisoners, documenting crimes against humanity, and helping
others free themselves from oppression.”
 
Zaitouneh
was awarded the 2011 Sakharov
Prize for Freedom of Thought and the 2011 Anna Politkovskaya Award of Reach All Women in War (RAW in WAR) among other accolades,
for her human rights work. 
 
In February, a
coalition of NGOs nominated Zaitouneh as the prisoner of the month as part of
the “Their freedom is their right” campaign initiated by the Arabic Network for
Human Rights Information (ANHRI) and Maharat Foundation. See http://www.gc4hr.org/news/view/1178

Khalid Ibrahim, Co-Director of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights
(GCHR), says, “I worked with Razan for many years. It would have been very easy
for Razan to leave Syria and have a luxury life in any Western country of her
choice, however she decided to stay in Syria to do the job she knows best and
loves more than anything else which is to defend the people's rights in Syria.”
For a recent joint action hosted by GCHR and other rights groups, see: http://www.gc4hr.org/news/view/1140
 
“Zaitouneh
has been one of the most prominent and effective lawyers defending political
prisoners in Syria since 2001,” says FIDH President, Karim Lahidji. Zaitouneh
was head of the VDC, which is active in monitoring and reporting on human
rights violations in Syria. Human rights organisations believe that the
abduction of the four human rights defenders was a direct result of their
peaceful human rights work. Their ongoing detention forms part of a wider
pattern of threats and harassment against human rights defenders by both
government forces and non-state actors.
 
Just
prior to her abduction, Zaitouneh, in a video
interview with FIDH, said, “Nothing, not even our
100,000 deaths or harsh siege, or betrayal of the international community can
ever defeat the will of people who have a dream and faith in the future.” 
 
This birthday campaign for Razan Zaitouneh and her
colleagues is supported by:
Amnesty International Canada
Association for Women's Rights in Development (AWID)
CIVICUS
FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders
Front Line Defenders
Gulf
Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
Hivos
Institute
for War & Peace Reporting (IWPR)
International
Media Support (IMS)
International
Service for Human Rights (ISHR)
Lawyers for Lawyers
Lawyers Rights Watch Canada (LWRC)
Maharat Foundation
Martin Ennals Foundation
Nazra for Feminist Studies
Syrian
Network for Human Rights (SNHR)
Violations
Documentation Centre (VDC)
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 