Cambodia:  Release immediately land rights activist Yorm Bopha,  arbitrarily detained since one year!
September  4, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2013 / SeptemberCambodia: Release immediately land rights activist Yorm Bopha,  arbitrarily detained since one year!

Geneva-Paris,
September 4, 2013. As today marks one
year since land rights
activist Yorm Bopha was detained, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH), reiterates its call to the Cambodian authorities for Ms. Yorm Bopha's
immediate and unconditional release. The Observatory further denounces that the Phnom Penh authorities restricted a peaceful march
that was organised to mark the one-year imprisonment of Ms. Bopha.
 
Ms.
Yorm Bopha, a housing rights activist who was pivotal in the
protests against forced evictions of residents from the Boeung Kak Lake
community in Phnom Penh, was detained on September 4, 2012 and sentenced to three years in prison
on December 27, 2012, on the basis of questionable allegations that Ms. Bopha has always denied.
 
On June 14, 2013, the Court of
Appeal in Phnom Penh decided to uphold the conviction of Ms. Bopha, but
suspended one year of her three-year original sentence. She then appealed to
the Supreme Court. In the meantime, she remains detained in Prey Sar prison,
where she is expected to serve the rest of her sentence until September 2014.
 
“Ms. Yorm Bopha is being detained merely for being at the forefront of
the campaign in favour of the Boeung Kak Lake community’s rights and calling for the release of community members who were arbitrarily
arrested in May 2012 after protesting their forced evictions”,
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock said today. “Accordingly, she should be released immediately and unconditionally, as
her detention merely aims at obstructing her human rights activities”, he
added.
 
Moreover, on September 4,
2013, the Phnom Penh authorities
restricted a peaceful march by Boeung Kak community representatives and
supporters to mark the one-year imprisonment of Ms. Yorm Bopha. The community
planned to march from their area of Phnom Penh to the Wat Phnom pagoda and then
to the Supreme Court to demand that the court urgently hear Ms. Bopha’s case.
When they notified City Hall that they planned to hold the march, City Hall
responded that if they were planning on having more than 200 participants, they
could only carry out their activities within the Boeung Kak area. 
 
Despite the lack of permission from City Hall, the community decided to
proceed, believing that there were no legal grounds to prevent them from
peacefully demonstrating. When they attempted to leave from Boeung Kak this
morning to march towards Wat Phnom, several groups of community members wearing
t-shirts and carrying flowers, flags, loudspeakers and other campaigns material
were prevented from exiting by the police. The community representatives then asked
the team from the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR) who was monitoring
the rally to load their van with the campaigns material so that they would be
allowed to leave. The police and military police then stopped the CCHR van and
prevented it from exiting. The police and other security forces also confiscated
aggressively the materials supporters behind the van were carrying, even
hitting one man on the head. Following the intervention of rights groups and
observers, the march was finally able to proceed.
 
“We condemn the
obstacles to the peaceful march that was organised to mark the one-year
imprisonment of Ms. Yorm Bopha and we reiterate our call on the Cambodian authorities
to ensure in all
circumstances that human rights defenders are able
to work without any fear of reprisals”,
FIDH President Karim Lahidji said. 
 
The Observatory more generally urges the
authorities of Cambodia to conform to the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international
human rights instruments ratified by Cambodia. 