Viet Nam:  Vietnam: Release of Thich Vien Phuong
April 11, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2005 / AprilViet Nam: Vietnam: Release of Thich Vien PhuongCase VNM 070405.1 Follow up to Case VNM 070405 Release  Geneva, April 11th, 2005  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information concerning the following situation in Vietnam.    New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that Thich Vien Phuong, a member of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV), who was arrested in Saigon by Security Police on March 30th 2005, was released after being subjected to intense interrogation for several days. According to the information received, although he has been allowed to return to his pagoda, he remains under constant surveillance and is interrogated daily by Security Police.   Remarks  The International Secretariat of OMCT wishes to thank the individuals and institutions who intervened on behalf of Thich Vien Phuong. OMCT continues to be gravely concerned by the general climate of arbitrariness against UBCV monks. UBCV monks have been subjected to systematic harassment and repression on the part of the Vietnamese authorities for many years because of their commitment to religious freedom, human rights and democracy in Vietnam.   Brief Reminder of the Situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed by a reliable source that Thich Vien Phuong, a member of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV), was arrested in Saigon by Security Police on March 30, 2005, at 5.30 pm. Security Police arrested him on his motorbike at the Phu Nhuan crossroads, at the intersection of Phan Dang Luu, Hoang Van Thu, Phan Dinh Phung and Nguyen Kiem streets. Thich Vien Phuong had just left the Thanh Minh Zen Monastery, where he had visited the UBCV’s Deputy leader and prominent dissident Thich Quang Do. Police confiscated Thich Vien Phuong’s video camera which contained a message from Thich Quang Do to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.  According to the information received, Security Police arrested Thich Vien Phuong on the pretext that his dilapidated Honda had no wing mirror. A number of passers-by protested this action, arguing that Police might fine the monk, but they had no right to arrest him for such a minor offence. A crowd began to gather, and someone suggested to Thich Vien Phuong that he take a cab and go home. He hailed a motorcycle taxi (xe om) and set off towards the Giac Hoa Pagoda, where he currently lives. However, Police intercepted the motorcycle and dragged him into a taxi. Thich Vien Phuong has not been heard of since. Venerable Thich Vien Dinh, Superior monk at Giac Hoa Pagoda allegedly called the local police in Binh Thanh Ward, but they knew nothing about the arrest. At 9pm, the monks at Giac Hoa pagoda still had no news of Thich Vien Phuong’s whereabouts.   Geneva, April 11th, 2005 