Tunisia:  The adoption of the new constitution marks an historic day
January 30, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Tunisia / 2014 / JanuaryTunisia: The adoption of the new constitution marks an historic dayOMCT_CP_Adoption of the new constitution marks an historic day (arabic version)1 page / 619 KB

Tunis, 28 January 2014
 
The World Organisation Against Torture congratulates all stakeholders who,
by their contributions and concessions, brought about the adoption of the new constitution
on 26th January 2014. Thereby, Tunisia marked an historic moment and an
important milestone in her democratic transition.
 
"This achievement that all generations and all tendencies of
society have contributed to, is the warranty for Tunisia’s promising future for
forging a path towards a participatory democracy. The text of the constitution
reflects the broad consensus within society that no circumstances can ever
justify torture," said Gabriele Reiter, Director of the OMCT Office in
Tunis.
 
This supreme text, that includes the protection of rights, freedoms
and universal principles of human rights, including the absolute prohibition of
torture, was passed by a large consensus after lengthy discussions. In
particular OMCT welcomes the fact that crimes of torture are
not subject to any statute of limitation as an important
element in the fight against impunity.
 
Despite
the provisions of Article 22 of the Constitution
authorising legal exceptions to the sacred right to life, OMCT encourages the
Tunisian authorities to continue their moratorium on the application of the
death penalty with a view to its abolition.
 
“A constitution is a living instrument. It will be judged by its
implementation," added Gabriele Reiter. OMCT is committed to supporting Tunisia's
efforts to put in place instruments to reverse past injustice, to address
current shortcomings, especially in the treatment of cases of torture victims,
and to strengthen rule of law that respects human dignity and reinforces
confidence in public institutions.
 
Press Contact: Halim Meddeb, hm@omct.org, +216 23 660 689 