Philippines:  Unfounded terrorist accusations against dozens of human rights defenders
March 19, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2018 / MarchPhilippines: Unfounded terrorist accusations against dozens of human rights defenders​PHL 001 / 0318 / OBS 032Criminalisation / Threats /
Intimidation
Philippines
March 19, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in the
Philippines.
 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed
by reliable sources about the unfounded terrorist accusations against dozens of human rights defenders.
 
According to the information received, on
February 21, 2018, the Department of Justice (DOJ) filed a petition before the
Manila Regional Court against more than 600 individuals, tagging them as
terrorists under the Human
Security Act of 2007 (Republic Act 9372), also known as the Anti-Terrorism Law, for to their alleged connection with the Communist Party
of the Philippines (CPP) and the New People’s Army (NPA). 
 
The list comprises several prominent Filipino
human rights defenders, including Ms. Victoria
Tauli-Corpuz, United
Nations (UN) Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples[1] Ms. Joan Carling, Co-convener of the Indigenous Peoples Major
Group on the Sustainable Development Goals, former Secretary General of the
Asia Indigenous Peoples Pact (AIPP) and former member of the UN Permanent Forum
on Indigenous Issues; Mr. Windel Bolinget, Chairperson of the Cordillera
Peoples Alliance (CPA) and
National Co-Convenor of KATRIBU National Alliance of Indigenous Peoples in the
Philippines; Ms. Joanna Cariño, member of CPA Advisory
Council and Co-Chair of the SANDUGO Movement of Moro
and Indigenous Peoples for Self Determination; Mr. Jose
Molintas, human rights lawyer, former member of the UN Expert
Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (EMRIP), and member of the CPA
Advisory Council; Ms. Beverly Longid, Global Coordinator for the Indigenous
Peoples Movement for Self-Determination and Liberation (IPMSDL) and member of CPA
Advisory Council; Ms. Jeanette Ribaya Cawiding, Regional Coordinator of
the Alliance of Concerned Teachers - Cordillera; Mr. Sherwin De Vera,
Regional Coordinator of DEFEND-Ilocos and member of the Save The Abra River
Movement (STARM); Ms. Elisa Tita Lubi, Karapatan National Executive Committee member; Mr. Isidro Indao, Matigsalog-Manobo village chief, council member
of the PASAKA Lumad Confederation in Southern Mindanao, and an active
member of the Parent-Teacher Community Association of the Lumad school run by
the Mindanao Interfaith Services Foundation, Inc.; Mr. Mandayhon Han-ayan, Talaandig village chief in
Malaybalay, Bukid, and member of the PIGYAYONGAAN Lumad organization; Mr. Mandayhon, a Talaandig village
chief and member of the
PIGYAYONGAAN Lumad organization; Mr. Sergio Lumonday, Secretary
General of Tinananon Kulamanon Lumadnong Panaghiusa (TIKULPA), a local organisation standing against agri-business plantations and
other corporate business interests in the area; Ms. Zara
Alvarez, Research and Advocacy Officer of the Negros Island Health
Integrated Program (NIHIP) and former Campaign and Education Director of
Karapatan-Negros chapter; Mr. Romulo Bito-on, Regional Coordinator
of Makabayan-Negros and member of the Samahan ng Ex-detainees Laban sa
Detensyon at Aresto (SELDA); Ms. Rogina Navarro Quilop, Administrative
Officer of the Center for People’s Resources and Services (CPRS)-Negros; Mr. Isidro
Castillo, former Chairperson of the National Federation of Sugar
Workers (NFSW); Mr. Arnold Evangelista and Mr. Erlindo Baes,
officers of the Batangas Human Rights Alliance-Karapatan.
 
Moreover, the list
reportedly includes names of individuals already deceased or disappeared,
including Ms. Kamil Manangan, former Gabriela Youth Spokesperson who was
killed in November 2017, and Ms. Luisa Posa-Dominado, then SELDA
Spokesperson who has been missing since April 12, 2007.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns these unfounded terrorist accusations against the above-mentioned human rights
defenders, which take place in a context
of a surge of killings and attacks against human rights defenders in the
Philippines under President Duterte[2] and put their lives and safety at great risk
and only aims at punishing them for their
peaceful and legitimate human rights activities.
 
The Observatory further recalls that under the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations
of 1946, UN experts have immunity from legal proceedings of every kind
undertaken in the course of their mandated work.
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of the Philippines to remove the
names of the above-mentioned human rights defenders from the list of alleged
terrorists and to guarantee, in all circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity. 
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write to
the authorities in the Philippines, urging them to:
 
i.     Guarantee, in all
circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned
defenders as well as all human rights defenders in the Philippines;
 
ii. Remove the names of the above-mentioned human rights
defenders from the list of alleged terrorists;
 
iii. Put an end to any
harassment against all human rights defenders in the Philippines, recognise that human rights defenders have a
legitimate role to play in ensuring peace, justice and democracy, and therefore
ensure in all
circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate activities
without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions
of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular with Articles
1 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by
the Philippines.
 
Addresses: 
 
·    
H.E. Rodrigo Duterte,
President of the Republic of the Philippines, Fax: (+632) 742-1641 / 929-3968,
E-mail: op@president.gov.ph or send message through http://president.gov.ph/contact-us/ 
·    
Hon. Jesus Dureza,
Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process, Fax: +63 (2) 638 2216, Email:
stqd.papp@opapp.gov.ph, feedback@opapp.net
·    
Ret. Maj. Gen. Delfin
Lorenzana, Secretary, Department of National Defense, Fax: +63(2) 982-5600,
Email: info@dnd.gov.ph, webmaster@dnd.gov.ph
·    
Hon. Vitaliano Aguirre,
Secretary, Department of Justice, Fax: (+632) 521-1614, Email:
communications@doj.gov.ph
·    
Hon. Jose Luis Martin Gascon,
Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, Fax: (+632) 929 0102, Email:
chairgascon.chr@gmail.com
·    
H.E. Mr. Evan P. Garcia,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the United Nations Office
in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19 32 Email: mission@genevapm.ph
·    
Embassy of the Philippines in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 02 345 64 25, E-mail: brusselspe@gmail.com
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Philippines located in
your country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, March 19, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both
members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line:
• E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
• Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
• Tel and fax FIDH: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80




[1]
Ms. Tauli-Corpuz had
recently denounced human rights violations of indigenous peoples in the south
of the country.


[2] For more information, see Observatory Press
Release, September 8, 2017. 