Bangladesh:  Bangladesh examined at the Committee on the Rights of the Child : OMCT's concerns regarding violence against girls and juvenile justice
September 30, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2003 / SeptemberBangladesh: Bangladesh examined at the Committee on the Rights of the Child : OMCT's concerns regarding violence against girls and juvenile justiceThe World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its concern  regarding violence against girls and the juvenile justice system in  Bangladesh at the 34th session of the Committee on the Rights of the  Child   Geneva, 30 September 2003  The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child will today begin its  examination of the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of  the Child in Bangladesh. In its alternative country report entitled  "Violence against Girls in Bangladesh," which has been submitted to  the Committee on the Rights of the Child, the World Organisation  Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its grave concern at reports of  violence against girls at the hands of both private individuals and  state officials. OMCT also submitted an alternative report on  juvenile justice to the Committee on the Rights of the Child.  Early marriage is common in Bangladesh, with half of women being  married before they are 18 although legally a girl cannot be married  before this age. This practice makes girls particularly vulnerable to  domestic violence, which is reportedly widespread. Girls are also  especially vulnerable to dowry related violence in Bangladesh.  Despite a law prohibiting the payment of dowry, this practice  continues and the consequences are severe. First, failure to meet the  dowry demands often results in verbal and physical abuse of the wife.  Physical abuse includes beating, burning with cigarettes, withholding  food, sleep deprivation and denial of medical treatment.   Acid throwing is another alarming manifestation of violence against  girls and women in Bangladesh. The reasons for the acid throwing  attacks include the refusal of an offer of affair or marriage,  illegal physical relations, dowry disputes, domestic fights and  arguments over property. In 2002, 362 people were burnt through acid  violence, among that number, 138 were girls and 188 were women, and  with respect to these incidents, only 172 cases were filed.   Girls in Bangladesh are also reportedly victims of rape in large  numbers, including by supporters of the BNP, the government in power.  There are exceedingly difficult obstacles to overcome in reporting a  case of rape, including the requirement of an eyewitness to the  crime. Politically motivated rapes of ethnic minority girls and women  often go unpunished and there is a lack of access to redress and  reparation.   In relation with the juvenile justice system, OMCT vividly  disapproves of the setting of a child's criminal responsibility at 7  years. In addition, Bangladeshi legislation provides police with  extensive powers of arrest, which have led to regular abuses. Grounds  of arrest include "vagrancy", "uncontrollable behaviour" and being  "victim of crime." The latter particularly affects girls who suffer  secondary victimisation by the justice system.   Juvenile courts have the power to commit a child to a certified  institution for up to ten years, a maximum which is unduly high.  Also, some children have reportedly been detained for up to five  years while awaiting trial on charges that only carry a punishment of  2-3 years. Deprivation of liberty for children should be measures of  last resort and for the shortest time possible, and the government  should develop adequate diversion programmes and alternatives to  imprisonment for juvenile offenders.   Additionally, conditions in correction centres and in jails do not  conform with international instruments, with nutrition, educational  opportunities, and sanitary conditions far below minimal standards.  The circumstances of detention are particularly troublesome for  children of women prisoners (who may stay in detention with their  mothers up until the age of six).   Overall, the government has failed to protect girls from violence  whether at the hands of private individuals or state officials and  its juvenile justice system severely violates children's rights.  OMCT's report concludes Bangladesh has not fulfilled its obligations  under the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  For copies of the alternative report on "Violence against Girls in  Bangladesh"and "The  rights of the child in Bangladesh - Focus on  Juvenile Justice" or for further information on OMCT's programme on Violence against Women please contact Carin Benninger-Budel (Violence against Women Programme) at +41 22 809 4939 or at cbb@omct.org. and Séverine Jacomy at +41 22 809 4939 or sj@omct.org. 