Cameroon:  Ongoing judicial harassment of members of the Esu Youths Development Association (EYDA)
January 13, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2017 / JanuaryCameroon: Ongoing judicial harassment of members of the Esu Youths Development Association (EYDA)
New information
CMR 001 / 0716
/ OBS 056.2
Judicial
harassment /
Arbitrary
detention /
Release / Intimidation
Cameroon
January 13, 2017
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Cameroon.
New information:
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial harassment of
members of the Esu Youths Development Association (EYDA)[1],
namely Messrs. Abue Philip Kpwe, Cyprian Azong, Bernard Fuh
and Divine Biame. The four are part of a group of leaders opposing
land-grabbing undertaken on the land of the Esu community
(North-West Cameroon) by Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo[2],
a billionaire businessman, cattle rancher, tea plantation owner and a
member of the Central Committee of the ruling Cameroon People’s
Democratic Movement (CPDM) party.
According to the
information received, on December 20, 2016, the North-West Court of Appeal
granted bail to the 4 youth leaders following several unjustified adjournments.
No date for the appeal hearing regarding the lack of jurisdiction[3]
has been set yet.
However, Mr. Albert
Njie Nganje, the General Prosecutor
of the North-West Region has blocked the release of the four defenders despite
several requests for release, which have been denied on grounds that they were
not filed to the appropriate court. They have been detained since May 2016 and
all applications for their release since have been denied (see background
information).
In addition, the
Observatory has been informed of the precarious psychological condition of Mr.
Abue Philip Kpwe who lost his son on September 7, 2016 and was refused
permission to attend the funeral. Furthermore, the health of Messrs. Cyprian Azong,
Divine Biame and Bernard Fuh are deteriorating due to poor detention conditions
and no adequate medical care has been given to the detainees.
The four leaders are
being prosecuted alongside five other Esu leaders, namely Messrs. Redemption
Godlove, Ephraim Kagha Mbong, Emmanuel Wung, Ivo Meh
and Williams Meh, on trumped-up
charges of depredation by band”
(Section 236.1 of the Penal Code). If convicted, the nine face 10 to 20 years
in prison. HRH Fon Kum Achuo II, chief of the village[4],
is also facing charges due to two complaints filed on behalf of Mr. Baba
Ahmadou Danpullo. The case is still
pending without any date for the next hearing scheduled.
Furthermore, Mr. Robert Fon, lawyer of the nine Esu
community leaders, and Mr. Chris Mbunwe, a journalist of the Post
Newspaper in Bamenda, who are targeted by a complaint for defamation filed
by Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo on February 24, 2016 regarding an interview[5],
also had their hearings postponed on several occasions, including on October 5,
2016. The next hearing is scheduled on February 2, 2017.
Accordingly, the
Observatory calls upon the Cameroon authorities to release immediately Messrs. Abue Philip Kpwe, Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong
and Bernard Fuh, and to put an end to the ongoing harassment, including
at judicial level, against them as well as against Messrs. Redemption Godlove,
Ephraim Kagha Mbong, Emmanuel Wung, Ivo Meh, Williams Meh, HRH Fon Kum Achuo
II, Robert Fon and Chris Mbunwe.
The Observatory further urges the Cameroon authorities to ensure that,
until charges are dropped, all the judicial proceedings are carried out in full
compliance with their right to a fair trial, as protected under international
law and to ensure the physical and psychological integrity of all nine
defenders.
Background
information:
In 2015, Mr. Baba
Ahmadou Danpullo attempted to establish a land certificate on the Esu land. The Esu community leaders subsequently
filed a case requesting Mr. Danpullo to prove the land ownership. Instead of
providing this proof, Mr. Danpullo filed a case based on trumped-up charges of
defamation against Barrister Robert Fon,
the Esu community lawyer, claiming 100 million FCFA (152 449 euros),
alleging that he had paid the Governor of the North-West and other
officials 50 million FCFA (76 225 euros) to own the land. These
developments are part of the pattern of judicial harassment to deprive the Esu
community of legal counsel. Mr. Fon is also lawyer for the Mbororo community
that has been resisting abuses by Mr. Danpullo over several years[6].
On January 18, 2016, farmhouses belonging to Esu people were
reportedly burnt down by workers of the Elba Ranch, belonging to Mr. Baba
Ahmadou Danpullo. The Esu filed a complaint to the Divisional Officer of Fungom
but have received no response to date.
According to reports filed by Elba Ranch, in the night of
April 18, 2016, huts belonging to the workers of his “Elba ranch” were burnt
down. However, it is reported that at that time around 50 gendarmes were
stationed in the area. A gendarmerie report of May 5 determined that no one
could be held responsible for the above-mentioned acts.
On April 22, 2016, Mr.
Redemption Godlove was arrested at his home on charges of “arson” and
“vandalism” and transferred to Bamenda Central Prison. His door was forced upon
by gendarmes from Elba Ranch. He was initially taken to Bamenda several
kilometers from Esu and locked up in secret. Esu community leaders and their
lawyer found him following several days of search.
On May 3, 2016, a two-room house under construction in Elba
Ranch was reportedly partly damaged. 
The same day, lawyers acting on behalf of Elba Ranch and Mr.
Baba Ahmadou Danpullo filed a complaint against the nine above-mentioned
community leaders and HRH Fon Kum Achuo II, for alleged burning down
of huts belonging to the workers of his “ELBA ranch”.
On May 9, 2016,
Messrs. Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong and Bernard Fuh were summoned to the gendarmerie legion of Bamenda and arrested under the
same charges. 
On May 25, 2016, Mr.
Abue Philip Kpwe was in turn arrested at a routine identity card checkpoint,
and placed in detention at Bamenda Central Prison on the same grounds.
On May 31, 2016, the Chambers of the Examining
Magistrate of the High Court of Mezam Division Holden at Bamenda ruled on a
Preliminary Objection filed by Barrister Robert Fon, on behalf of the nine
above-mentioned activists. 
Examining Magistrate Justice Francis Ndip Oben
relied upon Section 140 of the Penal Procedure Code[7]
to decline jurisdiction, and withdrew the remand warrant against Mr. Redemption
Godlove only, though the remand arrests should have been cancelled against the
other four[8],
and effectively ordering their release. 
In spite of this court
decision, the Bamenda Central Prison authorities kept the five human rights
defenders in detention, under the above-mentioned accusations. 
On July 14, 2016,
State Prosecutor Justice Nchang Augustin Amongwa had ordered the release on
bail of Mr. Redemption Godlove for lack of jurisdiction ratione loci. However, according to the Penal Code he was supposed
to also release the remaining four activists still in jail and close the case
as the court has no jurisdiction to continue handling the matter.
On July 26, 2016, Abue
Philip Kpwe, Cyprian Azong, Bernard Fuh, Redemption Godlove, Ephraim Kagha Mbong, Emmanuel Wung, Ivo Meh, Williams Meh and Divine Biame were expected to be brought
before the Examining Magistrate Oben Francis of
Bamenda High Court for a preliminary inquiry on trumped-up charges of
“depredation by band” (Section 236.1 of the Penal Code). 
The court decided to
postpone the hearing for the third time until August 16, 2016, because the magistrate
was busy and also because only Mr. Kpwe was brought to court. Since the arrest
of several of the activists in April and May 2016, the trial had been postponed
two other times (July 5 and July 12), all at the request of the court,
allegedly due to the “late coming of Mr. Abue Phillip Kpwe and absence of Mr.
Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong and Bernard Fuh”. According to the information
received, the court did not prepare the warrant to bring the detainees to the
hearing.
Hearings in the case
were then continuously postponed including on October 17, November 1, 22,
December 6, 13, 15 and 20, 2016.
In addition, Mr. Robert
Fon and Chris Mbunwe,
have been summoned to appear before the Examining Magistrate on August 18, 2016
following a complaint for defamation filed by Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo on
February 24, 2016, regarding an interview. He is claiming 100 000 000 FCFA (152 449 euros) in damages. Once again, the
hearing has been postponed three times (April 20, 25 and June 13).
Several other acts of
intimidation against the Esu community leaders have been reported.
On July 11, Mr. Sale Umaru, the ELBA Ranch manager, tried to bribe Mr.
Abu Philip Kpwe in order to make him sign a document accusing
HRH Fon Kum Achuo II of instructing
them to carry out the acts they are accused of. As a reward, he promised to
secure his release and give him 500 000 FCFA (762 euros). Mr. Kpwe refused to
sign the document.
On July 14, 2016, Mr. Danpullo through his ranch manager, filed a second
complaint against HRH Fon Kum Achuo II accusing him of “setting up an
armed group and importing guns from neighbouring Nigeria to come in an attack the military in
Esu and cattle belonging to Elba Ranch”. This complaint is still being
investigated by gendarmes.
On July 18, 2016, Messrs. Ivo Friday Kenah and Joseph Kelly Gham, two
villagers working for Elba Ranch, who testified in this case, confessed they
had been threatened and forced by Mr. Sale Umaru and Mr. Baba Ahmadou
Danpullo’s lawyer Sule Zakari to make false statements against the villagers
and the Fon HRH Fon Kum Achuo II. They have been interviewed by gendarmes and
provided written statements to this effect. Investigations are ongoing and this
complaint is not yet at the level of the courts.
Actions
requested:
Please write to the authorities of Cameroon and
ask them to:
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of the nine members of EYDA, Messrs. HRH Fon Kum Achuo II, Robert Fon and Chris
Mbunwe and all human rights defenders in Cameroon;
ii. Release immediately Messrs.
Abue Philip Kpwe, Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong and Bernard Fuh;
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at
judicial level - against the nine members of EYDA, HRH Fon Kum Achuo II, Robert Fon and Chris Mbunwe
and all human rights defenders in Cameroon;
iv. Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9,
1998 by the UN General Assembly, in particular its Articles 1 and 12.2;
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights instruments
ratified by Cameroon.
Addresses:
·      
Mr. Paul Biya, President of
the Republic of Cameroon, Fax +237 222 22 08 70
·      
H.E. Mr. Philémon Yang, Prime
Minister and Head of Government of Cameroon, Fax: +237 222 23 57 35 / + 237 222
23 57 65. Email: spm@spm.gov.cm 
·      
Mr. Laurent Esso, Minister of
Justice of Cameroon, Fax: + 237 222 23 00 05 / + 237 222 23 55 59
·      
Mr. René Emmanuel SADI,
Minister of Territorial Administration of Cameroon, Fax: + 237 22 22 37 35
·      
Dr. Chemuta Divine Banda,
President of the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms, Fax: +237
222 22 60 82, E-mail: cndhl@iccnet.cm / cdbanda26@yahoo.fr 
·      
H.E. Mr. Anatole Fabien Nkou, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cameroon to the
United Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 736 21 65, Email: mission.cameroun@bluewin.ch 
·       H.E. Mr. Daniel Evina Abe'e, CameroonAmbassador to
the European Union, Embassy of the Republic of Cameroon, Brussels, Belgium.
Fax: + 32 2 344 57 35; E-mail: ambassade.cameroun@skynet.be 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Cameroon in your
respective countries.
***
Paris-Geneva, January 13, 2017
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is
dedicated to the protection of human rights defenders and aims to offer them
concrete support in their time of need. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency
line: 
Email:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel
and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                 The EYDA aims at promoting and
protecting human rights, and notably the land rights of the Esu community.


[2]                 In 1986, Mr. Baba Ahmadou
Danpullo established two cattle ranches in the Boyo and Menchum divisions of
the North-West Region. He allegedly forced farming communities from their lands
without compensation, which made him the largest single private landowner in
the region. Since then, the landowner, who has close links with the
authorities, has been involved in land disputes with people peacefully
defending their land.


[3]                
In May 2016 the court ruled that he had no jurisdiction over the case since
the alleged offence was committed in Esu (Menchum judicial division), which is
also where the defendants reside and were arrested. According to criminal law
in Cameroon, jurisdiction is based on the location of the alleged offence
and/or arrest. The court overturned its own rulling in October 2016.


[4]                 HRH Kum Achuo II is the heir
chief of the Esu village. He is a traditional authority and any land title
application needs to be signed by him and two other notables. 


[5]                
See article in Cameroon Postline, Esu Does Not Want To Evict Danpulo
– Barrister Robert Fon, January 19, 2016: http://www.cameroonpostline.com/esu-does-not-want-to-evict-danpullo-barrister-robert-fon/   


[6]            Members of the Mbororo Social
and Cultural Development Association (MBOSCUDA), an organisation defending the
rights of Mbororo pastoralists in North-Western Cameroon since 1992, have faced
similar harassment over the past years after a complaint filed against them by
Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo. See Observatory Urgent Appeal CMR 002/0613/OBS 049
of July 7, 2013 and Observatory Annual Report 2014.


[7]                 Section 140 states: (1) the
competent State Counsel shall be either: (a) That of the place of commission of
the offence; or (b) that of the place of residence of the suspect; or (c) that
of the place of arrest of the suspect. (2) When more than one State Counsel are
seized of the same matter, priority shall be given to the State Counsel in
whose jurisdiction the offence was committed.


[8]                 The remands
were issued on the same alleged grounds by the state counsel (procureur) of
Bamenda on the day of the arrest of each of the five EYDA members. However, as
the remand warrant was withdrawn for the first defendant, there can be no basis
to pursue the rest individually for the same alleged crime. 