Violence against Women in Nigeria; flogging of 17 year-old to be carried out on 27 January 2001
January 11, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Niger / 2001 / JanuaryViolence against Women in Nigeria; flogging of 17 year-old to be carried out on 27 January 20019 January 2001  On 14 September 2000, the International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expressed its deep concern to the Nigerian authorities over information received regarding the sentencing of a pregnant 17-year-old girl to 180 lashes by an Islamic court in the northern Nigerian state of Zamfara.  She is to be publicly flogged 40 days after the delivery of the baby.   Bariya Ibrahim Magazu was found guilty by one of the new Islamic courts in the state of having had sex outside marriage, and of accusing three men of having slept with her without proof. It seems that Police in her village reported the unmarried girl to the courts after seeing that she was several months pregnant. When asked by the court to identify the father, she named three middle-aged farmers in her village as possible fathers, but several witnesses were unable to confirm her claim.   As a result, the judge sentenced the girl to receive 100 lashes for engaging in pre-marital sex and 80 lashes for making unsubstantiated claims against the three men.   On 9 January 2001, the International Secretariat is of the World Organisation Against Torture was informed that the baby has been born and that the sentence is due to be carried out on January 27, 2001.  According to the information received, a team of seven lawyers (all but one working pro bono) are filing a leave to appeal and stay of execution on Bariya Ibrahim Maguzu's behalf, as well as undertaking research on grounds and argumentation for the appeal.  OMCT unreservedly condemns the use of such punishments which clearly violates international human rights standards as embodied in the Convention against Torture and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.    The International Secretariat of OMCT calls on the authorities in Nigeria to intervene and revoke this sentence and guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Bariya Ibrahim Magazu.  Please continue writing expressing concern that the flogging of 17-year-old Bariya Ibrahim Magazu will reportedly be carried out on the 27th of January 2001.  Addresses:  His Excellency, Alhaji Ahmed Sani, State Governor, Government House Gusau,Zamfara State, Nigeria,   Alhaji Ibrahima Okala, Commissioner for Justice and Attorney General,  Government House, Zamfara State, Nigeria  Chief Bola Ige, Minister of Justice and Attorney General of the Federation, Ministry of Justice, Abuja, Federal Capital Territory, Nigeria Fax: + 234 9 523 5208 c/o Minister of Foreign Affairs (marked for attention Minister of Justice)  E-mail: or ssa@nopa.net    c/o Presidency(marked for attention Minister of Justice)  Diplomatic representatives of Nigeria accredited to your country. 