Bangladesh:  Charges framed against Odhikar's Secretary and Director Messrs. Adilur Rahman Khan and ASM Nasiruddin Elan
January 10, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2014 / JanuaryBangladesh: Charges framed against Odhikar's Secretary and Director Messrs. Adilur Rahman Khan and ASM Nasiruddin Elan 
New information
BGD 001 / 0813 / OBS 074.4
Judicial
harassment
Bangladesh
January
10, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH (the International Federation for Human Rights), has received
new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Bangladesh.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources that charges were framed against Messrs. Adilur Rahman
Khan and ASM Nasiruddin Elan,
respectively Secretary and Director of the human rights non-governmental organisation Odhikar. Mr. Rahman
Khan is also a member of OMCT General Assembly.
 
According to
the information received, on January 8, 2014, Messrs. Adilur Rahman Khan and ASM Nasiruddin Elan appeared before the
Cyber Crimes Tribunal. Messrs. Khan and Elan’s
lawyers requested Judge Shamsul Alam of the Cyber Crimes Tribunal for a
discharge of the application under Section 265C of the Code of Criminal
Procedure[1]. However, the judge rejected their plea and took
into cognisance the Prosecution report/charge sheet submitted by the police on
September 11, 2013.
 
Charges were framed under Section 57 of the
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Act 2006 (amended in 2009)
against Messrs. Khan and Elan, in relation to a fact-finding report
issued by Odhikar on the killing of 61 people during an operation carried out
by security forces against Hefazat-e Islam activists on May 5-6, 2013 in Dhaka.
According to the charges, Odhikar would
have distorted the information of the police operation that took place on May
5, 2013, where 11 people had died. The charges state that Odhikar would have
collected information of deaths around the country, including Dhaka, which
occurred on May 5-6 and put that total on their website instead. The charges
further state that this would have caused extreme damage to the image of the
State. Mr. Khan and Mr. Elan both pleaded not guilty and Mr. Khan further
declared that the information in Odhikar report was completely accurate, adding
that Odhikar had made the list of deceased persons after fact-finding and
thorough verification. 
 
Moreover, Odhikar lawyers argued that the
investigating officer was not able to give sufficient proof or evidence that
Odhikar’s report was incorrect. They also argued that Odhikar was not an
individual, but a human rights organisation and that there was no proof that
the report had been signed by any one individual. They also stated that several
organisations, media and individuals had quoted various numbers of deceased
Hefazat-e Islam supporters at that time. Yet, only Odhikar has been targeted by
a case filed by the Government, which in addition has failed to set up an
independent Judicial Inquiry Commission to investigate the events of May 2013,
as proposed by Odhikar.
 
Judge Shamsul Alam ordered that the trial against the two
human rights defenders would start on January 22, 2014 with examination of
witnesses.
 
The
Observatory is greatly concerned over the arbitrary prosecution against Mr. Khan and Mr. Elan, which only aims at sanctioning
and preventing their activities as human rights defenders,
therefore failing to comply with international human rights standards. Moreover, the Observatory is concerned about the delay in framing
charges against Messrs. Khan and Elan, and about the
fact that it took a long time to appoint a Public Prosecutor to represent
the Government, which amounts to further harassment against the two
defenders.
 
Background
information:
 
On August 10, 2013, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was
arrested and on August 11, he was placed on a five-day remand for
interrogation. On August 12, the High Court
of Bangladesh stayed the five-day remand order to interrogate Mr. Khan and
asked police to send him to jail. The next day, Mr. Khan was transferred
to Kashimpur Jail number 1. 
 
On September
4, 2013, the Detective
Branch of Police announced they had filed a charge sheet against Mr. Khan and Mr. Nasiruddin Elan under Section 57 of the ICT Act and Sections 505 (c) and 505A of the Penal Code for allegedly “distorting images by
using photo shop and publishing a fabricated report, which enraged public
sentiment”. The charges were brought in relation to Odhikar fact-finding report
on the police operation carried out against Hefazat-e Islam activists on May
5-6, 2013 in Dhaka. If found guilty, the two human rights defenders face up to
14 years in jail or a Tk 10,000,000 (about 93,660
€) fine under the ICT Act and seven years’ jail term under the Penal Code.
 
On September
11, 2013, the Cyber Crimes Tribunal issued
an arrest warrant against Mr. Nasiruddin Elan.
 
On October 8, 2013, the High Court Division of the
Supreme Court of Bangladesh granted a six-month interim bail to Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan. On October 9, 2013, the Office of the Attorney General filed an
application before the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court, requesting to
stay the High Court’s order granting bail to Mr. Khan. However, the Chamber
Judge decided on the same day to uphold the High Court Division’s decision. The
Observatory recalls that the bail
petition filed by Mr. Khan’s lawyer was earlier rejected three times
in the same case. On October 11, 2013, at 10.30 am, Mr. Khan was finally
released on bail from Kashimpur Jail number 1. 
 
On November 6, 2013, Mr. Nasiruddin Elan and his
lawyers appeared before the Cyber Crimes Tribunal and appealed for bail in the
above-mentioned case. However, Judge Shamsul Alam rejected the plea for bail
and ordered that Mr. Elan be arrested and taken to Dhaka Central Jail.
 
On November 24, 2013, the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of
Bangladesh granted a six-months ad interim bail to Mr. Elan, who was finally released from jail on December 1, 2013. 
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Bangladesh, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Messrs. Adilur Rahman Khan and Nasiruddin Elan, of all Odhikar
members as well as of all human rights defenders in
Bangladesh;
 
ii. Put an end to any kind of harassment - including at
the judicial level - against Messrs. Adilur
Rahman Khan and Nasiruddin Elan, all
members of Odhikar as well as all human rights defenders in Bangladesh;
 
iii. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially:
-       its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually
and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, as well as
-       its Article 12.2, which provides that the State shall “take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of his or her rights”; 

iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Bangladesh.
 
Addresses:
 
·  Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office
of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka,
Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2
8113243, Email: pm@pmo.gov.bd
·  Mr. Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, Minister for
Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4,
Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com; minister@mha.gov.bd;
· Barrister Shafique Ahmed, Minister for
Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and
Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
·  Mr. Hasanul Haq Inu,
Honourable Minister, Ministry of Information, Building # 4 (8th floor),
Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh. E-mail: minister@moi.gov.bd
·  Mr. Mahbubey
Alam, Attorney General for Bangladesh, Attorney General's Office, Supreme Court
Premises, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: adv_mahbubey@yahoo.com
·  H.E. Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations
in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16,
E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
·  Embassy of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh in Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32
2 646 59 98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or
embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in
Bangladesh.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, January 10, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal
in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax
OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29Tel and fax
FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1] 

Section
265C of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 reads that “If, upon consideration
of the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith and after
hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the
Court considers that there is no sufficient grounds for proceeding against the
accused, it shall discharge the accused and record reasons for doing so”. 