Syrian Arab Republic:  Opening of the trial against detained human rights defenders  Mazen Darwish, Hussein Ghrer and Hani Al-Zitani for terrorism
March 28, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2014 / MarchSyrian Arab Republic: Opening of the trial against detained human rights defenders  Mazen Darwish, Hussein Ghrer and Hani Al-Zitani for terrorism

Paris-Geneva, March
28, 2014. FIDH and OMCT, within the
framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, express their deepest concern about
the decision made by the Damascus' Anti-Terrorism Court to prosecute Mazen
Darwish, Hussein Hammad Ghrer and Mohamed Hani Al-Zitani under the 2012 Anti-Terrorist Law. 
 
On
March 24, 2014, the General Prosecutor of the Anti-Terrorism Court of Damascus
presented charges against Mr. Mazen Darwish,
President of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM),
together with two other SCM members, Messrs. Mohamed Hani
Al-Zaitani and Hussein Hammad Ghrer, with
“publicizing terrorist acts” pursuant Article 8 of the 2012 Anti-Terrorism Law.
Two of their other colleagues, Messrs. Mansour
Omari and Abdel Rahman Hamada, who were conditionally released on February 6,
2013, will also stand trial for the same charges.
 
Defense lawyers challenged
the jurisdiction of the Anti-Terrorism Court, arguing in particular that
activities carried out by SCM, an NGO promoting human rights, could not be
considered as terrorist acts. They also raised several procedural
irregularities: the absence of arrest warrant at the time of arrest of the
human rights defenders should render the case null and void; the fact that a
Military Court ruled on September 11, 2012 that SCM staff members had served
prison for a sufficient amount of time and that they should all be released;
that the body which conducted the investigation and decided to bring charges
had no authority to do so (Article 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code).
 
The next
hearing is scheduled for June 18, 2014. Messrs. Mazen Darwich, Hani Zaitani,
Hussein Ghrer, Mansour Omari and Abdel Rahman Hamada face
a penalty of 15 years imprisonment. 
 
“The indictment of the
five SCM members on terrorism charges is absurd” declared
Karim Lahidji, FIDH President. “It is a sad example
of the mock justice delivered in Syria, which aims solely at sanctioning
legitimate and necessary activities carried out by human rights defenders”. 
 
“The Syrian government should not
use its overbroad terrorism law to punish peaceful activists for their
legitimate work”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. “Further,
their trial should not be held in the Anti-Terrorism Court, which does not
afford defendants basic due process rights according to international fair
trial standards”.
 
Mazen Darwish, Hussein
Hammad Ghrer and Mohamed Hani Al-Zitani are detained since February 2012, for
promoting freedom of expression and monitoring gross human rights violations
committed in Syria. During nine months they were held in conditions amounting
to enforced disappearance and subjected to acts of torture. There has been no
investigation into the abuses.
 
Despite repeated calls by the
international community, including the United Nations, for the release of the
three human rights defenders, the authorities have refused to release them. A
May 15, 2013 UN General Assembly resolution included a demand for their
immediate release and on November 15, 2013, the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention declared their detention to be arbitrary and asked for
their immediate release.
 
Bringing charges against the five human rights
defenders, especially after the UN found their two-year pre-trial detention to
be arbitrary, clearly breaches international norms. Accordingly, the Observatory calls on Syrian authorities to drop charges against
them and release Mazen Darwish, Hussein Hammad Ghrer and Mohamed Hani
Al-Zitani immediately and
unconditionally as well as to order
investigations into the above-mentioned allegations of torture and
ill-treatment. 
 
The
Observatory urges more generally the Syrian authorities to release all human rights defenders detained in Syria for carrying out their
legitimate and peaceful human rights activities. 