Saudi Arabia:  The UN finds the detention of Waleed Abu Al-Khair and eight other human rights defenders arbitrary; and call for their immediate and unconditional release and for reparations
December  2, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2015 / DecemberSaudi Arabia: The UN finds the detention of Waleed Abu Al-Khair and eight other human rights defenders arbitrary; and call for their immediate and unconditional release and for reparations(Paris,
 Geneva) - The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 
(a joint FIDH and OMCT programme), welcome the opinion rendered by the 
United Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD), which 
considers the detention of human rights defender Waleed Abu Al-Khair and
 eight other human rights defenders, as arbitrary, and requests their 
immediate release.In 
an opinion adopted during a session held in September 2015, the United 
Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) requested the 
release of Waleed Abu al-Khair as well as eight other human rights defenders, Dr.
 Mohammed Al-Qahtani, Dr. Abdullah Al-Hamid, Dr. Abdulkarim Al-Khodr, 
Raif Badawi, Mohammad Al-Bajadi, Fadel Al-Manasef, Sheikh Sulaiman 
Al-Rashudi, Omar al-Sa’id, from arbitrary detention.
In April 2015, the Observatory and six other organisations referred the case of Waleed Abu al-Khair to the UN WGAD [1].
 Mr. Waleed Abu al-Khair is a human rights lawyer, Founder and Director 
of the Monitor of Human Rights in Saudi Arabia (MHRSA). He also acted as
 lawyer of the prominent human rights defender Raif Badawi, who is among
 the other eight human rights defenders whose detention was found 
arbitrary by the UN WGAD.
He was arrested on April 15, 2014 while appearing at the fifth 
session of his trial before the Specialized Criminal Court, which deals 
with terrorism cases, in Riyadh. On February 15, 2015, the Specialized 
Criminal Court of Appeal in Riyadh confirmed a 15 years prison sentence,
 a travel ban of equal duration following imprisonment, and a fine of SR
 200,000 (approximately EUR 46,957). Charges against him were “striving 
to overthrow the state and the authority of the King”, “criticising and 
insulting the judiciary”, “assembling international organisations 
against the Kingdom”, “creating and supervising an unlicensed 
organisation”, and “contributing to the establishment of another” and 
“preparing and storing information that will affect public security”.
In its decision, the UN Working Group highlighted that the detention of Mr. Waleed Abu Al-Khair “forms a part of both continued and recent persecution and crackdown on human rights activists in Saudi Arabia”. The UN WGAD further stated that most of the offences that Mr. Abu Al-Khair has been convicted of are “too
 broad and imprecise, therefore allowing for interpretations that 
undermine fundamental rights such as the right to freedom of expression,
 association and assembly”.
The UN WGAD concluded that “the deprivation of liberty of 
Waleed Abu Al-Khair [and the eight other human rights defenders] is 
arbitrary, being in contravention of Articles 9, 10 and 19 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and […] of Articles 9, 14 and 19 
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights”. Accordingly, the UN WGAD requested “the
 Government of Saudi Arabia to release Waleed Abu Al-Khair and the other
 eight human rights defenders forthwith and bring their situation in 
conformity with the requirements of international human rights 
instruments”, and to provide them “with appropriate reparation”.“Waleed Abu Al-Khair is one more victim of the Saudi repressive 
authorities that are consistently abusing the country’s vague laws to 
deprive human rights defenders and other citizens of their liberty. As a
 member of the Human Rights Council, Saudi Arabia must uphold and 
respect the highest standards of human rights, in particular the rights 
to freedom of expression, association and assembly,” said the Observatory (FIDH-OMCT).While the Saudi Basic Law of Governance governs the operation of 
charities, a number of civil society groups, including those engaged in 
the protection and promotion of human rights are unable to obtain legal 
status under the narrow definition of charity. Although there are no 
specific rules or regulations that address the receipt of funds from 
abroad, in practice Saudi NGOs are prevented from receiving any foreign 
funding. On another note, the recently implemented counter-terror law 
and decrees have extended legal cover for human rights violations and 
abuses of power, allowing the authorities the intimidate and lock up 
human rights defenders that dare to speak up against the state depicting
 them as “terrorists”.
The Observatory calls upon the Saudi authorities to implement the UN 
WGAD decision, to immediately and unconditionally release Waleed Abu 
Al-Khair, Dr. Mohammed Al-Qahtani, Dr. Abdullah Al-Hamid, Dr. Abdulkarim
 Al-Khodr, Raif Badawi, Mohammad Al-Bajadi, Fadel Al-Manasef, Sheikh 
Sulaiman Al-Rashudi and Omar al-Sa’id, and to drop all charges against 
them.[1] See the Observatory Joint Press Release of April 15, 2015. 