Syrian Arab Republic:  Press Release: Verdict against 3 prominent human rights defenders expected on March 25
March 18, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Syrian Arab Republic / 2015 / MarchSyrian Arab Republic: Press Release: Verdict against 3 prominent human rights defenders expected on March 25Paris-Geneva, March 18, 2015 – According to subpoenas issued by the
President of Damascus Anti-terrorism Court, Messrs. Mazen Darwish, Hani Al-Zaitani
and Hussain Ghrer, will appear before the court on March 25, 2015 for the
verdict hearing. The Observatory calls for the immediate and unconditional
release of the three human rights defenders, who have been arbitrarily detained
for more than three years for promoting and protecting human rights in Syria.
 
On March 5, 2015, the President of the Damascus Anti-terrorism Court set
March 25, 2015 as the new date for the verdict hearing in the criminal case
against Messrs. Mazen Darwish, Hani Al-Zaitani and Hussain
Ghrer, respectively President and members of the Syrian Centre for Media and
Freedom of Expression (SCM). The same subpoena also ordered the transfer of
Mr. Mazen Darwish from Hama central prison to Damascus Prison via Homs Central
prison, as well as the transfer of Mr Hani Zitani from Swedaa Central prison to
Damascus prison.
 
The Observatory draws attention to the fact that the trial has been
marred by excessive delays. The verdict hearing has already been
scheduled six times and since the trial was opened before the Anti-terrorism
court in February 2013, it has been suspended 18 times.
 
“At minimum, the Syrian authorities shall guarantee Mazen Darwish, Hani Al-Zaitani
and Hussain Ghrer's right to a fair trial before an independent and impartial court,
including the right to be tried within a reasonable delay”, said FIDH President, Karim Lahidji.
 
The Observatory further underlines that the UN General Assembly, in
Resolution 67/262 adopted on May 15, 2013 called for the release of the three
defenders. In January 2014, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD)
also found that the three defenders had been arbitrarily deprived of their
liberty due to their human rights activities and called for their immediate
release. UN Security Council Resolution 2139, adopted on February 22, 2014,
also demanded the release of all arbitrarily detained people in Syria.
 
“Syrian authorities should heed UN calls and
immediately and unconditionally release Messrs Mazen Darwish, Hani Zitani and
Hussein Greer as their detention is arbitrary and only aims at preventing them
from carrying out their legitimate and peaceful human rights activities in
Syria”, concluded OMCT Secretary
General Gerald Staberock.
 
Mazen Darwish, Hani Al-Zaitani and Hussain Ghrer are detained since
February 2012, for promoting freedom of expression and monitoring gross human
rights violations committed in the country through their work in the Syrian
Centre for Media and Freedom. During nine months, they were held in conditions
amounting to enforced disappearance and subjected to acts of torture. There has
been no investigation into these abuses.
 
On February 26, 2015 Mazen Darwish was named “World Press Freedom Hero”
by the International Press Institute in recognition of “his efforts to ensure
that the truth of what was happening in his country after conflict erupted in
2011 was known beyond its borders, and in his willingness to continue speaking
out in support of free media from prison, despite the obvious danger to him in
doing so”.
 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT). The objective of
this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy to situations of repression
against human rights defenders.
 
For more information, please contact :
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Lucie Kröning: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24 