Bahrain:  Crackdown on the trade-union movement
April 14, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2011 / AprilBahrain: Crackdown on the trade-union movement

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
BHR 002 / 0411 / OBS 061
Crackdown on the trade-union
movement
Arrests / Arbitrary and
incommunicado detentions
Bahrain
April 14, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your
urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the harassment against trade-union leaders and trade-unionists
who called for strikes to protest violent repression led by
security forces against peaceful protesters demanding human rights and
democracy in the country, or who provided help to the victims of this
repression. 
 
In the wake of the
wave of peaceful demonstrations which started in February 2011 and which have
been met by the Bahraini authorities with excessive use of force, the General
Federation of Bahrain Trade Unions (GFBTU) - to which more than 60 trade-unions are
affiliated – first announced a nationwide strike to denounce the killing on
February 14 and 15, 2011 by the military and security forces of peaceful
protestors calling for reforms. This strike was called off on February 20,
after the military first withdrew from the Pearl Roundabout on February 19. On
March 13, 2011, the GFBTU called for the launch of an indefinite strike, in
solidarity with protesters who had been violently evicted from the area
adjacent to the Bahrain Financial Harbor on the same day. The
strike was called off on March 22, 2011, when the Government assured the GFBTU
that workers would not be harassed on the way to work.
 
Following these
events, on April 5, 2011, the
Parliament called on the Government to take immediate legal measures
against the heads of organisations that supported the strikes, and to refer
them to the Public Prosecution Office.
 
To date, the GFBTU registered 603 workers who have been dismissed by
private employers for participating in the strikes.
 
The Observatory was
further informed that on March 29 and 30, 2011, five members of the Board of
Directors of the Bahrain Teachers’ Society (BTS), Ms. Jaleela Al-Salman,
Mr. Anwar Abdul-Aziz Akbar, Ms. Salah Al-Bari, Ms. Afrah
Al-Asfour, Ms. Sana Abdul-Razak, were arrested without warrant by
security forces and individuals in civilian clothes at their places of
residence. All still
remain reportedly detained incommunicado to date. Furthermore, on April 6, the
Social Development Ministry issued a statement dissolving the BTS. The same
day, security forces stormed the house of Mr. Mahdi Abu-Deeb, President
of the BTS, and then arrested him in another house and took him to an unknown
location. He also reportedly remains detained incommunicado to date. The
Observatory fears that the six were arrested for their support to the call for
the strikes mentioned-above.
 
On April 4, 2011,
Mrs. Rulla El Saffar, President of the Bahrain Nursing Society (BNS), was
summoned by phone to the Adlia Criminal Investigation Building and taken away
from there by security forces to an unknown location. She had been active in
providing help to injured victims of the demonstrations.
 
In addition,
on April 6, 2011, the Social Development Minister issued an edict suspending the
Board of Directors of the Bahrain Medical Society (BMS), and the Ministry of
Health suspended 30 doctors and nurses whose cases was referred to an
“investigation committee” created by the Ministry, which mandate is to
investigate the medical personnel who treated injured victims of
demonstrations.
 
The
Observatory was also informed that on April 11, 2011, Dr. Nabeel Tamman,
an Ear/Nose/Throat (ENT) specialist, member of Bahrain Human Rights Society
(BHRS) and the former president of the Medical Committee, was arrested and
taken by security forces to an unknown location. Dr. Tamman is under treatment
for cancer, and needs constant medical care and medication.
 
Furthermore,
Mr. Abdul Ghaffar Abdullah Hussein, one of the founding leaders of the
Bahraini labour movement and Chairman of the trade-union of Bahrain Petroleum
Company was fired on March 31, 2011 for having "called on workers to take
part in the general strike». The management of the Bahrain Petroleum Company
threatened to undertake a legal action against him and other members of the
union.
 
The Observatory condemns
the crackdown against trade-union leaders and trade-unionists, which merely
seems to aim at sanctioning the exercise of their human rights activities. The
Observatory is concerned about the arrests and intimidations against supporters
of peaceful demontrations and professionals providing injured demonstrators
with medical assistance.
 
The Observatory urges the
Bahraini authorities to take the necessary measures to guarantee the protection
of all human rights defenders in Bahrain and, more generally, to comply with
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted on December 9,
1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights as well as international and regional human rights instruments ratified
by Bahrain, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. 
 
Actions requested:
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain
to: 
 
i.      Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned
trade-union leaders and trade-unionists and all human rights defenders in
Bahrain;
 
ii.     Put an end to any acts of harassment, including at the
judicial and administrative level, against trade-unions, human rights
organisations and their members, and against all human rights defenders in
Bahrain; 
 
iii.    Guarantee in all circumstances the independence of
human rights organisations and prevent any interference in their activities,
such as suspension of their board or dissolution;


iv.    Conform
in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular :
-
its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in
association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”; 
-
its Article 5 (a) and (b) which provides “for the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,
at the national and international levels: (a) To meet or assemble
peacefully; (b) To form, join and participate in non-governmental
organizations, associations or groups;
- its Article 6 (c) which states that: everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others to study, discuss, form and hold
opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to
draw public attention to those matters;
 
-
its Article 10 which provides that “No one shall
participate, by act or by failure to act where required, in violating human
rights and fundamental freedoms and no one shall be subjected to punishment or
adverse action of any kind for refusing to do so”;
-
and its Article 12.2 which states that “the State
shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”. 
 
v.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 
 
Addresses: 
 
·        
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain,
Fax: +973 176 64 587
·        
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032
·        
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice
and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·        
Permanent
Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin
Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: +
41 22 758 96 50.
Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations
of Bahrain in your respective countries. 

*** 
Paris-Geneva, April 14, 2011
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is
dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them
concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency
line:
·        
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org

·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·        
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 