Lebanon:  Lebanon must implement its human rights commitments
April 24, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent Interventions / Lebanon / 2007 / AprilLebanon: Lebanon must implement its human rights commitmentsThe adoption of the EU-Lebanon Action Plan in January 2007 which involves major commitments for the improvement of the human rights situation in Lebanon was an important and positive step. Important, but not sufficient… The successful implementation of the Action Plan will depend on the ability of both parties to put in place a clear and public mechanism for regular monitoring of the process, a detailed calendar for the reforms to be achieved, a regular evaluation of the implementation and regular and systematic consultations with human rights NGOs both in Lebanon and Europe. On the occasion of the Association Council between the European Union and Lebanon, six human rights associations* would like to make the following recommendations aimed at improving the human rights situation in Lebanon: Reform of the Justice and Judiciary System We urge Lebanon to review past trials where allegations of torture have been made, to restrict the jurisdiction of military tribunals to appropriate military matters, and to become a party to the International Criminal Court. Respect for the freedoms of association and expression Lebanon should effectively promote freedom of expression and association, enhance the development of civil society, and stop all forms of intimidation against human rights defenders. Death penalty and the fight against torture and ill-treatment Lebanon should abolish the death penalty, ensure that the provisions of the UN Convention Against Torture are fully incorporated into Lebanese legislation and that the practice of torture and ill-treatment is stopped immediately. Respect for women’s rights The Lebanese government must amend discriminatory laws against women. For instance, the Nationality Code should be amended so that women also have the right to transmit nationality to their children. Respect for children’s rights The Lebanese authorities should promote children’s rights and fight against child labor. Resolution of the investigations into enforced disappearances We urge the EU and Lebanon to cooperate on the issue of enforced disappearances by taking concrete steps to establish an independent commission of inquiry. Respect and the protection of the rights of migrants, refugees and asylum seekers We urge that it is guaranteed in accordance with international law. Lebanon must ensure in particular that all laws that discriminate against Palestinian refugees are amended in order to recognize their rights to work, to own private property and to be issued identification papers. *The Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN), the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the International Federation For Human Rights (FIDH), SOLIDA (Soutien aux Libanais Détenus Arbitrairement), PHRO (Palestinian Human Rights Organisation) and The René Moawad Foundation. 