Azerbaijan:  Azerbaijan: release of remaining Nardaran detainees
February  9, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2004 / FebruaryAzerbaijan: Azerbaijan: release of remaining Nardaran detaineesCase AZE 060602.12 Follow-up of Case AZE 060602 Release  Geneva, February 9th, 2004  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information  regarding the following situation in Azerbaijan.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Human  Rights Center of Azerbaijan, a member of the OMCT network, of the  reduced sentences and release of the three remaining individuals  detained in connection with events in Nardaran, which has been the  scene of repression of demonstrations, including a killing, and  numerous arrests and detentions since June 3rd, 2002.  The released individuals include Aliyev Alikram Ismayil oglu, Alizade  Djebrayil and Atakishiyev Hafiz Hasan oglu. On November 14th, 2003,  the Supreme Court changed the first two persons' sentences to 4 years  of suspended imprisonment, and they were released from the court  hall. On April 1st, they had been sentenced to 9 and 8 years of  detention respectively. On June 6th, 2003, the Court of Appeals had  changed their sentenced to 6 years of imprisonment. The other  remaining detainee, Atakishiyev Hafiz Hasan oglu, was reportedly  released at around the same time, having been sentenced to 5 years  imprisonment, although further information as to his condition  remains unavailable.   The International Secretariat of OMCT wishes to thank all individuals  and institutions who intervened concerning this case.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, on June 3rd, 2002, the  Azerbaijani police arbitrarily arrested and shot various  demonstrators in Nardaran, killing one and wounding several others.  The International Secretariat of OMCT continues to call for an  investigation into the death of the Nardaran villager. These events  occurred against a background of ongoing civil unrest in Nardaran  since members of the police and the Ministry of Internal affairs  (MIA) arbitrarily arrested persons who had participated in an earlier  demonstration on May 7th. The trials of 15 persons that were arrested  in connection with these events have led to further demonstrating in  Nardaran (see previous appeals for more information concerning these  situations). Many persons have engaged in demonstrations in  Nardaran's central square. Subsequently, on February 5th, 2003, at  4:15 in the morning, five busloads of police officers staged an  operation in Nardaran in order to arrest persons responsible for  organizing or participating in demonstrations against the  authorities.  The authorities were reportedly aiming to arrest Mr.Yakhshibeyov  Hamid Ibrahim oglu who was on a wanted list for not voluntarily  turning himself in to be tried as part of the  afore-mentioned trials. Claiming that they had found weapons on some  of the demonstrators, the police then reportedly opened fire on them,  resulting in injuries to 17  people. Eight people were also arrested and were either being  administratively detained having been charged with resisting the  police or detained on criminal charges of  possession of weapons (the police claimed to have seized 2 pistols  and 7 hand grenades during the operation). The trial of the persons  arrested in relation with the initial  events on June 3rd, 2002, has reportedly been marred by procedural  irregularities and finished on April 01, 2003 with imprisonment  sentences for 15 defendants. Later, as a result of active mediation  by the Moslem clergy, the majority of detainees received suspended  sentences and were released.  As of June 11th, 2003, the International Secretariat of OMCT was  informed that the Court of Appeal had changed the sentences of three  individuals still being detained in connection with the demonstration  in Nardaran, Azerbaijan, on February 5, 2003.   Geneva, February 9th, 2004 