Turkey:  Justice at last! P?nar Selek acquitted after 16 years of judicial harassment
December 19, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2014 / DecemberTurkey: Justice at last! Pınar Selek acquitted after 16 years of judicial harassmentTurkey_PR_1912141 page / 267 KBParis-Geneva, December 19,
2014. The Observatory welcomes the long-awaited for court decision to acquit
Ms. Pınar Selek, 16 years after her arrest and protracted judicial harassment
on fabricated charges of terrorism.
 
Today, the Istanbul
High Criminal Court No. 15 acquitted Ms. Pınar Selek, an academic known
for her commitment towards the rights of the most vulnerable communities in
Turkey. She was prosecuted for allegedly causing a bomb to explode in
Istanbul’s Egyptian bazaar on July 9, 1998, and for membership in a terrorist
organisation.
 
In 1998, Ms. Pınar
Selek was arrested and accused of supporting the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK)
and then of causing a bomb to explode. On the basis of these accusations, she
was detained during two years and subjected to torture and ill-treatment, until
her provisional release in 2000. Court’s investigations largely confirmed the
absence of any bomb and attributed the explosion to a gas leak. In addition the
other defendant in the case who had accused her during interrogation withdrew
his statement during the trial. 
 
“Since the outset
the police and prosecution have failed to demonstrate that Ms. Pınar Selek had been involved in any
terrorism-related activity. We welcome the decision of the court to acquit her
at last”, said FIDH President Karim
Lahidji.
 
Previously, the
Istanbul Special Heavy Penal Court No. 12 had acquitted her on three occasions:
in 2006, 2008, and 2011. Notwithstanding, the Supreme Court quashed the first
two acquittal decisions and requested the lower court to convict her. In, 2013,
the Istanbul Special Heavy Criminal Court No. 12 deferred to the Supreme Court's request and sentenced Ms. Pınar Selek
to life imprisonment, while the case was still pending before the
Supreme Court. On June 11, 2014, the Criminal Chamber No. 9 of the Supreme Court decided to overturn the
conviction on procedural
grounds.
 
“Countless procedural irregularities have been observed
during the trial. She should have never been prosecuted in the first place.
This decision should now become final”, recalled
Martin Pradel, Lawyer at the Paris Bar, who has been observing the legal
process for the Observatory since 2011.
 
“The ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Pınar Selek
illustrated Turkey's failure to live up to its repeated pledges to respect and
protect human rights. This decision is a positive sign for the future”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. 
 
The Observatory
welcomes the acquittal of Ms. Pınar
Selek and thanks all the persons, institutions and organisations who
intervened in their favour. In addition, the Observatory calls upon the Turkish
authorities to ensure the protection and a favourable environment for human
rights defenders.
 
The Observatory has
been particulary mobilised on this case, through the publication of nine urgent
alerts, six trial observations and demarches towards the Turkish authorities
and the international community at the highest level. For more information see
Observatory mission report published in April 2014, available in English on the
following web links:
http://www.omct.org/files/2014/04/22642/turkey_mission_report_pinar_selek_2014.pdf 
 
For further
information, please contact:
• FIDH:
Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
• OMCT:
Miguel Martín Zumalacárreguil: +41 22 809 49 24 (Geneva) 