Zimbabwe:  Ongoing risks for human rights defenders in the context of political deadlock and pre-electoral period
November 26, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Zimbabwe / 2012 / NovemberZimbabwe: Ongoing risks for human rights defenders in the context of political deadlock and pre-electoral periodZimbabwe_Mission Report_Ongoing risks for human rights defenders in the context of political deadlock and pre-electoral period19 pages / 700 KB
Publication of an International fact-finding mission
report
 
Paris-Geneva,
November 26, 2012. The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has published today the report “Zimbabwe: Ongoing
risks for human rights defenders in the context of political deadlock and
pre-electoral period”.
 
More than four years after
the adoption of the Global Political Agreement (GPA) between the two major
political parties in Zimbabwe, following the 2008 major crises that resulted in
grave human rights violations, human rights defenders continue to be harassed,
marginalised and victims of repeated human rights violations. Impunity and a
lack of justice for past abuses also remain a serious concern.
 
The report analyses multiple forms of harassment
facing human rights defenders while they try to do their work, including police
summons, disruption of assemblies and protests, police violence, propaganda and
slandering, threats of organization closure, and deterrence from participating
in international and regional meetings. They remain the target of arbitrary
arrests and detentions. Most of these violations are instigated by the police,
members of the Zimbabwe African National Union - Patriotic Front (Zanu-PF),
militias and traditional leaders. The Censorship Board and the Provincial
Governors also take a stance against anyone deemed to run counter the interests
of Zanu-PF.
 
Some of these acts are facilitated
by repressive legislation related to “public order”. These contribute to
maintaining an extensively restrictive environment impeding NGOs from carrying
out their activities. In particular, the Public Order and Security Act (POSA)
remains widely used to ban public meetings, further restraining freedom of
peaceful assembly. The POSA, as well as the Access to Information and Protection
of Privacy Act (AIPPA) and the Criminal Law (Law Reform and Codification) Act
are still used to threaten, harass, criminalise and intimidate civil society
actors.
 
Thanks to a legal emergency
response project implemented by national NGOs, no human rights defender has
been convicted since 2003. However, despite judicial progress, authorities
continue to use excessive preventive detention to silence human rights
defenders. 
 
In such a grim situation, with a
referendum for a new Constitution and the next general elections approaching,
which shall take place respectively at the end of 2012 and in March 2013, the
Observatory fears that once again human rights defenders will fall victim to a
potential rise in violence and a crackdown on civil society due, in particular,
to the substantiated collusion between security forces and the presidential
party. 
 
“Almost
four years after the conclusion of the GPA, and despite the repeated calls from
the international community, the situation of human rights defenders in
Zimbabwe remains extremely perilous”, deplored
Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President. “Besides the need for radical change in
the authorities' methods, it is of vital importance that the reforming process
be completed in conformity to international and regional human rights
standards. In particular, the first step is that a new Constitution has to
enter into force as soon as possible in order to ensure that human rights are
effectively guaranteed”, she added.
 
“It is time that the
Zimbabwean authorities stop resorting to legislation that restrict fundamental
freedoms as well as encouraging and condoning serious violations of the rights
of human rights defenders, including arbitrary arrests or acts of torture”,
added Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. “Accordingly, the
authorities must take all the necessary steps to ensure that human rights
defenders are able to operate efficiently and without hindrances in the
country, as well as to put an end to the climate of impunity that still
prevails within the society”, he concluded.
 
The Observatory has
respectfully urged Zimbabwean authorities to pay close attention to its
recommendations, to take the necessary steps to create and maintain a safe and
conducive environment for human rights defenders to operate freely and
efficiently in the country. This includes fully recognising the legitimate role
played by human rights organisations, releasing all human rights defenders
detained for exercising human rights activities, ending judicial harassment and
fully investigating abuses faced by human rights defenders.You can download the report at the following link: http://www.omct.org/files/2012/11/22036/zimbabwe_mission_report.pdf 