Egypt:  Elimination of civil society signed into law by President Sisi
May 31, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2017 / MayEgypt: Elimination of civil society signed into law by President Sisi

PRESS
RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY


Geneva-Paris, May 31,
2017 - Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi officially
ratified the repressive NGO law that Egyptian Parliament approved in November
2016. The law handcuffs NGOs with regulations and strangles their funding
mechanisms, essentially eliminating civil society in Egypt, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an OMCT-FIDH
partnership) said today. Introduced under the guise of national security,
the implementation of this new legislation attempts to eradicate the human
rights movement as a whole. 
On May 30, 2017, Egypt’s draconian NGO law was published in the
Official Gazette after ratification by President Sisi over six months after it
was approved by Parliament, despite global criticism and condemnation. NGOs
will now have one year to register with the, yet to be formed, National
Authority for the Regulation of Non-Governmental Foreign Organizations. No
representatives from civil society will serve on the organization, instead it
will be composed of representatives from the Defense Ministry, the
Interior Ministry, the Foreign Ministry, the Justice Ministry, the General
Intelligence Directorate, the Administrative Control Authority, the
International Cooperation Ministry, and the Money Laundering Unit. 
Under the law, NGOs will be only allowed to engage in activities that conform to
national development plans while non-compliance will be met with jail terms of
up to five years. Human rights work is banned under this law; similarly NGOs
may not conduct work that harms “national security”, “law and order”, “public
morals”, or “public health”, terms that are subject to the discretionary
interpretation of government agencies. Increasing global concern is the
new prohibition banning NGOs from calling
for supporting or financing terrorist organizations or violence. This signals
future intentions to associate NGOs with terror organizations, therefore
stigmatizing their efforts and providing the government lenity to impose
harsher restrictions and punishments under Egypt’s counterterrorism legal
framework. 
“The implementation of this law eliminates
civil society in Egypt. Egyptian authorities have insinuated these restrictions
under the veil of security; a veil which has become a shroud over Egyptian
civil society. The eradication of NGOs leaves hundreds of thousands of
Egyptians without support and services. Egypt’s censored and restrictive
approach to ‘safety’ will leave thousands in danger”, declared Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. 
Additions to the November 2016 law attack NGO funding
mechanisms, leaving them without adequate means to continue their work. NGOs
must receive advanced approval for all funding they acquire and report all
funding to the government. Further, any funding
totaling over 10’000 EGP (approx. 510 EUR) must be received via wire transfer
from a bank subject to Egypt’s Central Bank auditing or through a paper check
(Article 23). 
This new version of the law now into force
further attacks the partnering capabilities of NGOs. No Government entities may
enter into agreements with foreign NGOs for civil society work without approval
from a council comprised of security agencies (Article 59). Further, the
Government may now cancel the licenses of foreign NGOs, “for reasons pertaining to threats to the
national security or public safety or undermining public order or according to
the principle of Reciprocity” (Article 68).
“Attacking the autonomy, funding and
partnerships of Egyptian NGOs is a systematic approach to eliminate and isolate
them from their global partners. This creates a dangerous vacuum in light of
the economic crisis, food and medical shortages plaguing Egypt. Not only does
this law jeopardize the fundamental human rights of all citizens but also the
stability of the entire country”, concluded Dimitris Christopoulos, President
of FIDH. 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society. 