Russian Federation:  Stop the anti-LGBT law now!
June 14, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2013 / JuneRussian Federation: Stop the anti-LGBT law now!

Paris-Geneva,
June 14, 2013. The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), calls on the Federal Council of Russia
(Upper House) to reject the law that prohibits “propaganda on non-traditional
sexual relations”, which was adopted by the Russian Duma on June 11, 2013. The
discriminatory bill contradicts international standards that bind Russia as
well as the Russian Constitution, which guarantees equal rights to all Russian
citizens, and risks to paralyse the work of LGBT activists and NGOs promoting
universal values of human rights for all. If it comes into force, this bill
will have a further negative impact on the drastically deteriorating plight of
human rights defenders in the Russian Federation. 
 
The bill bans
'propaganda of non-traditional sexual relations', which is defined as 'spreading
information aimed at forming non-traditional sexual desires in children,
describing such relations as attractive, promoting a distorted understanding of
the social equality of traditional and non-traditional relations and through
unwanted exposure to information that could provoke interest to such
relations'. Under the pretext of protecting the rights of minors, the law bans
de facto not only any demonstrations and gatherings by LGBT activists, but aims
at silencing them also on-line. It aims to punish and wipe out any expressions
of tolerance towards homosexual, bisexual and transgender people, and by
consequence stop all the possible work on protection of the social, political,
economic and civil rights of these groups. 
 
Russian Duma adopted the
text hastily on June 11, 2013 in two final readings, almost unanimously: 436
parliamentarians voted in favour, only one abstained, there were no votes
against. The day of the adoption, the activists protesting against the bill at
the entrance of the National Assembly were attacked by violent nationalist
protesters. The special polices forces failed to protect them and only arrested
the anti-bill demonstrators. Other activists were also later assaulted on their
way home. 
 
If adopted, the new law
exposes offenders to heavy fines. Individuals may face a fine of 4,000 - 5,000 Roubles (93 - 116 EUR), while legal entities
could pay between 800,000 and 1 million Roubles (18,713 - 23,291 EUR). Using
mass media to spread any LGBT-friendly content increases the fine for individuals
up to 50,000 - 100,000 Roubles (1,169 - 2,339 EUR). Foreigners are likewise
covered by the bill and could face the same fines as Russian citizens and
deportation or 15-50 days of arrest and deportation. 
 
“This bill is absolutely
shameful and has no place in a country that wishes to call itself a democracy.
It violates freedom of expression and freedom of assembly, it also harasses
LGBT activists and advocates both in Russia and abroad. We call on the Federal Council of Russia and the Russian President to stop
this law which tarnishes the image of Russia”, said Karim Lahidji, FIDH President. 
 
“Apart from paralysing the
work of human rights defenders in Russia, this bill will lead to even more acts
of discrimination and violence towards the LGBT community and human rights
defenders in Russia, while the impunity for such acts already prevails. This
must be prevented”, said Gerald
Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. 
 
Russian LGBT organisations already face numerous persecutions,
most notably under the new 'foreign agent' law, adopted in 2012, which targets
NGOs that receive foreign funding and are engaged in 'political activities'. In
a climate of media smear campaigns, LGBT defenders were among the first
associations to be charged under this new law. On June 7, 2013 the 'Side by
Side' LGBT film festival was charged of conducting “political activities”
without being registered as a 'foreign agent' and fined to 0.5 million roubles
(11,739 EUR). Another LGBT organisation from St Petersburg, 'Coming Out' (Vyhod),
is currently on trial. Its second hearing held on June 11 was attended by an
organised group of nationalists, which aggressively insulting the activists. To
prevent violence, after the hearing the members of 'Coming Out' had to be
escorted by the police. The hearing was preceded by an attack on LGBT activists
in St Petersburg on June 10, when they peacefully protested against the law on
'propaganda of non-traditional sexual relations'. Despite all this they are
determined to continue their work for the estimated five-million-strong LGBT
community in Russia. 
 
For
additional information, please contact:
• FIDH:
Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: 0033 1 43 55 25 18
• OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau: 0041 22 809 49 39 