Angola:  Angola:Extrajudicial killings
January 10, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Angola / 2000 / JanuaryAngola: Angola:Extrajudicial killingsCase AGO 120100  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Angola.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed by a reliable source of the extrajudicial killings of a total of 28 persons, including 3 children in various incidents.  According to the information received, 27 persons, of which 9 of the victims are confirmed as members of the Sambyu tribe some 15 kilometers east of Rundu were massacred by Angolan Government (FAA) troops on December 11, 1999 along the Kavango River.  15 of those killed have been identified as the following:  1.	HUHWA, Mateus (38 years) 2.	KAMEYA,   (22 years) 3.	KANYANGA,  (25 years) 4.	KANYANGA, Lyamalilo (47 years) 5.	MAWANO,  Ndumba (21 years) 6.	MUHULI, Kangonga (50 years) 7.	MUYENGA, (age to be established) 8.	SHIHWAKU, (age to be established) 9.	SHIYAVE, Johannes (24 years) 10. 	VIHEMBA, Kanoya 11.	MUYENGA, Tjameja (45 years) - cousin of human rights activist 12.	KALIMBWE, Shivava 13.	LIKOLO, Ngondo  14.	LIKUWA, Ndaia  15.	MUSENETE, Siyave   Two children of Muyenga (no.7), formerly employed at the Rosh Pinah Zinc Mine, some 800 south of Windhoek, were also executed in this incident (see case ANG 120100.CC).  The massacres, perpetrated by Angolan forces, took place between December 10 and 11, 1999. Another 10 people whose identities could not immediately be established were also executed in the same incident.   According to information received, reports indicate that immediately before the incident took place, the victims were in the custody of members of Namibian security forces, viz. certain David JACOBS, Hangombe NAMBWANGU, Herman NDARA, Rafael HAMUTENYA, Simon MANDENGU, Lucas JOHANNES, SEKO (from Vungu-vungu) and SIPWEKA, all members of the notorious paramilitary unit, the Special Field Force (SFF).  Seko and Sipweka are said to have been drivers for the unit shortly before the massacre took place.    The victims were handed over to the Angolan Government (FAA) troops, who then carried out the massacre shortly afterwards.  According to the information, the victims were all the subjects of female Chieftain Pregrina Ntero Shindjamba, who is currently in the captivity of MPLA (FAA) forces at the Angolan village of Calais, just north of Rundu.  The local NBC TV team, while being surrounded by her captors recently, interviewed Chief Shindjamba. She repeatedly appealed for peace during the interview. The victims are residents of Mangarara, Kasanga, Shiyana, Magoro and Kafuro villages, some 20 kilometers east of Rundu.  Johannes SHIYAVE (no.9), Ndumba MAWANO (no.5) and Kangonga MUHULI (no.6) are said to be brother, son and tribal headman of Chief Shindjamba, respectively.  Their FAA killers robbed all the victims of their belongings.   Also, the International Secretariat has received information that two Namibian males who were shot at by gunmen while traveling in a Golf on Tuesday, January 4, 2000, near Mashare, some 50 kilometers east of Rundu, and were seriously assaulted allegedly after they reported the shooting incident to members of the Special Field Force.  They were allegedly accused of collaborating with suspected UNITA rebels.  In addition to these events, in another incident and in what appears to be a «shoot first and ask questions later» policy, a six year old Angolan girl refugee was shot and killed, allegedly by members of the SFF.  The incident took place at approximately 06h00 on January 10 at a tourist Levi Hakusembe Lodge some 20 kilometers west of Rundu. (See case AGO 120100.CC)  According to the information, the dead child was part of a group of between 25 and 30 Angolan men, women and children fleeing from the intensified fighting in southeastern Angola.  At least 200 shots were reportedly fired directly at the refugees who at the time were sitting in the floodlights of the said lodge.  Another person was shot in the leg and seriously wounded.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Angola urging them to:  i.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the deaths of the above-mentioned persons, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  ii.	guarantee adequate compensation and rehabilitation to the families of all those killed;  iii.	guarantee all human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  His Excellency José Eduardo dos Santos, President of the Republic, Futungo de Belas, Luanda, Republic of Angola. Fax :+002442392733  His Excellency Joao Miranda, Palácio do Comércio, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Avenida Comandante Gika, Luanda, Republic of Angola  His Excellency  Paulo Chipilica, Ministry of Justice,, Ministry of Justice,  Luanda, Republic of Angola. Telegram : Ministro Chipilica, Ministerio da Justicia, Luanda, Angola.  Exmo Sr. Dr. Antero Gruedosa Abreu, Procurador Geral da República, Procuradoria Geral da República, Luanda, República de Angola. Telegram : Procurador Geral da República, Luanda, Angola.  Geneva, January 12, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 