Ethiopia:  Ethiopia:  Press Release: OMCT condemns the attack perpetrated against peaceful demonstrators by the Ethiopian Armed Forces
June 25, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Ethiopia / 2002 / JuneEthiopia: Ethiopia:  Press Release: OMCT condemns the attack perpetrated against peaceful demonstrators by the Ethiopian Armed ForcesPRESS RELEASE   For the attention of the representatives of the press  Geneva, June 24th, 2002   Ethiopia: OMCT condemns the attack perpetrated against peaceful demonstrators by the Ethiopian Armed Forces.   The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the world’s largest network of NGOs fighting against torture, expresses its concern about the attack carried out on May 24th, 2002, by the Ethiopian Armed Forces against unarmed, peaceful demonstrators from the Sidama Community in the town of Awassa, which reportedly lead to 25 deaths, 26 wounded and some 36 arrests among the estimated 7000 assembled protesters. According to the information received, to this day no investigation has been launched into these events and the perpetrators of these grave acts continue to enjoy impunity.  Although it has as yet not publicly announced the decision, the Ethiopian Government has reportedly recently decided that Awassa town, which serves as the capital for both the Southern Peoples, Nations and Nationalities Regional Government (SPNNRG) and the Sidama Zone Administration, is henceforth only going to serve as the political centre for the SPNNRG, forcing the Sidama Zone Government to relocate to Aleta, Wondo town.  A peaceful demonstration against this decision was organised by members of the Sidama Community living in Awassa and neighbouring towns. The authorities were reportedly notified about the fact that the peaceful demonstration was going to be held, including its starting and finishing times and locations and the route that was going to be used.  On May 24th, 2002, about 7,000 residents of Awassa town and its surroundings began a 5 km march from a place called “Hoke” in the outskirts of Awassa town, heading towards Revolution Square in the town’s centre. It is reported that the Armed Forces of the Federal Government intercepted the demonstration as it approached Awassa town, some 3 km into the march, and, following a signal, the soldiers aimed mounted P.K.M. machine guns against the assembled crowd and indiscriminately opened fire at them, halting and breaking up the demonstration. As a result of this attack, 25 people, including 13 children, were killed, and 26 people, among them 7 children, were wounded and were admitted to hospital for medical treatment. Following these events 36 people were reportedly arbitrarily arrested, including three children.  A list of the names and ages of the afore-mentioned persons can be obtained from OMCT upon request.  OMCT vigorously condemns the Ethiopian authorities’ use of indiscriminate and lethal force against unarmed, peaceful demonstrators, who were simply exercising their internationally recognised rights to assembly and peaceful demonstration, which are also enshrined under Article 30 of the Ethiopian Constitution. Furthermore, OMCT deplores the fact that, according to the information received, the authorities appear to be doing very little to ensure that a thorough and impartial investigation is launched into these events and that the perpetrators of these acts are brought to justice.   OMCT calls on the Ethiopian authorities to remedy this situation, as well as to release all the demonstrators that have been arrested and detained in connection with these events in the absence of valid legal charges, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times. OMCT also calls upon the authorities to ensure that reparation is guaranteed to all persons that have been injured, or to the families of those that have been killed, during or as a result of this indiscriminate and disproportionate attack upon peaceful demonstrators.   OMCT Contact: Michael Anthony Telephone:  (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 Fax:  (+ 41 22) 809 49 29 