Belarus:  Press Release: Crackdown continues, more human rights defenders detained
March 29, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2017 / MarchBelarus: Press Release: Crackdown continues, more human rights defenders detained



PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
Paris-Geneva, March 29, 2017: Belarusian
authorities continue to use detention to prevent human rights defenders from
observing peaceful protests throughout the country. The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT) deplores a new series of
arrests, harassments and convictions and urges Belarusian authorities to
release all detained human rights defenders and investigate allegations of
ill-treatment.
 
As massive protests continue to take place
throughout the country, several human rights defenders have been arrested and
sentenced this weekend under Article 23.34 of the Code of Administrative
Offences (participating in an unauthorized peaceful assembly) in reprisal for
their legitimate monitoring activities.
 
Amongst them, Mr. Pavel Levinau, board
member of the Belarusian Helsinki Committee was arrested on March 26, 2017, for
taking part in protests held in Vitebsk on March 25 and 26 as an observer.
Suffering from a heart problem, his blood pressure increased while in detention
causing a hypertensive crisis. Mr. Pavel
Levinau has been at the hospital under
constant police surveillance since then.
 
Also in Vitebsk, two members of the Human
Rights Centre (HRC) “Viasna”, Messrs. Kastus Mardzvintsau and Leanid
Svetsik were arrested on March 26 and sentenced the following day to 15
days of administrative detention. In Biaroza, on March 26, a member of HRC
Viasna, Ms. Tamara Shchapiotkina, was summoned to the police
department, interrogated and charged with “conducting journalistic activities
without an accreditation” (Article 22.9 of the Code of Administrative
Offences). No trial date has been scheduled yet. Moreover, her colleague, also
a member of Viasna in Biaroza, Mr. Siarhei
Rusetski was summoned the same day in “relation to a theft”, as he was
going out to observe the Minsk demonstration. He was detained in Biaroza police
station but later released without charge.
 
“Belarusian
authorities have been using detention as a means to prevent human rights
defenders from attending peaceful protests and observing massive violations and
arbitrary detentions of peaceful protesters[1].
Freedom of assembly is neither punishable nor negotiable. The crackdown must
end immediately,” said Dimitris
Christopoulos, FIDH President.
 
In Homel, Messrs. Leanid Sudalenka and Anatol
Paplauny, both HRC “Viasna” members, as well as Mr. Andrei Stryzhak
(Independent Trade Union “REP”)” were convicted on March 17, for monitoring
protests in the city, and Paplauny sent to prison for 10 days[2].
 
In Polack, Mr. Yury Belski, a member of
the Belarusian Helsinki Committee (BHC) was arrested and placed in custody on
March 25, a few hours before heading to a protest in Minsk. He was sentenced on
March 27, 2017, to two days in detention on charges of “disorderly conduct”. He
was released the same day as he had already served his time.
 
The Observatory recalls that on March 25,
2017, at least 58 persons from various human rights groups involved in the
monitoring of ongoing peaceful protests were arrested at the office of HRC
“Viasna” in Minsk and released shortly after. Member of HRC “Viasna” Mr.
Aliaksei Loika was injured during the raid when the special unit police stormed
the premises and remains in the hospital with a skull fracture.
 
In addition, Ms. Tatsiana Reviaka (a
member of HRC “Viasna” and President of the Belarusian Human Rights House) was
arrested the next day on March 26, 2017 in Minsk as she was protesting the
arrest of her colleagues the day before. She was released several hours later
on the same day. Mr. Aleh Volchek, Head of the Human Rights Center
“Legal Assistance to the Population”, was convicted
on March 21, 2017 in Minsk for observing the demonstration of March 17, in
absentia, and sentenced to 13 days? He is not currently serving the sentence as
he was absent during the trial which he appealed. 
 
“Reports
of ill-treatment of protesters and detainees are very concerning as well as the
fact that two human rights defenders are in hospital. Belarusian authorities
must ensure peaceful protesters can exercise their freedoms and ensure their
psychological and physical integrity,” concluded
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
Background information:
 
Since the beginning of March 2017, peaceful protests have erupted
throughout the country to oppose Presidential Decree No. 3 “On the prevention
of dependency on social aid” that introduced a tax on non-employment.
 
Peaceful protests were massively repressed
with hundreds of protesters detained by the police Those detained include human
rights defenders, journalists and protesters throughout the country[3].
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH
and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human
Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
For more information, please contact:
·       FIDH: Samuel Hanryon: +33672284294
·       OMCT: Delphine Reculeau/Miguel Martín: +41228094939
 



[1]           
On arbitrary “administrative” detention in Belarus and conditions of detention,
see FIDH Report of September 29, 2014: “Arbitrary Preventive Detention of
Activists in Belarus”, https://www.fidh.org/en/region/europe-central-asia/belarus/16113-release-of-a-report-arbitrary-preventive-detention-of-activists-in-belarus


[2]           
See the Observatory’s Urgent Appeal BLR
001 / 0317 / OBS 027.1, March 24, 2017. Mr. Andrei Stryzhak was sentenced to 10 days in jail in absentia, after
he failed to appear in court. Mr. Oleg Volchek sentenced in absentia is
appealing the sentence.


[3]           
See FIDH Press Release, "Belarus crackdown: more than 200 arrested or
detained in two weeks", March 17, 2017, https://www.fidh.org/en/region/europe-central-asia/belarus/belarus-crackdown-more-than-200-arrested-or-detained-in-two-weeks 