Viet Nam:  Another blogger jailed for denouncing human rights violations
March  4, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2014 / MarchViet Nam: Another blogger jailed for denouncing human rights violations

Paris-Geneva, March 4, 2014. This
morning, a court in Danang, central Vietnam, sentenced prominent blogger and
human rights defender Truong Duy Nhat to two years in prison under Article
258(2) of the Criminal Code for “abusing democratic freedoms to infringe upon
the interests of the State”. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT joint programme, together with the Vietnam Committee on
Human Rights (VCHR), denounce Truong Duy Nhat’s conviction and sentencing and
call on the Vietnamese Government to release him and the other human rights
defenders who are languishing in jails across the country.
 
Truong Duy Nhat has been detained since
his arrest on May 26, 2013. Police arrested him for publishing online articles
critical of the Government on his blog A Different Point of View Truong Duy Nhat is a former journalist with State-run
newspapers “Bao
Cong An Quang Nam Danang” (Quang Nam Danang Security Police newspaper) and “Dai Doan Ket”
(Great Solidarity newspaper). In 2011, he quit his work as a
reporter to write for his blog, which became widely known for its criticism of
the government[1].
In his blog, Truong Duy Nhat frequently critiqued the
performance of top government officials, including the Prime Minister, from the
point of view of the rights enshrined in Vietnam’s legislation and the
international covenants Vietnam has signed.
 
Scores of human rights defenders and
cyber-dissidents are currently serving long prison sentences or awaiting trial
in Vietnam[2].
Another blogger, Pham Viet Dao, arrested in the first semester of 2013, faces a prison sentence of up to seven years also
for “abusing democratic freedoms to infringe upon the interests of the State”. His blog aims at informing people about human
rights and advocating ways to promote and protect them. 
 
Our
organisations urge Vietnam to immediately repeal draconian laws that severely restrict
freedom of opinion and expression. The Government’s claim that it respects and
protects human rights will continue to ring hollow unless Vietnam upholds its
obligations under Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR).
 
Our
organisations reiterate their call on the Vietnamese authorities to ensure in all circumstances that human rights defenders are able
to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of
reprisals, in line with
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 
For more information, please
contact:
VCHR: Penelope Faulkner
     (Vietnamese/French/English) +33 1 45 98 30 85FIDH: Audrey Couprie, Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25
     18OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39




[1] See Observatory-VCHR Joint Press
Release, issued on July 19, 2013.


[2] For more information, see
FIDH-VCHR joint report, Bloggers and Netizens Behind Bars: Restrictions on
Internet Freedom in Vietnam, February 2013, and previous Urgent Interventions
by the Observatory on Vietnam. 