Cambodia:  Killing of Kem Ley adds grave concern to the deteriorating human rights situation
July 13, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / JulyCambodia: Killing of Kem Ley adds grave concern to the deteriorating human rights situation
We, the undersigned organisations, are deeply
shocked by the murder of Kem Ley, a prominent Cambodian activist, political
analyst, and government critic, on 10 July 2016. We strongly condemn Kem Ley’s
murder and express our condolences to his family. We call for a prompt,
thorough, impartial, and independent investigation into his death, and call on
the authorities to ensure accountability for this atrocious killing.
Kem Ley was shot dead on
the morning of 10 July 2016 at a gas station’s coffee shop, which he regularly
frequented on Monivong Boulevard, a major thoroughfare in Phnom Penh. The
alleged perpetrator was immediately arrested and authorities claimed he
confessed in a leaked video to killing Kem Ley over an unpaid debt. However,
suspicions of underlying political motives behind Kem Ley’s death remain
strong. Kem Ley’s wife has vehemently denied that her husband had any debts
whatsoever. Further, Kem Ley was often critical of Cambodia’s ruling party.
Before he was killed, Kem Ley had commented on the business interests of Hun
Sen’s family, reportedly worth at least US$ 200 million.[1]Bystanders
surrounding Kem Ley’s body after his death refused to allow authorities to
remove his body from the crime scene over fears that the police would
contaminate or destroy evidence. Thousands of people gathered in the streets of
Phnom Penh when Kem Ley’s family transported his body to Wat Chas pagoda, Phnom
Penh, in the afternoon of 10 July.
Kem
Ley’s death is a tragic loss for civil society, in both the country and the
region. He was a prominent and brave political commentator and a strong
advocate of democracy, good governance, and human rights in Cambodia, who
worked closely with grassroots movements. In 2014, Kem Ley founded a grassroots
advocacy group called ‘Khmer for Khmer’, aimed at encouraging the formation of
grassroots-based political parties across Cambodia.
Kem
Ley’s killing occurred amid a sharp deterioration in the space for fundamental
freedoms in Cambodia over the past year. Civil society group members, opposition
leaders, and government critics have been arrested and subjected to judicial
harassment, and in some cases, violence.
Cambodia’s
deteriorating human rights situation has resulted in widespread international
condemnation of the Cambodian authorities, including at debates at the UN Human
Rights Council, which concluded its 32nd session at the beginning of this
month. The killing of Kem Ley has only added to concerns over the situation in
Cambodia, after the arbitrary arrest and detention of five human rights
defenders in May 2016 on trumped-up charges.
We
remind the Cambodian Government that the state has a responsibility to ensure a
safe and enabling environment for human rights defenders, civil society, and
government critics to freely operate without fear of retaliation. We are highly
concerned that this space is under severe threat in Cambodia. We therefore call
on the UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Cambodia,
Ms. Rhona Smith, to take urgent note of this serious development and exercise
her mandate to adequately respond to the increasing threats faced by civil
society. We also call on all member states of the UN Human Rights Council to
continue to closely observe the situation in the country in the lead-up to the
Council’s discussion on Cambodia in September.
We
call on the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights (AICHR) to
fulfil its purpose to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms of the
ASEAN people, as stipulated by its Terms of Reference, at this critical juncture
for human rights and democracy in Cambodia.
Lastly,
we call on the international community to support Cambodia’s civil society in
their campaigns to obtain the immediate release all political prisoners and an
end to all human rights violations, including judicial harassment and attacks
on human rights defenders and organisations working for the protection of human
rights, democracy, and sustainable development.
Signed
by:
Alternative
ASEAN Network on Burma (ALTSEAN-Burma)
Asia
Democracy Network (ADN) 
Asian
Federation Against Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD)
Asian
Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA)
Asia-Pacific
Solidarity Coalition (APSOC)
Burma
Partnership
Cambodian
Center for Human Rights (CCHR)
 
Civil
Rights Defenders
Commission
for the Disappeared and Victims of Violence (KontraS)
 
Community
Resource Centre Foundation (CRC) 
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Migrant
Forum in Asia (MFA)
People’s
Empowerment Foundation (PEF)
Philippine
Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA)
Pusat
Komunikasi Masyarakat (Pusat KOMAS)
Sekretariat
Anak Merdeka Indonesia (SAMIN)
Southeast
Asia Committee for Advocacy (SEACA)
Suara
Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM)Task
Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP)
Togetherness
for Equality and Action group – Thailand (TEA Group)
World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders



[1] Global Witness,
“Cambodian ruling family’s secret stranglehold on economy poses major risk to
foreign investors and wreaks havoc on population”, 7 July 2016. See
https://www.globalwitness.org/en-gb/press-releases/cambodian-ruling-familys-secret-stranglehold-economy-poses-major-risk-foreign-investors-and-wreaks-havoc-population/. 