Malaysia:  Continued arbitrary detention and solitary confinement of Chairperson of Bersih 2.0
November 28, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2016 / NovemberMalaysia: Continued arbitrary detention and solitary confinement of Chairperson of Bersih 2.0
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
New information
MYS 001 / 1116 / OBS 096.2
Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment / 
Ill-treatment
Malaysia
November 28, 2016
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and
FIDH, has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Malaysia.
New information:
The Observatory has been
informed by Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM) about the continued arbitrary
detention and solitary confinement of Chairperson of Bersih 2.0[1],
Ms. Maria
Chin Abdullah.
According to the information
received, on November 22, 2016, Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah filed a habeas corpus
application to the High Court to challenge her detention under the Security
Offences (Special Measures) Act (SOSMA)[2],
which authorities invoked after she was arrested under Article 124C (‘attempt
to commit activity detrimental to parliamentary democracy’) of the Criminal
Code on November 18, 2016 (See Background information). The hearing is
scheduled for November 29, 2016.
Under the SOSMA, Ms. Maria Chin
Abdullah can be detained for up to 28 days before being charged and withheld
legal representation for two days. Authorities held her incommunicado and
without legal representation for the first 48 hours of her detention. According
to lawyers and family members who have since been able to visit, Ms. Maria Chin
Abdullah is in solitary confinement in a 2.5m x 4.5m cell without a window or
proper ventilation. She has to sleep without a pillow or blanket, and two light
bulbs are kept on 24 hours a day.
On November 21, 2016, Ms. Maria
Chin Abdullah’s son, Azumin Mohamed Yunus, filed a police report against her
inhumane treatment in detention.
Authorities have confirmed that
Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah would remain in custody for 28 days under the SOSMA.
Inspector General of Police, Khalid Abu Bakar, said that during the raid on the
Bersih 2.0 office on November 18, the police found documents “detrimental to parliamentary
democracy.” He denied her detention under the SOSMA was related to the Bersih 5
rally[3].
The Observatory expresses
concern over Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah’s health condition as she suffers from
hypertension, high cholesterol, and osteoarthritis, which require medication.
On November 20, 2016, police
released Mr. Mandeep
Singh, Bersih 2.0 Secretariat Manager; Mr. S. Arutchelvan, Socialist Party of Malaysia
(PSM) member; Messrs. Ronnie Liu, Andy Wong, and Lee Khai Ming, Democratic Action Party (DAP)
members; Mr. Anthony
Loke, DAP Member of Parliament (MP); and Mr. Mhamad Luqman Nul Haqim and Ms. Anis Syafiqah, student leaders, pending
further investigation.
The Observatory welcomes the
release of Messrs. Mandeep Singh, S. Arutchelvan, Ronnie Liu, Andy Wong, Lee
Khai Ming, Anthony Loke, Mhamad Luqman Nul Haqim, and Ms. Anis Syafiqah, who
were also arrested on November 18 (See Background information).
However, the Observatory
condemns the arbitrary detention of Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah and calls on the authorities
to immediately and unconditionally release her.
Until she is released, the
Observatory also urges the authorities to provide Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah with
adequate medical treatment and ensure that she is detained in decent and humane
conditions.
Background information:
In October and November 2016,
Bersih 2.0 members, including in particular Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, were
subjected to numerous acts of harassment and threats.
In October, Ms. Maria Chin
Abdullah received a number of death threats. On October 17, 2016, she received
violent messages on her mobile phone that threatened her, her sons, Mr. Mandeep
Singh and former Co-Chair of Bersih Ms. Ambiga Sreenevasan, and warned her of reprisals if
she proceeded with organising the November 19 Bersih 5 rally. The messages
claimed to be from the ‘Islamic State Malaysia’.
On November 11, 2016, Ms. Maria
Chin Abdullah received photoshopped images of herself, her three sons, Mr.
Mandeep Singh and Ms. Ambiga Sreenevasan, being beheaded by ISIS on her mobile
phone. She subsequently lodged a police report on the incident.
Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah has also
been subjected to harassment by the authorities. On October 29, 2016, she was
arbitrarily arrested under Article 11 of the 1984 Printing Presses and Publications
Act for distributing Bersih 5 leaflets in Kota Marudu, Sabah State. She was
brought to Kota Marudu district police headquarters for questioning and
subsequently released on bail. Several other individuals have also been
threatened with arrest under the 1984 Printing Presses and Publications Act and
the 1948 Sedition Act for distributing the same leaflets.
On November 4, 2016, Ms. Maria
Chin Abdullah was briefly detained for questioning at the Bukit Aman police
headquarters over allegations that Bersih 2.0 received foreign funding, which
the police claimed was in violation of Article 124C of the Criminal Code
(‘attempt to commit activity detrimental to parliamentary democracy’). She was
released on the same day pending further investigations. During questioning,
the police officers told her that she would be summoned after the November 19
rally.
Authorities have also threatened
Bersih 2.0 with legal action in relation to the November 19 Bersih 5 protest.
On November 3, 2016, Home Affairs Minister Ahmad Zahid Hamidi warned Bersih 5
organisers that they would face legal action if the rally went ahead. Mr. Zahid
claimed Bersih 5 did not comply with the 2012 Peaceful Assembly Act because the
rally venue was among the locations prohibited by the Act. Bersih 5 organisers
maintain that the planned November 19 rally complies with the legal
requirements under the 2012 Peaceful Assembly Act, including the requirement to
notify the authorities 10 days before the demonstration.
In addition, other Bersih 2.0 members
have been threatened several times. In October 2016, a number of local Bersih
2.0 coordinators were summoned by the police for questioning in the States of
Johor, Penang, Selangor, Negeri Sembilan, and Perak, over a Bersih 5 convoy,
which travelled from Melaka to Negeri Sembilan from October 6 to 8, 2016.
Bersih 2.0 members also
regularly receive threats from the pro-government ‘red shirts.’ On October 8,
2016, participants of a Bersih 5 convoy were attacked with eggs and
firecrackers, and physically assaulted. ‘Red shirt’ leader Jamal Yunos has said
that they would continue to gather, legally or illegally, and use physical
force against Bersih 5 participants.
On November 18, 2016, at about
3pm, Bukit Aman police raided Bersih 2.0’s office
in Petaling Jaya, Selangor State, for suspected violation of Article 124C of
the Criminal Code (‘attempt to commit activity detrimental to parliamentary
democracy’)[4].
Police officers prevented Bersih
2.0 staff from leaving the office and stopped lawyers from entering the
premises. They arrested Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah and Mr. Mandeep Singh and took
them to the Petaling Jaya district police headquarters for questioning. The
police also confiscated laptops, phones, and bank and payroll statements from
the Bersih 2.0 office.
The arrests of Ms. Maria Chin
Abdullah and Mr. Mandeep Singh and the raid on the Bersih 2.0 office occurred
one day before the Bersih 5 rally.
On the same day, in separate
incidents in Petaling Jaya and Kuala Lumpur, police took into custody seven
other Bersih 5 supporters: Mr. S. Arutchelvan, Socialist Party of Malaysia
(PSM) member; Messrs. Ronnie Liu, Andy Wong, and Lee Khai Ming, Democratic
Action Party (DAP) members; Mr. Anthony Loke, DAP Member of Parliament (MP);
and Mr. Mhamad Luqman Nul Haqim and Ms. Anis Syafiqah, student leaders.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Malaysia asking
them to:
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, as well as of
all human rights defenders in Malaysia;
ii. Release Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, immediately and
unconditionally, as her detention is arbitrary since it only aims at
sanctioning her legitimate human rights activities;
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment,
including at the judicial level, of Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah as well as of other
members of Bersih 2.0 and of all human rights defenders in the country so that
they are able to carry out their work without hindrance;
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular with its Articles 1, 5(a), and
12.2;
v. Guarantee the respect of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and other international human rights instruments signed or ratified by
Malaysia.
Addresses:
Dato’ Sri Mohd Najib bin Tun Abdul Razak,
Prime Minister of Malaysia, Fax: +60 3 8888 3444, Email: ppm@pmo.gov.myMr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Minister of Home
Affairs of Malaysia, Fax: +60 3 8889 1613 / +60 3 8889 1610, Email:
webmaster@moha.gov.myTan
Sri Razali Bin Ismail, Chairman of the Human Rights
Commission of Malaysia (SUHAKAM), Fax: +60 3 2612 5620, Email:
humanrights@suhakam.org.my; hasmyagam@suhakam.org.myH.E. Mr. Amran Mohamed Zin, Ambassador,
Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations in Geneva,
Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 710 75 01, Email: malgeneva@kln.gov.myEmbassy of Malaysia in Brussels, Belgium, Fax:
+32 2 762 50 49, Email: malbrussels@kln.gov.my
Please also write to the diplomatic representations
of Malaysia in your respective countries.
***
Paris-Geneva, November 28, 2016
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting
the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The
objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of
ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency
line: 
·      
Email: Appeals[at]fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel
and fax FIDH +33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·      
Tel
and fax OMCT +41 22 809 49 39 / +41 22 809 49 29



[1]                
The Coalition for Clean and Fair Elections (Bersih) is a non-partisan, civil
society campaign created in 2006 and endorsed by over 60 Malaysian
non-governmental organisations, which seeks to reform the electoral system in
Malaysia to ensure free, clean, and fair elections and to promote the respect
of democratic rights.


[2]                
SOSMA was adopted in 2012 to maintain public order and safety in case of
terrorism or security offense.


[3]                
The Bersih 5 has been organised amid corruption allegations involving Malaysian
Prime Minister Najib Razak, in connection with misappropriation of funds by the
debt-ridden state-owned investment firm 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB).


[4]                
Article 124C of the Malaysian Criminal Code
states that “Whoever attempts to commit an activity detrimental to
parliamentary democracy or does any act preparatory thereto shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 15 years.” 