Russian Federation:  Ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Oyub Titiev
March  9, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2018 / MarchRussian Federation: Ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Oyub Titiev





New
information
RUS
001 / 0118 / OBS 004.2
Judicial
harassment /
Arbitrary
detention
Russian Federation
March 9, 2018
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in the Russian Federation.
 
New information: 
 
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary
detention of Mr. Oyub Titiev, Head
of the Human Rights Center (HRC) "Memorial" office in Chechnya.
 
According to the
information received, on March 6, 2018, the Staropromyslovsky District Court in
Grozny rejected an appeal filed against the pre-trial detention order and
extended Mr. Oyub Titiev’s pre-trial detention for another two months, until
May 9, 2018, despite the fact that two guarantors pledged for a “personal vouch”[1]. 
 
Mr. Oyub Titiev is
being prosecuted under Article 228 of the
Criminal Code for allegedly possessing drugs in large amounts and is being
detained at the pre-trial detention center in Grozny. If convicted, Mr.
Oyub Titiev faces a maximum 10-year prison sentence. 
 
The Observatory recalls
that Mr. Oyub Titiev was stopped in his car by police on January 9, 2018 and
held incommunicado for several hours. The Chechen authorities later stated that
drugs had been “discovered” in his car. Mr. Oyub Titiev denied the allegations
and insisted the bag had been planted by police. 
 
Moreover, the
Observatory expresses its utmost concern over acts of harassment and reprisals
targeting Mr. Oyub Titiev’s relatives and lawyers. Indeed, Mr. Titiev’s family
members were threatened by law enforcement authorities and consequently left Chechnya
in late January 2018. Likewise, one of Mr. Titiev’s lawyers, Mr. Aslan Telkhigov, was allegedly forced
to resign from Mr. Titiev’s defence team and to leave Chechnya in late January
2018. On January 22, 2018, HRC Memorial’s car, used by one of Mr. Titiev’s
lawyers, Mr. Petr Zaikin, was set on
fire in neighbouring Dagestan. In addition, on February 5, 2018, Chechen
authorities ordered residents of several private houses, including Mr.
Titiev’s, to leave their house within a week. Houses will be demolished to
build a shopping center.
 
The Observatory
expresses its utmost concern over the arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment of Mr. Oyub Titiev. The harassment of his relatives and lawyers as
well as the arson of HRC "Memorial" premises in North Caucasus (see
background information) clearly suggest that Mr. Oyub Titiev is being
prosecuted under trumped-up charges in a wider context of harassment against
HRC “Memorial” and its members linked to their work in North Caucasus and aimed
at intimidating and silencing them.
 
The Observatory urges the
Russian authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Oyub Titiev and
to put an end to all acts of harassment against him, all HRC “Memorial” members
and human rights defenders in the North Caucasus.
 
In the meantime, the
Observatory urges Russian authorities to uphold his right to a fair trial and
to guarantee his physical and psychological integrity.
 
Background information:
 
In the morning of January 9, 2018, Mr.
Oyub Titiev left his home in
the village of Kurchaloi, in the Chechen Republic, to head to a meeting
with a friend scheduled at 9am and subsequently to the office of HRC
"Memorial" in Grozny. Mr. Titiev being more than one hour late for
the meeting with a friend whose identity is not being revealed on purpose, the
latter spotted Mr. Titiev on a road between the villages Kurchaloi and Mairtup,
next to the bridge on the river Khumyk. Next to Mr. Titiev were five-six
traffic police officers inspecting his car. Mr. Titiev gave his friend a sign
not to approach him, and after the both cars left - that of Titiev and the
second belonging to the traffic police - he headed to the Kurchaloi District
Department of Internal Affairs supposing Mr. Titiev would be taken there.
Although he was not allowed to enter the District Department of Internal
Affairs, Mr. Titiev's car present outside and unofficial sources allowed him to
assume Mr. Titiev's detention. 
 
Despite repeated calls,
the District Department officially kept denying Mr. Titiev's presence. If Mr.
Titiev’s detention was not officially confirmed by the authorities until seven hours
after his detention when Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Interior of the
Chechen Republic Apti Alaudinov confirmed to the Russian Ombudsman Tatiana
Moskalkova that Mr. Titiev was being kept in Kurchaloi police station. Several
hours later, Mr. Titiev's lawyer confirmed that his client was charged under
Article 228 of the Criminal Code possessing drugs in large amounts.
 
On January 17, 2018, at
3.35 am, the CCTV camera of the HRC “Memorial” office recorded two young men,
wearing masks and gloves, one of whom was carrying a canister. The arsonists
put a ladder to the roof of the building and climbed to the second floor of the
office. The attackers also attempted to break one of the CCTV video cameras
installed on the building on their way to the window of HRC “Memorial”’s
office. The camera also recorded the rapid departure of the two arsonists.
Fortunately, the two attackers could only access three of the six rooms. The fire
brigade arrived quickly at the scene and extinguished the fire but not before
three of the office’s six rooms were burnt, destroying electronic equipment and
documents. The remains of a melted plastic bottle with the smell of kerosene
were found in the office of HRC “Memorial” Ingushetia office’s Head Mr. Timur
Akiev. 
 
Furthermore, on January
15 and 16, 2018, Mr. Oleg Orlov, Chairman of HRC “Memorial” Council,
lawyer Petr Zaikin and journalists who were in Chechnya to investigate the case
of Mr. Titiev were subjected to constant surveillance of local law-enforcement
bodies. For two days, the group was detained five times allegedly for
verification of their involvement with illegal armed groups. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Russia,
urging them to: 
 
i. Take all necessary
measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity and security of
Mr. Oyub Titiev, the staff of HRC “Memorial” in Ingushetia and all human rights
defender in in the Russian Federation;
 
ii. Release Mr. Oyub Titiev immediately and unconditionally, as his
detention is arbitrary since it merely aims at sanctioning his legitimate
human rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against him as well as all human rights defenders in the Russian
Federation, including by putting an end to all forms of
surveillance of their activities by local enforcement officials, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate activities without
any hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Carry out an immediate, thorough and impartial investigation into the
arson attack on the office of HRC “Memorial” in Ingushetia with a view to
publishing the results and bringing those responsible to justice in accordance
with international standards;
 

Properties Date: March  9, 2018Activity: Human Rights DefendersType: Urgent InterventionsCountry: Russian FederationSubjects: Arbitrary arrests and enforced disappearances, Human Rights Defenders, Threats, intimidation and harassmentShare thisTweetRelated articlesRussian Federation:  Continuing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Oyub Titiev
Urgent Interventions / March 13, 2019Russian Federation:  Ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Oyub Titiev
Urgent Interventions / March 20, 2018Russian Federation:  Arson of the office of the Human Rights Center (HRC) Memorial in Nazran, Ingushetia, Chechenya
Urgent Interventions / January 19, 2018Russian Federation:  Rights Defender Arbitrarily Arrested in Chechnya
Urgent Interventions / January 11, 2018Russian Federation:  Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of the Head of Human Rights Centre (HRC) "Memorial" in Chechnya Mr. Oyub Titiev.
Urgent Interventions / January  9, 2018LanguagesThis page is available in:EnglishYou can also translate it on the fly: 
  function googleTranslateElementInit() {
    new google.translate.TranslateElement({
      pageLanguage: "en",
      autoDisplay: false
    }, "google_translate_element");
  }
  Recently Viewed Articles 