China:  Follow-up to case CHN 260810_Kalsang Tsultrim again detained incommunicado_OMCT fears for his safety
February  7, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2011 / FebruaryChina: Follow-up to case CHN 260810_Kalsang Tsultrim again detained incommunicado_OMCT fears for his safety​Case CHN 260810.2Follow-up of case CHN 260810 and CHN
260810.1Incommunicado detention/ Risk of torture and
ill-treatment/ Fear for the safety
The International Secretariat
of OMCT has received new information in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.
Brief description of the situation
The International
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the
incommunicado detention of Kalsang
Tsultrim (aka Gyitsang Takmig), a 30-year-old Tibetan monk from Sang-chu
county, Kanlho “Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture” (TAP), Gansu Province. OMCT fears that he may be at risk of
torture and ill-treatment.
According to the information received, Kalsang
Tsultrim was arrested again on 16 December 2010 by the Tsoe Public Security Bureau (PSB)
after being summoned for questioning. He has since then been detained
incommunicado in the PSB detention centre of Tsoe city. No further information
is currently available on the exact reasons for this new arrest.
OMCT recalls that Kalsang Tsultrim had previously been
arrested, on 27 July 2010, by the PSB on the basis of committing “political
error” (see below). He was then detained incommunicado until his release, on 15
 October 2010[1].
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the safety of Kalsang Tsultrim, particularly because he is
detained incommunicado, and recalls to the competent Chinese authorities that
China is legally bound to effectively ensure the physical and psychological
integrity of all persons deprived of liberty in accordance with international
human rights law, and in particular, the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
OMCT is also preoccupied about this new arrest and calls
on the competent authorities to order Kalsang
Tsultrim’s immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law
and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him promptly before an impartial,
independent and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all
times, including immediate and unconditional access to a lawyer of his choice.
Finally, OMCT urges the
authorities to conform with China’s international
human rights obligations, commitments that were reaffirmed on the occasion of
its election as a member of the United Nations Human Rights Council.
Background
information
OMCT had earlier been informed about the arbitrary arrest on 27 July
 2010 and
subsequent incommunicado detention of Kalsang Tsultrim. OMCT feared that he may
be at risk of torture and ill-treatment.
According to the information
received, on 27
 July 2010, Kalsang
Tsultrim, along with another Tibetan who was later released, was arrested by
the police at Dzoge County, in Sichuan Province, and taken to Tsoe (Hezuo) PSB Detention
Centre. Kalsang Tsultrim’s family, who was informed about his arrest by the
aforementioned individual, went to Tsoe PSB Detention Centre to inquire about
the reason of his detention. Not only did the police refuse to communicate any
information about Kalsang Tsultrim’s arrest and detention, but they also denied
the family any contact with him.
According to the same information, in 2009, Kalsang
Tsultrim recorded and distributed videos on Tibetan history since the flight of
the Dalai Lama into exile. He also wrote a book which illustrates the concerns
of the Tibetan people. Since then, Kalsang Tsultrim had been reportedly on the
move. OMCT was seriously preoccupied that Kalsang Tsultrim was arrested solely
for exercising his right to freedom of expression.
Kalsang Tsultrim was transferred to different prisons
during his detention. He was released from Kanlho Prefecture prison on 15 October 2010 reportedly under the condition not to
participate in any political-related work.
Actions
Requested
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to: 
i. Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Kalsang
Tsultrim; 
ii. Grant
Kalsang Tsultrim immediate and unconditional access to a lawyer of his choice
and his family, as well as guarantee that he is examined by independent doctors
and receives adequate medical care if necessary, in accordance, inter alia, with the UN Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iii.  Order his immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring him before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee
his procedural rights at all times;
iv. Guarantee
the
respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2
Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
Ø      Mr. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the
People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie,
Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529
2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
Ø      Mr. Meng Jianzhu, Minister of
Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14
Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s Republic of China,
Fax: +86 10 63099216
Ø      Mr. Ma Zhenchuan, Director of the Beijing
Public Security Bureau, Juzhang, Beijingshi Gong’anju, 9 Qianmen Dongdajie,
Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100740, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
85222320, Email: wbjc2sohu.com
Ø     
Permanent
Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Ch. De Surville, CP 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse,
e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22 793 70 14
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.

***
Geneva, 7 February 2011. 
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 



[1] See OMCT
urgent appeal CHN 280810.1. 