Libya:  OMCT wraps up 5-part series of trainings for Libyan lawyers
May 26, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionEvents / Libya / 2014 / MayLibya: OMCT wraps up 5-part series of trainings for Libyan lawyers
PRESS RELEASE
For
Immediate Release
26 May 2014
TUNIS – Today,
the World Organization Against Torture (OMCT) brings to a close its series of
five trainings for the Libyan legal community. This series, held over the past
two years, was designed to build the capacity of lawyers, judges, prosecutors,
jurists, and activists to document cases of torture and ill-treatment in Libya.
The final workshop, held this weekend in Tunisia amid the uncertain security
situation in Libya, has been designed to ensure the sustainability of civil
society organizations that are fighting to end the systemic practice of torture
in Libya. 
The first workshop, held in Tripoli in June 2012, sought to
sensitize legal professionals to the issue of torture and encourage them to
accept and endorse international anti-torture standards. The second workshop,
held in Tripoli in September 2012, began to equip lawyers with practical tools
to document cases of torture, arbitrary detention, forced disappearance, and
other grave crimes. The third workshop, held in Tunis in October 2013, featured
experience-sharing from Tunisian and Egyptian counterparts in how to construct
national networks for legal aid. The fourth workshop, held in Tripoli earlier
this month, refined participants’ knowledge of legal strategies to handle cases
and increased their comfort with providing legal aid.
Gabriele Reiter, Regional Director for OMCT, gave the
opening address of this fifth and final training: “Now our Libyan friends are
fully prepared to document the most grotesque of crimes. But Libya is fast descending
into a new spiral of violence, and the fight against torture is not exclusively
a legal one. With this final workshop, we hope to inspire Libyan lawyers to
take a step back and reflect on their efforts of the past two years, and to come
up with a big-picture vision about how to carry on the fight against torture in
a sustainable way.” 
This final workshop thus aims to guide the participants
toward a concrete understanding of maintaining a viable program of operation,
as well as how to overcome the day-to day constraints they face while fighting
torture in Libya. It is facilitated by Marwan Tashani, Head of the Libyan
Judges’ Organization, who has accompanied all five trainings and describes a
“world of a difference” from the first training to this last. With the
completion of this workshop, OMCT will have trained more than 100 Libyan
lawyers and human rights defenders on: the proper documentation of torture
cases; prison and detention center visitation protocols; monitoring human
rights violations; and, perhaps most significantly, ensuring that Libyan civil
society and local NGOs possess the necessary vision and expertise to achieve
their long-term goals and to guarantee their continued sustainability. 
Over the past two years, the most active participants in
this series of workshops and training seminars have mobilized to create the
Libyan Network for Legal Aid (LNLA). The network is a team of lawyers,
activists, and jurists trained by OMCT, who began informally monitoring human
rights violations since the very first days of the Libyan revolution and who
now enjoy a solid professional platform. Salahadin Abukhzam, President of the
LNLA, said, “OMCT has bestowed on us both the legal expertise and project
management skills to ensure the long-term sustainability of our network.”
At this critical moment in Libya, OMCT trusts that the 100
legal professionals trained through this series will have an outsized effect in
stabilizing the country and restoring the rule of law, with view to a future in
which all Libyans can live peacefully and exercise their basic rights.The joint IRCT-OMCT project is financially supported by the European Union.For more information, contact Daniel Davis at +216 52 62 30 35 