Bahrain:  WHRDIC Statement: Free woman human rights defender Ebtisam Al-Saegh
July  7, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Bahrain / 2017 / JulyBahrain: WHRDIC Statement: Free woman human rights defender Ebtisam Al-Saegh

The Women Human Rights 
Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC), of which the OMCT is a member, is a network that supports and protects woman human rigths defenders 
worldwide in their defence of human rights. 

The Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition calls for the 
immediate and unconditional release of human rights defender Ebtisam 
Al-Saegh, and for an end to the harassment, intimidation, and threats she 
has been subjected to.  We express deep concern for Ebtisam 
Al-Saegh’s safety and wellbeing, and about the continued
 harassment, 
intimidation and violence she has faced at the 
hands of authorities in Bahrain, that is in direct violation of the 
country’s commitment to international human rights law.


Ebtisam Al-Saegh, who works for Salam for Democracy and Human Rights 
(SALAM DHR)  
 reporting on human rights 
violations and calling for justice for victims of torture in Bahrain, was 
arrested at the end of May, beaten and sexually assaulted by members of the 
Bahraini National Security Agency (NSA). The Bahraini authorities have not 
investigated these claims, putting Ebtisam Al-Saegh at renewed risk for 
torture and other ill-treatment, including sexual assault.


On 3 July, Ebtisam Al-Saegh was detained following a raid on her home, 
when masked officers in plainclothes and without presenting a warrant, 
arrested her. She was later taken to Issa Town Women’s Detention 
Centre, after an interrogation at an unknown location. Earlier that 
day Ebtisam Al-Saegh had been 
tweeting about the ill treatment of women by the NSA.


On 6 July, her home was again raided again by masked 
men and all the family’s phones were confiscated. They told her 
daughter that they knew she had been giving out information about her mother 
who had not cooperated with them 
.

Ebtisam Al-Saegh has been targeted 
numerous times in the past

, including through interrogation, media 
harassment, and a travel ban imposed on her and other human rights defenders 
prior to the 32nd  
regular session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva.


The Women Human Rights 
Defenders International Coalition calls for the immediate and unconditional 
release of Woman Human Rights Defender Ebtisam Al-Saegh, the end to the 
harassment, intimidation, violence and threats towards her and her family, 
and for the Bahraini authorities to end their campaign against all human 
rights defenders. 