Libya:  Outrage following the assassination of prominent lawyer and women activist Salwa Bouguiguis
June 27, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Libya / 2014 / JuneLibya: Outrage following the assassination of prominent lawyer and women activist Salwa Bouguiguis​Geneva-Tripoli-Paris, June 27, 2014. The World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, strongly condemn the assassination of
Ms. Salwa Bouguiguis, prominent Libyan human rights lawyer and women activist,
in a context where human rights defenders, including lawyers, journalists,
judges and public prosecutors, are continuously victims of reprisals in the
country.
 
On June 25, 2014, the day of the country's general
election, Ms. Salwa
Bouguiguis, a prominent Libyan lawyer and women human rights defender, was
stabbed and shot through the head by five unknown hooded gunmen who broke into
her home in Benghazi and injured a security guard with a live bullet. She was
taken to hospital in critical condition, where she died shortly afterwards. Her
husband, who was in the family home at the time of the attack, has remained
missing since then. It is therefore feared that he was abducted by the same men
who killed his wife.
 
Ms.
Bouguiguis was a strong advocate for gender equality and women’s political
participation. She had also actively participated in Libya’s 2011 revolution
that overthrew the regime of Muammar Gaddafi. A former member of the National
Transitional Council, she was since the Vice-President of the Preparatory
Committee for National Dialogue in Libya.
 
Ms. Salwa
Bouguiguis was killed hours after she had returned from voting in Wednesday’s
parliamentary election in Libya and called upon citizens to participate in the
voting process. She published photos of herself at a polling station on her
Facebook page. She also gave an interview to Libya’s Al-Nabaa TV channel, in which she discussed the recent
deterioration of security situation in Benghazi where civilians are affected by
fighting between army units and militias.
 
“We
condemn in
the strongest term the murder of Ms. Salwa
Bouguiguis,
which seeks to silence critical voices
in the country”, said
today OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “At this critical juncture in
Libya the independent voice of human rights defenders is ever more needed.
We
urge the authorities of Libya to open
urgent, effective and transparent investigations into the shameful
assassination of Ms.
Bouguiguis. It is absolutely fundamental now to set an example in order
to discourage further acts of violence against human rights defenders”,
he added.
 
Since the
2011 revolution, the city of Benghazi has been a stronghold for militias,
including jihadist groups, and the scene of attacks and assassinations
targeting notably the military, police and judges. 
 
The
Observatory further recalls that this is not the first time that human rights
defenders have been targeted in Libya, where they are increasingly victims of
reprisals for denouncing human rights violations, including serious acts of violence,
systematic harassment, intimidation, arbitrary detention, torture and
defamation. To date all these crimes remain unpunished.
 
“The judicial system in any country is essential in providing for the protection of human rights and civil liberties, and must be allowed to operate
independently and free from the forceful coercion of outside actors”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji. “It
should now ensure that the assassination of Ms. Salwa Bouguiguis
does not remain unpunished”, he added.
 
The
Observatory offers sincere condolences to the bereaved family and to Ms. Salwa
Bouguiguis' friends and colleagues and urges the authorities in Libya to adopt
urgent measures to protect human rights defenders and ensure that they are able to carry out their
work without unjustified hindrances and fear of reprisals. 