Bahrain:  Human rights defender Nabeel Rajab re-arrested on other charges despite court order to temporarily release him
December 30, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2016 / DecemberBahrain: Human rights defender Nabeel Rajab re-arrested on other charges despite court order to temporarily release him​
30 December 2016 – Following the court’s decision to temporarily release
Bahrain’s most prominent human rights defender Nabeel Rajab in a Twitter case,
he was immediately taken into custody on another investigation in relation to
televised interviews dating back to 2015 and January 2016. The pending charges
are without substance and must be dropped and he must be immediately and
unconditionally released, say the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT partnership), the Arabic Network for Human Rights Information
(ANHRI), Front Line Defenders and the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR), who
mandated a joint trial observation mission.
 
On December 28, 2016,
following an important mobilisation for his release, Manama’s Fifth High
Criminal Court acceded to an application for Nabeel Rajab’s temporary release
following a failure to give any basis or any sufficient evidence of a link
between him and the Twitter account with respect to the Yemeni and Jaw prison
tweets (see below). 
 
“The quality of the
evidence from the purported computer forensic expert was very poor. It extended no further than a recital of the
results of a basic Google search,” said the trial observer. “The supposedly neutral
expert witness is an employee of the Bahrain Government Ministry of interior,” he added.
 
According to defense
submisisions made by Rajab’s lawyer during the hearing: “There has never been any sound legal justification to hold Nabeel Rajab
in detention in this trial because of a lack of evidence since the very start
of this case. The evidence of the Ministry of Interior’s so-called expert
before the Court today makes it clearer than ever that at no point in time has
there been, nor probably could there have been, any technical evidence to
support this prosecution. Hence Nabeel Rajab’s release should be ordered
forthwith.” The judge agreed and ordered the temporary release of Rajab
until the next hearing scheduled on January 23, 2017 in which the court will
allow the Public Prosecution to present new evidence against Nabeel Rajab,
after such was requested by the Public Prosecution.
 
Nabeel Rajab thus
continues to face charges of allegedly “offending a foreign country” (Saudi
Arabia) and “offending national institutions,” for comments about the alleged
torture of inmates in Bahrain’s Jaw Prison in March 2015. He still faces up to
15 years in prison notably for tweets critical of Bahrain’s participation in
Saudi Arabia-led military operations in Yemen, which according to the United
Nations, have so far been responsible for the deaths of thousands of civilians.
A travel ban remains in place as it
has been without a break for almost three years.
 
Then Rajab was taken to
the Criminal Investigation Directorate (CID) for temporary release. However, he was re-arrested
later on the same day and referred to the Public Prosecution in relation to an
investigation into televised interviews dating from 2015 and January 2016,
which commenced in mid-June 2016. He will be held for seven days on these
charges. It seems that these interviews were with television networks which
support the Bahraini opposition: a Bahraini network (based in the United
Kingdom), a Lebanese network and an Iranian network.
 
“It is shocking that the
Court has only ordered Nabeel Rajab’s temporary release when there was a
finding of no evidence after more than a year of the Twitter case. It is
extraordinary that he has been immediately taken back into custody for
investigation on charges relating to events that date back to 2015 and January
2016, in an investigation which has been completely dormant since mid-June
2016,”
noted the trial observer.
 
Nabeel Rajab is the
co-founder and President of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR),
Founding Director of GCHR, Deputy Secretary General of FIDH from 2012 to 2016,
and a member of the Middle East advisory committee at Human Rights Watch. Comments
on his Twitter account about the Saudi-led coalition airstrikes in Yemen first
led to his arrest on April 2, 2015. He remained in custody until he received a
royal pardon for health reasons and was thus released on July 13, 2015. Again
on June 13, 2016 he was arrested for the televised interviews. During his
detention in relation to the televised interviews’ investigation he was
referred for trial in the criminal court in relation to the Yemeni war Tweets.
He remained in detention on these charges until December 28, 2016.
 
He has suffered from poor health in prison including
heart problems. Most worryingly, he has been held in solitary confinement for
the vast majority of that period and denied access to proper care. It is
reported that his cell is air conditioned but filthy and infested with
cockroaches. On October 3, 2016, he was taken to the Bahraini Defense Forces
hospital for surgery to remove his gallbladder. Despite the risks of moving him
back to jail, Rajab was taken from the hospital the day after his surgery and
placed in solitary confinement in a dirty cell. Three days after surgery, he
was taken back to court.
 
“The practice of holding a person in
solitary confinement for prolonged periods is internationally recognised as a form of
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment that may amount to torture. Solitary
confinement can have a devastating effect on a prisoner’s mental health.” remarked
the trial observer.
 
Charges regarding the
Yemeni Tweets are based on Articles 133 and 160 of Bahrain’s Penal Code and
provide for up to 10 years in prison for anyone who “deliberately announces in
wartime false or malicious news, statements or rumors.” Charges regarding the
televised interviews are based on Article 134 of the Penal Code, which provides
between three months and three years of imprisonment for releasing deliberately
“abroad false or malicious news or statements or rumours about domestic
conditions or for exercising in any manner whatsoever activities that are
harmful to the national interests.”
 
In September 2016, an additional
investigation was initiated against Rajab following the publication on September
5, 2016 of an Op-Ed in The New York Times with his by-line, which discussed
the conditions of his imprisonment and arrest. The pending charge of
“intentionally broadcasting false news and malicious rumours abroad impairing
the prestige of the State” carries an additional one-year prison term if he is
convicted.
 
On December 21, 2016,
Rajab was interrogated in connection with a letter published in his name in the
French newspaper Le Monde on December 19, which urged Paris and Berlin
to “reassess their relationship with [members of the Gulf Cooperation Council],
which actively work against democracy and human rights and fan the flames of
violence and extremism.”
 
Human rights
organisations, the UN and government representatives worldwide have all
called for Rajab to be released, including through ANRI “Their Freedom is Their
Right” Campaign which named him Prisoner of the Month in September, FIDH #RT4Freedom website,
and a case history by Front Line Defenders. 
 
ANHRI, Front Line
Defenders, GCHR and the Observatory (FIDH-OMCT) call on the Government of
Bahrain to:
1.  Immediately and unconditionally release Nabeel
Rajab and drop all charges against him, as well as remove
his travel ban;
2. Uphold international
legal standards including ensuring that technical experts are independent; and
3. End all forms of reprisals against human
rights defenders and other activists in Bahrain, including travel bans, to
which they have been subjected in violation of their rights to freedom of
assembly and freedom of expression.
 
For
more information, please contact:FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18 

World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT): Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39
GCHR:
     Khalid Ibrahim: +961 70159552 