Djibouti:  Djibouti: children secretly released
May 31, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Djibouti / 2000 / MayDjibouti: Djibouti: children secretly releasedDjibouti: children secretly released  Case DJI 190400.2 CC Second Follow-up to case DJI 190400.CC CHILD CONCERN  Geneva, 31st May 2000.  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Djibouti.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received further information that the 29 children detained in Gabode Prison in Djibouti were secretly released on 24th May 2000 and sent to an unknown destination.  OMCT had previously received information that an official announcement had been made that the children were to be released on 13th June 2000.  OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of these children.  OMCT is also gravely concerned by the risk of impunity of those responsible for the alleged acts of ill-treatment and sexual abuse against these children.  Brief reminder of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT expressed its grave concern for the physical and psychological integrity of 29 Oromos (Ethiopian citizens) boys, allegedly detained and subjected to sexual abuse by fellow adult inmates and prison guards in ‘Prison de Gabode’ in Djibouti for the last 6 months.  It was reported that these children were arrested in the street following their arrival in Djibouti from Ethiopia as refugees from the regional conflict.  Furthermore, according to the information received, the conditions inside the prison are described as suffocating and dirty and they were given very little guard supervision.  The International Secretariat of OMCT recalled that Djibouti is a state party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and has obligations to the provisions of this Convention, particularly Articles 3, 37 and 40.  Remarks  The International Secretariat of OMCT wishes to thank all those institutions, organizations and individuals who intervened on their behalf.  However, OMCT remains concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of these children and their well-being upon their release.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Djibouti urging them to:  i.	Identify the whereabouts of these children and continue to take measures to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity; ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the alleged sexual abuse and ill-treatment, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, particularly the Convention on the Rights of the Child, ratified by Djibouti.  Addresses  Gabode Prison Monsieur le directeur, prison civile de Djibouti BP 12  Son Excellence Monsieur - Ismail Omar Guelle, Président de la République, La Présidence, BP 6, Djibouti, République de Djibouti.    Fax (+ 253) 35 50 49  //  350174					  Monsieur  - Ibrahim Idriss Djibril, Ministre de la Justice, Ministère de la Justice, B.P. 12, Djibouti, République de Djibouti.  Fax (+ 253) 35 40 12  //  35 54 20  Monsieur Ali Abdi Farah, Ministre des affaires étrangères, Ministère des affaires étrangères, BP 1863, Djibouti, République de Djibouti. Fax: (+ 253) 353840  Monsieur Ali Dini, Batonnier de l'Ordre des Avocats de Djibouti, Barreau de Djibouti, B.P. 2461, Djibouti, République de Djibouti.  Geneva, May 31st 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 