Belarus:  Continued harassment of the Human Rights Centre “Viasna” and rejection of a complaint challenging the blackmailing of its website
February 20, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2014 / FebruaryBelarus: Continued harassment of the Human Rights Centre “Viasna” and rejection of a complaint challenging the blackmailing of its website

New Information
BLR 005 / 1213 / OBS 097.1
Internet censorship /
Harassment
Belarus
February 20, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Belarus.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed of the continued
harassment of the Human Rights Centre “Viasna” and the rejection by the Court
of a complaint challenging the blackmailing of its website www.spring96.org.
 
According
to the information received, on February 18, 2014, the Central District Court
of Minsk considered a complaint filed by Mr. Valiantsin Stefanovich,
Deputy Chairman of “Viasna”, challenging the decision by the Prosecutor
General's Office to restrict access to “Viasna”'s website, www.spring96.org on the grounds that
“actions on behalf of the human rights organisation 'Viasna', that do not
comply with the established procedures of state registration, are contrary to
the legislation of the Republic of Belarus”. The decision was based on
Article 193.1 of the Criminal Code, which prohibits organising or participating
in the activities of unregistered organisations. 
 
At
the hearing, Mr. Stefanovich defended his rights as one of the authors of HRC
Viasna’s website and challenged the illegal restriction on the dissemination of
information. He argued that the Prosecutor’s Office had no reason to blacklist
the website, as materials posted on it do not violate the law, but on the
contrary contribute to improving the legal culture in
Belarus. 
 
The
Central District Court of Minsk eventually held that Mr. Valiantsin Stefanovich
had no legal standing: since he is not the owner of www.spring96.org, he may not suffer a
damage from the blacklisting the website. Mr. Stefanovich can file a private
complaint within 10 days but cannot appeal the decision in cassation. The
Deputy Chairman of “Viasna” said that he intended to send a complaint to the United
Nations Human Rights Committee once he will have exhausted all domestic
remedies available to him. 
 
The
Observatory expresses its concern about the decision of the Central District
Court of Minsk to reject the complaint filed by Mr. Valiantsin Stefanovich,
which gives full effect to the previous decision of the Prosecutor General's
Office to blacklist “Viasna”'s website. 
 
The
Observatory denounces the court decision as a means to curtail human rights
activities of ”Viasna” and to infringe upon the right to freedoms of
association and expression in Belarus, in violation of international law. 
 
Background information:
 
On
December 16, 2013, Mr. Valiantsin Stefanovich was
informed by the Prosecutor General’s Office of Belarus, that “Viasna”’s website
had been introduced into the list of resources with restricted access by
decision of the same in August 2011, on the grounds that “actions on behalf
of the human rights organisation 'Viasna', that do not comply with the
established procedures of state registration, are contrary to the legislation
of the Republic of Belarus”.
 
Until December 16, 2013, authorities had refused to
disclose to “Viasna” the maker or the basis of the decision to restrict public
access to its website. Mr. Stefanovich contacted the Operative Analytical
Centre (an agency under the authority of the President of the Republic of
Belarus), the Republican Unitary Enterprise for Oversight of
Telecommunications, and the Ministry of Communications and Information. Each
body either declined to give any information, referred Mr. Stefanovich
elsewhere or advised him to contact all other agencies with the authority to
restrict access to a website. 
 
It was not until he had contacted all the agencies
empowered to issue such a decision that Mr. Stefanovich received a response
from the office of the Prosecutor General, disclosing that they had made a
decision in August 2011 to put www.spring96.org on the list of resources with restricted access. Other websites on the
list include those dealing with pornography, promoting extremist activities or
violating copyrights, and five opposition or critical minded websites. Those
sites have the access blocked from the State, education and cultural
institutions.
 
In August 2007, the UN Human Rights Committee declared
that the November 2003 decision of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Belarus
to dissolve “Viasna” is a violation of the right to freedom of association and
called on authorities in Belarus to re-register and compensate “Viasna” in
accordance with their obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. The Government of Belarus is yet to comply with the
recommendation. Furthermore, it has refused several requests by “Viasna” and
many other organisations to be registered.
 
Article 5 of the Constitution of the Republic of
Belarus provides for grounds for the restriction of the activities of associations
– aiming to change the constitutional order or advocating war, social,
national, religious and racial hatred. Unarguably, the activities of “Viasna”
do not fall into any of these categories.
 
Furthermore, the mention of Article 193.1 of the
Criminal Code in the General Prosecutor's answer to their request amounts to a
form of intimidation against “Viasna”, which has been continuing its legitimate
and peaceful activities despite a constant pressure. The Observatory has
repeatedly qualified Article 193.1, which penalises acting on behalf of an
unregistered organisation, as a provision violating both the Constitution and
international human rights law. The Council of Europe Venice Commission
concluded in October 2011 that Article 193.1 of Belarus’ Criminal Code,
violates the provisions of international law. According to the Venice
Commission, freedoms of association and expression are of vital importance in
any democratic country, and any restrictions on them should be well justified.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Belarusian authorities, urging
them to:
 
i.
Remove all restrictions on “Viasna”'s website immediately and unconditionally
since this restriction is arbitrary as it only aims at curtailing “Viasna”'s
human rights activities by reducing its online presence and discrediting its
existence and work by grouping it together with publishers of pornography and
extremists;
 
ii.
Put an end to any censorship - including print, audio, televisual and online –
of “Viasna”'s communication materials, as well as of all other human rights
defenders in Belarus;
 
iii. Repeal Article 193.1 of the Criminal Code of the
Republic of Belarus;
 
iv. Put an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against all human rights defenders in Belarus
and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their work
without unjustified hindrances;
 
v.
More generally, conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on
December 9, 1998, especially:
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the
right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive
for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at
the national and international levels”,
- its Article 6 (b) and (c), which states that
“Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others […] as
provided for in human rights and other applicable international instruments,
freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information and
knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms and [...] to study,
discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice,
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other
appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters”.
- and its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State
shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration” ;
 
vi. Conform with the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the First Protocol thereto, both of which have been
ratified by Belarus; especially Article 22: “Everyone shall have the right to
freedom of association with others, including the right to form and join trade
unions for the protection of his interests.”
 
vii.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by the Belarusian Republic.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
President Aliaksandr Lukashenka, vul. Karla Marksa, 38, 220016 Minsk,
Belarus, Fax: + 375 172 26 06 10 or + 375 172 22 38 72, Email: contact@president.gov.by
·    
General Prosecutor, Alexander Konyuk, vul. Internatsyjanalnaya. 22,
220050 Minsk, Belarus, Fax: + 375 17 226 42 52
·    
Minister of Justice of Belarus, Mr. Oleg Slizhevsky, vul.
Kalektarnaya, 10, 220004 Minsk, Belarus, Email: kanc@minjust.by
·    
President
of the Supreme Court of Belarus, Mr. Valiantsin Alehavich Sukala, vul.
Lenina, 28, 220030 Minsk, Belarus, Email: scjustrb@pmrb.gov.by
·    
H.E. Mr. Mikhail
Khvostov, Permanent Mission
of Belarus to the United Nations in Geneva, 15 avenue de la paix, 1211 Geneva
20, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 748 24 51. Email: mission.belarus@ties.itu.int
·    
Embassy
of Belarus in Brussels, 192 avenue Molière, 1050 Ixelles, Belgium, Fax : + 32
2.340.02.87, Email : embbel@skynet.be 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of Belarus in your respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, February 20, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.  
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·    
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·    
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·     Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 