Kyrgyzstan:  Azimjan Askarov Case: Kyrgyzstan should uphold, not undermine the international human rights framework
April 29, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2016 / AprilKyrgyzstan: Azimjan Askarov Case: Kyrgyzstan should uphold, not undermine the international human rights framework 



Paris-Geneva, April 29, 2016 - The Supreme Court of Kyrgyzstan should
order the provisional release of human rights defender Azimjan Askarov, pending
the review of his case following the UN Human Rights Committee's request to
release him and quash his life-sentence conviction. The authorities of
Kyrgyzstan should abide by their international human rights commitments and the
provisions of the Constitution that guarantee compliance of Kyrgyzstan with
international human rights bodies' decisions, says the Observatory (FIDH-OMCT).


 
On April 27, 2016, human rights defender Azimjan Askarov,
who serves a life sentence in Colony No. 47 in Bishkek, filed an appeal to
review his conviction after the UN Human Rights Committee (CCPR) concluded that
Kyrgyzstan must immediately release him.
 
On April 25, 2016, the Supreme Court of Kyrgyzstan declared
that the UN decision created grounds, under Article 41 of the Constitution, for
Askarov to lodge a new appeal. Article 41.2 provides that “Everyone shall
have the right to apply in accordance with international treaties to
international human rights bodies seeking protection of violated rights and
freedoms. In the event that these bodies confirm the violation of human rights
and freedoms, the Kyrgyz Republic shall take measures to their restoration
and/or compensation of damage”.
 
Worryingly, in the past days, several officials and public
figures, including Mr. Tabaldiev, Advisor to the President and former Chairman
of the State Committee on National Security, have called for a revision of
Article 41 of the Constitution. Mr. Tabaldiev portrayed the UN CCPR's decision
as a threat to national security and foreign interference into national
affairs. 

“As a member of the UN
Human Rights Council since January 2016, Kyrgyzstan should demonstrate its
genuine commitment towards the promotion and protection of human rights at home
by conforming to UN conclusions, recommendations and decisions”, said FIDH President Karim
Lahidji. 
 
The Observatory recalls that founder of the human rights
organisation “Vozduh” (Air) Azimjan Askarov was sentenced to life imprisonment
in 2010 after mass disturbances in southern Kyrgyzstan. Prior to his arrest, he
documented police brutality and prison conditions. During the June 2010 ethnic
clashes, he was documenting violence in the southern city of Bazar Kurgan. Mr.
Askarov also worked with the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights (ODIHR) of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) on monitoring human rights in places of detention in southern Kyrgyzstan.
 
“The legal obligation to release
Azimjan Askarov is clear and Kyrgyz law recognises international standards as
part of domestic law. It is now for the Supreme Court to choose on which side
it wants to come down in the history books. On the side of repression, or as
part of system of justice and the rule of law”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary
General. “The world
knows that Azimjan Askarov is not a criminal. But a highly respected defender
who worked to prevent torture, and won several human rights prizes for his
work. It is time to bring his persecution to an end”.
 
On April 21, 2016, the UN CCPR confirmed that Azimjan
Askarov was tortured, subject to inhuman conditions while in pre-trial
detention and that his trial did not respect minimum international fair trial
standards. The Committee urged Kyrgyzstan to immediately release Azimjan
Askarov and quash his conviction based on evidence that his lawyer was
obstructed from participating in the judicial process, including
prevention of witness participation, obstacles posed on A. Askarov’s
lawyer from attending the first hearing, and little time allocated for the
preparation of A. Askarov's defense. 

The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created
in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders. 