Sri Lanka:  Immediately disclose the whereabouts of - and release - Sinnavan Stephen Sunthararaj; put an end to the impunity into the murder of Pattani Razeek!
February 18, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2013 / FebruarySri Lanka: Immediately disclose the whereabouts of - and release - Sinnavan Stephen Sunthararaj; put an end to the impunity into the murder of Pattani Razeek!


PRESS RELEASE -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
SRI
LANKA: Immediately disclose the whereabouts of - and release - Sinnavan Stephen Sunthararaj; put an end to
the impunity into the murder of Pattani Razeek!
 
Geneva-Paris, February 18, 2013. Three years after the disappearance
and murder of Mr. Pattani Razeek and almost four years after the disappearance
of Mr. Sinnavan Stephen Sunthararaj, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), expresses its deep concern about the lack of
significant progress in the investigation into the two cases.
 
Mr.
Pattani Razeek, Managing Trustee of the Community Trust Fund (CTF) and a
member of the Executive Committee of the Asian Forum for Human Rights and
Development (FORUM-ASIA), was last seen in Polonnaruwa, a city in the north
central province of Sri Lanka, in the afternoon of February 11, 2010, as he was
travelling together with other staff members from CTF on their way home from a
mission.
 
For over a year, the police made no attempt to apprehend and
question the main suspect in Mr. Razeek’s disappearance, Mr. Shahabdeen
Nowshaadh, a former CTF employee, despite evidence linking him to several ransom
calls made to Mr. Razeek’s family on Mr. Razeek’s mobile number, following his
disappearance. It is not until July 2011 that Mr. Nowshaadh was arrested. On
July 28, 2011, police exhumed Mr. Razeek's body in Kavathamunai, Uddamaveli,
Valaichchenai province, eastern Sri Lanka.
 
Yet, three years after Mr. Pattani Razeek’s disappearance and
murder, the police have not made any significant progress in Mr. Razeek’s case.
Although a post mortem was conducted on August 2, 2011, the police have failed to
submit the resulting report to the family. Besides, the family has no further
information on the progress of the investigation. On November 3, 2011, Mr.
Nowshaadh was released on bail by the Pollonnaruwa High Court. The second
arrested suspect, Mr. Ismail Mohamed Mushdeen, was also subsequently released
on bail.
 
Furthermore,
the Observatory is concerned by the ongoing enforced disappearance of Mr. Sinnavan
Stephen Sunthararaj, Project Manager at the Centre for Human Rights and
Development (CHRD), well known for documenting cases of child abuse in Jaffna
and District Child Coordinator from 2003 to 2005, who was last seen in Colombo
in the evening of May 7, 2009, when he was abducted
by unknown gunmen in army uniforms, allegedly officers of the
Criminal Investigation Department (CID). He had just been released from Kollupitiya
police station, where he had spent two months in detention without charge.
Since May 2009, no information could be obtained about his whereabouts. 
 
Right after his abduction, officers from the Cinnamon Garden police
station collected statements of witnesses, mainly of Mrs. Sunthararaj, who
identified one of the perpetrators as one of the CID officers who had
previously visited her home for inquiries while her husband was held at Kollupitiya police
station. However, no investigation was initiated.
 
In December 2009, the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Palitha Kohana, revealed at a meeting with the Embassy
of the United States and European Union officials that Mr. Sunthararaj had not
been abducted but arrested, probably by intelligence services. Since then, Mr.
Sunthararaj's wife has been writing to the Office of the President of Sri
Lanka, urging him to reveal Mr. Sunthararaj's place of detention, and calling
for his immediate release. Despite her efforts, she has still not received any
response. 
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the
ongoing impunity in Mr. Pattani Razeek’s murder as well
as Mr. Sunthararaj’s enforced disappearance. The
Observatory fears for his physical and psychological integrity, and urges the
Sri Lankan authorities to take prompt action in order to disclose the
whereabouts of Mr. Sunthararaj and release him immediately as his abduction and
detention seem to merely aim at sanctioning his human rights activities. It
further calls upon the authorities of Sri Lanka to
effectively work towards bringing those responsible for Mr. Razeek’s murder
before a competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them the penal sanctions
provided by the law.
 
The Observatory more generally urges the
authorities of Sri Lanka to guarantee that human rights defenders can carry out
their activities free of any hindrances, to put an end to all acts of
harassment against human rights defenders and to conform to the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and international human rights instruments ratified by Sri Lanka.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·  
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
+ 41 22 809 49 39
·  
FIDH: Arthur Manet /
Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 