Spain:  Attack of the headquarters of “SOS Racismo Madrid”, a human rights organisation which fights against racism and xenophobia
February 28, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Spain / 2014 / FebruarySpain: Attack of the headquarters of “SOS Racismo Madrid”, a human rights organisation which fights against racism and xenophobia

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

ESP 001 / 0214 / OBS 017
Attack
Spain
February 28, 2014
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Spain.
Description
of the situation:
The
Observatory has been informed about the attack of the headquarters of “SOS
Racismo Madrid”, a human rights organisation which fights against racism and
xenophobia since 1992. 
According
to the information received, on February 21, 2014 at around 5 a.m., a group of
supporters of the extreme right-wing party “Democracia Nacional” (DN) attacked
the premises of SOS Racismo Madrid, in the Lavapiés district of the Spanish
capital. 
Members of
DN placed a large banner with hung puppets on the front of the building,
containing xenophobic catchwords such as “Stop the invasion!” and blaming the
human rights organisation for its “anti-spanish” activities of “denouncing
those who protect [spanish] borders”. They also threw firecrackers into the
offices of SOS Racismo, attracting the attention of the neighbours who called
the police. 
The
nationalist party openly claimed having initiated this action, placed its logo
on the banners that were hung on the facade of SOS Racismo Madrid, and posted
pictures of the action on its public Facebook page. 
DN further
decided to organise a protest on March 8, 2014 in the same neighbourhood of
Lavapiés, with the slogan “Stop the invasion! We have to protect our borders”. 
SOS
Racismo has strongly denounced this attack as an unacceptable threat against
its human rights activities and filed a complaint against the DN, which led to
the opening of an investigation by the police. In addition, representatives of
SOS Racismo requested an interview with the Prosecutor specialised in hate
crimes and discrimination.
The Observatory firmly condemns this attack
against the headquarters of SOS Racismo, which represents a clear threat
against the human rights activities of the NGO, and more generally an
infringement against freedom of expression and the fight against racism and
xenophobia in Spain. 
Actions
requested:
Please
write to the Spanish authorities, urging them to:
i. Take all necessary measures to
guarantee in all circumstances the protection of the human rights organisation
SOS Racismo Madrid, its members and all human rights defenders in Spain, from
any attack or threat;
ii. Conduct a proper, thorough, and timely
investigation about the attack committed against the headquarters of SOS
Racismo Madrid in order to identify all those responsible and sanction them
according to law;
iii. React promptly to all racist
and xenophobic actions undertaken by extremists movements and their supporters
in Spain;
iv. Take all necessary measures to protect all
human rights defenders in Spain from any kind of harassment, and ensure in all circumstances that they
are able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrances;
v. More generally, conform with the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
- its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”,
- and its
Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration”;
vi. Ensure in all circumstances
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by
Spain.
Addresses:
Head of the Royal House, Mr. Rafael SPOTTORNO DIAZ-CAR
Casa de su Majestad el Rey, Palacio de La Zarzuela, Carretera del Pardo
s/n, 28071 Madrid, España, Tel: +34 91 599 24 24President of the Government, Mr. Mariano RAJOY BREY,
Complejo de la Moncloa, Avda. Puerta de Hierro, s/n. 28071 Madrid, EspañaFirst Vice-President, Minister of the Presidency and
Spokeman of the Government, Mme Soraya SAENZ de SANTAMARIA, Complejo
de la Moncloa, Avda. Puerta de Hierro, s/n. 28071 Madrid, EspañaMinister of Interior, Mr. Jorge Fernández DIAZ,
Calle Amador de los Ríos, 7, 28010 Madrid, España: Tel: +34 060Minister of Justice, M. Alberto RUIZ-GALLARDO, San
Bernardo, 45, 28071 Madrid, España, Tel: + 34 902 007 214/+34 91 837 22 9Minister of Foreign Affairs and of Cooperation,
Mr. José Manuel GARCIA MARGALLO, Sede Palacio de Santa
Cruz, Plaza de la Provincia, 1, 28012 Madrid, España, Tel: + 34 91 379 97
00
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Spain in your respective
country.
***
Paris-Geneva,
February 28, 2014
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply. 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0)
1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·     
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 