Syrian Arab Republic:  Detention and harassment of Syrian human rights defenders amid harsh repression of protests in the country
August  9, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2011 / AugustSyrian Arab Republic: Detention and harassment of Syrian human rights defenders amid harsh repression of protests in the countryPRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
SYRIA: Detention and harassment of Syrian human rights defenders amid 
harsh repression of protests in the 
country
 
Paris-Geneva, August 9, 2011. The Observatory for the Protection of Human 
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human 
Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), vehemently 
condemns the ongoing repression of Syrian human rights defenders, amid harsh and 
generalised repression in the country.
 
On August 8, 2011, at least twenty members of Syria’s Intelligence 
Agency (Mukhabarat) arrested Mr. Walid Al Bunni, a member of the Syrian Organisation for Human Rights (SWASIAH) as 
well as of the Founding Committee for the National Dialogue Forum and of the 
Committees for the Revival of Civil Society, together with his two sons, while 
at his house in the city of Al Tal, Damascus governorate. One of his sons was 
later released but as of August 8, 2011, no information could be obtained about 
the whereabouts of Mr. Al Bunni and his other son.
 
Moreover, on August 2, 2011, Mr. Mohamed Najati Tayara, a human rights activist and former Vice-President of the Syrian 
Association for Human Rights, was subjected to physical assault in the central prison of Homs, 
where he has been detained since May 12, 2011. Members of the Syrian security 
forces violently assaulted eight detainees, including Mr. Najati Tayara, after a 
sit-in was organised by some prisoners to denounce their arbitrary detention. 
Mr. Najati Tayara was severely injured and was suffering from severe bleeding as 
of the end of last week.
 
Previously, on July 5, 2011, Mr. Ahmad 
Tomeh, elected member of the General Secretariat of the National Council 
of the Damascus Declaration for Democratic National Change (NCDD), was arrested 
by the security forces while working at his medical clinic near Der Al-Zor. He 
was subsequently released in the course of last week, putting an end to a month 
of incommunicado detention. No information could be obtained as to whether charges are pending 
against him. Prior to his arrest, Mr. Tomeh had been reporting on human rights 
violations committed in Der Al-Zor.
 
The Observatory was also informed of acts of judicial harassment 
against the brother and husband of the human rights lawyer Ms. Razan Zaitouneh, Messrs. Abd Al-Rahman Hammada and Wa’el Hammada. On July 31, 2011, Mr. Wa’el Hammada was released on bail after two 
and a half months of arbitrary detention, but he remains charged with 
alleged “affiliation to a secret society” and for having “initiated 
sectarianism”. On June 27, 2011, Mr. Abd Al-Rahman Hammada was also released on 
bail after his arrest on April 30. He was detained incommunicado in the 
facilities of the Air Force Security and the Adra prison near Damascus, and was 
reportedly subjected to ill-treatment during his first two weeks of detention. 
Mr. Al-Rahman Hammada is currently facing several charges including “weakening 
national sentiment” and “conveying within Syria false information that could 
hinder the morale of the nation”, pursuant to Articles 285 and 286 of the Syrian 
Criminal Code.
 
The Observatory firmly condemns the acts of harassment against the 
above-mentioned human rights defenders, as they provide further evidence of the 
continued repression of dissenting voices in Syria. Accordingly, the Observatory 
calls upon the Syrian authorities to guarantee in all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity, to 
disclose the whereabouts of Mr. Walid Al Bunni and his son and to release them 
and Mr. Mohamed Najati Tayara immediately and unconditionally, in conformity 
with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders.
 
For further information, please contact:
·         FIDH: Karine Appy, Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
·         OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39 