Brazil:  Investigation opened over suspicions of illegal intelligence activities by mining company against social movements and human rights defenders
May  2, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Brazil / 2013 / MayBrazil: Investigation opened over suspicions of illegal intelligence activities by mining company against social movements and human rights defenders

Geneva-Paris, May 2, 2013. The International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), in the
framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, were informed of the recent opening of an
investigation against Vale, the second largest global mining company, for
suspected illegal intelligence activities targeting social movements and human
rights defenders through phone tapping and infiltration. 
 
According to the information received, the Public Prosecutor recently opened
an investigation on the basis of a complaint brought on March 18, 2013 by the
former Intelligence Director of Vale. The latter reported the phone tapping in
November 2010 of a private conversation between Mr. Fernando Thompson, an
officer from Vale, and Ms. Vera Durão, a journalist working for Valor
Econômico, in charge of the daily coverage of the activities of the mining
company. Illegal spying practices were also allegedly directed against some
Vale employees, targeting not only phone calls, but also emails and computer
files.
 
It is also alleged that the company paid a number of individuals to
infiltrate the Landless Workers' Movement (Movimiento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra – MST) as
well as the Rede Justiça nos Trilhos (JnT - a coalition of organisations
defending the rights of the communities), and to monitor some trade unionists,
environmentalists and journalists. According to the information received, such
infiltrations have been taking place since 2008 and are reportedly still
ongoing.
 
According to the same allegations, two agents of the Brazilian
Intelligence Agency (Agência Brasileira de Inteligência - ABIN), a State
body formerly known as the National Intelligence Service, developed under the
dictatorship and essentially composed of ex-military personnel, would have been
hired by the Vale mining company to conduct these activities.
 
Through the publication of a written announcement published on April 22,
2013[1],
Vale officially admitted having monitored both the MST and JnT movements,
claiming that they were harming the interests of the company, but denied the
accusations of infiltration[2].
 
The Observatory expresses its
deep concern about these acts of monitoring and allegations of infiltration,
and urges the Brazilian authorities to carry out a prompt, impartial and
transparent investigation into all the above-mentioned elements. 
 
The Observatory more generally urges the
authorities of Brazil to guarantee in all circumstances that human rights defenders and NGOs can carry
out their activities free of any hindrances, and to comply with international human rights standards and
instruments ratified by Brazil.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·  
FIDH: Arthur Manet /
Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·  
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
+ 41 22 809 49 39
 



[1]     See
http://s.conjur.com.br/dl/nota-vale.pdf.


[2]     Some of those facts had already been
covered in an FIDH report published in May 2011 and titled “How Much Are
Human Rights Worth In The Brazilian Mining And Steel Industry”. The report
outlined a number of recommendations to the Brazilian authorities and to the
company. 