Iran:  Press Release: The cruel & inhuman treatment of Ms. Nargess Mohammadi must stop
October 19, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Iran / 2015 / OctoberIran: Press Release: The cruel & inhuman treatment of Ms. Nargess Mohammadi must stopIran_2015.10.19_English2 pages / 154 KB 
Paris-Geneva, October 19, 2015. The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), strongly denounces the cruel and inhuman treatment of
the arbitrarily imprisoned human rights defender Ms. Nargess Mohammadi in Iran.
 
Ms. Nargess Mohammadi, the
Spokesperson and Vice-President of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC)
who has been arbitrarily imprisoned since May 2015[1],
has been chained hand and foot to her bed since her transfer to hospital on
October 11, 2015. Ever since her hospitalisation, she has suffered convulsions
at least three times. A female security officer is sitting by her bed round the
clock and two guards are on watch outside her room and prevent her friends from
visiting her, but some family members have been granted restricted visits. 
 
Ms. Mohammadi, who suffers from muscular
paralysis and lung complications, had a nervous attack on October 6, 2015, that
led to partial numbness of her body. She was taken to specialists in a hospital
outside of prison on the same day, where neurologists instructed her immediate
hospitalisation. The officials did not heed this instruction and she was
returned to Evin prison. Finally, prison officials decided to dispatch her to
hospital on October 11, at which point they forcefully handcuffed her before
leaving the prison and caused her to have a panic attack. 
 
Ms. Mohammadi was arbitrarily arrested
on May 5, 2015, allegedly in order to serve the remainder of a
6-year prison sentence she had commenced serving between April 21 and July 31,
2012, when she was released on bail for medical reasons, as she was suffering
from the same conditions that have now caused her hospitalisationw.
Since her arrest she has been subjected to increasing judicial harassment and
violations of her rights[2].

 
The authorities have twice scheduled judicial proceedings against her on
July 6 and October 6, but both were postponed without any explanation. 
 
“The inhuman chaining
of Ms. Mohammadi to her bed and the ongoing judicial harassment and violations
of human rights against her appear to be aimed at punishing her and her family
for her activities promoting human rights”,
said Karim Lahidji, FIDH President. 
 
“The Iranian
authorities must end the cruel and degrading treatment of Ms. Mohammadi. The UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, which has received an official complaint
regarding Ms. Mohammadi’s case, must also urgently issue an Opinion on this
case”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. 
 
Ms. Mohammadi has been facing continuous judicial harassment related to
her human rights work, including repeated summons, interrogations and trials
for several years now[3].
Furthermore, the Observatory urges the Iranian authorities to guarantee the
physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Mohammadi, and to release her
immediately and unconditionally. The Observatory more generally urges the
Iranian authorities to put an end to all harassment - including at the judicial
level - against all human rights defenders in Iran.

 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur Manet /
Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·      
OMCT: Miguel Martin Zumalacarregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24
 



[1]           
See Observatory Press Release of May 5, 2015.


[2]                
See Observatory Press Release of July 10, 2015.


[3]                
See Observatory Press Release of July 10, 2015. 