OMCT joins call for China resolution at Human Rights Council, focusing on Uyghur and other ethnic minorities
January 30, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / 2019 / JanuaryOMCT joins call for China resolution at Human Rights Council, focusing on Uyghur and other ethnic minorities30 January 2019


In a first such move in more
than a decade, over three dozen organisations, including OMCT, have launched
today a call on governments to adopt a resolution at the next session of the
Human Rights Council addressing the worsening abuse of rights in the People’s
Republic of China. For the signatories, the mass detention of an estimated one
million Uyghur and other Turkic Muslims in China calls for a concerted response
from the international community.  
The resolution would ask for
access by independent international human rights experts to all parts of the
People’s Republic of China, in particular to areas inhabited by Uyghur, other
Turkic Muslim, and Tibetan communities, but also for an end to the criminalization
of the work of human rights defenders, and for the immediate release of all
individuals unlawfully deprived of liberty.
The full text of the letter
to Governements is copied below.





At upcoming session of Human Rights Council, States should pass resolution to address human
rights violations in the People’s Republic of China




Your Excellency,
The past year was marked by vitally
important monitoring and review of China’s human rights situation by the United
Nations human rights system. The upcoming session of the UN Human Rights
Council provides a key opportunity to reinforce the issues raised over the last
year, and express collective concern about worsening rights abuse in China and
the government’s failure to follow through on its obligations and commitments.
Considerable information has been
available in the last year for governments to deepen their understanding of the
situation in the country, spanning two UN reviews and nearly two dozen expert
letters or opinions, including a full paragraph in the annual update from the
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights. Nonetheless, the Chinese state, at the
direction of the Chinese Communist Party, continues to suppress dissent and
undermine efforts to hold it accountable to its obligations under international
agreements.
Millions in the country face dire abuses
of their fundamental human rights – be they members of ethnic groups,
practitioners of Islam, Tibetan Buddhism or Christianity, human rights
defenders, feminists, petitioners, lawyers, journalists, professors or
students. Uyghurs and Tibetans are particularly targeted with discriminatory
policies and practices. Furthermore, these abuses increasingly affect individuals
and communities beyond China's borders.
In
light of this, the international community must push with one voice for change.
We urge your government to contribute to and support a resolution on the human
rights situation in China.
In doing this, you will join with others
to make clear that no State’s development model or economic and political
influence can exempt it from its international human rights obligations. If
China seeks to be a responsible member of the United Nations and global actor,
it should be open to and engage with criticism, rather than seek to deflect or
discredit views with which it disagrees.
Such a resolution and any other joint
action at the Council should:
•      
urge
prompt, unfettered and independent access to all parts of the country, in
particular Uyghur, other Turkic Muslim and Tibetan areas, by independent
international human rights experts, including the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights and relevant UN Special Rapporteurs;
•      
demand
an end to the abuse of national security legislation as a means of
criminalising the work of human rights defenders, freedoms of expression,
association, religion or belief and subverting due process, and call on China
to seek technical assistance from UN experts to this end, including at the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR).
•      
call
for the immediate release of any and all individuals subjected to unlawful and
unjustified deprivation of liberty, in particular those held extra-legally or
in extended pre-trial detention, and provide remedies and reparations to
address harsh treatment, at times including torture, and loss of livelihoods.
•      
express
support for the OHCHR and UN Country Team to take steps to expand, improve and
regularise monitoring and reporting of the situation in China.
Resisting efforts by China to shield
itself from international scrutiny, analysis, and reporting is essential to
preventing widespread impunity for violations which, in some cases and based on
available reporting, may amount to crimes against humanity. This resistance has
the greatest, and perhaps only, chance of success when conducted jointly, and
when backed by a multi-pronged multilateral and bilateral effort.
We therefore urge you to take advantage of
this moment, and the platform of the Human Rights Council, to convey to China
the need to open itself to international monitoring and reporting, and the need
for rapid and drastic improvement of its human rights performance across all
civil, cultural, economic, political, and social rights.
In so doing, you will demonstrate your
commitment to supporting  the Chinese,
Tibetan and Uyghur  human rights
communities – those most central to sustainable change, and yet those most
vulnerable in the struggle for it. You will also send a clear message to the
Chinese government that such abuses cannot be tolerated or ignored, and that
the international community will defend the universality of human rights.
Please rest assured, your Excellency, of
our highest consideration, and our willingness to engage with you on these issues
in the days and weeks to come.
 
Sincerely,
Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA) 
Asociación Cultural Tibetano-Costarricense
China
Human Rights Accountability Center
China
Labour Bulletin
Christian
Solidarity Worldwide
CIVICUS

Core
Group for the Tibetan Cause
Free
Tibet
Frontline
Defenders
Grupo
de Apoio ao Tibete
Human
Rights in China
Humanitarian
China
International
Campaign for Tibet
International
Commission of Jurists
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
International
Service for Human Rights
International
Tibet Network Secretariat
Lawyers
for Lawyers
Lawyer's
Rights Watch Canada
LUNGTA
– Actief voor Tibet
Network
of Chinese Human Rights Defenders
PEN America
Safeguard Defenders
Students for a Free Tibet
Students for a Free Tibet Denmark
Swedish Tibet Kommitten
The
Rights Practice
Tibet
House, Moscow
Tibet
Initiative Deutschland
Tibet Justice Center
TIBET LIVES
TibetMx Querétaro
Tibet Society UK
Tibet Support Group Netherlands
Tibet Watch
Tibetan Youth Association Europe
Uyghur
Human Rights Project
West
Africa Human Rights Defenders Network (ROADDH)
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
World
Uyghur Congress
Relevant Background
 The below points summarize key updates
from the last six months and provide additional detail for the substance of a
resolution. It is important to note that joint action should not preclude
continuing the positive practice of raising the overall deterioration of human
rights in China through bilateral statements under the full range of dialogues
and general debates on the Council's agenda.
•      
In
August 2018, a review by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination declared that western China’s Xinjiang region was akin to a
‘no-rights zone’, and urged the government to take prompt action to disclose
information about internment camps and to release the up to one million
Uyghurs, Kazakhs and other Muslim minorities arbitrarily detained there.
•      
In
her update to the September 2018 session of the Human Rights Council, the UN
High Commissioner on Human Rights Michelle Bachelet echoed the Committee’s
concerns, noting ‘deeply disturbing allegations of large-scale arbitrary
detentions of Uighurs and other Muslim communities, in so called re-education
camps across Xinjiang’ and adding that her Office has also received ‘reports…
of patterns of human rights violations in other regions’. She requested access
for her Office to all regions of China.
•      
At
the Universal Periodic Review of China in November 2018, the consistency of
recommendations related to the need to improve respect for minority rights in
general, and in particular address serious violations in Xinjiang and Tibet,
was remarkable. Similarly, key issues of interest to the diverse human rights
community in mainland China – freedom of expression and opinion, freedom of
religion or belief, civil society space, ‘residential surveillance in a
designated location’, and protections for LGBTI individuals – were clearly
articulated. 
•      
Over
2018, the UN Special Procedures issued at least 21 official communications on
China, on issues ranging from access to education and cultural rights for
Uyghurs and Tibetans; to due process violations, including risk of torture and
suppression of the legal profession; to forced evictions and occupational
safety risks for electronics workers. Also in 2018, the Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention adopted at least two opinions, concerning two citizen
journalists and three lawyers, deeming their detentions in China arbitrary
under international human rights law.
•      
Naming
specific individuals is critical; this contributes to sustained attention and
improved conditions. Those who have been the subject of Communications by
Special Procedures and, in some cases, referred to in the Concluding
Observations of UN treaty bodies, include: Huang Qi, Li Yuhan, Jiang Tianyong, Qin
Yongmin, Tibetan language advocate Tashi Wangchuk, Uyghur intellectual Ilham
Tohti, and human rights lawyer Wang Quanzhang, sentenced after a closed trial
on 26 December 2018 to four and a half years imprisonment for subversion of State
power.
•      
An
additional Communication by 10 Special Procedures, issued in August 2018,
called for the removal of legal provisions permitting 'residential surveillance
in a designated location', echoing concerns of the Committee against Torture
that this constitutes de facto incommunicado detention. 