Land Rights defenders: the forgotten victims of unbridled development - Publication of the 2014 Annual Report of the Observatory
December  2, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / 2014 / DecemberLand Rights defenders: the forgotten victims of unbridled development - Publication of the 2014 Annual Report of the ObservatoryPR_OBS_2014_English2 pages / 304 KBParis-Geneva, December 2, 2014 – Land rights defenders are 
increasingly the target of repressive measures, says the Observatory in a 
new report published today in The Philippines, Mexico, and South Africa, and 
which will be presented tomorrow in Geneva at the United Nations Annual 
Forum on Business and Human Rights. The pressure on land has become 
unbearable and mobilisation for the respect of the economic, social and 
cultural rights of affected communities has become a high risk 
activity.

		 
“This Report shows the daily struggle conducted by land 
rights defenders, often confronted to “economic predators” 
greedily supportive of unbridled development. Land rights defenders often 
live in isolated areas, far from actors of protection. These factors 
facilitate acts of violence against them, the level of violence being 
proportional to sky-rocketing profits”, declared Karim 
Lahidji, FIDH President. 
		

https://wearenotafraid.org/en/

		 

		Between 2011 and 2014, the Observatory documented 43 assassination cases 
targeting land rights defenders and the judicial harassment of 123 
defenders, sometimes together with their arbitrary detention. These figures 
only reflect a small fraction of the real picture. All regions in the world 
are concerned, Asia and Latin America being the most affected.

		 

		The Observatory found that authors of repression are often the police, the 
military, private security agents and “henchmen”. Their 
objective being to silence dissenting voices likely to slow down investment 
projects.

		 

		In addition to violence, numerous States also use judicial harassment and 
arbitrary detention to intimidate defenders. Thanks to laws that violate 
fundamental freedoms or in violation of their own laws, they jail any person 
deemed to be a nuisance. “Terrorism”, “misleading 
propaganda”, “infringement to State security”, 
“public unrest”, there are many abusive charges which can result 
in heavy prison terms.

		 

“Land rights defenders speak for millions of victims. When a 
defender is jailed or killed, thousands of victims are silenced 
”, declared Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.

		 

		Land rights defenders are often powerless when they face physical attacks 
and arbitrary arrests. According to the Observatory, 95% of violations 
against them remain unpunished today.

		 

		Judicial bodies in countries where such violations occur are characterised 
by a lack of independence, resources and expertise. Regarding the 
possibility of prosecuting business corporations responsible for human 
rights violations, the legal battle – if any – is often lengthy, 
perilous, unequal and costly.

		 

		At the heart of the problem lies the issue of the participation of 
individuals and communities affected by the development policies and 
investment projects. The Observatory calls for meaningful consultations that 
ensure the direct participation of populations affected by the projects and 
the recognition of land rights defenders as the legitimate spokespersons in 
order to prevent conflicts and put an end to serious human rights 
violations. Furthermore, it is necessary to strengthen the capacity and 
independence of domestic judicial systems, including in States hosting the 
headquarters of business corporations, in order to allow defenders to access 
justice and seek redress in the event of human rights violations.

		 

		The Observatory also recommends to strengthen international law in order 
to trigger effectively the responsibility of business corporations when the 
latter commit human rights violations and to guarantee the adequate 
protection of land rights.

		 

The Report is available on OMCT's website
in English (OBS 2014 Annual Report_English)
French (OBS 2014 Rapport Annuel_Français)
and Spanish (OBS_InformeAnual2014_ES)
	

		Join the conversation on social networks with the #WeAreNotAfraid

		 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders is the 
leading global programme on the protection of human rights defenders. Since 
2013, it has launched more than 500 urgent interventions on more than 60 
countries.

		 

For more information:
		FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
		OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41 22 809 49 
24 