Libya:  Exile or death: violence and collapsed State leave human rights defenders with few options
August 12, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Libya / 2015 / AugustLibya: Exile or death: violence and collapsed State leave human rights defenders with few optionsLibya report PR EN2 pages / 142 KB Publication
of a report
Libya:
Exile or death:
violence and collapsed State leave human rights defenders with few options
Paris,
Geneva, August 12, 2015 – In Libya, human
rights defenders have become prime targets for many armed groups involved in
the ongoing civil war, reveals The Observatory in a report published today.
Violence, harassment and intimidation are daily occurrences for these
defenders, in a climate of impunity resulting from the breakdown of the State.
The respect of human rights defenders as vital,
non-partisan voices should be a baseline consensus for
any successful agreement between parties to the conflict. 
“No
democratic society can exist without human rights defenders. They are the
keystones in the construction of a State that protects and empowers the
people. The situation they face is unbearable and puts at risk the entire
process of building a sustainable democracy in Libya. Therefore, we call on the
international community and all the parties to include them in the negotiations
and to provide them with shelters for their protection”, stated Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
The
report illustrates this catastrophic situation through the stories of 24 human
rights defenders, several of whom have been killed. Others have been kidnapped,
received violent threats against them or their family. Their places of work
have been broken into and subject to arson. Threatening phone calls,
defamation, and exile in neighbouring countries are regular occurrences for
Libyan defenders. In this polarised context with no room for independent voices, no male or female citizen promoting the respect for human
rights and democratic principles is out of danger. However, those most often
targeted by acts of violence are lawyers, judges, representatives of government
institutions and national or international human rights organisations,
journalists and those who defend the rights of ethnic minority groups.
According
to the testimonies of human rights defenders, the authors of these violations
are mainly members of various non-State armed groups, particularly those
belonging to the fundamentalist Islamist movement (in particular “Fajr Libya”).
Sources have told the Observatory that Islamist armed groups keep “black lists”
of targets containing the names of persons who promote democratic ideals and
defend human rights and gender equality, values diametrically opposed to those
promoted by Islamist armed groups.
The
judicial institutions that do exist include in their founding statutes their
allegiance to various tribes, warlords, and non-State actors, effectively
legalising these entities. In some cases, these armed groups actually fund the
judicial institutions themselves. These groups have gone on to replace State institutions
by infiltrating them and rendering them dysfunctional.
With
the support of the international community, Libya is currently participating in
a process to reach an agreement to stabilise the country. The process will
specifically address the protection of
human rights and human rights defenders. However, some paramilitary groups and
militias have deserted the negotiations. Their return to the negotiating table,
upon which the success of the process depends, should be contingent upon their
strict commitment to respect human rights. Human rights defenders must also be
actively included in the process. Only under these conditions can a State
respectful of basic human rights be established.
“Today
in Libya, human rights defenders are forced to cease their activities or to go
into exile in order to stay alive. However, even in exile, most Libyan human
rights defenders face a very precarious situation. The
host countries must examine the possibilities for supporting and facilitating
the granting of refugee status to them”,
declared Karim Lahidji, FIDH President.

The report is available here: Libya Report 