India:  India: death threats to Mr. James T. Godwin and kidnapping of Ms. Violet Godwin
February  9, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2004 / FebruaryIndia: India: death threats to Mr. James T. Godwin and kidnapping of Ms. Violet GodwinCase IND 090204 Death Threats / Kidnapping / Risk to personal integrity / Impunity  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian  Human Rights Commission (AHRC), a member of the OMCT network, of the  death threats received by Mr. James T. Godwin of Mahim, Mubai, India,  along with the kidnapping of his sister, Ms. Violet Godwin.   According to the information received, Mr. Godwin has challenged the  corruption in the society for several years and has filed various  complaints with the Mahim Police Station regarding the illegal  activities carried out by the Mahim Police in alleged connivance with  the building construction mafia, yet no serious action has been taken  by either the police or the high authorities, and he and his family  are now being threatened and harassed. His sister, Ms. Violet Godwin,  was also active in reporting police corruption, and on December 15th,  2002, she was reportedly kidnapped from Gopi Tank Fish Market in  Mumbai. The police are  allegedly delaying the investigation, despite  the a High Court order that was issued to immediately conduct an  inquiry into the matter. Since the kidnapping, Mr. Godwin has  reportedly received numerous death threats from both the police  officers and the construction mafia.  According to the information received, Ms. Violet Godwin is a  journalist and has reported about corruption at the Mahim Police  Station, notably concerning verification of passport applications.  She lodged a complaint at the police station and as a result of the  inquiry senior police officials of Mumbai police, Assistant  Commissioner of Police Mr. Bhosle, Senior Police Inspector Mr. J.  Shastri and two police constables were suspended from service. Soon  after the incident, on December 15th, 2002, Ms. Violet was reportedly  kidnapped and her whereabouts are still unknown. Given the now- lengthy period for which she has disappeared, OMCT has grave fears  that she may have been killed.  Several complaints were made by the Godwin family with the local  police station and with the higher authorities, but to no avail. The  family also obtained an order from the Maharashtra High Court, in  which the police were ordered to conduct an immediate inquiry,   however the police have reportedly failed to take appropriate action.  The letters written by the Godwin family addressed to Mr. Deepak  Gajool of Kurla Division, the supervising officer of the inquiry,  were also never responded to. A legal notice addressed to the same  officer was replied to only after one month.  The complaints of Mr. James T. Godwin (resident of Flat No.16, 3rd  Floor, Union House No.2, off L.J.Road, Mogul Lane, Mahim, Mumbai-400  016, India) include drug peddling, illegal cutting of trees and  violation of the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act and the Development  Control Rules regarding construction of buildings. The builders are  violating all safety norms and, reportedly as a result of this, a  laborer died at the construction site.   After his complaints about the illegal activities of the construction  mafia, Mr. Godwin was approached by the local Member of Legislative  Assembly (M.L.A.) Mr. Suresh Gambir who offered him cash in return  for his abandoning the complaints. Mr. Godwin refused to accept and  was later threatened by politicians, policemen and businessmen with  having him charged in false cases. The builders also threw stones at  Mr. Godwin's house, and his car was stolen from the parking lot near  his house. The local M.L.A also published false news about Mr. Godwin  in localmagazines (which Mr. Godwin has issued lawyer notice  against), and in association with the M.L.A, Mr. V.B Chandanshive,  the senior police inspector of Mahim police station has given false  information about Mr. Godwin and his family.  Mr. Godwin has approached the National Human Rights Commission and  the Lokayut through his letter dated on 13 May 2003 for initiating  appropriate action. However this action brought in more retaliation  from the Mahim police and now they are threatening Mr. Godwin and his  family with dire consequences if he does not withdraw his complaints,  giving rise to increasing concerns for the personal integrity Mr.  Godwin and his family.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the  physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Violet Godwin, who has  disappeared since December 15th,  2002, and that of Mr. James Godwin and his family, who are under  constant harassment and who have received death threats. OMCT calls  on the Indian authorities to  guarantee the Godwin family's full protection. Furthermore, the  release of Ms. Violet and an investigation into her kidnapping should  occur as soon as possible.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in India urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and  psychological integrity of Ms. Violet Godwin, who has disappeared  since December 15th, 2002, and of  Mr. James Godwin and his family; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the  circumstances of these events, notably the death threats, kidnapping  and more generally the wide-ranging   corruption allegations, in order to identify those responsible, bring  them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative  sanctions as provided by law; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental  freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and  international human rights  standards.  Addresses  ·	Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Office of  the Chief Minister, Mantralaya, Mumbai 400 023, INDIA, FAX: + 91-22- 23631446, E-mail:  chiefminister@maharashtra.gov.in ·	Justice Shri Arivind Sawant, Chairperson, Maharashtra Human Rights  Commission, Mumbai, INDIA, Fax: +91 22 2885858  ·	Dr. P.P.J. Abdul Kalam, President, Office of the President,  Rashtrapati Bhawan, New Delhi, 110004, INDIA, Fax: +91-11-23017290,  23014570,  Email: presssecy@alpha.nic.in. presidentofindia@rb.nic.in or  Pressecy@Sansad.nic.in  ·	Shri Justice A S Anand, Chairperson National Human Rights  Commission of India, Sardar Patel Bhawan Sansad Marg, New Delhi - 110  001 INDIA, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, E-Mail: chairnhrc@nic.in  ·	Ministry of Home Affairs, North Block, Central Secretariat, New  Delhi - 110 001, Fax: +91 23093750, 23092763, E-mail:  websitemhaweb@mha.nic.in ·	Ambassadeur Puri Hardeep Singh, Rue du Valais 9 (6ème), CH-1202,  Genève, Suisse, E-mail: mission.india@ties.itu.int, Fax: +4122 906 86  96  Please also write to the embassies of India in your respective  country.  Geneva, February 9th, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this  appeal in your reply. 