Colombia:  Colombia: massacre in El Firme and death threats against indigenous leaders
May  9, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2001 / MayColombia: Colombia: massacre in El Firme and death threats against indigenous leadersCase COL 090501 The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Colombia. Brief description of the situation: The International Secretariat of the OMCT has received information concerning several acts by paramilitary groups which seriously violate fundamental Human Rights, including a massacre in the community of El Firme, and death threats against various community leaders. Six persons were killed and one person was wounded in El Firme  Yurumanguí river, Municipality of Buenaventura,; death threats were received by Mr. Floro Tunubalá, governor of the Department of Cauca and the members of his cabinet, who were declared a military target; against the leaders of the CIMA communitarian organization, the ASOINCA union ; the mayors of Cartago, Tuluá, Villa Rica, Timbio, El Patía y Rosas, as well as against the inhabitants of six peasant communities of the region.    According to the information from several reliable sources, at dawn on April 29 2001 an armed group stormed the community of El Firme, killing 6 afro-colombian fishermen, 2 of them with firearms and 4 with axes; the victims of this massacre were Messrs. Placido Quintero (60 years old), William Valencia (24), Mercedino Canga (19), Luis Torres Valencia (18), Ramón Severo Mosquera (18), Juan Trimistico Caicedo (30) and Mr. Víctor Caicedo who was wounded. The armed group told the inhabitants to abandon their collective territory, which had been formally handed over only the year before. This new violent act caused the displacement of about 450 persons to the city of Buenaventura, as well as a much greater wave of displacement along the Yurumanguí river. The reports also point out that Mr. Floro Tunubalá, governor of el Cauca, and the 13 members of his cabinet received death threats and were declared military targets by the Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia (AUC). The reports point out that the threats against Mr. Floro Tumbalá’s administration were received in January this year because of the belief among paramilitary leaders, notably Carlos Castaño, that Mr. Tunubalá was elected with the support of the guerrilla and he is therefore committed to allowing the guerilla to control certain municipalities. The paramilitaries consider that during his administration a development zone in this region will be handed over to the ELN and the FARC. The reports add that on Thursday, May 3, 2001, professor  Diego Jaramillo, advisor to the Gobernación (provincial government), received a call at home, in which alleged paramilitaries warned him that he and the Governor and the 13 Secretaries of his Office, would be killed that week. The Governor explained that the threat appeared to be serious because it coincided with an anonymous call to his portable telephone in which a woman warned him that “he should take care”, that the ‘para’s’ instruction was “to hit” all his administration. The information adds that approximately 2000 members of paramilitary groups are in action in the Department of Cauca, aiming to take control of the cities using urban commandos. In addition, around 600 paramilitaries are apparently active in Popayán. Furthermore, in a communiqué from paramilitaries, death threats were received by the leaders of the CIMA communitarian organization, the ASOINCA union and the mayors of the municipalities of Cartago, Tuluá, Villa Rica, Timbio, El Patía and Rosas. In another communiqué, the paramilitaries threatened six peasant communities, Páramo de Miraflores, El Dobio, Santander de Quilichao’s flat zone, the Patía Valley, Balboa and Mercaderes, in which, on May 4, 2001, in the morning, they were allowed 48 hours to evacuate their lands. The following is the translation of the three threatening communiqués, sent to the media: i. AUTODEFENSAS UNIDAS DEL CAUCA Sirs Mass Media – SOUTH OF THE CAUCA NARIÑO COUNTRY. Following the national guideline and my assignment, I RATIFY AGAIN the previous communiqués and allow the following communities, mayors and guerrilla collaborators, who from this day are declared MILITARY TARGETS, 48 hours to abandon the area: Cartago Mayor; Tuluá Mayor; Villarica Mayor; Timbio Mayor; El Patía Mayor; Rosas Mayor; Páramo de Miraflores Community; El Dobio Community; Santander de Quilichao; zona plana Community; the Patía Valley, Balboa, Mercaderes, CIMA leaders, The central leaders of ASOINCA, CIMA. We invite the governor of el Cauca not to collaborate with left wing movements, or else he will be declared a MILITARY TARGET. From this date no one can move around from 6 in the afternoon until 6 am.  Sincerely, EL CAMALEÓN  ii. AUTODEFENSAS CAMPESINAS CORDOBA Y URABA Sirs MASS MEDIA DIRECTORS – SOUTH OF THE COUNTRY We are satisfied to have recuperated 30% of the territory in the SOUTH OF THE COUNTRY. We intend to continue with the eradication of the different guerrilla fronts as well as the more immediate collaborators. In accordance with central guidelines we reaffirm the positions of commanders MAKENSON, ANDRES and assign commander CAMALEÓN again to the south,. In order to avoid speculation, the different commandos will send to their areas their identifying logo or emblem and a particular password identifying them with your media directors. We INVITE those COMMUNITIES, GUERRILLA LEADERS AND COLLABORATORS who have received a communiqué to abandon the areas with each of their commandos. iii. AUTODEFENSAS UNIDAS DE COLOMBIA  MASS MEDIA We ratify the previous decrees and will work in co-ordination with commander CAMALEÓN in order to be able to destroy the left wing parasites. GOVERNOR, you are now warned. Sincerely AUTODEFENSAS UNIDAS DE COLOMBIA CALIMA FRONT.  Requested Action:  Please write to the Colombian Authorities urging them to:  i. take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons and to bring an end to such threats and aggression; ii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned events, especially the reports of torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to justice and apply the civil, penal or administrative sanctions stipulated by law; iii. fully execute the recommendations made by international and regional human rights organisations, including those of the High Commission for Human Rights, the United Nations Human Rights Commission, the Inter.American Human Rights Commission as well as national and governmental human rights organisations; iv. guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental liberties in all the country in accordance with national law and international human rights norms.  Addresses  · S.E. Álvaro Uribe Vélez, Presidente de la República, Cra. 8 n .7-26, Palacio de Nariño, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 566 20 71  · Consejería Presidencial de Derechos Humanos, Calle 7 n . 6-54 Piso 3, Santafé de Bogotá, D. C. Fax: (+57 1) 337 13 51  · General Fernando Tapias Stahelin, Comandante de las Fuerzas Militares, Avenida el Dorado con Cra. 52, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 222 29 35; e-mail: siden@mindefensa.gov.co ; pilaque@cgm.mil.co · Mission Permanente de la Colombie auprès de l’Office de las Nations Unies et des institutions spécialisées a Genève. Chemin du Champ d’Anier 17-19, 1209 Genève. Tel : (+41) 22 798 4554, 798 4555. E-mail: mission.colombia@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Colombia in your respective country.  Geneva, May 9, 2001 