Cameroon:  Report Publication: Defenders of the Rights of LGBTI persons face homophobia and violence
February 25, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Cameroon / 2015 / FebruaryCameroon: Report Publication: Defenders of the Rights of LGBTI persons face homophobia and violence OBS Report Cameroon February 2015 English36 pages / 2.53 MB​
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT)Human Rights Defenders Network in Central Africa (REDHAC)
Maison des droits de l’Homme au Cameroun (MDHC)
AMSHeR - African Men for Sexual Health and Rights  
Douala, Geneva,
Johannesburg, Paris, 25 February 2015 – In a report presented today in Douala, our
organisations deplore that threats and physical assaults against lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersexual (LGBTI) human rights defenders in
Cameroon have reached alarming proportions over the last few years. Testimony
and information compiled during a fact-finding mission in 2014 indicate that increasing
numbers of extremely serious violations are being committed, in some cases
leading to murder, and that nothing is being done to prosecute the
perpetrators. Our organisations feel that this impunity is especially
contemptible since, at the same time, the authorities are arresting and
convicting many people for homosexual acts. Since 2011, at least 28 people have
apparently been convicted in Cameroon because of their sexual orientation,
whether true or presumed. 
 
“In Cameroon, LGBTI rights
defenders are victims of the complacency of people who should be guaranteeing
respect for the defenders’ rights and security”, our organisations declared. “Justice, which is supposed to respect the
principle of equality for all before the law, is actually supporting the
repression of LGBTI persons and their defenders. This can and must change. The
rule of law should not tolerate people being threatened or murdered with
impunity simply because of whom they love or who they are”.
 
Since 1972,
homosexual acts have been indictable offences in Cameroon. Article 347 bis of
the Cameroonian Penal Code provides for prison terms of six-months to
five-years for any person found guilty
of having had “sexual relations
with a person of the same sex”. This unfortunate legal context – with
the administrative, law enforcement and judicial authorities showing
indifference or even encouragement – has led to the increase in the
number of attacks against the defenders of LGBTI persons’ rights over the last
few years.
 
Associations and NGOs
cannot register under a name that explicitly refers to the rights of LGBTI
persons. In 2013, the offices of Alternatives-Cameroun were set on fire, and
the offices of AIDS ACODEV, REDHAC and CAMEF were burglarised and ransacked.
Defenders of LGBTI persons' rights and particularly the rare lawyers who defend
them, along with members of their family, are frequently subjected to insults
and death threats, either directly or anonymously, by telephone or by text
message. The President of REDHAC and one of the lawyers representing LGBTI
persons had to evacuate some members of their families because of the serious
attacks and threats they were receiving.
 
At the same time,
nothing has been done to address the many complaints filed by the LGBTI rights
defenders to denounce violations of their rights, and the investigation into
the assassination of Eric Ohena Lembembe, Executive Director of the Cameroonian
Foundation for AIDS (CAMFAIDS) and journalist committed to defending the rights
of LGBTI persons, remains at a standstill. He was found murdered in his home on
15 July 2013.
 
According to our
organisations, “the bungled investigation and the irregularities in the legal
proceedings in the Eric Ohena Lembembe murder case are indicative of the impunity that is
guaranteed to the perpetrators of violence against LGBTI persons and the
defenders of LGBTI rights”. “The Cameroonian judiciary must undertake a truly
independent, impartial, transparent investigation to identify the persons
responsible for this crime and bring them to court,” they added.
 
Our organisations
wish to point out that the United Nations Human Rights Committee has
recommended that the Cameroonian authorities take immediate steps to
decriminalise homosexual relations between consenting adults in order to bring
its legislation in line with the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. In its concluding observations following its examination of Cameroon
State Report in 2013, the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
(ACHPR) criticised the Government of Cameroon for judicial harassment, attempts
on the lives of human rights defenders and other violations of their human
rights, especially those working on the issue of sexual orientation.
 
Our organisations
deplore the fact that: “Homophobia, which is legitimated by the
criminalisation of homosexual acts, and the inflammatory statements made by
representatives of some political and religious authorities and certain media,
puts the defenders of LGBTI rights in a position of psychological and physical
insecurity.”  
 
Our organisations
wish to reiterate their appeal to the Cameroonian authorities to decriminalise
sexual orientation and to embark on a genuine battle against all forms of
discrimination by adopting administrative, political and legal measures that
can guarantee respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
individuals, regardless of sexual orientation or gender, and thus comply with
international standards. 
 
Context
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, (a joint
FIDH-OMCT programme), together with MDHC, REDHAC and
AMSHeR, conducted an international
fact-finding mission in Cameroon in January 2014 on the situation of LGBTI
rights defenders. The mission was composed of Assane Dioma Ndiaye (Senegal), attorney-at-law at the
Dakar Bar and President of the Senegalese League for Human Rights (LSDH), Berry
Didier Nibogora (Burundi), lawyer in charge of the AMSHeR programme Law,
Politics, Advocacy and Human Rights, and Catherine Delanoë-Daoud (France), attorney-at-law
at the Paris Bar. The mission noted the fragile environment of the defenders of
the LGBTI persons’ right to health and to human rights and documented the
intimidation aiming at defenders, in an environment that criminalises
homosexuality between consenting adults. The new report presents the
findings of this investigation. The fact-finding mission also met several
witnesses, people who were close to Eric Ohena Lembembe, and persons working
for the judiciary in order to assess progress made in the investigation of the
death of this defender, this journalist who was determined to support the
rights of LGBTI persons. A post-mission press release has also been
published.  
 
The report is available in English on
the following web links:OBS Report Cameroon February 2015 English


 
For more information, please contact:
• FIDH: Arthur Manet/Lucie Kröning: +
33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
• OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +
41 (0) 22 809 49 24 