Malaysia:  Malaysia : Open letter to Mr. Dato Abdullah Haji Ahmad Badawi
August 20, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2003 / AugustMalaysia: Malaysia : Open letter to Mr. Dato Abdullah Haji Ahmad BadawiOPEN LETTER TO MR. DATO ABDULLAH HAJI AHMAD BADAWI Minister of Home Affairs    Paris - Geneva, August 20, 2003     Dear Sir,  The International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World  Organisation against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of their joint  programme, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights  Defenders, express their deepest concern over the fact that, on  August 18th, Ms. Cynthia Gabriel, Executive Director of the human  rights organization Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM), was denied entry  into Sarawak by Immigration officers at Miri Airport.  According to the information received, Ms. Cynthia Gabriel was to  attend a workshop entitled "Workshop on Globalisation and its Impacts  on Indigenous Peoples in Malaysia" in Miri, Sarawak. Immigration  officers at the airport told Ms. Gabriel that she was denied entry as  her name was blacklisted. The officers kept her passport and booked a  ticket back for her on August 19th, to Kuala Lumpur. Upon  negotiation, she was allowed to stay overnight and was told to be  back at the airport at 5.30 am. She was then given back her passport  and took the plane.  No official information were given on the blacklist mentioned by the  authorities nor on the reasons why Mrs. Gabriel's name was on this  list. According to the information received, Mrs. Gabriel was only  told that additional names had been put on this blacklist in 1998.   The Observatory is preoccupied about these measures, aimed at  hindering Ms. Cynthia Gabriel's activities as a human rights defender  and notes with concern that similar measures preventing other human  rights defenders from going to Sarawak territory have already been  taken in the past by Sarawak local authorities.   These measures contradict both the Universal Declaration on Human  Rights (article 13) and the Declaration on Human Rights defenders  adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1998, which states that :  "Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,  to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human  rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international  levels" (article 1).  The Observatory urges the Malaysian authorities :  i.	to conform with the provisions of the Declaration on human rights defenders adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 9 December 1998, in particular its Article 1 above mentioned; ii.	to comply generally with the terms of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights which guarantees freedom of movement and security of all citizens, as well as with international human rights standards.    Sidiki Kaba - President of the FIDH 	 Eric Sottas - Director of the OMCT 