Sudan:  Sudan: 7 Massaleet tribespersons detained and 55 killed in attacks
April 29, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2003 / AprilSudan: Sudan: 7 Massaleet tribespersons detained and 55 killed in attacksCase SDN 250403.1 Follow-up of Case SDN 250403 Arbitrary arrests / Incommunicado detention / Risk of torture / Killings  Geneva, April 29th, 2003  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Sudan.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Organisation against Torture, a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detention of seven persons, and attacks resulting in the death of 55 and many injured persons in Sudan.  According to the information received, members of the Massaleet village of Mulli, 8 miles south of Al-Jenaina have been targeted by Sudanese authorities for arbitrary arrests and have suffered armed militia attacks resulting in widespread injury and death. On April 23, 2003 the Sudanese authorities reportedly arrested seven Mulli villagers: Al Tahir Abd Al Rahmna; Mahmoud Abd Al Rahman; Abd Al Majid Abd Allah; Wad Alumda, Abd Al Latif Mohamed Adam; A'abid Aldeen Abd Al Rahman and Mugiba Adam Mousa. They have reportedly been taken to the security force office in Nyala and the pro-government media has accused them of being supporters of the Suddan Liberation Army/Movement (SLA/M). There has been no information about their condition in detention, giving rise to fears that they may be subjected to ill-treament or torture during detention.  On the same day, an armed milita reportedly consisting of members of the Arab tribes in the Darfour province and led by uniformed militiamen attacked a traditional Massaleet weekly market place in Mulli village. According to the information received, market stalls were burned, livestock stolen and slaughtered, fifty-five people killed and fifty-three others injured. The fifty-five people killed were: Ibrahim Ali Ishaq; Haroon Hamed; Al Haj Ali Abd Allah; Yahya Al Sheique Al Noor; Jumaa Mohamed Adam; Adam Mohamed Adam; Abd Al Majeed Adam; Al Haj Abd Allah Aboon; Arbaba Haroon; Abd Allah Mohamed Adam; Abakar Jumaa Mahdi; Abakar Mohamed; Muktar Mohamed Adam; Ismail Adam Abakar; Ibrahim Mohamed Haroon; Mohamed Haroon Adam; Al Haj Yahya Azhaq; Ibrahim Mustafa Mohamed Saeed; Ibrahim Waded Bashir; Qamar Mousa Youseef; Al Haj Badr Al Din Yaqoub; Abu Bakr Abd Al Suni; Mohamed Haroon; Adam Ibrahim Kassim; Ashaq Haran Adam; Qameise Abu Mubarak; Yahiya Adam Sayeed; Kater Adam Issa; Saleh Abd Al Rahman Suliman; Abd Al Rasoul Yahya Baraka; Ibrahim Mousa; Dafa Allah Aboon; Haroon Dafa Allah; Ahmed Abd Allah Mohamed; Mohamed Abd All Karim Abd Allah; Ashaq Mahdi Haroon; Adam Abd Allah Adam; Mohamed Haroon Ali; Gamer Al Din Da’wood; Mohamed Adam; Zakaria Azhaq; Ibrahim Haroon; Khalil Omer Mohamed; Mohamed Adam; Mohamed Abd Al Rahman Suliman; Ahmed Ali; Mohamed Youseef Khater; Abd Al Aziz Ali Haroon and seven others whose names have not been confirmed. Two days before the attack, government security forces reportedly confiscated weapons from Massaleet in the Al-Janeina area, leaving them vulnerable to attack.  According to information received, on April 24th, one day after the attack, the Massaleet organised a peaceful demonstration protesting the government's failure to protect them. The demonstration was reportedly attacked - Mohamed Abd AL Karim was killed and others were injured. The Sudanese government alleges that the demonstrators had burned down the city hall and a fuel warehouse. The demonstrators claim that the destruction of the town hall and warehouse only occurred after they found themselves under attack.  OMCT is gravely concerned by this most recent wave of attacks and arbitrary arrests that has been carried out by the Sudanese authorities and Arab militia groups. OMCT is particularly concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the afore-mentioned detainees. OMCT calls for their immediate release, unless there are valid legal charges against them that are in line with international law, and if this is the case, for their procedural rights to be guaranteed at all times. OMCT deplores the large numbers of injured and dead that have resulted from these events and calls upon the Sudanese government to launch prompt and impartial investigations into the circumstances of these attacks, in order to bring the perpetrators of these acts to justice and to provide adequate reparation to the persons or families of persons who have been injured or killed during these events.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to information received previously, on April 8th, 2003 the National Security Agency arrested seven men in Kubkabia, in Northern Darfour. During the first week of April 2003 the Military Intelligence arrested two men from the Four tribe in Zalengi and four men in Al Jenaina. It has been alleged that at least one of the detainees has been subjected to torture during detention and that the other detainees may also be subjected to ill-treatment or torture (see previous appeal for more information).  Darfour in Western Sudan has experienced a marked increase in arbitrary arrests, detention, and torture and ill-treatment, particularly targeting members of the Four, Zaghawa, and Massaleet tribes. People have been injured and killed, livestock and homes destroyed, and villages depopulated and/or displaced. The Sudanese government claims that these attacks are the result of "tribal conflict" resulting from competition for limited resources. The attacks are reportedly carried out by members of the militia from the Gangawied group of twenty-eight Arab states against Four, Massaleet, and Zaghawa villages. The Four and Massaleet leaders have identified the leaders of the militia attacks, but the government has reportedly taken no action against the perpetrators.  In direct response to these attacks, a group of individuals from the Four and Zaghawa tribes have taken up arms and created the Sudan Liberation Army/Movement (SLA/M). This rapidly growing group reportedly states as its aim the liberation of all of Sudan and the restoration of democracy and civil rights. Many of its members are thought to be hiding in the mountains of the Jebel Marra region of Darfour.   Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the aforementioned persons that are being detained incommunicado; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, notably the arrests and attacks, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iv.	guarantee adequate reparation to all injured people and the families of the deceased; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses:  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 24911 783223 ·	Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: +24911 788941  ·	Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: +24911 779383 ·	Mr. Yasir Sid Ahmed, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 24911 779173 ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax : +4122 7312656. E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, April 29th, 2003 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 