Colombia:  Preliminary findings of an international fact-finding mission - No peace for human rights defenders
July 19, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2017 / JulyColombia: Preliminary findings of an international fact-finding mission - No peace for human rights defenders





Geneva-Paris-Bogotá, July 19, 2017 -
The lowest murder rate in Colombia for 40
years in the context of the peace process masks a climate of constant threats
and a sharp rise in killings of human rights defenders. The persistence of
paramilitary structures, impunity and limitations in the State response are among
the main reasons for this reality, as reported by the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an OMCT-FIDH partnership) at the close of its mission to
the country.
 
The
work of human rights defenders continues to be a high-risk activity in
Colombia. Depending on the source[1],
figures for the number of killings of defenders in 2016 range between 59 and
134. Despite these inconsistencies, the figures are scandalous at either end of
the scale, and it is important to highlight that the different national State
institutions, international bodies and Colombian civil society organisations which
have gathered these statistics all coincide in reporting a significant increase
in the number of killings of human rights defenders in comparison with previous
years. Moreover, according to the information gathered by the mission, human
rights defenders who are local leaders, particularly those who defend rights
related to the land and environment in rural areas, are the group most
vulnerable to constant threats.
 
The
Observatory has identified four structural causes that explain the current
situation. 
 
In
the first place, the main attacks against defenders take place amid the
persistence of paramilitary structures in the country, identified as the main
perpetrators of these crimes. The mission was able to document various cases of
collusion and/or connivance between State officials and paramilitary groups in
different parts of the country including Norte de Santander and Antioquia in a
context in which the authorities continue to deny the existence of this
phenomenon.
 
“In the words
of a Colombian defender: ‘If something does not exist, it cannot be
confronted’. That is why the Government must publicly recognise the persistence
of paramilitary structures in Colombia and confront this phenomenon by
effectively and decidedly applying the relevant measures included in the peace
agreement”, declared Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui,
Director of the OMCT Office in Brussels and delegate of the Observatory mission
in Colombia.
 
In
second place, according to the Observatory findings, there is now a tendency
among public authorities to recognise the legitimacy of human rights defenders’
work. However, there continue to be examples of smears and stigmatisation
against defenders. For example, in Sur de Bolívar, Bucaramanga and Barrancabermeja,
in a case where five defenders were arrested, one was linked by the Prosecutor
to the National Liberation Army (Ejército de Liberación Nacional -
ELN) as a result of his leadership in the organisation of demonstrations. 
 
The
criminalisation of social protest continues to cause concern. The mission received
a number of reports describing the use of repression by the authorities during
peaceful protests in Colombia, including numerous examples of excessive use of
force against protestors. The mission heard about a number of cases involving
defenders in the department of Cauca and during the civic strike in the city of
Buenaventura.
 
In
third place, the Observatory notes the persistence of high levels of impunity,
which reinforce the vulnerability of all human rights defenders in the country.
According to the information received, there have only been convictions in five
cases of murders of defenders over the past year. What is more, in May 2017 the
first conviction in the history of Colombia was made in a case related to
threats against a human rights defender. A bodyguard was convicted of threats
to the person he was responsible for protecting; however, there has been no investigation
into who may have planned the crime. 
 
“We are
particularly concerned about the low priority given to cases of threats by the Public
Prosecutor’s office. There is also a tendency, in all investigations into
attacks against defenders and in the few cases that lead to a conviction, that
these investigations are limited to those who carried out the crimes, while
those who planned the crimes are not investigated”,
stated Vincent Vallies, international expert and mission delegate. 
 
Finally,
in the fourth place, the Observatory notes that despite the considerable
institutional framework dedicated to protecting human rights defenders in
Colombia, the institutional response continues to be weak for the following
reasons: the inadequacy of measures to tackle the structural causes that place
defenders at risk, the lack of local implementation of national guidelines and
plans, insufficient guarantees to carry out work to defend human rights, and a
lack of measures with a differential focus according to age, ethnicity, gender
and socio-economic situation. 
 
Context:
The
Observatory carried out an international fact-finding mission in different
areas of Colombia (Bogotá, Norte de Santander, Antioquia and Valle del Cauca) from
July 11 to 19, 2017. The delegation was composed of Vincent Vallies
(international expert, French nationality) and Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui
(Director of the OMCT Office in Brussels and Human Rights Advisor for the
Observatory at OMCT, Spanish nationality), and was accompanied by Jahel Quiroga
(Director of the Reiniciar Corporation - Corporación
Reiniciar and member of the OMCT Executive Board), and Ana María Rodríguez
(Representative before the United Nations, Colombian Commission of Jurists - Comisión Colombiana de Juristas - CCJ).
 
In
the coming months the Observatory will publish a report on its specific
findings, conclusions and recommendations regarding the situation of human
rights defenders in Colombia. In addition, as part of a strategy to strengthen
the Observatory’s work on Colombia, a report will also be published over the
following months documenting various cases of attacks against human rights
defenders who defend land and environmental rights in the context of
large-scale development projects.
 
The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in
1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective
of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
For more
information, please contact:
·    
OMCT:
Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui / Delphine Reculeau: (+41) 22 809 49 39·     FIDH: Samuel Hanryon /
Audrey Couprie: (+ 33) 1 43 55 25 18



[1] The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights record 59
killings. The “We are Defenders Program” (Programa
Somos Defensores) report 80 such killings. The figure of 135 corresponds to
data from the Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office (Defensoría del Pueblo). 