Spain:  Response to article in El País - Joint statement by the OMCT and  the Coordination Committee of the Civic Solidarity Platform
October 30, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Spain / 2017 / OctoberSpain: Response to article in El País - Joint statement by the OMCT and  the Coordination Committee of the Civic Solidarity Platform 
29 October 2017
On 26 October 2017, El País published an article on a human
rights assessment mission conducted by the Civic Solidarity Platform (CSP)
entitled “Two Russian NGOs make propaganda on police charges on the
October 1 Referendum – OMCT facilitates a visit to Barcelona”. 
Between 23 and 27
October 2017, a needs assessment mission, organized by a broad international
coalition of human rights NGOs called the Civic Solidarity Platform, was
conducted in Barcelona following reports of police violence on the referendum
day. The CSP brings together more than 90 organizations from 30 countries
in Europe, Eurasia, and North America, including the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT).
The mission was
composed of two delegates, Yuri Dzhibladze and Olga Zakharova, both Russian
citizens, internationally renowned human rights defenders, co-founders of
the CSP in 2011 and members of its Coordination Committee.
The OMCT and the
Coordination Committee of the CSP wish to clarify the following:
First, we deplore
that the El País article
misrepresents damagingly CSP delegates and by extension member NGOs of the
Platform including OMCT, portraying them as “Russian propaganda agents” harming
their reputation and questioning their independence. The impermissible irony is
that it discredits without any basis whatsoever as ‘propaganda agents’ the very
individuals who like few others and at personal risk have spoken out on human
rights violations in the Russian Federation and across the OSCE region, and
whose reputation, integrity, objectivity and professionalism is internationally
recognized. 
Second, while basic
information regarding the nature and goals of the mission was shared when OMCT
was approached by El País, the OMCT
notes with great surprise that the article gives as basis for the article
“Spanish intelligence sources”. While the OMCT and the CSP are not privy to any
information in this regard, they recall that any form of surveillance of human
rights defenders in and outside Spain would be inacceptable and a breach of the
UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, OSCE’s human dimension commitments
and OSCE Guidelines on the Protection of Human rights Defenders.
The concern of members
of the Civic Solidarity Platform is not the contentious issues of independence
or referenda, but human rights. It is the obligation of any state under
international law to investigate allegations of excessive use of force – no
matter where and no matter when it happens. Addressing those concerns is
legitimate in particular in times of tensions, and firmly recognized by the government
of Spain who supported the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders as well the
Helsinki Final Act’s principle of legitimate international concern about the
human rights situation in any OSCE participating state. 
Finally, in a context of increasing
confrontation, the OMCT and the CSP restate the call for an
independent, transparent, exhaustive and effective investigation into
reports of excessive use of force by law enforcement agents on October 1 in
order to rebuild confidence. We urge Spanish and Catalan authorities to
guarantee all fundamental rights. 