Bangladesh:  The release on bail of Odhikar Secretary Adilur Rahman Khan must be the first step to respect and protect human rights defenders!
October 17, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / OctoberBangladesh: The release on bail of Odhikar Secretary Adilur Rahman Khan must be the first step to respect and protect human rights defenders! Geneva-Paris,
October 11, 2013. As the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, completed their mission to
Bangladesh, they call for an end to the prosecution of leading human rights
lawyer Adilur Rahman Khan and to ensure full respect for the rights set forth
in the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders.

The
mission was led by Mr. Yves Berthelot, OMCT President (France), and Mr. Max De
Mesa, Chairperson of the Philippine Alliance
of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), an OMCT and FIDH member organisation,
and a member of OMCT General Assembly (The Philippines), and carried
out in Dhaka from October 5 to October 9, 2013. The delegation met with
representatives of civil society, the media, diplomatic community as well as
the Minister of Information, the Minister of Law, Justice and Parliamentary
Affairs, the Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission and the Attorney
General of Bangladesh. The delegation was also able to attend the bail hearing
of Mr. Adilur Rahman
Khan, Secretary of OMCT
and FIDH member organisation Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly,
before the High Court Division of the Supreme Court
on October 8, 2013. The delegation wishes to thank all those that it met during
the course of the mission.
“We welcome the
decision of the High Court to order the release on bail of Mr. Adilur Rahman
Khan as an important and long-awaited step forward. We hope that this is the
first step towards closure of the criminal proceedings against him and
colleagues at Odhikar”, said Mr. Yves Berthelot, commenting on the issuance
of the order on the last day of the mission. “The detention of Mr. Khan and the use of the Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
Act have an acute intimidating effect on the human rights community in
Bangladesh. It is apparent that there is strong political influence on the case
resulting in serious concerns over the respect of due process and the rule of law”,
he added.
 Max de Mesa, member of OMCT General Assembly, on the prosecution against Adilur Rahman Khan in Bangladesh (1/3) from OMCT / SOS-Torture Network on Vimeo.
Mr. Khan has been detained since
August 10, 2013 in connection with a case filed under
the ICT Act in relation to a fact-finding report issued by Odhikar on the operation
carried out on May 5-6, 2013 by security forces in the context of the gathering
of Hefazat-e Islam activists in Dhaka. On
September 4, 2013, a charge sheet was filed against Mr. Khan as well as against Odhikar's Director Mr. Nasiruddin Elan for allegedly “distorting images by using photoshop and
publishing a fabricated report, which enraged public sentiment”, under Section
57 of the ICT Act and Sections 505 (c) and 505A of the Penal Code, in relation to
Odhikar’s report. On
September 11, 2013, the Cyber Crimes Tribunal issued an arrest warrant against
Mr. Elan.
On October 8, 2013, the High Court Division of the
Supreme Court of Bangladesh granted a six-month interim bail to Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan. On October 9, 2013, the
Office of the Attorney General filed an application before the Appellate
Division of the Supreme Court, requesting to stay the High Court’s order
granting bail to Mr. Khan. However, the Chamber Judge decided on the same day
to uphold the High Court Division’s decision. The Observatory recalls
that the bail petition filed by Mr. Khan’s lawyer
was earlier rejected three times in the same case, once by the Cyber Crimes
Tribunal in Dhaka on September 25, 2013 and twice by the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate Court on August 11 and September 9. Mr.
Khan subsequently challenged the Cyber Crimes Tribunal’s order of September 25,
and filed an appeal with the High Court, requesting it to grant him bail.
On
October 11, 2013, at 10.30 am, Mr. Khan was finally released on bail from
Kashimpur Jail number 1. The Observatory is concerned that it took two days for the
bail order to be implemented, and considers this as
further harassment against Mr. Khan.The
Observatory further recalls that Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was detained for more
than 21 days without being charged in violation of the law, that he has been awaiting trial since August 13, 2013 and that a Public
Prosecutor has not yet been appointed to represent
the Government at his trial, which amounts
to further harassment and delay in framing charges against him. In addition,
although the next hearing has been scheduled to October 21, 2013, yesterday
was the last day of court and it will not resume again before November 1.
Moreover,
during the mission to Bangladesh, the delegation was informed that on October
6, 2013, the National Parliament of Bangladesh passed the Information and Communication Technology (Amendment) Act, 2013, setting a minimum of seven years’ imprisonment and increasing the highest punishment for cyber-crimes from 10
years under the existing Act to 14 years or a fine of Tk 10 million or
both. In addition, offenses under Sections 54,
56, 57 and 61 of the ICT Act, 2006 are now considered
as cognisable and non-bailable. As a
consequence, law enforcers are empowered to arrest anyone accused of violating the law without a warrant, by
invoking Section 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
It is feared that
those amendments will lead to further arrests and
harassment of human rights defenders, therefore shrinking the space of civil
society in the country, and that there is risk that they could be applied
retrospectively to the pending case against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and Mr. Nasiruddin Elan. “Changing
the ‘rules of the game’ in the middle of the legal process with the creation of
a new jurisdiction, increased punishment and new bail provisions would violate the
rule of law”, the delegation noted. It has not received any satisfactory
explanation of the need for such a change and remains very concerned over the
compliance with the principle of legality. The broadly framed offences under
the ICT Act are lending to abuse and undermine the work of human rights
defenders, as well as the work of journalists, bloggers and others.Finally, while
welcoming the repeated assurances of Government officials met by the mission
delegation of the Government’s adherence to human rights, the freedom of
expression, due process and the rule of law, and the authorities’ assurances of
Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan’s physical integrity and safety, the delegation found
that:The prosecution of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and his stigmatisation in
     the media has had a chilling effect on civil society and human rights
     defenders at large. There is today a clear sense of insecurity within the
     human rights community in Bangladesh, traditionally known to be diverse
     and vivid. Its ability to undertake critical human rights work is already
     negatively impacted as organisations are becoming reluctant to document
     violations, and victims and witnesses especially in rural areas are afraid
     to come forward. Human rights documentation is a fundamentally important
     element for advancing human rights in any democratic country and defenders
     must be able to do so while protecting their sources where needed. There
     is a need to re-establish consensus on those fundamental principles. 
The continuation of the prosecution and even more so a possible
     conviction of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan will further entrench the existing
     threats and intimidation to human rights defenders and shrink the
     democratic space for effective human rights work. We found indication of government
     influence on the proceedings against Mr. Khan and Odhikar casting serious
     doubts as to the integrity of the process. We recall in this regard that
     any instrumentalisation of the judiciary and direct or indirect
     interference risks to undermine and compromise the role of the judiciary
     and the rule of law. In this context it is doubly important to guarantee
     scrupulously the right to a fair trial under the International Covenant on
     Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), and to avoid any interference by the
     Executive into the proceedings, and to allow international observers to
     monitor the proceedings. 
There is today a highly polarised political situation that has
     socially gripped and divided Bangladesh wherein statements, much more so
     criticisms, are associated, labelled or categorised with one or the other
     political party with persons vilified, charged or subjected to violent
     actions. The environment of growing radicalisation in society is further
     contributing to such polarisation. This has placed human rights defenders
     at great risk, has led to self-censorship for fear that critical human
     rights work is mistaken as political activism. It is especially in
     environments such as this one that it is important to ensure that human
     rights defenders can maintain independent human rights work free from
     threat and from being wrongly labelled as political activists.
A concerted paradigm shift in the medium and
     long term period from over-arching partisan politics that determine one’s
     status in society to rights-based governance and development is
     imperative. At the heart of this paradigm shift needs to stand the
     protection of human rights, including effective steps to investigate
     violations, protecting witnesses and victims and a commitment to ensure
     full accountability. This reshift and needed change by all actors must
     centre on the protection of those who defend the rights of others;
In light of the acute sense of crisis for defenders urgent steps
     have to be taken to ensure the full protection for the rights under the
     United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and to reaffirm the
     authorities’ commitment to human rights defenders protection, which is the
     first responsibility of any democratic government. There is need
     for a review of the broader legal and policy framework for human rights
     defenders to ensure an enabling environment for human rights defenders in
     Bangladesh. 
The human rights community in Bangladesh is today more important than
ever and will require continuous support in overcoming the present threats that
it is facing.  
“The case of
Mr. Khan”, observed Mr. Max De Mesa, “will become the litmus test both for Government and for civil society
on the direction the country will take before, during and after the elections,
i.e., whether or not the implementation of civil and political rights, such as
freedom of expression, due process and the rule of law, would be done with
determined adherence”.
 Max de Mesa, member of OMCT General Assembly, on the prosecution against Adilur Rahman Khan in Bangladesh (2/3) from OMCT / SOS-Torture Network on Vimeo.
More generally, the Observatory urges the authorities in Bangladesh to
put an end to any kind of harassment against all human rights defenders
in Bangladesh as well as to conform with the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and to
ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Bangladesh.
Max de Mesa, member of OMCT General Assembly, on the prosecution against Adilur Rahman Khan in Bangladesh (3/3) from OMCT / SOS-Torture Network on Vimeo. 