Colombia:  Press Release: Dear Mr. Defence Minister: these are not “lovers’ quarrels”; they are attacks against the right to defend human rights!
December 20, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2017 / DecemberColombia: Press Release: Dear Mr. Defence Minister: these are not “lovers’ quarrels”; they are attacks against the right to defend human rights!


PRESS RELEASE – THE OBSERVATORY

 
Geneva-Paris, 20 December 2017 – The
declarations of the Colombian Minister of Defence, Mr Luis Carlos Villegas which
trivialise the scandalous figures of killings of human rights defenders as
“lovers’ quarrels”, call into question his ability to carry out his functions
as head of the state security forces, which should instead offer guarantees for
defenders’ work, reported the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (OMCT-FIDH). 
 
On December 16, Colombian Defence Minister, Mr. Luis Carlos Villegas,
declared in an interview[1]
 with Noticias Uno that the
murders of social leaders “have been overwhelmingly the result of issues
related to boundaries, lovers’ quarrels, revenge, and arguments over illicit earnings”.
In addition, Mr. Villegas stated that there was no organisation behind the killings
of social leaders.
 
The Observatory laments these declarations by Mr. Villegas which not
only trivialise an extremely serious problem in Colombia but also contravene
the country’s obligations related to the protection of human rights defenders
and their organisations and increase their vulnerability. It is important to
highlight that the Procurator General’s Office (Procuraduría) has called upon the Public Prosecutor’s Office (Fiscalía) to initiate investigations
against Mr. Villegas in relation to these declarations.
 
It should also be noted that the
different Colombian State institutions, international organisations and
Colombian civil society organisations that collect statistics on aggressions
against defenders coincide in reporting figures which show a significant
increase in the number of murders of human rights defenders compared to
previous years, in the context of the negotiation, signing and implementation
of the Peace Agreement[2].
The Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office has reported that 156 social leaders and
defenders were murdered between January 2016 and March 2017[3].

 
Moreover, the declarations of Mr.
Villegas call into question the government’s commitment to implementing point
3.4 of the Peace Agreement to dismantle paramilitary structures, who are
alleged to be responsible for the majority of attacks against human rights
defenders.
 
These declarations have been made just weeks after the Colombian
legislative power approved the Statutory Law on the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace (Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz -
JEP), which includes a provision that discriminates and stigmatises human
rights defenders by excluding them from the possibility of holding office as
judges in the JEP precisely because of their work defending human rights.
 
The Observatory notes that all the figures point to the fact that
defenders are facing extremely high levels of risk related to their involvement
in the peace process which is being promoted by the government to which Mr.
Villegas belongs, which means that the Colombian government has the moral
responsibility, aside from its legal obligations, to protect human rights defenders. 
 
In light of the above, the Observatory calls for a public statement by Mr.
Villegas, the rest of the government and the President himself, to clarify
whether they are in agreement with these assertions, and if they are not, they
must publicly reject them and reiterate their commitment to establishing guarantees
for human rights defenders, including the commitments established within the
Peace Agreement.
 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by OMCT and FIDH.
The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations
of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of
ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
Press contacts:
·       OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: (+41) 22 809 49 39 
·       FIDH: Samuel Hanryon: + 33 6 72 28 42 94 / José Carlos Thissen: + 51
95 41 31 650
 



[1]                 Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D7yix8oGoQQ 


[2]                
For further information, see the report of the Observatory (OMCT-FIDH)
/ José Alvear Restrepo Lawyers’ Collective (CAJAR), “Defender el territorio y el ambiente en
contextos de actividad de empresas extractivas”.
See also the Observatory press release, “Conclusiones preliminares de misión
internacional de investigación - No hay paz para las personas defensoras de
derechos humanos en Colombia” 


[3]                Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office,
31 March 2017, available at:
 http://www.defensoria.gov.co/es/nube/noticias/6236/156-l%C3%ADderes-sociales-y-defensores-de-derechos-humanos-han-sido-asesinados-en-los-%C3%BAltimos-14-meses-Defensor%C3%ADa-Defensor%C3%ADa-del-Pueblo-l%C3%ADderes-sociales-Defensor-del-Pueblo-Colombia-l%C3%ADderes-sociales.htm 