Joint Letter to Chancellor Angela Merkel Re: Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi's Visit to Berlin
June  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Egypt / 2015 / JuneJoint Letter to Chancellor Angela Merkel Re: Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi's Visit to Berlin 2015.06.01_Egypt_Letter to Merkel_visit Al Sisi4 pages / 117 KB​













June 1, 2015 
 
 
Dr. Angela Merkel
Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany
Willy-Brandt-Straße 1
10557 Berlin
 
 
   
Dear Chancellor Merkel, 
 
We, the undersigned international human rights
organizations, write to you in advance of your scheduled meeting with President
Abdel Fattah al-Sisi of Egypt. The government headed by President al-Sisi
presides over the gravest human rights crisis Egypt in decades. We urge you in
the strongest terms to make clear in your meetings with President al-Sisi, and
in public remarks you or other German officials may make in connection with
this visit, that the nature and extent of Germany’s relations with Egypt going
forward will depend on the Egyptian authorities taking prompt and concrete
measures to put an end to government policies that systematically violate
Egypt’s obligations under international human rights law as well as the
Egyptian Constitution of 2014. 
 
Since July 2013, when then-Defense Minister al-Sisi
ousted the elected president Mohamed Morsi and his government, authorities have
by their own admission detained more than 22,000 people. Egyptian rights
organizations have credibly documented a much higher number of at least 41,000
persons who were arrested, indicted or sentenced between July 2013 and May 2014,
including 300 lawyers. Many have been detained solely on the basis of alleged
membership in or sympathy with the Muslim Brotherhood, with which President
Morsy was affiliated. Hundreds of others have been arrested for participating
in peaceful demonstrations, in violation of the repressive November 2013 assembly
law outlawing gatherings of 10 or more persons not approved in advance by the
Interior Ministry. Those detained for violating the assembly law include some
of Egypt’s leading pro-democracy activists and a number of human rights
defenders. 
 
In one case, which the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights
Network raised with you in a letter of 2 April 2015, a leading women’s rights
lawyer, Azza Soliman, was charged with 16 others for participating in an
illegal protest after they came forward as witnesses to the fatal police shooting
of political activist Shaimaa al-Sabbagh. A judge acquitted Soliman and the 16
members of al-Sabbagh’s Socialist Popular Alliance Party on May 23, but prosecutors
have appealed the acquittal and continue to seek to jail peaceful activists.
 
President al-Sisi and other officials frequently
characterize dissent as a threat to national security. Egypt’s judges and
prosecutors have contributed to a further politicization of the criminal justice
system that has resulted in mass trials in which a judge sentences hundreds of people
to death without any regard for individual criminal responsibility. In separate
decisions on May 16, a criminal court recommended the death penalty for 122 people,
including former President Morsy, noted academic Dr. Emad Shahin, and half a
dozen top Muslim Brotherhood officials. The sheer number of people condemned to
death in these rulings is emblematic of a much larger problem of lack of respect
for international fair trial standards in proceedings involving political
dissidents. Between January and March 2015, Egyptian courts convicted 2,381
political dissidents, sentencing 194 of them to death and 312 to life in
prison, according to the Egyptian Observatory for Rights and Freedoms. Since
Morsy’s removal in July 2013, Amnesty International research indicates that courts
have issued more than 742 death sentences after unfair trials and targeting
Muslim Brotherhood members and their supporters. The authorities have shown a
willingness to carry out executions more rapidly than in the past, and have
executed 27 persons since June 2014. Seven out of the 27 were convicted of
murder in relation to political violence and were executed following grossly
unfair trials that violated international fair trial standards. 
 
Another key area of concern is the Egyptian
government’s efforts to restrict the legitimate activities of independent
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), including human rights organizations, which
criticize government policies. The 2002 Law on Associations currently in force
allows the government to shut down such organizations at will, freeze their
assets, confiscate property, reject persons nominated to their governing
boards, and block foreign funding. Authorities frequently deny the applications
of groups seeking to register under the law, which mandates prison terms for
members of those groups for what then become “unauthorized activities.”  The Ministry of Social Solidarity, which is
responsible for implementing the 2002 law, relies heavily on the Interior
Ministry’s Homeland Security (formerly State Security investigations) bureau to
monitor the activities and funding of human rights and other civil society
organizations. 
 
In September, President al-Sisi amended by decree the Penal
Code to raise the penalty for accepting foreign funding with intent to “harm
the national interest” to life in prison and a US$70,000 fine. In November
2014, Egyptian authorities threatened to close down any organizations
conducting NGO-type activities while registered as a law firm or civil company,
as many are to avoid the 2002 law’s onerous restrictions. In the face of broad
criticism from many countries as well as international organizations and United
Nations rights bodies, the government refrained from implementing this threat
but has continued more quietly to intimidate and harass individuals and their
organizations with travel bans, investigations, and denial of permits for
public events. This comes on top of the closure of offices of international
organizations that support Egyptian groups, including the Konrad Adenauer
Stiftung, and criminal prosecution of their staff. These threats have led several
of Egypt’s most prominent NGOs to shut down key programs for fear of running afoul
of the law and relocate some of their programs abroad.
 
Egyptian authorities have taken no evident action to
improve fatal conditions in badly overcrowded prisons, police stations and security
directorates beyond occasional apparently superficial inspections by
prosecutors. The authorities have also undertaken no steps to investigate or
end detention in unofficial places of detention, like the premises of the
National Security Agency, where torture and ill-treatment are routine. Human
Rights Watch and Amnesty International documented the deadly consequences of these
overcrowded conditions and the lack of proper medical care in such facilities. At
least 124 detainees have died in police custody since August 2013 as a result
of medical negligence or torture and other forms of ill-treatment, according to
human rights groups including three former Muslim Brotherhood parliamentarians.
 
Women continue to face discrimination
in law and in practice, including high levels of gender-based domestic, public
and state violence. A June 2014 amendment to the penal code to combat sexual
harassment requires further improvement and incidents of sexual harassment are
ongoing. Assaults by mobs of men against women in Tahrir Square during President
al-Sisi’s inauguration spurred his administration to promise action to combat
violence against women, but promised additional measures have not yet materialized.
The authorities have not taken serious measures to bring perpetrators of
violence against women to justice, especially when they are from the security
forces. 
 
Finally, Germany should continue to freeze the
transfer of all arms and security related items that could be used for
repression until Egyptian authorities have carried out judicial and impartial
investigations into the killings of hundreds of protesters by police and
security forces, and bring those responsible to justice. This includes the
infamous and bloody August 14, 2013, clearing of two largely peaceful sit-ins in
Cairo organized by opponents of the military takeover, in which security forces
killed more than 1,000 protesters in a single day.  
 
We encourage you to make clear to President al-Sisi
that closer German ties with Egypt depend on his government’s taking steps to
address these concerns. Specifically, we ask you to urge President al-Sisi to
commit to the following steps:
 
·       Repeal the November 2013 law (Law
107/2013) severely restricting the right to peaceful assembly or amend it to
bring it in line with international human rights law and standards and release
immediately and unconditionally those jailed solely for peacefully exercising
their right to freedom of expression and assembly;
·      
Release or retry before civilian courts whose proceedings meet
international fair trial standards those sentenced in mass trials or those
jailed solely for their alleged membership in or sympathy with the Muslim
Brotherhood;
·      
Establish a moratorium on executions with the view of abolishing the
death penalty;
·      
Refrain from forcing NGOs to comply with the 2002 Law on Associations
until an elected parliament passes a new law respectful of international human
rights standards after dialogue with relevant stakeholders;
·      
Put in place effective measures to end sexual and gender-based violence
in private and public spheres, as well as by the state, in consultation with
independent women’s rights groups; 
·      
Ensure that all places of detention, including police stations and
unofficial places of detention are under judicial oversight comply with
international standards including the UN Convention against Torture, to which
Egypt is party, and the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners 
 
Thank you for your attention to these important
concerns. 
 
Sincerely,
 
Selmin Çalışkan,
Secretary General, Amnesty International Germany 
Wenzel Michalski, Germany Director, Human Rights Watch
Mary Lawlor, Executive Director, Front Line Defenders 
Gerald Staberock, Secretary General, OMCT 
Michel Tubiana, President, Euro-Mediterranean Human
Rights Network 