Pledge your voice, an action, or funds and help us support 10 HRD continue their fight against torture
November 27, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Links / 2015 / NovemberPledge your voice, an action, or funds and help us support 10 HRD continue their fight against torture10 December, 10 Defenders" Campaign 
In
the 10-weekday count down to the United Nations’ Human Rights Day on December
10th, the World Organization Against Torture (OMCT) is inviting you
to join us in celebrating the work and life-long commitment 10 human rights
defenders from around the world.
 
This
is also the occasion to kick off a yearlong celebration for the OMCTs 30th
anniversary, and the more will bandwagon, the merrier!
 
From
30th November until December 10th, we will share with you the
stories of 10 different defenders – Yavuz in Turkey, Olga in Russia, Justin in
DRC and others who are making a difference for whole communities, and indeed
transform entire nations – through short articles hosted on our website
and social media channels. 
 
As
a leader of the global movement against torture and a network of human rights
defenders fighting against torture around the world, OMCT needs your support to
make sure human rights defenders can keep carrying out their work effectively
and safely so that torture can cease.
 
We
therefore invite you to pledge for
our "10 December, 10 Defenders" campaign the
following:
 
-     an action, your expertise on our Facebook page so that
everyone can see and get inspired, and/or
-     funds
to support the realization of the eradication of torture around the world,
and/or
-    engage in our advocacy on LinkedIn, Facebook
and Twitter, by commenting, sharing, liking and inviting your friends to think about what they
can do to help.
 
The
stories and your pledges will be posted on this page and weekly on our brand
new LinkedIn page,
as well as on our Facebook
and Twitter accounts,
starting today. 
Please
get in touch via email to receive some sample tweets to
help you to talk about this campaign amongst your contacts, influencers and
followers. 
 
To
guide your support through comments, we call upon you to:
• Showcase and underline the commitment of our colleagues and
friends – human rights defenders who may at any time lose their life
to this cause, and those who have been victims of torture themselves, or of repression,
extremism, intolerance, attacks, threats or intimidation;
 
• Share your stories and
experiences on social media using the hashtag #10HRD10DEC and help
us make visible the often-silent struggles human rights defenders have to
endure every day as a result of their involvement. Your story can help raise awareness
about the violence that torture activists face on a daily basis and be a source
of strength for thousands of human rights defenders
 
OMCT
remains committed to pushing the universal prohibition of torture and
implementation of human rights through information sharing, advocacy and
collaboration, plus concrete life-saving initiatives. 
 
We
hope that you will join us in this third decade in our mission, by contributing
to making a difference for those children, women and men subjected to torture
around the world.
 To know more about the "10 Defenders, 10 December" campaign, click here.OMCT wishes to thank the OAK Foundation and the Republic and Canton of Geneva for
 their support. Its content is the sole responsibility of OMCT and 
should in no way be interpreted as reflecting the view(s) of the
supporting institutions. 