Viet Nam:  UN caves in to Vietnamese pressure, rejects the consultative status of the NGO KKF
July 24, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2012 / JulyViet Nam: UN caves in to Vietnamese pressure, rejects the consultative status of the NGO KKF
 
 
 
  
JOINT 
PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
 
Viet 
Nam: 
UN caves in to Vietnamese pressure, rejects human rights group’s consultative 
status 
 
 
Bangkok-Paris-Geneva, 
July 
24, 2012. 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH and OMCT 
joint programme) and the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights (VCHR) condemn the 
resolution passed by the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) 
overturning a previous decision to grant consultative status to the 
non-governmental human rights organisation Khmers Kampuchea-Krom Federation 
(KKF).
 
In 
May 2012, ECOSOC’s Committee on Non-governmental Organisations, in a consensus 
decision, approved KKF’s application for special consultative status with the 
Council. Vietnam 
protested strongly against the decision. On July 23, member States of ECOSOC, in 
a vote of 27 in favour to 14 against, with 10 abstentions, adopted a resolution 
to rescind that decision. The resolution was tabled by 
Vietnam 
along with El 
Salvador 
and fellow ASEAN 
member States
Burma, 
Indonesia, 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, 
the Philippines, 
Singapore 
and Thailand.
 
In 
a joint letter[1] 
issued on July 
18, 2012, 
the Observatory, along with 12 international and regional human rights groups 
across the globe, urged ECOSOC member states to oppose the draft resolution and 
to “support the ability of civil society organisations to freely participate in 
the work of the United Nations”. Special consultative status is granted to 
non-governmental organisations that “have a special competence in, and are 
concerned specifically with, only a few of the fields of activity covered by the 
Council and its subsidiary bodies, and that are known within the fields for 
which they have or seek consultative status”. 
 
Before 
the vote, representatives of Cuba, 
Indonesia, 
Philippines, 
Lao PDR, Nicaragua, 
Russia, 
and Venezuela 
took to the floor in support of the resolution. On the other hand,, the 
United 
States 
and Ireland, 
speaking on behalf of the European Union, expressed  their opposition to the resolution. “It was 
not appropriate to oppose accreditation for an organization simply because it 
expressed views different from those of Governments represented on the Council”, 
said the representative of Ireland.
 
“It 
is shameful that many UN member states caved in to 
Vietnam’s 
pressure and became an accomplice in stifling the rightful voices of human 
rights defenders. It sends a chilling signal to the people in 
Vietnam 
that the international community is not on their side in their quest for greater 
freedom”, 
said Vo Van Ai, president of VCHR.
 
KKF 
is headquartered in the United 
States 
and conducts human rights advocacy globally. KKF aims, “through the use of 
peaceful measures and international laws, to seek freedom, justice, and the 
right to self-determination for the Indigenous Khmer-Krom Peoples”. It has an 
established track record in engaging with UN human rights mechanisms and 
providing valuable and quality information on abuses against the Khmer Krom 
minority group in Vietnam. 
Vietnam’s ambassador to the UN, Le Hoai Trung, labeled KKF’s activities as 
“politically motivated” and characterised KKF’s aim to seek freedom and justice 
for the Khmer people as a “grave offence” to the “sacred, national value” of 
national unity.
 
In 
the 2010 joint report Vietnam: From “Vision” to Facts: Human Rights in 
Vietnam under its Chairmanship of ASEAN, the International Federation for 
Human Rights (FIDH) and the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights (VCHR) documented 
human rights violations against the Khmer Krom, including religious persecution, 
land confiscation, and excessive use of force. In the last five years, the 
Observatory and VCHR documented instances of arbitrary arrests and forced 
defrocking of Khmer Krom Buddhist monks in retaliation of their peaceful 
protests against religious persecution[2]. 

 
In 
another example of its diplomatic offensive against criticisms abroad, in 
September 2010, Vietnam 
lobbied the government of Thailand 
to obstruct a press conference in Bangkok 
where FIDH and VCHR were to launch their joint report on 
Vietnam.[3]
Vietnam’s 
hostilities against independent human rights defenders and groups at home and 
abroad are nothing new and reflect its consistently dismal human rights records, 
said FIDH and VCHR. 
 
Vietnam 
intends to run for a seat on the UN Human Rights Council, which requires member 
States to uphold the highest human rights standards. “Before it is even 
elected to the Human Rights Council, 
Vietnam 
is already busy obstructing human rights groups from cooperating with the UN to 
promote human rights. This kind of intimidation must not be tolerated anywhere 
in the UN system”, 
said Souhayr Belhassen, President of FIDH.
 
"The 
political intervention led by a coalition of Asean States overturning the 
decision of the competent committee excluding civil society access is an 
expression of fear to hear unpleasant truths and opinions. The basis of any 
commitment to human rights defenders is the recognition of their very existence 
and their right to speak and to be heard, and the states have failed in this 
test - Vietnam in the first place", said Gerald Staberock, Secretary-General 
of OMCT. 
 
Press 
contact:
VCHR: Vo 
Tran Nhat: +33 1 45 98 30 85
FIDH: 
Karine Appy +33 1 43 55 14 12 / + 33 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT:            Isabelle Scherer: +41 22 809 49 
39
 



[1]              http://www.fidh.org/Viet-Nam-In-open-letter-NGOs-call

[2]              FIDH and VCHR, 
Vietnam: From “Vision” to Facts: Human Rights in 
Vietnam under its Chairmanship of 
ASEAN, September 2010, pg. 
25. Available at: http://www.fidh.org/VIETNAM-From-Vision-to-Facts-HUMAN

[3]              See, i.e., Observatory Press 
Release of September 13, 2010. 