Egypt:  Blogger Alaa Abdel Fattah is detained arbitrarily according to UN Working Group
July 22, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / JulyEgypt: Blogger Alaa Abdel Fattah is detained arbitrarily according to UN Working Group

Paris-Geneva, July 22, 2016 - The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (a partnership of FIDH and OMCT) welcomes the recent opinion
of the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) recognising
the arbitrary nature of Alaa Abdel Fattah's arrest and detention and calling
for his immediate release.  
 
On June 29, 2016, the WGAD published
its opinion[1] regarding the detention of
Alaa Abdel Fattah. The Working Group stated that “the peaceful,
non-violent expression
or manifestation of one’s opinion, or dissemination or reception of information,
even via the Internet, if it does not constitute incitement to national, racial or
religious hatred or violence, remains within the boundaries of the freedom of
expression. Hence, deprivation of liberty applied on the sole ground of having committed
such actions is arbitrary”.
 
Alaa Abdel Fattah is an Egyptian
blogger and civil and political rights activist, member of the “No to Military Trials for Civilians”[2] movement. Since November 28, 2013, he has
spent 2,5 years in
detention for the peaceful exercise of his right to freedoms of expression and
demonstration. Two different sets of charges were brought against him in
relation to protests held in November 2013 and May 2012. On January 5, 2014,
the North Giza Criminal Court sentenced him to a suspended sentence of one year
in prison on charges of “arson”, “theft”, “damage to property”, “violence” and
“danger to public safety” in relation to the first case. On February 23, 2015,
the Cairo Criminal Court sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment for
“organising a protest without a permit”, “organising an illegal assembly that
endangers public security”, “blocking roads”, “assembling illegally” and
“attacking and injuring a public servant”. While he is serving his prison
sentence, he is now serving charges for “insulting the judiciary. 
 
The WGAD stated in its opinion that
“the aim of such a demonstration was to express different legitimate views
and opinions regarding amendments to legislation of Egypt”. 
 
The case of Alaa Abdel Fattah is
illustrative of the extensive scope of the repression campaign targeting human
rights defenders for their legitimate activities under the current regime. The
Working Group highlighted that the decision, linked with previous ones, “indicates
systemic and widespread arbitrary detentions of individuals in the context of
peaceful protests”. Ms. Sanaa Seif[3],
Mr. Abdel Fattah's sister, is currently serving a six-month term for “insulting
judiciary” as she refused to answer to the judge’s questions and replied that
she did not want to be part of this masquerade. Other human rights defenders,
including Mr. Malek Adly, Mr. Haytham Mohamadeen, Ms. Mahienour
El-Massry, Mr. Ahmed Douma, Ms. Aya Hijazi, Mr. Ahmed
Abdel Rahman, Mr. Ahmed Doma, Mr. Ahmed Maher, Mr. Ahmed
Abdallah, Ms. Gamila Ahmed Saraeldin, Ms. Abir Said Mohamed
Mostafa, are currently in detention[4].
 

The Observatory calls upon the
Egyptian authorities to implement the UN decision and to release immediately
and unconditionally and drop all charges against Alaa Abdel Fattah as well as
all human rights defenders detained in the country for their human rights
activities. 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
For more information, please
contact:
• FIDH:
Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet: + 33 143552518
• OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 228094939



[1] See UN WGAD Opinion No. 6/2016 (Egypt), UN Document A/HRC/WGAD/2016,
June 6, 2016: http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Detention/Opinions/Session75/Opinion_2016_6_Egypt.pdf


[2] This movement was set up in 2011 and denounced human rights abuses
committed in particular by security forces and the army during the rule of the
Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) after the fall of former President
Mubarak.


[3] Previously, in 2014, she was condemned for participating in a march
against Law 107 but she was released following a presidential pardon a year
after. See Observatory Urgent Appeal EGY 002/0614/OBS 058.2, issued on
July 1, 2014 


[4] For more information on these cases
and other emblematic cases of activists arbitrarily detained in Egypt, please
see the campaign launched by ten Egyptian human rights organsiations on http://alznazeen.net/ 