Turkey:  Open Letter to the President and Prime Minister of Turkey
November 20, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2012 / NovemberTurkey: Open Letter to the President and Prime Minister of Turkey

THE OBSERVATORY FOR THE
PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS (FIDH - OMCT)
THE HUMAN RIGHTS
ASSOCIATION (İnsan Haklari Derneği – İHD)
THE HUMAN RIGHTS
FOUNDATION OF TURKEY (Türkiye İnsan Hakları Vakfı (TİHV) 
 
 
TO:                                                   Mr. Abdullah Gül
President of the Turkish
Republic
 
Mr. Recep Tayyip
Prime Minister
 
CC:                                              
Mr. Sadullah Ergin
Minister of Justice
 
Mr. Beşir Atalay
Deputy Prime Minister
Responsible for Human Rights and the fight against terrorism
 
Mr. Erdogan Iscan
Director General,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
 

Open Letter to the
President and Prime Minister of Turkey
 
 
November 20, 2012
 
Your Excellency,
 
On October 17 and 18, 2012, the United Nations
Human Rights Committee (HRC) considered the initial report of Turkey. On this
occasion, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation against Torture (OMCT), submitted its mission report “Turkey:
Human Rights defenders: guilty until proven innocent”, which provides
information on the global situation of human rights defenders in Turkey.
 
After two days of constructive dialogue with the
Turkish Delegation, the HRC adopted concluding observations whereby it
expressed serious concerns over a number of issues, a number of which are
related to and/or affect the situation of human rights defenders in the
country.
 
In its concluding observations, the Committee
largely referred to the abuse of the legal framework on the fight against
terrorism to criminalise legitimate and peaceful activities protected under
international human rights standards, including human rights activities.
 
More precisely, the HRC denounced the
non-conformity of several provisions of the 1991 Anti-Terrorism Law with
the rights guaranteed by the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR), expressing its particular concern at “the high number of
cases in which human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists [...] are charged
under the Anti-Terrorism Law for the free expression of their opinions and
ideas, in particular in the context of non-violent discussions of
the Kurdish issues”. Thus, measures should be taken to “ensure that its
counter-terrorism legislation and practices are in full conformity with the
Covenant”, particularly by remedying “the vagueness of the definition of
a terrorist act in the [legislation] to ensure that its application is limited
to offences that are indisputably terrorist offences”.[1]
The Observatory, the Human Rights Association and the Human Rights Foundation
of Turkey recall that this echoes the findings and recommendations put forward
by both the UN Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms while Countering Terrorism and the Working
Group on Arbitrary Detentions following their respective visits in Turkey in
2006[2],
and urge you to put the Anti-Terrorism Law in line with the international
obligations of Turkey.
 
The HRC also pointed out the “widespread
use of lengthy pre-trial detention of up to ten years for terrorism-related
offences and five years for other offences”, further highlighting that
“detainees do not have access to an effective mechanism to challenge the
lawfulness of their pre-trial detention, and do not always in practice have
prompt access to a lawyer”. The HRC thus recommended that the “legal
period of pre-trial detention [be reduced] in compliance with article 9 of the
Covenant” and be “only used as an exceptional measure”. In addition,
detainees should have access to a lawyer, be able to challenge the conditions
of their pre-trial detention, and the Turkish State should “enhance the use
of alternative measures to pre-trial detention, such as electronic monitoring
and conditional release”[3].
The Observatory, the Human Rights Association and the Human Rights Foundation
of Turkey share these concerns and calls on Turkey to reform the law to limit
the resort to pre trial detention, in particular ensure that human rights
defenders are not subjected to pre-trial detention for their legitimate human
rights activities, and more generally to take all necessary measures to
end all forms of harassment – including at the judicial level – against human
rights defenders.
 
Among other human
rights restrictions that have been occasioned in the framework of the fight
against terrorism, the HRC also highlighted “the vagueness and lack of
clarity of the definition of “illegal organisations” resulting in “restricting
the right to freedom of association”. In order to ensure that this basic right, guaranteed under article 22
of the Covenant, is fully respected, the Committee stated that the notion of
“illegal organisations” should be strictly limited[4].
 
More generally, the
HRC finally expressed its concern about the ongoing trend that consists in
making an abusive and arbitrary use of multiple provisions of the Criminal
Code, including defamation, to subject “human rights defenders and media
professionals to convictions for the exercise of their profession”,
putting at risk freedom of expression. Among other recommendations, the HRC
stressed that measures should be taken to decriminalise defamation, “provide redress to
journalists and human rights activists who are subjected to criminal
prosecution and imprisonment”[5].
 
The Observatory, the Human Rights Association
and the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey share the concerns expressed by the
HRC and call on the Turkish authorities to take measures aimed at implementing
the recommendations without undue delay.
 
Actions should be taken to ensure that the respect of human
rights defenders' rights
effectively guides the operation of law-enforcement and judicial bodies,
that the safety of human rights defenders is guaranteed, that the rights to
freedom of expression and of association are fully respected, and that human
rights defenders are not subjected to any form of harassment.
 
Your Excellency, 
 
The UN Human Rights Committee review is an
occasion for Turkey to prove that it stands by its international commitment to
comply with its international human rights obligations. The Observatory, the
Human Rights Association and the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey call on the
Turkish authorities to seize this opportunity to take action by releasing all
those who are arbitrarily detained for the peaceful use of their fundamental
freedoms of expression, association and assembly, by trying without delay or
release all human rights defenders, journalists and lawyers in pre-trial
detention under the Anti-Terrorism Law, by reforming its legislation and by
taking any other action necessary to bring its law and practice in line with
international standards.
 
We express our sincere hope that you will take
these considerations and requests into account.
 
Yours sincerely,
 
Metin Bakkalcı, TİHV Secretary General
Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General
Öztürk Türkdoğan, İHD President



[1] See
Concluding Observations on the initial report of Turkey adopted by the
Committee at its 106th session, October-November 2012, UN Document
CCPR/C/TUR/CO/1, para. 16.


[2] See
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms while Countering Terrorism, Addendum, Mission
to Turkey, A/HRC/4/26/Add.2, available at http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G06/149/42/PDF/G0614942.pdf and Report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention,
Addendum, Mission to Turkey, A/HRC/4/40/Add.5 available at http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G07/106/46/PDF/G0710646.pdf


[3] See
Concluding Observations on the initial report of Turkey adopted by the
Committee at its 106th session, October-November 2012, UN Document
CCPR/C/TUR/CO/1, para. 17.


[4] Ibid
para. 19.


[5] Ibid
para. 24. 