Russian Federation:  Threats against Caucasian Knot Editor by Chechnya's Parliament Speaker Must Be Investigated
January 13, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2017 / JanuaryRussian Federation: Threats against Caucasian Knot Editor by Chechnya's Parliament Speaker Must Be Investigated





Paris-Geneva-Brussels, January 13, 2017. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an
FIDH-OMCT partnership, together with the Anti-Discrimination Centre (ADC)
“Memorial”, strongly denounce the threats made by the Speaker of the Chechen
Parliament Magomed Daudov via Instagram against the team of the independent
news portal Caucasian Knot, including Grigorii Shvedov, human rights journalist and Editor-in-chief.

 
On January 5, 2017, the Speaker of the Chechen Parliament Magomed Daudov
published a post on his Instagram account entitled “How to untie the Caucasian
Knot?”. The post refers to Grigorii
Shvedov as a dog nicknamed “Shved” whose “wisdom teeth must be pulled
out” and “long tongue shortened” for “prattling” in the Caucasian Knot.
On January 9, 2017, Grigorii Shvedov filed a complaint to the Investigative
Committee of the Russian Federation.
 
The Caucasian Knot is an
independent Russian media portal founded in 2001 known for reporting on human
rights abuses in the Caucasus region, including Chechnya.
 
The post implicitly calls for acts of violence against
the Caucasian Knot team, including in
particular Mr. Shvedov. The fact that it has already gathered close to 2,000 “likes”
and numerous hateful comments show that the message “has been accepted”,
creating a climate for a possible crime.
 
Our organisations recall that human rights defenders, including in
particular human rights journalists, have been targets of violence and
criminalisation in Chechnya. Last year, Chechnya-based Caucasian Knot
journalist Zhalaudi
Geriev was sentenced to three years in prison
on trumped up charges[1]. On December 28, 2016, the Supreme Court of Chechnya rejected his
appeal. Moreover, on January 10, 2017, five unidentified masked men attacked
and beat Caucasian Knot journalist Vladislav Ryazantsev in Rostov-na-Donu.
 
“It is inadmissible and irresponsible for a representative of the
Chechen authorities to publicly threaten a human rights defender and
editor-in-chief of a news portal. State authorities should ensure and promote a
conducive environment for human rights defenders”, stated Gerald
Staberock, Secretary General of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
 
“The authorities of the Russian Federation should investigate the
threats which, in the context of impunity prevailing in the Chechen Republic,
constitutes a real danger for Mr. Shvedov and the news portal team”,
added Stefania Kulaeva, Director of ADC Memorial, FIDH member organisation.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented
by international civil society.
 
For more information, please contact: 
• FIDH: Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18

• OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui / Delphine
Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 
 
Background information
 
In a context where human rights groups have been
facing increasing difficulties in reporting on the human rights situation in
Chechnya, the Caucasian Knot has
become one of the last sources providing daily reports on the human rights
situation. For this reason, the Chechnya's leadership has been particularly
targeting the new portal with a smear and stigmatisation campaign. 
 
Many journalists have been murdered for investigating
war crimes and human rights violations in Chechnya. The killings of Anna
Politkovsklaya, Natalia
Estemirova and Stanislav Markelov are the most illustrious cases.
All these cases remain in impunity. 
 
On March 9, 2016, several journalists and human rights workers of the
Joint Mobile Group, who were on a press tour in North Caucasus, were brutally attacked at the border between Ingushetia and Chechnya[2].
 
The Joint Mobile Group led by the Committee for the Prevention of Torture,
an OMCT member organisation, was attacked several times over the last years,
including their office and their head Igor Kalyapin in person[3]. The attacks have never been duly investigated and
those responsible have never been brought to justice. Attacks even intensified
following a post on Instagram by the Head
of the Chechen Republic, Mr. Ramzan Kadyrov on
December 10, 2014, accusing Mr. Kalyapin of supporting terrorist attacks
in Chechnya. 
 
Magomed Daudov is known for his recurrent acts of violence.
On October 6, 2016, he beat up the President of the Supreme Court of the
Chechen Republic and repeated open threats to the critics in his social network
accounts. He is known for his unconditional support to Chechnya's President
Ramzan Kadyrov.




[1] See
Observatory Joint Press Release, September 9, 2016.


[2]
See Observatory Press Release, March 14, 2016.


[3]
See Observatory Urgent Appeal RUS 004 / 1214 / OBS 093.1, issued on March
23, 2016. 