Moldova, Republic of:  Lack of adequate medical care for Mr. Be?leaga Vitalii and Mr. Bevziuc Serghei, two prisoners held in Prison n°3, in Tiraspol
May 16, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Moldova, Republic of / 2014 / MayMoldova, Republic of: Lack of adequate medical care for Mr. Beşleaga Vitalii and Mr. Bevziuc Serghei, two prisoners held in Prison n°3, in Tiraspol

MDA 160514
 Critical health conditions/ Denial of adequate
medical care
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation inthe Republic of Moldova.
Brief Description of the Situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source about
the critical health conditions of and the lack of adequate medical care for Mr. Beşleaga Vitalii and Mr. Bevziuc Serghei, two prisoners held in
Prison n°3, in Tiraspol (УИН-3), in the Moldovan Republic of Transdniestria
(MRT)[1]. 
According
to the information received, Mr. Bevziuc Serghei suffers of chronic paraproctitis (an inflammation around the rectum) with
abscesses and Mr. Beşleaga Vitalii suffers of type 2 diabetes mellitus[2],
diabetic nephropathy, diabetic neuropathy[3],
diabetic angiopathy, partial complicated cataract, and hypertension. Mr. Beşleaga Vitalii’s health problems were
diagnosed years ago and require regular medical attention. On 12 December 2013,
a Medical Consultative Comission of
Health Center Varnita, Anenii Noi district, examined both of them and confirmed that they need permanent medical
assistance. However, no medical treatment or care was provided. 
According
to their relatives, their
illnesses have reportedly deteriorated due the lack of basic medical care and
treatment. The medical center located in Tiraspol prison, where both are
currently being held, fails to meet medical standards of care. There is a lack
of medicines, medical equipment and qualified personnel. Both families have
reportedly sent medicines to the prison but it is not clear if Mr. Beşleaga
Vitalii and Bevziuc Serghei have received them. 
According
to the same information received, Mr. Beşleaga Vitalli has been feeling very
ill, has had difficulties to move and he has experienced dizziness and
hypertension due to his diabetes. Nevertheless, he has not received any
appropriate diabetes care. His blood sugar levels have reportedly never been
measured although it is an important part of diabetes care. Likewise, due to
the lack of adequate medical assistance, Mr. Bevziuc Serghei has been suffering
from perirectal abscesses, with pus oozing down the legs. On 24 December 2013 a
private doctor was allowed to visit and examine Mr. Bevziuc Serghei. He
reportedly concluded that Mr. Bevziuc  Serghei
needed an urgent medical intervention. 
On
28 March 2014, following various requests before the competent authorities to
get appropriate medical care, Mr. Beşleaga Vitalii and Bevziuc Serghei appealed
to the European Court of Human Rights and requested an urgent examination of
their request. Mr. Beşleaga Vitalii and Mr. Bevziuc Serghei invoked violations
of articles 3 (Prohibition of torture), 13 (Right to an effective remedy), and 5
(Right to liberty and security) of the European Convention on Human Rights.
The
OMCT is gravely concerned about the critical health conditions of Mr. Beşleaga
Vitalii and Mr. Bevziuc Serghei, and recalls to the de facto Transnistrian administration its responsibility to
effectively ensure the physical and psychological integrity of all persons
deprived of liberty in accordance with regional and international human rights
law, and in particular the European Convention on Human Rights, the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment,
and the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. OMCT urges
the de facto Transnistrian administration
to immediately transfer Mr. Beşleaga Vitalii and Bevziuc Serghei to specialized
institutions or civil hospitals where they can receive adequate medical care
and treatment for their illnesses. 
OMCT
also recalls the findings and recommendations entailed in the report by Senior
Expert on Human Rights in Transnistria, Mr. Thomas Hammarberg, entitled “Report
on Human Rights in the Transnistrian Region of the Republic of Moldova”
published on 14 February 2013.
Actions
requested
Please
write to the de facto administration of
the Region of Transnistria and the authorities of the Republic of Moldova
urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee the physical
and psychological integrity of Mr. Beşleaga Vitalii and Mr. Bevziuc Serghei; 
ii.             
Order their immediate
transfer to specialized institutions or civil hospitals where they can access
adequate medical examination and adequate medical treatment for their
illnesses; 
iii.           
Guarantee that they have
access to their families and lawyers; 
iv.           
Ensure that adequate
conditions of detention and medical services are guaranteed to all persons that
have been deprived of liberty, according notably to the UN Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
v.             
Guarantee the respect of
human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance
with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
The de facto administration of the Region of
Transnistria:




·       Yevgeny
Shevchuk, President of Transnistria, MD-3300, ул. 25 Октября, 42, for on-line petitions: http://president.gospmr.ru/ru/letter Tiraspol,
Republic of Moldova;



·     Baranova
Nadejda, Presidential Administration, MD-3300, ул. 25 Октября, 42, for on-line petitions: http://president.gospmr.ru/ru/letter Tiraspol,
Republic of Moldova;
·     Zemțov
Nicolai, Chairman of State Security, MD-3300, 42 Manoilova str., Tiraspol,
Republic of Moldova; press@kgb-pmr.com; tel/fax: (373 533)
80490



·     Kisnicean
Alexandr, Ministery of Justice, MD-3300, 26 Lenina str., Tiraspol, Republic
of Moldova; tel:(373 533) 8-18-18; http://justice.idknet.com/PriemObr.nsf/main!OpenForm



·     Deli Alexandr,
Prosecutor of Transnistria, MD-3300, Nr.3 8 Mart str., Tiraspol, Republic of
Moldova; http://www.prokuror-pmr.org/index.php/internet-priemnaya



·     Rimari
Vladimir, Chairman of the Supreme Court, MD-3300, 29. Iunosti str.,
Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova;  (373-533) 2-50-06, for on-line petitions:http://vspmr.org/mailform.php;




·    Burla Mihail, Presiding Officers of the
Parliament, MD-3300, 25 Oktyabrya str.Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova, tel/fax (+373) 533 9 44 49;  burla57@list.ru; 


Republic of Moldova:

Iurie Leancă, Prime Minister of Republic of
Moldova, Chisinau, Piaţa
Marii Adunări Naţionale 1, for on-line petitions: http://www.gov.md/feedbacktxt.php?l=en&idc=439 
Corneliu Gurin, General Prosecutor, Republic of
Moldova, Chisinau, str. Banulescu Bodoni 26; 

tel/fax.: (+37322) 212
032; email: procuror@procuratura.md

Mihai Poalelungi, President of the Supreme Court of Justice of
Moldova, Republic of Moldova, Chisinau, str.  Petru Rareş 18, e-mail: info@csj.md, Fax: 
(+373 22)  22 52 27;

·      
Victor Moraru,
Ambassador of the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Moldova, 28 Chemin du
Petit Saconnex, 1209 Geneva, Fax +4122 733-91-04, E-mail: mission.moldova@ties.itu.int   
Please also write to the embassies of the Republic
of Moldova in your respective country.
*******
Geneva, 16 May 2014 
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply



[1]         The MRT is a
separatist entity that split from the Republic of Moldova in 1990 but that has
not been recognized by the international community. 


[2]                 Type 2 diabetes mellitus causes
high blood glucose (sugar) levels, which can lead to a number of complications
if untreated.


[3]                 Diabetic neuropathy is a type
of nerve damage that can occur with diabetes. 