Azerbaijan:  Time for Justice for Ilgar Mammadov - The Council of Europe’s Legitimacy at Stake over Azerbaijan’s Persistent Non-compliance with European Court Judgment
May 22, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2017 / MayAzerbaijan: Time for Justice for Ilgar Mammadov - The Council of Europe’s Legitimacy at Stake over Azerbaijan’s Persistent Non-compliance with European Court Judgment

22 May 2017
 
Today three years have passed
since the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) delivered its judgment on the
case of political prisoner Ilgar Mammadov, concluding that the Azerbaijani
authorities had detained him to punish him for his criticism of the government.
In spite of this ruling, and repeated calls for his release by Council of
Europe bodies in follow-up to the ruling, the Azerbaijani authorities have
persistently refused to execute the decision of the Court and free Ilgar
Mammadov. In view of this, we, members of the Civic Solidarity Platform and the
Sports for Rights Coalition call on the Committee of Ministers of the Council
of Europe to refer the case back to the ECtHR on the grounds of non-execution
of the judgment. This is crucial to ensure justice for this wrongly imprisoned
government critic, who has already spent more than four years behind bars, as
well as to safeguard the legitimacy of the Council of Europe as the guardian of
human rights and the rule of law in the region.                       Ilgar Mammadov, chair of the
political opposition REAL party, was a well-known opponent of the regime when
he was arbitrarily detained in February 2013. He attempted to stand in the 2013
presidential elections, gathering the required 40 000 signatures in support of
his candidacy, which, the Central Election Commission ruled as invalid.[1] He
was also outspoken in his criticism of the policies of the authorities on his
blog and in the media. Ilgar Mammadov was detained after monitoring and
reporting on street protests in the town of Ismayilli in January 2013, which
resulted in clashes with the police. He did not participate in these protests,
but travelled to the region after they took place to observe developments and
revealed the role of individuals with ties to the authorities in initiating the
clashes. In spite of the lack of evidence llgar Mammadov was accused of
instigating the Ismayilli clashes and on 17 March 2014, he was sentenced to
seven years in prison on trumped-up charges of “organizing mass riots” and
using “violence against police officers”. His sentence was upheld on appeal.
 
In a judgment issued on 22 May
2014, the ECtHR found that Ilgar Mammadov’s arrest and detention violated
numerous provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights, including
articles 5.1, 5.4 and 6.2 on the right to liberty and security, the right to
judicial review of one’s detention and the principle of presumption of
innocence, as well as article 18 that limits the applicability of restrictions
on rights. The Court concluded that Ilgar Mammadov had been detained without
any evidence to reasonably suspect him of having committed a crime and that the
actual purpose of his detention was to silence and punish him for criticizing
the government and publishing information it was trying to hide.[2]
 
In its follow-up to the ECtHR’s
ruling, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe — the body
responsible for supervising the execution of ECtHR judgements — has repeatedly
called on the Azerbaijani authorities to release Ilgar Mammadov. The Committee
has examined this case as a matter of priority in its review of the execution
of ECtHR judgments by Council of Europe member states and adopted a number of
decisions and interim resolutions on it.[3]
 
Other Council of Europe bodies,
including the organization’s Secretary General, its Human Rights Commissioner
and the President of its Parliamentary Assembly have also repeatedly called for
Ilgar Mammadov to be released. However, the Azerbaijani authorities have
flagrantly ignored these calls and refused to implement the ECtHR’s judgment
and release Mammadov.
 
In view of the continued failure
of the Azerbaijani authorities to implement the ECtHR’s decision on Ilgar
Mammadov’s case, the Council of Europe’s Secretary General Thorbjørn Jagland
launched an official inquiry into Azerbaijan’s implementation of the European
Convention on Human Rights in December 2015.[4]
Under article 52 of the Convention, the Secretary General may initiate an
inquiry into how the domestic law of member states ensures the effective
implementation of the Convention. This was the first time that Secretary
General Jagland had taken such a measure and his initiative was welcome and
important.
 
However, in November 2016,
Azerbaijan’s Supreme Court nevertheless rejected an appeal submitted by Ilgar
Mammadov on the basis of the ECtHR ruling and upheld his seven-year prison
sentence. Thus, Ilgar Mammadov remains behind bars for no other reason than
speaking out critically about those in power. This continued defiance by the
Azerbaijani authorities leads us to conclude that further action is urgently
required.
 
Therefore, we call on the
Committee of Ministers to refer the case back to the ECtHR under article 46.1
of the European Convention on Human Rights, which obliges the parties to the
Convention to abide by the final judgment of the Court in any case to which
they are parties. The Convention authorizes the Committee to take action to
this end. Article 46.4 states: “If the Committee of Ministers considers that a
High Contracting Party refuses to abide by a final judgment in a case to which
it is a party, it may, after serving formal notice on that Party and by
decision adopted by a majority vote of two-thirds of the representatives
entitled to sit on the committee, refer to the Court the question whether that
Party has failed to fulfil its obligation under paragraph 1.”
Ilgar Mammadov v. Azerbaijan has
become a test case of the legitimacy of the Council of Europe. When commenting
on the Supreme Court’s failure to uphold Azerbaijan’s obligation to execute the
ECtHR judgment last year, Secretary General Jagland stated: “Azerbaijan’s
flagrant disrespect of the European Convention on Human Rights undermines the
entire scope of our cooperation” [and] “affects the 46 Member States of the
Council of Europe who have a collective responsibility for the implementation of
the Convention”.[5]
 
By resorting to the ultimate
mechanism for addressing non-compliance of judgments set out by the European
Convention on Human Rights, the Committee of Ministers can take resolute action
to safeguard the Council of Europe’s integrity and ensure that the Azerbaijani
authorities finally abide by their obligations under the Convention, implement
the ECtHR ruling and free Ilgar Mammadov.
 
 
Signed by the following members of the
Civic Solidarity Platform and the Sport for Rights Coalition:
 
1. Association of Ukrainian Human
Rights Monitors on Law Enforcement (UMDPL, Ukraine) 
2. Barys Zvozskau Belarusian
Human Rights House 
3. Bir Duino-Kyrgyzstan 
4. Bulgarian Helsinki Committee 
5. Center for Civil Liberties
(Ukraine) 
6. Center for Participation and
Development (Georgia) 
7. Center for Regional Strategic
Studies (Azerbaijan) 
8. Center for the Development of
Democracy and Human Rights (Russia) 
9. Civil Rights Defenders
(Sweden) 
10. Committee Against Torture
(Russia) 
11. Crude Accountability (USA) 
12. Fair Trials (UK) 
13. International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH, France) 
14. Freedom Files (Poland) 
15. Freedom House (USA) 
16. Freedom Now (USA) 
17. Helsinki Foundation for Human
Rights (Poland) 
18. Human Rights Center of
Azerbaijan 
19. Human Rights Club
(Azerbaijan) 
20. Human Rights Monitoring
Institute (Lithuania) 
21. Humanrights.ch (Switzerland) 
22. IDP Women Association
“Consent” (Georgia) 
23. Index on Censorship (UK) 
24. Institute for Reporters
Freedom and Safety (Azerbaijan) 
25. Institute Respublica
(Ukraine) 
26. International Partnership for
Human Rights (IPHR, Belgium) 
27. Kazakhstan International
Bureau for Human Rights and the Rule of Law 
28. Kosova Rehabilitation Centre
for Torture Victims 
29. Libereco – Partnership for
Human Rights (Germany) 
30. Moscow Helsinki Group
(Russia) 
31. Netherlands Helsinki
Committee 
32. Norwegian Helsinki Committee 
33. Notabene (Tajikistan) 
34. PEN America (USA) 
35. PEN International 
36. Promo LEX Association
(Moldova) 
37. Public Alternative (Ukraine) 
38. Public Association “Dignity”
(Kazakhstan) 
39. Public Verdict Foundation
(Russia) 
40. Swedish OSCE Network: signed
in personal capacity by Olof Kleberg and Anki Wetterhall 
41. Truth Hounds (Ukraine) 
42. Ukrainian Helsinki Human
Rights Union 
43. Women of the Don (Russia) 
44. World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) (Switzerland)



[1] In
several rulings against Azerbaijan, the ECtHR has found that the practices of
the Central Election Commission with respect to the validation of signatures
violate Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 to the European Convention on Human Rights,
which protects the right to free elections. - See more at: http://iphronline.org/azerbaijan-time-justice-ilgar-mammadov.html#sthash.aJGUzqW5.dpuf


[2] The
judgment is available at: http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=001-144124


[3] The
most recent decision on this case adopted by the Committee of Ministers is
available at: https://rm.coe.int/16806c4554


[4]
See press release at: https://www.coe.int/en/web/secretary-general/news/-/asset_publisher/EYlBJNjXtA5U/content/secretary-general-launches-inquiry-into-respect-for-human-rights-in-azerbaijan/16695?inheritRedirect=false&redirect=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.coe.int%2Fen%2Fweb%2Fsecretary-general%2Fnews%3Fp_p_id%3D101_INSTANCE_EYlBJNjXtA5U%26p_p_lifecycle%3D0%26p_p_state%3Dnormal%26p_p_mode%3Dview%26p_p_col_id%3Dcolumn-4%26p_p_col_count%3D1


[5] His
statement is available at: https://www.coe.int/en/web/portal/-/azerbaijan-statement-by-secretary-general-jagland-on-the-decision-of-the-supreme-court-today-rejecting-the-appeal-by-ilgar-mammadov
- See more at:
http://iphronline.org/azerbaijan-time-justice-ilgar-mammadov.html#_edn4 