Cambodia:  Prominent human rights NGO ordered to close down
November 27, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2017 / NovemberCambodia: Prominent human rights NGO ordered to close downGeneva-Paris, November 27, 2017. The World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, express their outrage at Prime Minister Hun Sen’s order
to close down the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR). The order is the
latest in a series of moves by the Cambodian Government to silence all critical
voices in the country.
 
On November 26, 2017, Prime
Minister Hun Sen ordered the Ministry of Interior to investigate CCHR, a member of OMCT SOS-Torture
Network in Cambodia, and demanded
the organisation be closed down for allegedly “following foreigners”.
 
“We
strongly condemn this new assault on independent civil society, which constitutes
a clear reprisal for CCHR’s legitimate and essential human rights work in
Cambodia. By muzzling one of the most prominent NGOs in the country, the
Government clearly demonstrates it has gone one step further towards the end of
rule of law and democracy”, OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock
said.
 
The current
order to close the NGO down appears to be linked to the fact that CCHR was
founded in 2002 by Mr. Kem Sokha, the detained leader of the Cambodia National
Rescue Party (CNRP) - the country's largest opposition party which was dissolved by the Supreme
Court in a widely condemned decision earlier this month
over accusations it was engaging in a foreign-backed “colour revolution”. 
 
Shortly
after Prime Minister Hun Sen’s order, in a press release CCHR reiterated “its absolute
non-partisanship and independence from all political parties”, and “its firm
commitment to promote human rights in a principled manner”.
 
Since its
foundation, CCHR has been advocating impartially for greater respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms that are enshrined in Cambodia’s Constitution
and international human rights treaties that Cambodia has ratified.
 
The
Observatory notes that the attack against CCHR comes at a time of heightened government pressure on independent human
rights groups, media outlets, and the main opposition party in Cambodia, amid a
severe crisis of human rights, the
rule of law and democracy in the country.
 
The
Observatory recalls that the right to freedom of association is a universally recognised right enshrined in
numerous international instruments, especially Article 22 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which
Cambodia is a State party, as well as by Article 42 of Cambodia’s Constitution.
 
The Observatory urges the Cambodian authorities to immediately and
unconditionally drop the investigation into CCHR, and cease the harassment of
all human rights organisations and human rights defenders in Cambodia, and to
guarantee that they can carry out their activities free of any
hindrance or reprisals.
 
“The
international community must condemn Prime Minister Hun Sen’s latest attack on Cambodia’s
civil society and human rights community, which is aimed at wiping
out all government critics from the country”, FIDH President Dimitris
Christopoulos added.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by OMCT and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
Press
contacts:OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39FIDH: Samuel Hanryon:
+33 6 72 28 42 94 / Audrey Couprie: +33 6 48 05 91 57 