Azerbaijan:  Investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova free at last!
May 25, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2016 / MayAzerbaijan: Investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova free at last!
Paris-Geneva, May 25, 2016 - The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint
FIDH-OMCT partnership) welcomes today's release on probation of prominent
investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova, following a decision of the
Supreme Court of Azerbaijan to commute the remainder of her 7.5-year jail
sentence to a three-year conditional sentence.  
Commenting on the decision, FIDH Honorary President Souhayr Belhassen
declared that “while we celebrate today's long-awaited freedom for
Khadija, we highlight that she should not have spent one single of her 537 days
in jail”.
 
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock added that “the release of
Khadija Ismayilova should not overshadow her conviction, which had no legal
grounds and merely aimed at sanctioning her legitimate human
rights activities”, and called for “her full
acquittal and all charges against her to be dropped”.
 
In addition to her three and a half year of probation, Ms. Ismayilova
also now faces a two-year ban on professional activities.
 
Internationally recognised independent reporter[1] and journalist of the Azerbaijani radio Azadliq (“Radio
Freedom”), Ms. Khadija Ismayilova was arrested on
December 5, 2014 on charges of "inciting" her ex-partner "to
commit suicide". Although in April 2015 the alleged victim withdrew his
accusations, claiming his testimony was given under pressure, blackmail and
torture, the prosecution did not take it into account and maintained the
charges. In February 2015, Ms. Ismayilova was further accused of charges of
which she was eventually convicted: embezzlement, illegal entrepreneurship, tax
evasion and abuse of office. During the hearings in first instance, no evidence
of these accusations was presented. On September 1, 2015, the Baku Court of
Grave Crimes sentenced Ms. Ismayilova
to 7,5 years imprisonment. On November 25, 2015, the Baku Court of Appeal
struck out the appeal filed by Ms. Ismayilova, leaving her behind bars.
 
Ms. Khadija Ismayilova's arrest was one in a series of detentions of
human rights defenders, activists and journalists and part of an unprecedented
crackdown on civil society, which culminated in 2014 and 2015 in Azerbaijan.
Prominent human rights defenders were sentenced and/or detained on similar
trumped up charges, including Mr. Rasul
Jafarov, Mr. Intigam Aliyev, Ms.
Leyla Yunus, Mr. Arif Yunusov, and Mr. Rauf
Mirqadirov. All of them were released between December 2015 and March 2016,
together with Anar Mammadli, detained since 2013, and Hilal Mammadov,
detained since 2012. The Observatory reminds that the release of prominent
political prisoners has not changed the systematic nature of repressions
against critical voices in Azerbaijan.
 
The Observatory calls on the Azeri authorities to put
an end to all forms of harassment - including at the judicial level - against
all human rights defenders in the country and to guarantee that they are able
to carry out their legitimate human rights activities without fear of
reprisals.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders.




[1] She won several
international prizes, among which the Gerd Bucerius Free Press of Eastern
Europe Award by Zeit-Stiftung on May 24, 2012, the Courage of Journalism Award
by the Washington-based International Women’s Media Foundation on October 24,
2012, and the Global Shining Light Award on October 14, 2013. 