Sudan:  Sudan: a street child beaten to death by the police
November  9, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2001 / NovemberSudan: Sudan: a street child beaten to death by the policeCase SDN 091101.CC  CHILD CONCERN Torture/Extra-judicial killing  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.   Description of the fact  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Sudanese Victims of Torture Group (SVTG), a member of the OMCT network, of the death of Alnour Ali Abd Allah, a 15 year old child who worked as a street trader.   According to SVTG, on Wednesday 7 November 2001, the Community Police (formerly known as the Public Order Police) attacked petty traders, including Alnour, between 5 and 6 pm in Alkalakla Al-lafa Local market. The market is located at 9-mile southwest from the centre of Khartoum.   The police allegedly kicked Alnour with their boots and gun buts in the head and chest until he fell unconscious. He was taken to the hospital but died before arrival.   According to SVTG; Alkalakla Al-lafa market is a local market where hundreds of displaced women and children and other extremely limited income people come and trade to earn their living. Police frequently attacks these women and children. Their products, together with what money they may have earned, is generally confiscated by the police and the individuals are usually subsequently taken to the “Instant Courts” (formerly known as the public order courts) where they are denied legal representation, flogged and fined by the courts. Right to appeal is also denied.   According to SVTG, the police Authority have said they will investigate the incident. However past experience has shown that such investigations are rarely pursued. Over last year at least 8 students have been killed, and many more injured and some have been tortured. On no occasion was investigation completed nor any perpetrators brought to justice. Instead the lawyers and families of the victims have been subjected to systematic harassment to force them to drop the cases  OMCT would like to recall that Sudan is a party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which clearly states that:  “No child shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment” (art. 37 (a)); “States Parties recognize that every child has the inherent right to life. States Parties shall ensure to the maximum extent possible the survival and development of the child” (art. 6(1,2)). and that: “States Parties shall respect and ensure the rights set forth in the (…) Convention to each child within their jurisdiction without discrimination of any kind, irrespective of the child's (…) national, ethnic or social origin (…) or other status” (art. 2 (1)).  Action requested  Please write to the authorities of Sudan  urging them to:  i.	Carry out a full and impartial investigation into the death of Alnour Ali Abd Allah and identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  ii.	Put an end to the harassment of market traders by Community Security Police;  iii.	Ensure to the family of Alnour Ali Abd Allah the right to reparation and compensation;  iv.	Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in  accordance with international human rights standards and especially with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.   Addresses  His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People’s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Telex: 22385 PEPLC SD or 22411 KAID SD- Fax: +249 11 771 7 24  Mr Ali Osman Yasin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Telex:22459 KHRJA SD or 22461 KHRJA SD (via Ministry of Foreign Affairs) – Fax: +249 11 7740 63  Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Telex: 22459 KHRJA SD or 22461 KHRJA SD – Fax: 249 11 7740 63  Please also write to the embassies of  Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, 9 November 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 