Korea, (South) Republic of:  Arbitrary detention of Mr. Sang-gyun Han, President of the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU) and crackdown on hundreds of KCTU labour activists
December 16, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Korea, (South) Republic of / 2015 / DecemberKorea, (South) Republic of: Arbitrary detention of Mr. Sang-gyun Han, President of the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU) and crackdown on hundreds of KCTU labour activists​















URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
KOR 002 / 1215 / OBS 108
Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment /
Obstacles to freedom
of assembly
South Korea
December 16, 2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in South Korea.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing arbitrary
detention of Mr. Sang-gyun Han, President of the Korean Confederation of
Trade Unions (KCTU)[1] and the crackdown on hundreds
of KCTU labour activists. 
 
According to
the information received, on December 10, 2015, Mr. Sang-gyun Han was arrested
by the police at the Jogye Temple in Seoul, and was taken to the Namdaemun
Police Station where he remains detained for questioning. Mr. Han is expected
to be moved to a detention centre on December 17 where he will be kept in detention
during the investigation and trial.
 
Mr. Han is
accused of violating the Assembly and Demonstration Act and the General
Obstruction of Traffic (Article 185 of the Criminal Code) in relation to his
participation in protests that took place in April and May 2015 to commemorate
the first anniversary of the sinking of the Sewol Ferry and to call for an
independent and transparent investigation into the Sewol Ferry incident. After
the protests in April and May, Mr. Han was summoned by the police for
questioning, but he refused to appear for fear that he would be arbitrarily
arrested. 
 
On June 23,
2015, an arrest warrant was issued for Mr. Han, who subsequently went into
hiding in the KCTU offices for about five months. He later sought refuge at the
Jogye Buddhist Temple in Seoul city centre for almost one month, until he was
finally arrested while leaving the temple after the police had surrounded it
and attempted to forcibly enter the building.
 
The
Observatory has also received information that Mr. Han has been on hunger
strike since November 30, 2015, in protest against the illegitimate arrest
warrant issued against him and the proposed labour reforms that would further
limit workers' rights. He has reportedly continued the hunger strike while in
detention, and his health is deteriorating significantly. In addition, on
December 16, 2015, the General Secretary of the International Trade Union
Confederation for Asia and the Pacific (ITUC-AP) was denied the right to visit
Mr. Han at the police station. Police stated that the visit was refused due to
“worries about the possibility of conspiracy and destruction of evidence”.
 
Mr. Han
faces eight types of charges related to the April and May demonstrations[2],
and police are also considering charging him with “incitement of violence” in
relation to his participation in a protest denouncing proposed labour law
reforms that took place on November 14, 2015, along with other members of KCTU,
farmers and civic groups. If convicted, Mr. Han could face up to 10 years in
prison and a fine of up to 15 million won (approximately 11,600 Euros).
According to reports, the police are already investigating more than 790 KCTU
officers and members in relation to the November 14 demonstration. 24 KCTU members,
including Mr. Han, are already detained, and 73 others have been charged but
are not yet in detention. The investigations are ongoing and KCTU
representatives fear that more charges could be filed everyday. 
 
In response
to the crackdown on labour activists and attempts by the government to pass
labour reforms that would further limit workers' rights, KCTU organised strikes
across the country on December 16, 2015. Although there were no reported
clashes with the police during the strikes, the authorities declared the strike
“illegal” and announced that they would take strict measures against the
organisers and participants. The government has reacted similarly to strikes in
the past, imposing criminal and civil charges against union leaders and strike participants,
and KCTU officers fear that today's strike will result in increased reprisals.
Nevertheless, KCTU members are planning another strike during the week of
December 21-25, 2015, unless the government puts an end to the repression of
the labour movement in South Korea. 
 
The
Observatory condemns the ongoing repression, intimidation, and judicial
harassment of labour leaders in South Korea, and in particular the arrest and
arbitrary detention of Mr. Sang-gyun Han, which seem merely aimed at sanctioning
the peaceful human rights activities of labour unions and workers' rights
organisations. The Observatory calls upon the South Korean authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Han and all other detained labour
leaders and human rights defenders, and drop all charges against them.

The
Observatory is concerned by the ongoing attempts by the South Korean
authorities to curtail freedom of association, assembly, and expression, which
seem to be aimed at undermining the legitimate activities of human rights
defenders. The Observatory recalls that the South Korean authorities have the
responsibility to ensure the protection of human rights in general and of
rights related to freedoms of expression, assembly and association in
particular.
 
Actions
requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of South Korea to:
 
i.      Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Sang-gyun Han
and all KCTU members, as well as all peaceful protesters and human rights
defenders in South Korea;
 
ii.     Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Sang-gyun Han and all KCTU
members, as well as all peaceful protesters and human rights defenders in South
Korea;
 
iii.   Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Mr. Sang-gyun Han and all KCTU members, as well as all peaceful
protesters and human rights defenders in South Korea;
 
iv.    Ensure in all circumstances that all human rights defenders in South
Korea are able to carry out their legitimate activities including the
organisation of strikes and peaceful assemblies without any hindrance or fear
of reprisals;
 
v.     Conform with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular: 
 
·       its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually
or in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
levels” ;
·       its Article 5 (a) which states that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others to meet or assemble
peacefully” ; and 
·       its Article 12 which states that “everyone has the right, individually
and in association with others, to participate in peaceful activities against
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms. The State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration.”
 
vi.   Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by South Korea. 


Addresses: 
 
·      
Mrs. Park Geun-hye, President of the Republic of
Korea, 1 Cheongwadae-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-820, Republic of Korea, Fax: +82
2770 1690
·      
Mr. Hwang Kyo-ahn, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Korea, 77-6 Sejongno, Jongno-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Fax: + 82-2-720-35
71
·      
Mr. Kim Hyun-Woong, Minister of Justice, Government
Complex-Gwacheon, Jungang-dong1, Gwacheon-si, Kyunggi-do, Tel: 02-2110-3178,
Fax: 02-503-7118
·      
Mr. Yun Byung-se, Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 60, Sajik-ro 8-gil, Jongno-gu, Seoul, Republic of
Korea (110-787) Tel: +82-2-2100-2114, Fax: +82-2-2100-7999
·      
National Human Rights Commission of Korea, Gumsegi
Building, No. 16, Ulgiro 1-ga, Jung-gu, 100-842 Seoul, Republic of Korea. Tel:
+82 2 2125 97 00; Fax: +82-2-2125-9718. E-mail: nhrc@humanrights.go.kr
·      
H.E. Choi Kyoung-lim, Permanent Mission of the
Republic of Korea to the United Nations, 1 Avenue de l'Ariana, Case Postale 42,
1211 Genève 20, Switzerland, Tel:(41-22) 748-0000, Fax: 748-0003. Email:
geneva.korea@mofa.go.kr.
·      
H.E. Chong-ghee Ahn, Ambassador of the Republic of
Korea to the Kingdom of Belgium, Chaussée de la Hulpe 173-175, 1170
Brussels(Watermael-Boitsfort), Belgium, Tel : + 32 (0)2 675 5777, Fax : + 32
(0)2 675 5221/(0)2 662 2305
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of
South Korea in your respective countries.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva,
December 16, 2015
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an FIDH
and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and
aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line:
·       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80 
·       Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                
The KCTU is an organisation representing Korean workers and the trade union
movement, committed to advancing workers' empowerment through economic, social,
and political reform, and the overall democratisation of the country. 


[2]                
Charges filed against him include “special obstruction of public duty”,
“special obstruction of public duty to injure public officials”, “special
destruction of public goods”, “general obstruction of traffic”, “violation of
article 16 of Act on Assembly and Demonstration (matters observed by organizers)”,
“failure of dispersion order”, “hosting an assembly at banned place” and
“violation of article 11 of the Act on Assembly and Demonstration (Places
Prohibited for Outdoor Assembly and Demonstration)”. 