Israel:  Israel: Israeli Special Forces units have killed Khader al-Rajabi and wounded his son, Hazim
June 17, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2002 / JuneIsrael: Israel: Israeli Special Forces units have killed Khader al-Rajabi and wounded his son, HazimCase ISR 170602 Attempted killing / Killing / Impunity  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Israel and the Palestine Occupied Territories.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), a member of the OMCT network, that Israeli Special Forces units killed Khader al-Rajabi and wounded his son, Hazim, on June 13th, 2002, during a raid in the Silwan neighbourhood in East Jerusalem.  According to the information received, when Zuhair, Hazim’s brother, arrived home that morning at around 6 a.m., he found a large number of Israeli troops outside the building.  Zuhair entered the residence and locked the door, following which the troops attempted to force their way in using a sledgehammer.  When Zuhair saw this, he reportedly immediately opened the door.   According to the report, as Hazim also advanced towards the now-open door, the Israeli troops shot him twice in the chest.  Fahmi, Zuhair and Hazim’s brother, tried to move the wounded Hazim away from the troops, but he was not allowed to do so.  Hazim lost a lot of blood before the ambulance arrived an hour later, at which point he was taken to the Hadassah hospital.    According to the information received, Mr. Khader al-Rajabi, who was also in the house at the time, was beaten by the Israeli forces during the raid.  Members of the Israeli Special Forces unit reportedly pushed his back against a pole, while another two members of the unit pushed his chest until he lost consciousness.  The Israeli soldiers left the house at around 7 a.m., and members of Mr. Khader’s family immediately took him to the al-Maqassed hospital, where the doctors informed them that Mr. Khader al-Rajabi was dead.  According to the report, during the raid, the Israeli forces threw tear gas grenades within the building, which comprises three apartments and houses a total of 28 people, including 14 children.  Firing tear gas within enclosed areas or against a person can reportedly be lethal.  While it is worth noting that these events have occurred against a background of crisis in Israel and the Occupied Palestine Territories, in which human rights violations are reported as being widespread, this grave case illustrates the degree of arbitrary and disproportionate force being used by the Israeli authorities and the apparent impunity that accompanies these acts. OMCT recalls that it has already contacted Israeli authorities requesting clarification on the various alleged human rights violations that have occurred in the wider context, notably during the most recent incursion into Ramallah on June 10th, 2002, in particular, the arbitrary arrests of 50 Palestinian students and the ongoing obstruction of medical services in the Occupied Territories.  The International Secretariat of OMCT condemns the use of force that has led to the death of Mr. Khader al-Rajabi and the wounding of his son Hazim by Israeli special units. OMCT fears that Mr. Khader al-Rajabi’s family will not be granted adequate reparation for his death and the wounding of his son Hazim and that the perpetrators of this attack will continue to enjoy impunity.    Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Israel urging them to:  ·	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events  in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ·	guarantee that Mr. Khader al-Rajabi’s family receive adequate reparation for his death and Hazim’s wounding; ·	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Ariel Sharon, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan Street, Jerusalem 91007, Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2) 651 2631 / 566 48 38 ·	Meir Shitrit, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah al-Din Street, Jerusalem 91029, State of Israel. Fax: (+ 972 2) 62 8 54 38 or  + 972 2 628 8618 ·	Eli Yishai, Minister of the Interior, Ministry of the Interior, Fax: 00972 2 670 1411 ·	Shimon Peres, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Fax:(+ 972 2) 530 3704, E-mail: sar@mofa.gov.il ·	The Supreme Court of Justice, Kiryat Ben Gurion, Jerusalem, Israel. Fax: (+ 972 2) 652 71 18 ·	Chief Military Attorney, Brigadier Menahem Finkelstein, Lishkat HaPatzar, HaKirya, Tel Aviv, Fax: (+972 3) 569 20 94  Please also write to the embassies of Israel in your respective country.  Geneva, June 17th, 2002.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 