Pakistan:  Joint Letter to the National Assembly: Draft Torture, Custodial, Death and Custodial Rape Bill
June 26, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Pakistan / 2015 / JunePakistan: Joint Letter to the National Assembly: Draft Torture, Custodial, Death and Custodial Rape BillPakistan_JointLetter_2015.06.26_English4 pages / 235 KB​National
Assembly SecretariatParliament
House,Islamabad
– PakistanLahore-Geneva,
26 June 2015
 Re: Draft
Torture, Custodial, Death and Custodial Rape Bill
 
Dear Members of the National Assembly,
On the occasion of June 26, the International Day in
Support of Victims of Torture, the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan and the
World Organisation against Torture very much welcome the introduction of
anti-torture legislation necessary to implement the UN Convention against
Torture (Convention). A comprehensive law on torture is a milestone in the
fight against torture and recognizes the rights and values of the Constitution
of Pakistan. 
On the basis of the Convention and our global
experience on anti-torture legislation, we would like to take the opportunity
to comment on the Draft Torture, Custodial, Death and Custodial Rape Bill(Draft
Bill). While the Draft Bill contains many important provisions, several draft
clauses risk to frustrate the very purpose of the law. The latter include
provisions on the special protection of the army and intelligence agencies,
malafide complaints, and the supremacy of extradition treaties over non-refoulement
provisions.
Criminalization of Torture
and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment and Punishment
Article 4 of
theConvention requires state parties to “ensure that all acts of torture are
offences under its criminal law”. State parties are further obliged to inflict
appropriate penalties which take into account the grave nature of the act. We
thus welcome the criminalization and punishment of torture, custodial death and
custodial rape in the draft Clauses 3 to 7.
At the same time, we regret that other forms of cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment (CIDT) are not regulated in the draft law. Articles
16 and 12 of the Convention,require member states to promptly and impartially
investigate complaints of torture as well as CIDT. Torture and CIDT are
interdependent, indivisible and interrelated and the threshold between them is
often not clear.[1]
In addition, torture and CIDT are both absolutely prohibited.[2] Our experience further
shows that the conditions under which torture occur also facilitate CIDT. The
Committee against Torture (Committee) has thus repeatedly raised concerns over
the lack of criminal responsibility for CIDT.[3]We therefore propose to extend
the application of all the clauses to CIDT.
Prompt and Impartial
investigations 
In Article 12, the Convention requestsprompt and impartial investigation.
The Committee has further specified that such investigations should not be undertaken by or
under the authority of the police but by an independent body.[4]
We thus very much welcome that the draft bill authorized the National
Commission for Human Rights to investigate complaints. However, the National
Commission for Human Rights is not yet functional. Although established by a
Bill in 2012, no commissioner has been selected. This means that in the
meantime the jurisdiction to investigate rests with the Federal
Investigation Agency (FIA). The FIA, a counter-intelligence and security
agency, has been widely criticized for its covert operations related to
political groups and parties on behalf of the government. By attributing
jurisdiction to the FIA, the impartiality and independence of torture
investigations is jeopardized. We thus urge the National Assembly to put
pressure on the government to finally establish a functional National
Commission. 
In the context of prompt and impartial investigations, we area also
concerned about draft Clause 15 that requires the FIA to seek instruction and
direction from the Federal Government when receiving a complaint against a
member of the armed forces or the intelligence agencies. Various UN treaty
bodies have condemned requirements to seek permission from the government
before investigating offences against army personnel. The Human Rights
Committee, for instance, urged India to abolish the prerequisite that “criminal
prosecutions or civil proceedings against members of the security and armed
forces, acting under special powers, may not be commenced without the sanction
of the central Government”.[5] These type of clauses
contribute to a climate of impunity and deprive people of remedies.We thus strongly
suggest omitting Clause 15.
 
Inadmissibility of statements that have been obtained
through the use of torture
Under Article 15 of the Convention against Torture,
evidence obtained as a result of torture shall not be invoked as evidence in
any proceedings. The Committee against Torture has emphasized that such
provisions are especially important where a criminal justice system relies heavily
on obtaining confessions for instituting prosecutions.[6] We therefore welcome draft
Clause 9 that makes statements extracted through torture inadmissible. 
It is important to add that this prohibition also
applies to CIDT and not only to torture. The Committee has stated that States
need to ensure that anystatement or confessions made by persons in custody
ascertained to have been made as a result of torture or ill-treatment should
not be admissible as evidence against the person.[7]
 
No exceptional circumstance may be invoked to justify torture
The Convention states in Article 2 that “no
exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or a threat of
war, internal political instability or any other public emergency, may be
invoked as a justification of torture.” This stipulates the absolute
prohibition of torture. Article 2 also applies to threat of terrorist acts, violent
crimes, and international or non-international armed conflicts. 
Draft Clause 24 is thus an important provision that reflects
Pakistan’s obligations under Article 2 of the Convention.
 
Preclude Malafide complaints
Draft Clauses 12 and 13 of the draft bill provide that
torture complaints with malafide intentions are punishable with imprisonment or
a fine. Provisions on malafide complaints have proven to constitute serious
obstacles for torture victims as they strongly discourage victims to come
forward. A torture complaint as such already brings the risk of reprisals,
especially if brought by victims who belong to the underprivileged and poor. In
addition, provisions on malafide complaints are often abused in cases in which
a torture complaint has been rejected for the lack of evidence and not because
of ill intent. We therefore propose to omit Clauses 12 and 13.
Prohibit expulsion to States where the person is at risk of being
tortured 
Article 3 of the Convention states that “no State
Party shall expel, return ("refouler") or extradite a person to
another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would
be in danger of being subjected to torture.” The Draft Bill implements Article
3 of the Convention by providing an almost identical provision in Draft Clause
22 paragraph 2 Sentence 1.
However, sentence 2 of the same Clause has a
limitation in favor of extradition treaties. Such a limitation is not
compatible with Article 3 of the Convention. The Committee has repeatedly
stated that non-refoulement is absolute.[8] This means that the
balancing of interests between the individual’s rights not to be subjected to
torture by means of expulsion/extradition and the compliance with international
expulsion treaty obligations are not permissible. In other words, if an
individual would be in danger of being subjected to torture if extradited, said
individual cannot be extradited regardless of extradition treaties or similar
obligations vis-à-vis an
inter-governmental organization. We therefore propose to omit the second
sentence of Draft Clause 22 paragraph 2.
Meaningful redress including
compensation and rehabilitation
The Draft Bill does not provide for meaningful
redress. Compensation is thesole form of redress foreseen in the Draft Bill. In
addition, compensation is only granted if the torture perpetrator is found
guilty and fined according to draft Clause 4 paragraph 3. Since it is the
actual fine that is transferred to the victim, the victim is only compensated
if the perpetrator pays the fine. This is not compatible with the Convention that
requires prompt, fair and adequate compensation regardless whether the
perpetrator is found guilty and pays a fine. When a representative of the state
inflicts torture, it is the primary responsibility of the state to compensate
the victim.
Furthermore, it is important to stress that compensation
for torture and the criminal responsibility of the perpetrator are not
necessarily connected. It might be established that torture was inflicted, but
the perpetrator cannot be held responsible for procedural reasons such as a statutory
period of limitation. The system of compensating thus needs to be detached from
awarding of fines.
Moreover, compensation alone is not sufficient redress
for a victim of torture. The Committee has repeatedly stated that Article 14 of
the Convention requires member states to enact other forms of redress including
restitution, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition.[9]We thus propose to include
a Clause in the Draft Bill that enables torture victims to seek full redress. 
On this day
dedicated to the victims of torture, we would like to remind the National
Assembly of its promise to eradicate torture and to implement the Convention
against Torture. In the light of the above we ask you to pass the Draft
Bill with the proposed amendments. 
We thank you
for your attention to this important matter.
 
Yours
sincerely,Gerald
Staberock, Secretary General OMCTZohra
Yusuf, Chairperson of the HRCP



[1] General Comment No. 2, Implementation of article 2 by States parties,
UN Doc. CAT/C/GC/2, 24 January 2008, para. 3. 


[2] See e.g. Concluding Observation on Zambia, UN Doc. CAT/C/ZMB/CO/2, 26
May 2008, para. 5.


[3] See e.g. Concludings Observation on Mongolia, UN Doc. CAT/C/MNG/CO/1,
20 January 2011, para. 9.


[4] See e.g. Concluding Observations on Kyrgyzstan, UN Doc. CAT/C/KGZ/CO/2,
20 December 2013, para. 6d; Concludings Observations on Yemen, UN Doc.
CAT/C/YEM/CO/2Rev.1, para. 16. 


[5] HRC, Concluding Observation on India, UN Doc. CCPR/C/79/add.81, 4
August 1997, para. 21.


[6] See e.g. Concluding Obsercation on Japan, UN Doc. CAT/CJPN/CO/2, 28
June 2013, para. 11


[7]Concludings Observation on Mongolia, UN Doc. CAT/C/MNG/CO/1, 20 January
2011, para. 18.


[8]Concludings Observations on Japan, UN Doc. CAT/C/JPN/CO/2, 28 June 2013,
para. 9. 


[9] General Comment No. 3, Implementation of Article 14 by State parties,
UN Doc. CAT/C/GC/3, 13 December 2012. 