China:  Forced disappearances of several nuns and monks - Fear for safety
June  4, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2008 / JuneChina: Forced disappearances of several nuns and monks - Fear for safetyCase CHN 040608  Forced disappearance/ Arbitrary detention/ Use of excessive and disproportionate force/ Fear for safety The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China. Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights and Democracy (TCHRD), member of OMCT SOS-Torture network, about the arbitrary arrest of three nuns of Dragkar Nunnery (Kardze County, Kardze "Tibet Autonomous Prefecture"('TAP') Sichuan Province), namely Ven. Sangye Lhamo (26 years old from Kyakyatengtsang family of Dungra Village, Serchuteng Township), Ven. Tsewang Kando (38 years old from Dungra Village, Serchuteng Township) and Ven. Yeshi Lhadon (24 years old from Tsozhi village) as well as of 21 years old student, Mrs. Rigden Lhamo (of Tapontsang family from Lhakey Village, Thingkha Township), on 28 May 2008, in Kardze County. According to the information received, on 28 May 2008 at around 9am, Ven. Sangye Lhamo, Ven. Tsewang Kando and Ven. Yeshi Lhadon were arrested and taken away by the Kardze County Public Security Bureau (PSB) officials for questioning after staging a peaceful demonstration in Karzde County main market square. The three nuns reportedly had chanted slogans calling for the “Swift return of the Dalai Lama to Tibet", "Long Live the Dalai Lama", "Freedom for Tibet" and "Immediate release of all political prisoners", as well as distributed pamphlets calling for the "Independence for Tibet". According to the same information, on the same day, Mrs. Rigden Lhamo staged a solo protest by unfurling the banned Tibetan national flag and shouted similar slogans at the county government headquarters. According to an eyewitness account, the county security forces fired gunshots but there is no confirmed information on whether Mrs. Rigden Lhamo was injured. She was then reportedly arrested by the county PSB officials. Previously, on 22 May 2008 at around 6pm, four nuns of Nyimo Gaysey Nunnery in Tehor Kardze County were also reportedly arrested by the local Public Security Bureau (PSB) officials for staging a peaceful protest at the Kardze County government headquarters, namely Bhumo Tengha (from Lunang Village), Rinchen Jamatsang, Jamgha Dolma and Pema (all three from Lhopa Township, Kardze County, Kardze "TAP" Sichuan Province). The four protesting nuns had reportedly raised their fists and protested against the recent crackdown of peaceful Tibetan protesters and the illegal detention of Tibetan people in the Chinese prisons. They also reportedly distributed pamphlets in and around the county government headquarters calling for independence for Tibet. According to the information received, the four nuns were beaten with baton used by the security forces, kicked, punched and manhandled during their arrest. OMCT has further been informed about the arrest, on 19 May 2008, of twelve monks of Dingri Shelkar Choedhe Monastery (Dingri County, Shigatse Prefecture, “Tibet Autonomous Region” TAR) for opposing the “Patriotic re-education”[1] campaign, during a night raid at the Monastery by Chinese People's Armed Police (PAP) forces and Public Security Bureau (PSB) officials. The identities and origins of the twelve arrested monks are as follow:  Ven. Khenrab Tharchin, 32 years old, Drushe Village, Shelkar Township, Ven. Tsewang Tenzin, Phelbar Village, Shelkar Township, Dingri County Ven Tenzin Gayphel, Lingshar Village, Gaymar Townsip, Dingri County Ven. Khenrab Tashi, Mashak Village, Shelkar Township, Dingri County Ven. Topgyal, Drushe Village, Shelkar Township, Dingri County Ven. Tenzin Tsering, Bichu Village, Gyatso Township, Dingri County Ven. Lobsang Jigme, Norgay nomadic area, Shelkar Township, Dingri County Ven. Khenrab Nyima, Shelkar Township, Dingri County Ven. Dhondup, Che Village, Tsakhor Township, Dingri County Ven. Tenpa, Lolo Langga, Shelkar Township, Dingri County Ven. Samten, Shollingshar, Shelkar Township, Dingri County Ven. Choedhen, Shollingshar, Shelkar Township, Dingri County  According to the same information, a few days after their arrest, the monks family members went to enquire the local PSB officers about the exact place of their detention and requested authorities for visitation. However, they were reportedly intimidated with warning for damaging the image of the government and questioned their source of information about monks' detention. At the time of issuing the urgent appeal, there is no information on the current whereabouts and the condition of detention of all the above mentioned individuals. The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the safety of all the above mentioned individuals, whose whereabouts are currently unknown and who, according to the information received, were arrested and detained solely for their peaceful political and religious beliefs and the rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly. OMCT fears that they may be subject to torture and ill-treatment. OMCT recalls that China is a State party to the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment which prohibits torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. In line with their obligations under this treaty, it is incumbent on the Chinese authorities to consider seriously any allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and to undertake a thorough and impartial investigation in this regard. OMCT urges the authorities to conform with China’s international human rights obligations, commitments that were reaffirmed on the occasion of its election as a member of the new United Nations Human Rights Council. Actions Requested Please write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:   Immediately locate the whereabouts of all the above mentioned individuals;  Guarantee, in all circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity;  Guarantee immediate and unconditional access to legal representation, their families and any medical treatment they may require;  Order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial, independent, competent and fair tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times;  Order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Mr. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn Mr. Yang Jiechi, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn; Mr. Meng Jianzhu, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216 Mr. Ma Zhenchuan, Director of the Beijing Public Security Bureau, Juzhang, Beijingshi Gong’anju, 9 Qianmen Dongdajie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100740, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 85222320, Email: wbjc2sohu.com Director of the Sichuan Provincial Department of Justice, Sifating, 24 Shangxiznglu, Chengdushi 610015, Sichuansheng, People's Republic of China Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Ch. De Surville, CP 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse, e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22 793 70 14 Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Brussels, Avenue de Tervuren, 463 1160 Auderghem, Belgium, Tel: + 32 2 663 30 10 / + 32 2 663 30 17 / +32 2 771 14 97 / +32 2 779 43 33; Fax: +32 2 762 99 66 / +32 2 779 28 95; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn  Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.  Geneva, 04 June 2008 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.    [1] According to the information received, the Chinese authorities re-launch and reinvigorate the "Patriotic re-education" campaign in the "Tibet Autonomous Region" ("TAR") and other Tibetan areas in neighbouring provinces for a stipulated two-month period covering almost every sections of society beginning primarily with the monastic institutions, party cadres, security forces and government employees, farmers and private entrepreneurs, educational institutions and common people, to denounce the Dalai Lama and the "Splittist forces". 