Nicaragua:  Press Release: The arbitrary decision to annul the legal personality of the CENIDH marks the definitive entry of the country into a dictatorial regime
December 13, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Nicaragua / 2018 / DecemberNicaragua: Press Release: The arbitrary decision to annul the legal personality of the CENIDH marks the definitive entry of the country into a dictatorial regime
PRESS RELEASE – THE OBSERVATORY 

Paris-Geneva, 13
December 2018 - The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and OMCT, rejects the cancellation of the legal status of
four organisations by the Nicaraguan National Assembly. This decision
demonstrates that the Assembly has become a summary court dedicated to the
repression of civil society organisations in the country.
On 12 December 2018,
the National Assembly, at the urgent request of the Ministry of Interior
presented on the same day, canceled the legal status of the Nicaraguan Center
for Human Rights (CENIDH), a member organization of FIDH and the OMCT
SOS-Torture Network. The explanatory memorandum states that the CENIDH has
distorted its legal personality by not acting in accordance with the aims and
objectives for which it was granted legal personality, "such as the achievement
of peace and justice in Nicaragua", indicates the text of the request for
annulment.
The
Observatory expresses its great concern after having been informed that today
the public force is surrounding the entrance to CENIDH’s headquarters, thereby
obstructing workers from entering there, telling them that "they are no
longer authorised". The Observatory calls on the authorities to respect
and guarantee the physical integrity of all CENIDH workers. 
"This
decision constitutes an arbitrary restriction of the right to freedom of
association in violation of Nicaragua's international obligations. This is clearly
an act of retaliation for its active denunciation of human rights violations
since its inception in 1990. We reiterate our solidarity with the CENIDH",
said Dimitris Christopoulos, President of the FIDH. 
"This
outrage is an example of the model of repression aimed at destroying
independent civil society in Nicaragua. For 30 years, the CENIDH has been a
hope for all victims of human rights violations. Its closure seems to be a
message to the Nicaraguan people not to denounce human rights violations, but
it will not succeed in silencing the human rights movement," said
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
CENIDH is the fourth
NGO to have been stripped of its legal status by the National Assembly in the
last two weeks, arguing that they are all part of a coup attempt to
overthrow the Nicaraguan government. Yesterday, the organization "Let's
Make Democracy" had its legal personality withdrawn, and on 11 December,
the Institute for Strategic Studies and Public Policy (IEEPP) also lost its
legal personality. Finally, on 29 November, the National Assembly annulled the
legal status of the feminist organization Centro de Información y Servicios de
Asesoría en Salud (CISAS).
In order to dismantle
student, rural and political activism, the Ortega-Murillo regime has deployed
violent repression in recent months, killing more than 300 people and detaining
hundreds of arbitrary detainees. As if that were not enough, the government now
wants to silence civil society by attacking NGOs that are opposed to it by removing
their legal status. 
In this context, the
Observatory expresses its concern and strongly condemns the deletion of the
legal personality of the CENIDH. We call on the authorities to immediately
reverse this decision and put an end to all types of harassment against the
CENIDH and other organisations, as well as against all human rights defenders
in Nicaragua.
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) is a partnership created
in 1997 by the FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and aims
to intervene to prevent or remedy concrete situations of repression against
human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union mechanism for human rights defenders implemented by
international civil society.
For more information,
please contact:
FIDH: Samuel Hanryon
(French, English): + 33 6 72 28 28 28 42 94 / José Carlos Thissen (Spanish): +
51 95 41 31 650
OMCT: Miguel Martín: +
41 22 809 49 39 