Congo, Democratic Republic:  'D.R. Congo
January 28, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2002 / JanuaryCongo, Democratic Republic: 'D.R. CongoCase COD 290900  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Democratic Republic of Congo.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from the ‘Le Monde des Droits de l’Homme Vu de Bruxelles’, a member of the OMCT network, that on 4th August 2000, Mr Dikenda Di Kansi Kita, 53 years old, a Congolese national and resident of Belgium, was arrested by Rapid Intervention Police at the Phoenix Hotel where he was staying.  He was taken to offices of the Building of Kin-Maziere in Gombe.  He was supposedly accused of being part of a conspiracy, organised by Belgian Security, to overthrow President Kabila and kill Mr G. Kakuji, Minister of the Interior.  Four days after his arrest he was transferred to the Departement Militaire anti-patriote (anti-patriot Military Department) (DEMIAP) where he was interrogated again.  On 22nd August Mr Dikenda was transferred to Makala prison where he remains without being interrogated and without formal charges.  Mr Dikenda arrived 6th July 2000 in Kinshasa to see his family and develop contacts to open a lawyers office.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Democratic Republic of Congo urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Dikenda Di Kansi Kita and order his immediate release in the absence of valid charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; ii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  The President Laurent-Désiré Kabila. Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo. Fax (+ 243) 880 02 120   Mr Mwenze Kongolo, Minister of Justice, Ministère de la Justice, BP 3137, Kinshasa-Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.   Mr Gaetan Kakudji, Minister of the Interior, Ministère de l'Intérieur, Hôtel du Conseil exécutif, Kinshasa - Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.  Geneva, September 29, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 