Turkey:  after release, judicial harassment against Ms. Ersanli and Mr. Zarakolu continues
July 16, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2012 / JulyTurkey: after release, judicial harassment against Ms. Ersanli and Mr. Zarakolu continues

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New
information
TUR
003 / 1111 / OBS 121.2
Release / 
Judicial harassment
Turkey
 
July 16, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Turkey.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the release on bail of Ms. Büşra Ersanlı, a lecturer at the Marmara
University (Istanbul) Faculty of Political Sciences and International Relations
who has been advocating with NGOs for the political rights of women. 
 
According to the
information received, on July 13, 2012, on the occasion of the eighth hearing
of the trial opened on July 2, 2012, the İstanbul
Heavy Penal Court No. 15 ordered the release on bail of Ms. Büşra Ersanlı,
together with 15 other suspects.
 
The Observatory recalls
that Ms. Ersanlı had been arrested in Istanbul on October 28, 2011, together
with Mr. Ragıp Zarakolu, Honorary
Board Member and Founder of the Human Rights Association (İnsan Haklari Derneği - İHD), Director of the Belge Publishing
House and Chairman of the Committee for Freedom of Publication in the Union of
Publishers as part of a vast anti-terrorist operation intended to dismantle part of an alleged terrorist network - the Kurdish Communities
Union (KCK) - that in fact targeted more than 193 peaceful activists for their opinion on the Kurdish issue (See background
information), and who are not related to any terrorist
activities.
On April 10, 2012, the İstanbul Heavy Penal Court No.
15 ordered the release on bail of Mr. Ragıp Zarakolu. 
 
The Observatory welcomes
the release of Ms. Büşra Ersanlı and thanks all the persons, institutions and
organisations who intervened in her favour. However, it denounces the ongoing
judicial harassment against Ms. Ersanlı and Mr. Zarakolu. Ms. Ersanlı indeed
still faces up to 22 and a half years of prison on charges of “belonging to a
criminal organisation” under Article 314 of the Turkish Penal Code (TPC), and
Mr. Zarakolu faces up to 15 years of prison on charges of “knowingly and
willingly helping an organised criminal group” under Article 220/7 of the TPC.
The court set October 1, 2012 for the next hearing of the case.
 
The Observatory calls
upon the Turkish authorities to put an end to the continuing harassment against
them,
which seems to only aim at sanctioning their human rights activities.
 
The Observatory further recalls that several İHD
members remain today in pre-trial detention, notably Mr. Muharrem Erbey,
İHD General Vice Chairperson and Chairperson of its Diyarbakir Province branch
who has been detained since December 2009, Mr. Arslan Özdemir, İHD
member in Diyarbakır, Mr. Osman Işçi, İHD member in Ankara, as well as
lawyers, trade unionists, journalists and members of associations of families
of victims of abusive anti-terrorism policies. Dozens of other human rights
defenders also remain in provisional release pending the outcome of criminal
trials on terrorism charges. 
 
Background
information:
 
On October 28, 2011, Mr.
Ragıp Zarakolu and Ms. Büşra Ersanlı
were both arrested in Istanbul. These arrests were part of a vast operation
that targeted several hundred peaceful activists, mostly Kurdish political
activists and particularly members of the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP). 
 
On November 1, 2011, the
two were officially charged with “being a member of an illegal organisation”,
namely the KCK - an organisation said to be the “urban branch” of the armed
Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) - under Article 314 of the TPC by İstanbul Heavy
Penal Court No. 14, together with 191 other peaceful activists. 
 
Actions requested:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Büşra Ersanlı and
Mr. Ragıp Zarakolu and, as well as Messrs.
Muharrem Erbey, Arslan Özdemir and Osman Işçi as well as all human rights defenders in Turkey;
 
ii. Release
Messrs. Muharrem Erbey, Mr. Arslan Özdemir and Osman Işçi as well as all other
human rights defenders, immediately and unconditionally since their detention is arbitrary as it
only aim at sanctioning their human rights activities;
 
iii. Put
an end to all acts harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Büşra Ersanlı and
Mr. Ragıp Zarakolu, as well as Messrs. Muharrem Erbey,
Arslan Özdemir and Osman Işçi, and as well as all human rights defenders in
Turkey;
 
iv. Comply
with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, especially its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”, as well as Article 12.2, which provides
that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration” ;
 
v. More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international and regional human rights
instruments ratified by Turkey. 