Lao People's Democ. Rep.:  Sombath Somphone one year on: 62 NGOs call for a new investigation into his enforced disappearance
December 13, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Lao People's Democ. Rep. / 2013 / DecemberLao People's Democ. Rep.: Sombath Somphone one year on: 62 NGOs call for a new investigation into his enforced disappearanceLAO_Sombath Somphone one year on: 62 NGOs call for a new investigation into his enforced disappearance4 pages / 100 KBWe, the
undersigned 62 regional and international organizations, express outrage over
the Lao Government’s ongoing failure to shed light on the enforced
disappearance of prominent activist and civil society leader Sombath Somphone.
December
15, 2013 marks the one-year anniversary of Sombath’s disappearance. Sombath was
last seen on the evening of December 15, 2012 in Vientiane. Closed-circuit
television (CCTV) footage showed that police stopped Sombath’s car at a police
post. Within minutes after being stopped, unknown individuals forced him into
another vehicle and drove away. Analysis of the CCTV footage shows that Sombath
was taken away in the presence of police officers. This fact supports a finding
of government complicity.
Despite
the Lao Government’s pledge to “thoroughly and seriously” investigate Sombath’s
disappearance[1],
the authorities’ probe has been inadequate and unproductive. On January 18,
2013, 65 NGOs signed a joint letter to Lao Prime Minister Thongsing Thammavong
to express their concern over Sombath’s disappearance. Since then and in spite of
widespread international calls for his return, including from the European
Union (EU), the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
parliamentarians, the USA and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Sombath’s whereabouts remain
unknown and there has been no progress in the investigation into the circumstances
of his enforced disappearance. In addition, the authorities have rejected
offers of technical assistance to analyze the CCTV footage.
For the past 30 years, Sombath has pushed tirelessly
for expansion for civil society space and rights of the rural poor and young
people to have a voice in the development of Lao society and governance.
Shortly before his disappearance, Sombath played a key role in organising the
Asia-Europe People’s Forum (AEPF), a civil society forum that preceded the
official Asia-Europe Summit Meeting. At the forum, discussions on land and
water issues, and poorly regulated FDIs which threatened people’s livelihoods
were discussed openly for the first time in Laos.
Sombath’s
enforced disappearance is not an isolated incident. To this day, the
whereabouts of nine people, two women, Kingkeo
and Somchit, as well as seven men, Soubinh, Souane, Sinpasong, Khamsone, Nou, Somkhit, and Sourigna, arbitrarily detained by Lao
security forces in November 2009 in various locations across the country remain
unknown. The nine had planned peaceful demonstrations calling for democracy and
respect of human rights. Also unknown are the whereabouts of Somphone Khantisouk, the owner of an
ecotourism guesthouse and an outspoken critic of Chinese-sponsored agricultural
projects that were damaging the environment in the northern province of Luang
Namtha. He disappeared after uniformed men abducted him in January 2007.
The Lao
Government’s failure to undertake proper investigations into all these cases of
enforced disappearances violates its obligations under Article 2(3) of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which Laos is
a State party. The ICCPR states that governments must provide an “effective
remedy” for violations of rights guaranteed by the Covenant, including the
right to liberty and security of person.
We call on
the Lao Government to:
·    
Establish a new commission tasked with
carrying out a prompt, thorough, independent, and impartial investigation into
Sombath’s enforced disappearance and return him safely to his family.
·    
Identify and hold accountable those
responsible for Sombath’s enforced disappearance.
·    
Undertake a thorough, impartial, and
effective investigation into all allegations of enforced disappearances.
·    
Extend an invitation for a country visit by
the UN Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances.
·    
Ratify the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
·    
Respect and protect the rights of all human
rights defenders, activists, and members of civil society.
We call on
the international community, particularly EU Member States, ASEAN Member
States, and the U.S., to:
·    
Raise the issue of Sombath Somphone’s
enforced disappearance with the Lao Government in all bilateral and
multilateral fora.
·    
Urge the Lao Government to immediately
release all political prisoners and conduct effective and thorough
investigations aimed at safely returning victims of enforced disappearances to
their families.
·    
Exert political and economic pressure on
the Lao Government to ensure the promotion of reforms that guarantee respect
for fundamental human rights in accordance with its international obligations.
Signed by:
1.      Alternative
ASEAN Network on Burma (Altsean-Burma)
2.      Armanshahr/OPEN
ASIA, Afghanistan
3.      ASEAN
Parliamentarians for Human Rights (APHR)
4.      Asian
Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA)
5.      Banglar
Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), India
6.      Boat
People SOS
7.      Burma
Partnership
8.      Bytes
for All, Pakistan
9.      Cambodian
Human Rights Action Committee, Cambodia
10.   Cambodian
Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC), Cambodia
11.   Cambodian
Volunteers for Society, Cambodia
12.   Campaign
for a Life of Dignity for All (KAMP), Philippines
13.   Centre
for Human Rights and Development (CHRD), Mongolia
14.   Commission
for the Disappeared and Victims of Violence (KontraS), Indonesia
15.  
Committee for Free and Fair Elections in
Cambodia (COMFREL), Cambodia
16.    FIDH
(International Federation for Human Rights)
17.   Front
Line Defenders
18.   Gender
and Development Advocates (GANDA) Filipinas, Philippines
19.   Globe
International Center, Mongolia
20.   Human
Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP), Pakistan
21.   Human
Rights Defenders Alert, India
22.   Human
Rights Education Institute of Burma (HREIB), Burma
23.   Human
Rights Working Group (HRWG), Indonesia
24.   Imparsial,
Indonesia
25.   Indonesian
Legal Aid and Human Rights Association (PBHI), Indonesia
26.   Indonesia
Legal Aid Foundation (YLBHI), Indonesia
27.   Informal
Sector Service Center (INSEC), Nepal
28.   INFORM
Human Rights Documentation Centre, Sri Lanka
29.   Institute
for Legal Consultation and People Advocacy of North Sumatera (BAKUMSU),
Indonesia
30.   ISchool-Myanmar,
Burma
31.   Judicial
System Monitoring Program (JSMP), Timor Leste
32.   Justice
for Peace Foundation, Thailand
33.   Knights
for Peace, Int’l
34.   Koalisi
Perempuan Indonesia, Indonesia
35.   Lao
Movement for Human Rights (LMHR)
36.   Law
and Society Trust (LST), Sri Lanka
37.   League
for the Defence of Human Rights in Iran (LDDHI)
38.   Life
Skills Development Foundation, Thailand
39.   Odhikar,
Bangladesh
40.   People’s
Empowerment Foundation (PEF), Thailand
41.   People's
Solidarity for Participatory Democracy (PSPD), South Korea
42.   People’s
Vigilance Committee on Human Rights (PVCHR), India
43.   People’s
Watch, India
44.   Programme
Against Custodial Torture and Impunity (PACTI), India
45.   Sawit
Watch, Indonesia
46.   Sehjira
Deaf/HoH Foundation, Indonesia
47.   Society
for the Protection of the Rights of the Child (SPARC), Pakistan
48.   Solidarity
for Asian Peoples' Advocacies Working Group on ASEAN (SAPA WG on ASEAN)
49.   South
East Asian Committee for Advocacy (SEACA)
50.   Southeast
Asian Press Alliance (SAPA)
51.   Suara
Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM), Malaysia
52.   Taiwan
Association for Human Rights, (TAHR), Taiwan
53.   Task
Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), Philippines
54.   Think
Centre, Singapore
55.   Thinzar
Shunlei Yi Myanmar, Burma
56.   Timor
Leste National Alliance for International Tribunal (ANTI), Timor Leste
57.   Union
for Civil Liberty (UCL), Thailand
58.   Vietnam
Committee on Human Rights (VCHR)
59.   WomanHealth
Philippines, Philippines
60.   World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
61.   Yayasan
Mandiri Kreatif Indonesia, Indonesia
62.   Yayasan
Transformasi Lepra Indonesia, Indonesia



[1] Vientiane
Times, Police report on Sombath Somphone’s disappearance, March 2, 2013. 