Iran:  The UN finds the detention of human rights defenders Khosro Kordpour and Massoud Kordpour arbitrary; release and reparation requested
February  5, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2014 / FebruaryIran: The UN finds the detention of human rights defenders Khosro Kordpour and Massoud Kordpour arbitrary; release and reparation requestedParis-Geneva,
February 5, 2014 - In an opinion adopted during its 68th session on November
20, 2013, the United Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD)
requested the release of Iranian human rights defenders Khosro Kordpour and
Massoud Kordpour from arbitrary detention. The WGAD carried out its
investigation pursuant to an Observatory’s Urgent Appeal[1]
published in August 2013, and its opinion was transmitted to the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders on February 4, 2014. The
Observatory is an FIDH-OMCT joint programme.
 
Messrs.
Khosro Kordpour and Massoud Kordpour are brothers and
respectively editor of and correspondent with the Mukrian News Agency,
reporting mainly about the conditions of civil rights activists, political
prisoners and human rights violations in particular in the Iranian Kurdish-inhabited
regions and cities. They were arrested on March 7 and 9, 2013, respectively, in
the west-Iranian mainly Kurdish-inhabited city of Mahabad.
 
Mr.
Khosro Kordpour was charged in June 2013 with “moharebeh” (“waging war
against God”), “corruption on earth through assembly and collusion to commit
crimes against the national security”, “insulting the Leader”, “spreading
propaganda against the State” and “spreading lies with intent to disturb the
public minds”. Mr. Massoud Kordpour was also charged in June 2013 with
“assembly and collusion to commit crimes against the national security”,
“insulting the Leader”, “spreading propaganda against the State” and “spreading
lies with intent to disturb the public minds”. Both were tried in the framework
of three hearings held in August, September and October 2013 before Branch 1 of
the Islamic Revolution Court of Mahabad. On November 9, 2013, the same court
sentenced Mr. Khosro Kordpour to five years in prison to be served in internal
exile in Tabriz prison as well as two years of internal exile in the city of
Kerman for “assembly and collusion”, and to one additional year in prison for
“spreading propaganda”, while Mr. Massoud Kordpour was sentenced to three years
in prison for “assembly and collusion” and to six months' imprisonment for
“spreading propaganda”. Both currently remain detained in Mahabad prison.
 
In
its decision, the UN WGAD highlighted that the trial of the Kordpour brothers
was “flawed in a number of respects from an international human rights
law perspective” and noted a number of violations such as “the
inordinate delay in according them access to a lawyer, the 45-day delay in
commencing interrogation and the jurisdiction of the court before which they
[were] tried”.
 
The
UN Working Group found more generally that “a number of Iranian laws and
policies, including the 1986 Press Law, the 2009 Computer Crimes Law and the
2010 Cybercrime law are not in conformity with the right to freedom of
expression and access to information under international law”, that the
“charges against the Kordpour brothers are vague and ambiguous and
therefore difficult to substantiate” whereas international law provides
that “restrictions on the freedom of expression must be unambiguous,
narrow and accompanied by adequate safeguards against abuse”.
 
The
UN WGAD therefore concluded that “the deprivation of liberty of Khosro
Kordpour and Massoud Kordpour is arbitrary, being in contravention of Articles
9, 10 and 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and […] of Articles
9, 14 and 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights”.
Accordingly, the UN WGAD requested “the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to release Khosro Kordpour and Massoud Kordpour forthwith and
bring their situation in conformity with the requirements of international
human rights instruments”, and to provide them “with appropriate
reparation”. 
 
The Observatory calls upon the Iranian authorities to implement the UN
WGAD decision immediately and unconditionally.



[1] See Urgent Appeal IRN 001 / 0813 / OBS 073, issued on August 9, 2013. 