Sudan:  Ongoing judicial harassment against 5 defenders working at TRACKs and the Director of ZORD
October 12, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2016 / OctoberSudan: Ongoing judicial harassment against 5 defenders working at TRACKs and the Director of ZORD
New information
SDN 001 / 1016 / OBS
084.1
Judicial
harassment/
Arbitrary detention / 
Ill-treatment in detention /
Death penalty
Sudan
October 12, 2016
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Sudan.
New information:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continuing judicial
harassment against five human right defenders working at the Centre for
Training and Human Development in Sudan (TRACKs)[1],
namely Mr. Al Hassan Kheiry, a computer technician, Ms.
Arwa Elrabie, the Administration
Manager, Ms. Imani-Leyla Raye, a student volunteer, Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, the
Director, and Mr. Midhat A. Hamdan,
a trainer, as well as against the Director of Zarqa Organisation for Rural
Development (ZORD) who had delivered training for TRACKs, Mr. Mustafa Adam, as
well as the arbitrary detention of the last three (see background information).
According
to the information received, on October 6, 2016, the six human rights defenders
were heard before the Khartoum Central Criminal Court for charges under the
1991 Criminal Act of “undermining the constitutional system” (Article 50),
“waging war against the State (Article 51), “espionage” (Article 53), “criminal
and terrorist organisation” (Article 65). Such offences are classified as
crimes against the State and carry the death penalty. Messrs Midhat A Hamdan
and Mustafa Adam are also facing charges under Article 14 of the Information Crime Law. These
charges relate to accusations of producing, setting, sending, storing or
promoting indecent content through internet, computer or alike that affect
public order or morals. They carry sentences of imprisonment up to seven years
and a fine.
During
the hearing, the Prosecutor continued showing evidence allegedly found on Mr.
Mustafa Adam’s laptop and without any relevance to the proceedings. The
Observatory fears that after attempting to question the morality of the
defendants during previous hearings, the Prosecutor is now trying to portray
them as working against the Sudanese State. Indeed, amongst the documents
brought forward, some of them were allegedly including “information about the
Sudanese regime”[2].
The
Prosecutor also presented the registration form filled out by TRACKs to the
National Centre for Training. In this document, TRACKs requests to be
registered as a centre that works on trainings covering a wide scope of issues
such as NGO, time and project management as well as proposal-writing,
negotiations, conflict analysis and youth capacity-building. The Prosecutor
thus argues that TRACKs is not registered to carry out trainings on human
rights and human rights monitoring. Nonetheless, TRACKs’ vision of work has
always included human rights throughout its trainings.
Lawyers
of the defendants have requested evidences to be stamped by the forensic
laboratory and cross-examined. The next hearing is scheduled on October 13,
2016 at 12pm.
The
Observatory expresses concerns regarding Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar as his
health condition is deteriorating, he suffers from heart condition and he does
not have access to the appropriate medical care. 
The Observatory urges the authorities to release
immediately and unconditionally Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa
Adam and Midhat A Hamdan and drop all charges against them and against Mr. Al
Hassan Kheiry, Ms. Arwa Elrabie and Ms. Imani-Leyla Raye.
The Observatory firmly
condemns the above-mentioned judicial harassment, which is the latest evidence
of an increasing pattern of judicial harassment launched by the authorities
targeting civil society organisations and human rights defenders in Sudan.
Finally,
until all charges are dropped against them, the Observatory urges the Sudanese
authorities to ensure that their conditions of detention are humane and that
all judicial proceedings against the six are carried out in full compliance
with his right to a fair trial, as protected under international law.
Background
information:
On March 26, 2015, approximately ten plain-clothed National Intelligence
and Security Services (NISS) agents raided TRACKs’ premises, during the last
day of a training on “social responsibility and active citizenship”. No search
warrant was presented and computers and documents belonging to TRACKs were
confiscated. 
On April 16, 2015, Mr. Adil Bakheit, member of the Board of
Trustees of the Sudan Human Rights Monitor (SHRM)[3]was
arrested and charged with “joint acts in the execution of criminal conspiracy,
undermining the constitutional system, waging war against the State, calling
for opposition to public authority by use of violent or criminal force,
publication of false news, and impersonating a public servant”. The offences of
waging war against the state and undermining the constitutional system carry
the death penalty. 
In May 2015, Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar was charged with a number of
crimes, including “criminal conspiracy”, “undermining the constitutional
system” and “waging war against the State” and later released on bail. 
On June 3, 2015, Mr. Adil Bakheit was released on bail. 
In February 2016, the State Crimes Prosecution Office dropped the
criminal case. 
On February 29, 2016, NISS officers raided for the second time TRACKs
offices without any warrant and brought the staff present in the premises to
the police station in order to interrogate them for 12 hours on TRACKs’
activities, including on their relation to KACE. Moreover, the NISS officers
severely threatened, verbally abused and ill-treated them for hours. 
On May 22, 2016, Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam,
Midhat A Hamdan, Al Hassan Kheiry, Ms. Arwa Elrabie and Ms. Imani-Leyla Raye as
well as three other TRACKs staff, Ms. Nudaina Kamal, accountant, Mr. Khuzaini
El Hadi and Mr. Al Shazali Ibrahim Al Sheikh were summoned to the
NISS Department in Khartoum. Only two of them were questioned and further
threatened in relation to their personal activities, including their activism
and sources of income, while others were kept waiting before all the
individuals summoned were placed in custody pending further investigations. 
Ms. Nudaina Kamal was released shortly after her arrest on the same day.
Ms. Arwa Elrabie and Ms. Imany-Leyla Raye were released on bail on May 30;
Messrs. Hassan Kheiry, Khuzaini El Hadi and Al Shazali Ibrahim Al Sheikh on
June 7, 2016. 
On August 15, 2016, Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam and
Midhat A Hamdan were transferred to Al Huda prison after spending almost three
months in a narrow cell with poor ventilation and access to food5, no access to
medication and limited access to toilet at the State Prosecution office and were
charged for the same offences. 
On
September 22 and 29, 2016, the Prosecutor showed a number of personal pictures
and materials found on the laptops of the defendants[4],
although completely
irrelevant to the charges and in blatant breach of their right to privacy and
property. The Observatory fears that these were shown in an attempt to question
the morality of the defendants. Furthermore, the Prosecutor claimed
TRACKs’ activities were used to carry on the work of the Al-khatim Aldan Center
for Enlightenment (KACE)[5]
despite being shut down by the authorities in 2012. 
The prosecutor also claimed that TRACKs was
operating without being registered as a training centre, since their licence
ended on March 27, 2015. However, TRACKs’ application to renew their licence in
due time, which included the payment of registration fees to the National
Centre for Training, has been delayed by the authorities due to “internal
issues”. The status of their application is therefore still pending, which
nonetheless enables TRACKs to legally operate under Sudanese legislation.
The hearing of September 29, which started with
two hours delay due to the late arrival of both Prosecutor and Investigator,
was eventually suspended due to a power cut.
Furthermore, Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Ms. Arwa Elrabie, Ms.
Nudaina Kamal and Mr. Adil Bakheit are also facing the similar charges in
another court case related to another raid conducted at TRACKs’ offices on
March 26, 2015. The case was dropped on February 2016 by the State Crimes
Prosecution Office, and re-opened by the same on August 15, 2016. Their first
hearing should have taken place on August 24, 2016 but has already been
postponed three times and no date for the next hearing has been set yet. 
Actions requested:
The
Observatory urges the authorities of Sudan to: 
 i.              
Release immediately
and unconditionally Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam and Midhat A Hamdan and guarantee in
all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity;
ii.              
 Drop all charges against Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam, Midhat A Hamdan, Al Hassan Kheiry, Mrs. Arwa Elrabie and
Ms. Imani-Leyla Raye, as they only aim at sanctioning their human rights
activities;
iii.              
Put an end to any kind of harassment, including
at the judicial level, against them, as well as against
all human rights defenders in Sudan, and ensure in all circumstances that they
are able to carry out their activities without hindrances;
iv.              
 Conform in any circumstances with the provisions
of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular its articles 1
and 12.2; 
v.              
 Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Sudan.
Addresses: 
· Mr. President Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, Office of the President, People’s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 249 183 783223
· M. Awad Al Hassan Al Nour, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan; Fax: 249 183 764 168 / +249 183 770 883; Email: moj@moj.gov.sd 
· Mr. Ibrahim Ahmed Ghandour, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs/External Relations, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: 249183772941
· Mr. Ismat Abdelrahman Zeinalabdin, Minister of Interior, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: +249 183 779383 / +249 183 776 554; Email: ministry@mfa.gov.sd
· Advisory Council for Human Rights, Rapporteur, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: +249 183 77 08 83
· H.E. Mr.
Mustafa Osman Ismail Elamin, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 51-53 (3rd Floor), 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 731 26 56 / +41 22 716 19 70, Email: mission.sudan@bluewin.ch 
· Embassy of Sudan in Brussels, Avenue F.D. Roosevelt 124, 1050 Brussels, Belgium. Fax: 0032 (2) 648 34 99, Email: sudanbx@yahoo.com
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Sudan in your respective countries. 



[1]                
TRACKs is a Sudanese NGO providing training on various topics relating to human
rights and information technology. 


[2]                 In reality, these were forms for an International
Criminal Court (ICC) witness-protection programme run by the US Embassy.


[3]                
See the Observatory’s Urgent Appeals SDN 001 / 0415 / OBS 033 and SDN 001 /
0415 / OBS 033.1, published on April 21 and May 18, 2015. 


[4]                
The materials shown in Court were film documentaries, 41
pictures of one taken during workshops or meetings and several personal
pictures taken during private time with friends


[5]                
KACE aimed to
develop democratic modes of behaviour, to encourage freedom of thought and
freedom of scientific research, and to reinforce peaceful and civilized debate
amongst different groups and sectors of the society. Sudanese authorities shut down KACE in late
2012 on allegations of working to topple the regime. 