Syrian Arab Republic:  Fears for Life of Free Expression Advocate: Bassel Khartabil, in Undiscloed Location, May Face Death Sentence
November 20, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Syrian Arab Republic / 2015 / NovemberSyrian Arab Republic: Fears for Life of Free Expression Advocate: Bassel Khartabil, in Undiscloed Location, May Face Death SentenceSyria_2015.11.20_Joint_Letter_English3 pages / 118 KB​













(Beirut, November 20, 2015) - Bassel Khartabil, a
defender of freedom expression being held in conditions amounting to
enforced disappearance may be facing a death sentence, 36 local and international
organizations said today. His wife has received unconfirmed reports that a
Military Field Court has sentenced him to death. His whereabouts should be
disclosed immediately, and he should be released unconditionally, the groups
said.
 
Military Intelligence detained Khartabil on March 15, 2012. He was
held in incommunicado detention for eight months and was subjected to torture
and other ill-treatment. He is facing Military Field Court proceedings for his
peaceful activities in support of freedom of expression. A military judge
interrogated Khartabil for a few minutes on December 9, 2012, but he had heard
nothing further about his legal case, he told his family. In December 2012 he
was moved to ‘Adra prison in Damascus, where he remained until October 3, 2015,
when he was transferred to an undisclosed location and has not been heard of
since.
 
Reports that his wife received from alleged sources inside Military
Intelligence suggest that since his disappearance he has been tried by a
Military Field Court in the Military Police headquarters in al-Qaboun, which
sentenced him to death. Military Field Courts in
Syria are exceptional courts with secret closed-door proceedings that do not
meet international fair trial standards. Defendants have no legal
representation, and the courts’ decisions are binding and not subject to
appeal. People brought before such courts who were later released have said
that proceedings are perfunctory, often lasting only minutes.
 
Khartabil is a software developer who has used his technical
expertise to help advance freedom of speech and access to information via the
internet.  He has won many awards,
including the 2013 Index on Censorship Digital Freedom Award for using
technology to promote an open and free internet. His arrest and on-going
detention are apparently a direct result of his peaceful and legitimate work,
the groups said.
 
Demands for his release have been published by this group since
his arrest and have been echoed by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
in April 2015. 
 
The authorities in Syria
should:
 
1.     Immediately disclose the whereabouts of Bassel Khartabil and grant him access to a lawyer and to
his family;
2.     Ensure that he is protected from torture
and other ill-treatment;
3.     Immediately and unconditionally release
him;
4.    
Release
all detainees in Syria held for exercising their legitimate rights to freedom
of expression and association.
 
 
List of signatories:
 
1.     Action by Christians for the Abolition of
Torture (ACAT)
2.     Amnesty International (AI)
3.     Arab Foundation for Development and
Citizenship (AFDC)
4.     Arabic Network for Human Rights
Information (ANHRI)
5.     Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS)
6.     Centre for Democracy and Civil Rights in
Syria
7.     Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) 
8.     EuroMed Rights (EMHRN)
9.     Fraternity Foundation for Human Rights
10.  Front Line Defenders (FLD)
11.  Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
12.  HIVOS Humanist Institute for Co-operation
with Developing Countries
13.  Human Rights Watch (HRW)
14.  Index on Censorship
15.  Institute for War & Peace Reporting
(IWPR)
16.  International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) under the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
17.  Iraqi Association for the Defence of Journalists’
Rights (IJRDA)
18.  Lawyer's Rights Watch Canada (LRWC)
19.  Maharat Foundation
20.  Metro Centre to Defend Journalists in
Iraqi Kurdistan
21.  PAX 
22.  PEN International
23.  Rafto
24.  Reporters Without Borders(RSF)
25.  Rethink Rebuild Society 
26.  Sisters Arab Forum for Human Rights (SAF)
27.  SKeyes Center for Media and
Cultural Freedom
28.  Syrian American Council (SAC)
29.  Syrian Association for Citizenship 
30.  Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of
Expression (SCM)
31.  Syrian Network for Human Rights (SNHR)
32.  Syrian Observatory for Human Rights 
33.  Syrian Women Association
34.  The Day After Association (TDA)
35.  Violations Documentation Center in Syria (VDC)
36.  World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
under the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 