Zimbabwe:  Pastor Evan Mawarire must be immediately and unconditionally released
February  2, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Zimbabwe / 2017 / FebruaryZimbabwe: Pastor Evan Mawarire must be immediately and unconditionally released
Paris-Geneva, February 2, 2017 - Arrested upon
return to Zimbabwe, prominent anti-corruption and human rights defender Pastor
Evan Mawarire must be immediately and unconditionally released, the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership) says
today.
 
On February 1, 2017, Pastor Evan Mawarire was
charged by the Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) with “subverting a constitutional
government”[1].
The ZRP claims that the cleric has been “inciting Zimbabweans from all walks of life either locally or
internationally to revolt and overthrow a constitutionally elected government”.
That includes allegations that Pastor Evan Mawarire has incited some
Zimbabweans living in the USA and “all over the world” through social media to
converge in New York on September 22, 2016 to “confront” President Mugabe, who
was attending the United Nations General Assembly and order him to “immediately”
resign from his position accusing him of destroying the country.
 
“Authorities were
clearly waiting for Pastor Evan Mawarire’s return to continue harassing him. He
cannot set foot in his own country without being arrested, that says a lot about
the situation of those who dare to denounce corruption and human rights
violations in Zimbabwe,” said
Arnold Tsunga, FIDH Vice President.
 
Pastor Evan Mawarire, who has been on self-imposed
exile to the United States for the past seven months, led last year’s #ThisFlag
protests[2]
which encouraged Zimbabweans via social media to hold protests against
President Robert Mugabe, accusing him of corruption and causing the economic
crisis.
 
As a result, in July 2016, Pastor Evan Mawarire was
arrested and charged with “inciting public violence”. The public prosecutor
then altered the charges to “attempting to overthrow a constitutional
government”. However, the Harare Magistrate Vakai Chikwekwe ruled that ZRP
officers had violated his constitutional rights in arresting and detaining him
and that the prosecutor acted in violation of the Constitution by bringing new
charges against Pastor Evan Mawarire while in court.
 
President Mugabe himself publicly attacked Pastor Evan
Mawarire accusing him of being a “great shame” and a “disgrace” for “allowing
himself to demonstrate against the country”.
 
“Leading peaceful protests aiming at exposing bad
governance which affects the rights of the population is nowhere close to
constituting a crime. Pastor Evan Mawarire should be immediately and
unconditionally released,” concluded
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both
members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.



[1] Section 22 (2) (a) of
the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act, Chapter 9:23.


[2] The #ThisFlag movement
started after Pastor Evan Mawarire posted a video on Facebook in which he
appeared with the Zimbabwean flag around his neck and denounced the country’s
worsening economic crisis.
 



​ 