Azerbaijan:  Journalist Rasim Aliyev murdered as human rights crackdown continues in aftermath of European Games
August 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / AugustAzerbaijan: Journalist Rasim Aliyev murdered as human rights crackdown continues in aftermath of European GamesSFR statement2 pages / 172 KB
OMCT
 is part of the 'Sport for Rights' campaign, established to raise the 
problem of political prisoners in the context of the forthcoming 
international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan.Azerbaijan: Journalist
Rasim Aliyev murdered as human rights crackdown continues in aftermath of
European Games
The Sport for Rights coalition resolutely
condemns the brutal murder of Azerbaijani journalist Rasim Aliyev, who
died on 9 August in a Baku hospital, after he was severely beaten on 8 August
by a group of people. Rasim Aliyev had reported receiving continuous threats
and intimidation via social media networks for three weeks leading up to his
death.
Azerbaijani authorities have launched an
investigation into the attack and detained at least one individual so far.
Officials are connecting the attack to a Facebook post from 3 August in which
Rasim Aliyev had criticised a football player,. The relatives of the football
players are alleged to have been responsible for the beating. 
However, prior to the Facebook post in
question, Rasim Aliyev had already been receiving threatening messages
connected to a series of photos he had posted online showing police brutality
and social discontent, such as protesters carrying a banner reading “Resign”.
Rasim Aliyev reported receiving a threat stating “You will be punished for
these photos”. He publicised the threat on 25 July, and filed a complaint with
the police, who failed to take action to protect Rasim Aliyev.
Rasim Aliyev was a board member and employee of
Azerbaijan’s leading media freedom organisation, the Institute for Reporters’
Freedom and Safety (IRFS), and was elected as the organisation’s chairman in
October 2014. Rasim Aliyev had faced many forms of pressure in his work with
IRFS, including being beaten by police in a 2013 incident that was captured in
a widely circulated photograph.
Notably, the attack against Rasim Aliyev took
place exactly one year from the date IRFS was forcibly closed by the
Azerbaijani authorities and IRFS founder and chairman Emin Huseynov was
forced into hiding to ensure his own safety, on 8 August 2014.
"We are
deeply shocked and saddened by the murder of Rasim Aliyev", said Index on Censorship's senior
advocacy officer Melody Patry. "The
attack on Rasim takes place in a deteriorating environment for media
professionals and civil society in Azerbaijan. Rasim was an independent
journalist who kept working after his employer, IRFS, was sealed shut by the
authorities. IRFS existed to provide support to journalists like Rasim,
especially at a time when threats, intimidation and violence against
journalists are commonplace in the country. We call on the authorities to
conduct a full and transparent investigation into the attack and bring the
perpetrators to justice". 
Rasim Aliyev’s murder is the latest incident in
a vicious cycle of violence against journalists in Azerbaijan. Over the past
decade, there have been hundreds of attacks against journalists in the country,
including the murder of Monitor
magazine editor-in-chief Elmar Huseynov in 2005, and writer and journalist
Rafig Tagi in 2011. Both murders remain unsolved, as do nearly all other cases
of attacks against journalists. Another journalist, Tolishi Sedo newspaper editor-in-chief Novruzali Mammadov, died in
2009 while serving a 10-year prison sentence on politically motivated charges.
This attack takes place amidst a brutal human
rights crackdown in the aftermath of the European Games and in the run-up to
November’s parliamentary elections in Azerbaijan. In recent weeks, another
Azerbaijani journalist, Berlin-based Meydan TV Director Emin Milli, reported
receiving a high-level threat, which was shortly followed by pressure against
many of his relatives. Four Meydan TV employees were later prevented from
leaving Azerbaijan.
“Further evidence of the on-going efforts of
the Azerbaijani authorities to silence all forms of criticism and dissent can
be found in the many violations taking place in the cases of human rights
defenders Leyla and Arif Yunus and journalist Khadija Ismayilova, who are
currently standing trial on politically motivated charges”, said FIDH Honorary President
Souhayr Belhassen and OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock, whose organisations
work together within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders. The prosecutor has requested staggeringly long prison
sentences for the Yunus couple, despite the fact that both have serious and
worsening health problems and should be immediately released on humanitarian if
not political grounds.
Sport for Rights calls on the Azerbaijani
authorities to conduct a full and transparent investigation into Rasim Aliyev’s
murder, and to bring the perpetrators as well as the masterminds behind the
crime to justice. The cycle of violence against journalists in Azerbaijan must
stop, and those responsible must be prosecuted. Threats against journalists
must be taken seriously, and the threatened journalists and their families must
be afforded adequate protection. The coalition also calls for the authorities
to take concrete steps to improve the broader human rights situation in the
country, including the immediate and unconditional release of all jailed
journalists and human rights defenders.
Sport for Rights further calls for the
international community to maintain its attention on Azerbaijan now that media
attention has shifted away from the country following the European Games. As
Rasim Aliyev’s murder shows, critical voices are at greater risk now than ever
before. The international community must act now to hold Azerbaijan accountable
for its human rights obligations and promote much-needed reforms in the
country.
Supporting organisations:
Article 19
FIDH (International
Federation for Human Rights), within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Front Line
Defenders
Helsinki
Foundation for Human Rights
Human
Rights House Foundation
Index on
Censorship
International
Media Support
Netherlands
Helsinki Committee
PEN
American Center
Polish
Green Network
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 