Saudi Arabia:  Appeal Court confirms sentence against human rights lawyer Waleed Abu Al-Khair to 15 years
February 20, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2015 / FebruarySaudi Arabia: Appeal Court confirms sentence against human rights lawyer Waleed Abu Al-Khair to 15 yearsJointPR_SaudiArabia_En1 page / 73 KB​SAUDI ARABIA: Appeal
Court confirms sentence against human rights lawyer Waleed Abu Al-Khair to 15
years 
Paris-Geneva,
February 20, 2015 - Specialized Criminal Court of Appeal in Riyadh endorses a
15-year sentence against lawyer Waleed Abu Al-Khair. The conviction of the
human rights lawyer jailed on April 15, 2014 should be overturned and he should
immediately and unconditionally be released, declared the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint programme of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture – OMCT) and the Union Internationale des Avocats (UIA - International Association of Lawyers).
 
On February 15, 2015,
the Specialized Criminal Court of Appeal in Riyadh, which deals with terrorism
cases, confirmed the sentence of 15 years in prison, a travel ban of equal
duration following imprisonment, and a fine of SR 200,000 (approximately EUR
46,957) against human rights lawyer Waleed Abu Al-Khair. The charges
against him are “striving to overthrow the state and the authority of the
King”, “criticising and insulting the judiciary”, “assembling international
organisations against the Kingdom”, “creating and supervising an unlicensed
organisation”, and “contributing to the establishment of another” and “preparing
and storing information that will affect public security”.
 
“No
lawyer should suffer prosecution for any legitimate activities undertaken in
the course of representing a client or for the promotion and protection of
human rights. The UIA will continue to denounce the injustice done to our
colleague”, said UIA President Miguel Loinaz.
 
On February 4, 2015,
Mr. Abu Al-Khair was transferred from Malaz prison to Al-Ha'ir rehabilitation
prison in Riyadh, approximately 1,000 km away from his home city without any
warning. This is Abu Al-Khair's sixth transfer and came after his refusal to
recognise the legitimacy of the trial court and to apologise.
 
“Waleed
Abu Al-Khair's summary and arbitrary sentence is a clear attempt to harass and
discredit his tremendous human rights work. Charges against him are completely
unfounded and he must immediately and unconditionally be released”, said FIDH
President Karim Lahidji. “Saudi authorities must stop the persecution of
human rights activists and lawyers”, he added.
 
Our organisations
recall that Waleed Abu Al-Khair is a prominent human rights lawyer, Founder and
Director of the Monitor of Human Rights in Saudi Arabia (MHRSA). The
application to register the organisation as a human rights NGO was rejected.
Mr. Abu Al-Khair also acted as lawyer of the prominent human rights defender Raif
Badawi. In 2012, he was awarded the Olof Palme Prize for human rights for
his “strong, self-sacrificing and sustained struggle to promote respect for
human and civil rights for both men and women in Saudi Arabia”.
 
“The
Saudi authorities should immediately release Waleed Abu Al-Khair as his
conviction is aimed at preventing him from carrying out his legitimate and
peaceful human rights activities in Saudi Arabia”, said OMCT
Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
For more information, please contact:
·        
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·        
OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24 