Lao People's Democ. Rep.:  Joint press release: Free former student leaders arbitrarily detained for 17 years
October 26, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Lao People's Democ. Rep. / 2016 / OctoberLao People's Democ. Rep.: Joint press release: Free former student leaders arbitrarily detained for 17 yearsLaos_2016.10.26_Joint_PR2 pages / 219 KB​













The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT)
Lao Movement for Human Rights (LMHR)
Paris-Geneva, October 26,
2016 - The Lao government must immediately and unconditionally release two
former pro-democracy student leaders who have been arbitrarily detained for 17
years and disclose the fate or whereabouts of two others, the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint FIDH and OMCT partnership)
and the Lao Movement for Human Rights (LMHR) said today.
Mr. Thongpaseuth Keuakoun and Mr. Sengaloun Phengphanh, two
former student leaders with the Lao Students Movement for Democracy (LSMD), are
believed to be detained in Samkhe prison, located on the eastern outskirts of
Vientiane. Messrs. Thongpaseuth and Sengaloun were arrested in Vientiane on
October 26, 1999, along with fellow LSMD members Mr. Bouavanh Chanhmanivong,
Mr. Khamphouvieng Sisa-at, and Mr. Keochay, for planning peaceful
demonstrations that called for democracy, social justice, and respect for human
rights. All five were subsequently sentenced to 20 years in prison for
“generating social turmoil and endangering national security.”
“Thongpaseuth and Sengaloun’s
prolonged, arbitrary, and incommunicado detention in atrocious conditions is an
alarming violation of international law. The fact that the two former student
leaders are among Southeast Asia’s longest-serving political prisoners reflects
Vientiane’s long-standing and severe repression of any dissent”, said FIDH President Dimitris
Christopoulos.
Mr. Khamphouvieng Sisa-at died in Samkhe prison in September 2001 as a
result of serious food deprivation, prolonged heat exposure, and lack of
adequate medical care. In 2006, the government stated that Mr. Keochay had been
released in 2002 upon completion of his prison term and “transferred to
guardians to further educate him to become a good citizen”. However, Keochay’s
family was never informed of his alleged release, and his fate or whereabouts
remain unknown. The government’s claim about Mr. Keochay’s release as well as
Mr. Khamphouvieng’s death in custody contradict Vientiane’s earlier statement
that only two LSMD members – Messrs. Thongpaseuth and Sengaloun - had been
arrested on October 26, 1999. The Lao government had initially refused to
acknowledge even the detention of Messrs. Thongpaseuth and Sengaloun. To this
day, the fate and whereabouts of the fifth former student leader, Mr. Bouavanh,
also remain unknown.
“The authorities must immediately and unconditionally release
Thongpaseuth and Sengaloun and provide compensation for their wrongful
detention. The Lao government must conduct a thorough, impartial, and
transparent investigation into the
death of Khamphouvieng Sisa-at in Samkhe prison, and disclose the fate or
whereabouts of Bouavanh and Keochay,” said OMCT
Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
The Observatory and LMHR also call on the Lao authorities to determine
the fate or whereabouts of nine other activists - two women, Ms. Kingkeo
and Ms. Somchit, and seven men, Messrs. Soubinh, Souane, Sinpasong,
Khamsone, Nou, Somkhit, and Sourigna - who were
detained in November 2009 for planning to participate in pro-democracy
demonstrations. Their detention, followed by the Lao government’s refusal to
acknowledge their deprivation of liberty, amounts to enforced disappearance
under Article 2 of the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED). Despite signing the ICPPED on September 29,
2008, Laos is yet to ratify the convention.
The Observatory and LMHR reiterate their call for the Lao government to
conduct swift, thorough, and impartial investigations into all cases of
enforced disappearances in the country and hold those responsible accountable.
The Observatory and LMHR also urge the Lao government to speed up the
investigation into the enforced disappearance of prominent civil society leader
Mr. Sombath Somphone, who was last seen at a police checkpoint on a busy
street of Vientiane on the evening of December 15, 2012.
“The international community must
unequivocally condemn the government’s ongoing repression of civil society,
urge the authorities to immediately release all detained activists and human
rights defenders, and demand that all cases of enforced disappearance in the
country be thoroughly investigated and resolved”, said LMHR President Vanida
Thephsouvanh.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European
Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.
 
Press contacts
FIDH: Mr. Andrea Giorgetta (English) - Tel: +66886117722 (Bangkok) / Mr.
Arthur Manet (French, English, Spanish) - Tel: +33672284294 (Paris)
OMCT: Ms. Delphine Reculeau:
+41228094939 (Geneva) 