Thailand:  Ongoing judicial harassment against Ms. Sirikan Charoensiri, from Thai Lawyers for Human Rights
February  3, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / FebruaryThailand: Ongoing judicial harassment against Ms. Sirikan Charoensiri, from Thai Lawyers for Human Rights
New information
THA 002 / 0715 / OBS 055.3
Ongoing judicial harassment
Thailand
February 3, 2016
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Thailand. 
New information:
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial harassment against
Ms. Sirikan Charoensiri, a human rights lawyer with the organization
Thai Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR)[1],
in connection with her work representing 14 activists of the Neo Democracy
Movement (NDM)[2]
(see background information).
According to the
information received on February 2, 2016, Ms. Sirikan received a police summons
dated January 29. The summons directed her to report to Bangkok’s Chanasongkram
police station at 10:00 am on February 9, 2016, to hear criminal charges filed
against her under Sections 172 (filing
a false police report)[3]
and 368 (failure to comply with official orders)[4]
of the Criminal Code (see
background information).
The charges are the
result of a lawsuit filed by Ms. Sirikan against Thai police for “malfeasance”
in June 2015. The lawsuit alleges that the police unduly obstructed her work as
a lawyer. At the time Ms. Sirikan filed the lawsuit, a senior police officer
had threatened her to file a counter suit against her.
The Observatory
strongly condemns the judicial harassment against Ms. Sirikan, which is a
blatant and calculated attempt to thwart her legitimate work as a human rights
lawyer.

The Observatory calls on the Thai authorities to drop all charges against Ms.
Sirikan, as well as against the 14 student activists, and to repeal decrees
issued by the the Head of the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO) that
fail to comply with international human rights standards.
Background information:
On June 26, 2015,
police arrested 14 activists of the Neo Democracy Movement (NDM) pursuant to an
arrest warrant issued by the Bangkok Military Court. The activists were: Mr. Rangsiman
Rome, Mr. Wasant Sadesit, Mr. Songtham Kaewpanphruek, Mr. Payu
Boonsopon, Mr. Apiwat Suntararak, Mr. Rattapol Supasophon,
Mr. Supachai Pookhlongploy, Mr. Apisit Sapnapaphan, Mr. Panupong
Sritananuwat, Mr. Suvicha Pitungkorn, Mr. Pakorn Areekul, Mr.
Chatupat Boonyapatraksa, Mr. Pornchai Yuanyee and Ms. Chonticha
Chaengreo. All were charged with violating the Head of the National Council
for Peace and Order (NCPO) Order No. 3/2015, which bans gatherings of five or
more people, and Article 116 of the Thai Criminal Code (‘sedition'). If found
guilty of sedition, the student activists face prison terms of up to seven
years. In addition, if found guilty of violating the Head of the NCPO Order No.
3/2015, they may face up to six months in prison and a fine of up to 10,000
baht (US$280).
At 0.30 am on June
27, 2015, the Bangkok Military Court remanded the 14 student activists in
custody for 12 days. The 13 men were detained at the Bangkok Remand Prison, and
Ms. Chonticha Chaengreo was held at Bangkok’s Woman Correctional Institution.
On July 7, the Bangkok Military Court rejected a police request to extend the
detention of the 14 and ordered their release. However, the charges of
violating NCPO Order No. 3/2015, which bans gatherings of more than five
people, and Article 116 of the Thai Criminal Code have not been dropped.

Ms. Sirikan together with seven other TLHR lawyers assisted the 14 students at
the Bangkok Military Court.

Shortly after the hearing, more than 10 police officers stationed by the
Bangkok Military Court, including Pol. Maj. Gen. Chayapol Chatchaidej,
commander of the Sixth Division of Metropolitan Police Bureau, requested access
to Ms. Sirikan's car in order to search for the mobile phones of the activist
students. Following Ms. Sirikan's refusal due to the lack of a court warrant
and relying on the special protection of lawyers and of the lawyer-client
confidentiality, the police officers arbitrarily seized Ms. Sirikan’s car by
locking one of her car wheels. The police then sealed all doors with A4 paper
and duck-tape and surrounding it with metal fences. Fearing that her clients’
belongings as well as the lawyers’ laptops and case files could be removed from
the car, the group of TLHR lawyers decided to stay overnight to watch the car.

At 12:45 pm on June 27, Ms. Sirikan went to a police station to file a
complaint against the police for “malfeasance” under Article 157 of Thai
Criminal Code regarding the illegal confiscation of her car. While Ms. Sirikan
was in the process of filing the complaint, a police team arrived at the site
of her seized car at 3:30 pm with a search warrant. The police were accompanied
by officials from the Office of Police Forensic Science to conduct the search.

Upon presentation of the search warrant, Ms. Sirikan, who went back on the
spot, agreed to open her car. Equipment found in the car included TLHR’s case
files, personal computers of the seven TLHR lawyers and personal belongings of
the student activists including mobile phones. Five mobile phones belonging to
the students were confiscated. The mobile phones belonging to the students were
placed into an envelope and the envelope was sealed. The envelope was turned
over to the custody of the Office of Police Forensic Science.

At approximately 6:00 pm, Ms. Sirikan returned to the Chanasongkram police
station in Bangkok to file a second complaint against the Sixth Division of
Metropolitan Police Bureau Commander Pol. Maj. Gen. Chayapol Chatchaidej and
his subordinates for “malfeasance”. Ms. Sirikan and her colleague were then
called into the chief police investigator’s room where the chief investigator
underscored the fact that “the police had powers to search her car” and
suggested that if Ms. Sirikan filed a suit, the police would file a counter
suit against her. Despite the threat, at 11:00 pm, Ms. Sirikan decided to file
a complaint for “malfeasance” which the police accepted.

On June 28, Metropolitan Police Commissioner Pol Lt Gen Srivara Rangsipramkul
told reporters police had recovered important evidence from Ms. Sirikan’s car
and that the police were considering whether to press charges against her.

Finally, on June 29, police visited the house of Ms. Sirikan’s parents in her
hometown and asked her mother to identify her in various photos and asked about
her daughter’s background.

Actions requested:

Please write to the authorities of Thailand asking them to:
i. Immediately and
unconditionally drop all charges against Ms. Sirikan, as well as against the 14
student activists and put an end to all acts of judicial harassment against
them and all human rights defenders in Thailand;
ii. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Sirikan, the 14
student activists, as well as of all human rights defenders in Thailand;

iii. Comply with the national and international legislation safeguarding the
independence of lawyers and protecting them from unlawful interference in their
professional activities;

iv. Order a prompt, thorough and impartial investigation into the harassment of
Ms. Sirikan in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and
apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;

v. Repeal the Head of the National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO) Order No.
3/2015 banning gatherings of more than five people;

vi. Guarantee that the exercise of freedom of expression and assembly are not
prosecuted under Section 116 of the Thai Criminal Code;

vii. Put an end to the prosecution of civilians in military courts in
accordance with international human rights law that prohibits governments from
using military courts to try civilians when civilian courts are functioning;

viii. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”, and Article 12.2, which provides that “the
State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”;

viii. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Thailand.
Addresses:
·     Prime Minister, Gen Prayuth Chan-ocha, Government
House, 1 Phitsanulok Road, Dusit, 10300, Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 282
5131
·     Minister of Interior, Gen Anupong Paochinda, Asatang
Road, Ratchabophit, 10200, Bangkok, THAILAND
·     Minister of Foreign Affairs, Don Pramudwinai, Sri
Ayutthaya Building, 443 Sri Ayutthaya Road, Phaya Thai, 10400, Bangkok,
THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·     Minister of Justice, Gen Paiboon Khumchaya, 120 Chaeng
Watthana Road, Laksi, 10210, Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 953 0503
·     Pol Gen Somyot Poompanmoung, Commissioner-General of
the Royal Thai Police, 1st Building, 7th Floor, Rama I Road, Pathumwan, 10330,
Bangkok, THAILAND; Fax: +66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2 251 8702
·     Ms. Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of the National Human
Rights Commission of Thailand; 120 Chaeng Watthana Road, Laksi, 10210, Bangkok,
THAILAND; Email: help@nhrc.or.th
·     Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations in Geneva, rue Gustave Moynier 5, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Tel:
+ 41 22 715 10 10; Fax: + 41 22 715 10 00 / 10 02; Email:mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·     Embassy of Thailand in Brussels, 2 Sq. du Val de la
Cambre, 1050 Ixelles, Belgium, Tel: + 32 2 640 68 10; Fax: + 32 2 648 30 66;
Email: thaibxl@pophost.eunet.be
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Thailand in
your respective country.



[1]               
Thai Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR) is an organization set up after the
2014-coup to provide legal aid to civilian arrested and/or prosecuted by
military, and monitor and document post-coup human rights situations and
violations throughout Thailand. TLHR received a human rights award by the
French Embassy in Bangkok in December 2014.


[2]               
The Neo Democracy Movement (NDM) is an organisation advocating for the
restoration of democracy, for the end of trials against civilians before
military courts, and for the respect of human rights and freedoms. NDM is
driven by five principles: democracy, human rights, justice, public
participation and peaceful means (non-violence).


[3]               
Article 172 states: "Whoever, giving any false information concerning a
criminal offence, which may likely cause injury to the other person or the
public, to the Public Prosecutor, official conducting cases, inquiry official
or any official who has the power to investigate the criminal cases, shall be
punished with imprisonment not exceeding two years or fined not exceeding four
thousand Baht, or both."


[4]               Article
368 states: "Whoever, being informed of an order of an official given
according to the power invested by law, refuses to comply with the same without
any reasonable cause or excuse, shall be punished with imprisonment not
exceeding ten days or fined not exceeding five hundred Baht, or both. If such
order is an order authorized by law requiring a person to assist in carrying on
the activities in the function of an official, the offender shall be punished
with imprisonment not exceeding one month or fined not exceeding one thousand
Baht, or both." 