Turkey:  Continued judicial harassment of 47 lawyers, one journalist, one legal secretary and two drivers
March 20, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2014 / MarchTurkey: Continued judicial harassment of 47 lawyers, one journalist, one legal secretary and two drivers​













New information
TUR 002 / 0613 / OBS 059.1
Provisional releases /
Judicial harassment /
Arbitrary detentions
Turkey
March 20, 2014
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in
the following situation in Turkey.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources of the continued judicial harassment of 47
lawyers, one journalist, one legal secretary and two drivers[1]
and the provisional release of nine lawyers and one journalist. 
 
According to the
information received, on March 18, 2014, the Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 1
ordered the provisional release of nine lawyers, Messrs. Doğan Erbaş, İbrahim
Bilmez, Ömer Güneş, Cengiz Çiçek, Muharrem Şahin, Emran
Emekçi, Sebahattin Kaya, Mehmet Bayraktar and Ms. Hatice
Korkut and one journalist, Mr. Cengiz Kapmaz, arguing that that there was no reasonable ground to keep them in
detention[2].
The aforementioned had been detained since November 2011. To date, all of the
accused are free. No date was set for the following hearing.
 
This decision follows the
recent closure of specialised heavy penal courts following a reform of the
Turkish Penal Procedure Code. After the Istanbul Special Heavy Penal Court No.
16 was closed, the hearing of the case was provisionally transferred to an
ordinary court, the Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 1. Thereafter the case will
be held before the Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 19.
 
The Observatory recalls that the lawyers have
been involved in the legal representation of Abdullah Öcalan, the leader of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers'
Party (PKK), and have participated in
the Kurdish Communities Union (KCK)[3]
trial held before Diyarbakır Special Heavy Penal Court No. 6. During the KCK
trial, in their capacity as defence lawyers, they took stance against the ban
to use the Kurdish language. 
 
The Observatory welcomes the provisional release of the above-mentioned lawyers and
journalist and thanks all the persons, institutions and organisations
who intervened in their favour. However, the Observatory regrets that several
of them were arbitrarily detained for more than two years, and remains deeply
concerned about their ongoing judicial harassment for allegedly “passing” Abdullah Öcalan's “orders” and being members
or executives of an illegal organisation, the KCK.
 
 
The
Observatory considers this trial to amount to judicial harassment for their
activities as human rights lawyers, and calls upon the Turkish judicial
authorities to unconditionally drop all charges. 
 
The Observatory further
recalls that this trial is one of dozens of ongoing mass show trials of Kurdish
intellectuals and activists in Turkey. Since 2009, over 8,000 people have been
arrested in the name of the KCK investigations – counter-terrorism operations
that in reality have little to do with countering terrorism, but rather have
been used as a means of criminalising peaceful dissent and Kurdish political and
cultural expression. 
 
In particular, 22 lawyers
belonging to the Progressive Lawyers Association (Cagdas Hukukçular Dernegi
– ÇHD) who had been involved in the defence of the above-mentioned lawyers are
also facing terrorism charges since January 2013, five of them remain in
pre-trial detention to date, namely Mr. Selçuk Kozağaçlı, ÇHD National
President (Ankara Bar Association); Mr. Taylan Tanay, President of ÇHD
Istanbul branch (Istanbul Bar Association); Mr. Günay Dağ, member
(Istanbul Bar Association); Ms. Ebru Timtik, member (Istanbul Bar
Association) and Ms. Barkın Timtik, member (Istanbul Bar Association)[4].
 
Background information:
 
On November 22, 2011, an
unprecedented broad campaign of arrest was launched and targeted dozens of
lawyers from the Ağrı, Ardahan, Batman,
Bursa, Diyarbakır, Denizli, Hakkari, Istanbul, Izmir, Kars, Mersin, Mus, Siirt, Sırnak, Urfa, Van Bar Associations, one journalist and three staff working for Asrin Law Firm (one legal secretary and
two law office drivers) in the scope of an anti-terrorism operation. Several of
the lawyers belonged to Asrin Law Firm. They
were taken into custody in Istanbul for their alleged membership in KCK under
charges of “membership in an illegal organisation” and “directing an illegal
organisation”. 
 
All were remanded into custody pending the end
of the investigation after they had been interrogated at the Beşiktaş
(Istanbul) Heavy Penal Court No. 11 and detained in İstanbul Bakırköy Closed
Prison for Females or Kocaeli Kandıra F Type Closed Prison No. 2. Some were
arrested a few weeks or months after. At the beginning of the detention,
communication between some of the lawyers and their families was restricted.
 
On April 18, 2012, the court accepted the
indictment order submitted to it on April 6. 46 lawyers together with one journalist and three staff working for
Asrin Law Firm were charged of “belonging to a criminal organisation”
under Article 314 of the TPC.
 
The indictment is mostly
based on recordings of discussions held between Abdullah Öcalan and his lawyers
in the visiting room of İmralı Island Prison, in violation of the principle of confidentiality between lawyer and client, which is
fundamental to an effective legal defence or on evidence related to acts
ordinarily conducted by lawyers to defend their clients. 

On July 16-17, 2012, the trial opened before the Istanbul Special Heavy Penal Court No. 16
in Çağlayan Justice Palace. At the time, only 36 lawyers and the journalist
remained in pre-trial detention. All other had been provisionally released. At
the end of this hearing nine lawyers were provisionally released. Dozens of
international trial observers monitored the hearing, including one lawyer
mandated by the Observatory. Trial observers complained about the very bad material
conditions of the hearing, which impaired the right to a fair trial.

Subsequently, one-day
hearings took place on November 6, 2012, January 3, 2013 and March 27, 2013
inside the Campus of the Silivri Prison, which has larger courtrooms. But, still,
at some hearings, the family of the accused were denied access to the courtroom
due to the lack of space. One lawyer was provisionally released on January 3
and four on March 27. 
 
On June 20, 2013, the Istanbul Special Heavy Penal Court No. 16 held in the
Campus of the Silivri Prison the fifth hearing in this long running mass trial
of lawyers. The court heard several of the accused and decided to provisionally
release seven of them, mostly some it had heard at the previous hearing.
Defence lawyers raised several irregularities in the act of indictment. The
prosecution of another lawyer, Mr. Bekir
Kaya, was joined to this case. The Court postponed the hearing to September 17,
2013.
 
On September 17, 2013, the Istanbul Special Heavy Penal Court No. 6 released
several of the lawyers who remained in pre-trial detention.
 
Actions required:
 
Please write to the Turkish
authorities, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned
47 lawyers, one journalist, one legal secretary and two drivers, as well as all
human rights defenders in Turkey;
 
ii.
Release Mr. Selçuk Kozağaçlı, Mr. Taylan Tanay, Mr. Günay Dağ, Ms. Ebru Timtik and Ms. Barkın
Timtik immediately and unconditionally since their
detention is arbitrary and only aims at sanctioning their human rights
activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts harassment, including at
the judicial level, against the above-mentioned human rights defenders, as well as against
all human rights defenders in Turkey and ensure in all circumstances that
they are able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrances;
 
iv. Comply with the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, as well as
Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration”;
 
v. More generally, ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
Turkey.
 
Addresses:
 
· President of Turkey, Mr. Abdullah Gül,
Cumhurbaskanligi 06100 Ankara, Turkey; Fax: +90 312 468 5026; Email: cumhurbaskanligi@tccb.gov.tr 
· Prime Minister, Mr. Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Office
of the Prime Minister Basbakanlik 06573 Ankara, Turkey, Fax: + 90 312 417 0476;
Email: receptayyip.erdogan@basbakanlik.gov.tr 
· Deputy Prime Minister Responsible for Human
Rights and Counter Terrorism, Mr. Beşir Atalay, Email: besir.atalay@tbmm.gov.tr, Fax: 00 90 (312) 422 13 98
· Interior Minister, Mr. Idris Naim Şahin,
06644 Ankara, Turkey; Fax: + 90 312 418 17 95 / +90 312 418 7696, 
· Justice Minister, Mr. Sadullah Ergin, Ministry
of Justice/ Adalet Bakanligi, 06659 Ankara, Turkey; Fax: + 90 312 414 62 26
· Foreign Minister, Mr. Ahmed Davudoglu, Office of
the Prime Minister, Basbakanlik, 06573 Ankara, Turkey; Fax: +90 312 287 88 11
· Ambassador, Mr. Oğuz Demiralp, Permanent Mission
of Turkey to the United Nations in Geneva, Ch. du Petit-Saconnex 28b - CP 271,
CH-1211, Geneva 19, Switzerland, E-mail: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41
22 734 08 59
· Ambassador, Mr. Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic
Mission of Turkey to the European Union in Brussels, Avenue des Arts 36-38,
1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, March 20,
2014
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and
OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims
to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line: 
· Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·Tel et fax FIDH: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / 33 1 43 55
18 80 
·Tel et fax OMCT: +41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49
29



[1] The 47 lawyers are Mehdi ÖZTÜZÜN, Faik Özgür EROL, Muharem
ŞAHİN, Fuat COŞACAK, İbrahim BİLMEZ, Emran EMEKÇİ, Cengiz ÇİÇEK, Doğan
ERBAŞ, Hatice KORKUT, Ömer GÜNEŞ, Mehmet Sani KIZILKAYA, Mehmet
BAYRAKTAR, Bedri KURAN, Sabahattin KAYA, Ümit SİSLİGÜN, Erdal
SAFALI, Ayşe BATUMLU KAYA, Asya ÜLKER, Nevzat ANUK, Baran
PAMUK, Ergün CANAN, Nezahat PAŞA BAYRAKTAR, Meral ATASOY
ATAN, Fırat AYDINKAYA, Yalçın SARITAŞ, Şaziye ÖNDER, Mustafa
ERASLAN, Mehmet Sabır TAŞ, Cemal DEMİR, Ümit SİSLİGÜN,
Erdal SAFALI, Ayşe BATUMLU KAYA, Nevzat ANUK, Baran
PAMUK, Ergün CANAN, Nezahat PAŞA BAYRAKTAR, Meral ATASOY
ATAN, Fırat AYDINKAYA, Yalçın SARITAŞ, Mehmet Deniz BÜYÜK,
Serkan AKBAŞ, Servet DEMİR, Mehmet AYATA, Şakir
DEMİR, Mizgin IRGAT, Mensur IŞIK and Bekir KAYA. The
journalist is Mr. Cengiz KAPMAZ. The three law firm staff are Sabahat Zeynep
ARAT, Hüseyin KARASU and Sıdık BAL.


[2] The court stated in its decision
that there was no sign indicating that the accused would flee, they all had
strong links to the places that they live and perform their profession,
evidences had been collected so there was no possibility that accused would try
to effect evidences or witnesses. 


[3] KCK is an umbrella organisation of
the Kurdish political movement including politicians, trade unionists,
university students, etc. said to be the “urban branch” of the armed PKK.


[4] See Observatory
Joint Press Release, June 28, 2013. 