Brazil:  Brazil: threats and ill-treatment of Mr. Samuel Francino Santana Monteiro, detained in the prison known as Dakar III in Pinheiros, State of São Paulo
December 20, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Brazil / 2001 / DecemberBrazil: Brazil: threats and ill-treatment of Mr. Samuel Francino Santana Monteiro, detained in the prison known as Dakar III in Pinheiros, State of São PauloCase BRA 201201  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT INTERVENTION in the following situation in Brazil.  Description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Christian Action Against Torture-ACAT of the torture, threats and ill-treatment of Mr. Samuel Francino Santana Monteiro, detained in the prison known as Dakar III in Pinheiros, State of São Paulo, apparently by members of the police.  According to information received from ACAT, Mr. Samuel Francino Santana Monteiro, who is being detained in Dakar III prison, was severely ill-treated and struck by several policemen until he was temporarily crippled and confined to a wheelchair for over a month; he still suffers from violent pains in his liver.  According to the information we have, these incidents took place three months ago when Mr. Samuel Francino Santana Monteiro refused to hand over to a policeman a piece of jewellery that his mother had given to him.  He was struck by several policemen who left him in an appalling state.  It would appear that Mr. Samuel Francisco Santana Monteiro did not receive any medical assistance, nor was he examined to determine the nature of the aggression of which he had been the victim.  Later, on his recovery, he was transferred to a prison known as Dakar II, also at Pinheiros, from where he was taken out on December 16th 2001 by members of the Special Operations Group (GOE-Grupo de Operações Especiais) claiming that he had to attend a audience with the judge the next day, December 17th.  The information goes on to say that the second time he was beaten, Mr. Samuel Francisco Santana Monteiro recognised one of the policemen who had been present the first time and had demanded that he had over the jewellery.  This policeman, realising that the victim had recognised him, threatened by, saying “if you intend to warn the internal affairs, you will be shot dead” and then challenged him saying “they did not fear you because they were from the GOE”.  The International Secretariat of the OMCT shares ACAT’s concern about the security and physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Samuel Francisco Santana Monteiro,   Geneva, December 20th 2001 