Philippines:  Extrajudicial killings and attacks against human rights defenders surge under Duterte
September  8, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2017 / SeptemberPhilippines: Extrajudicial killings and attacks against human rights defenders surge under Duterte





Paris-Geneva, September 8, 2017 - Authorities in the Philippines must ensure
greater protection of human rights defenders amid a recent surge of killings
and attacks against them, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (FIDH-OMCT) said today.
 
In
recent days, at least four representatives from different communities, -
peasant and small-scale miner groups - have been shot dead. More than 50 human
rights defenders - mostly peasants or indigenous persons - have been killed
since President Duterte assumed office in June 2016, according to human rights
NGO Karapatan (a member of OMCT’s SOS-Torture Network). Karapatan has
documented the killing of more than 660 human rights defenders in the last 16
years in the Philippines.
 
“While human rights defenders in the Philippines
have been traditionally vulnerable to killings, threats, and attacks[1],
President Duterte’s anti-human rights rhetoric and blatant disregard for human
life have created a more hostile environment for defenders”,
said FIDH President Dimitris Christopoulos.
 
President
Duterte has repeatedly threatened to kill human rights defenders. The latest
such instance was on August 16, when he suggested that human rights activists
were “obstructing justice” and urged police to “shoot them”.
 
 “President
Duterte’s Government, like any other Philippine
Government, has a legal obligation to protect human rights and human rights
defenders. His discourse that literally encourages violence against defenders -
the very people who stand up for human rights, social justice, and an inclusive
society - must stop”, said
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
On
August 23, 2017, Mr. Roger Timboco,
a member of the peasant group KAMMAO (Kahugpungan
sa mga Maguuma sa Maco ComVal), was shot dead in Mawab, Compostela Valley.
Four days later, a member of “Abante”,
a local organisation of small-scale miners, Mr. Lomer Gerodias, was shot dead in Maragusan, also in Compostela
Valley. Both killings were believed to have been carried out by Philippine
soldiers. Two others, Mr. Jezreel Arrabis and his wife Ms. Dalia Arrabis, both members of the
Farmers Association in Davao City (FADC), were gunned down in Davao City on
September 2, 2017.
 
In
addition to extrajudicial killings, human rights defenders operating in the
Philippines continue to be the target of harassment, death threats, and verbal
abuse. On August 22, police raided the houses of peasant activists Mr. Rolando Gumban, his son Jeremy Gumban, and son-in-law Jun Roy Diane - all members of farmers
group Pamanggas-KMP, which works to
promote land rights in Sitio Lubigan, Barangay Pananawan, Masbate Province.
Police arrested the three and detained them at Sara police station, Iloilo
Province. The charges against them are still unknown. In July and August,
several members of Karapatan, including Secretary Generals Ms. Cristina Palabay
and Mr. Reylan Vergara, received
death threats. On August 20, 2017, Dr. Darby
Santiago, Chairperson of the Health Alliance for Democracy (HEAD) - a
member organisation of Karapatan, also received death threats.
 
A
fact-finding mission to the Philippines, carried out by the Observatory from
August 7 to 16, 2017, observed an increasingly hostile environment for human
rights defenders in the country. Interlocutors reported having experienced
increased difficulties in carrying out their human rights activities under
President Duterte, particularly in relation to investigations surrounding
extrajudicial killings allegedly committed by police and vigilantes as part of
Duterte’s ‘war on drugs’.
 
House
Bill 1617, which is currently under consideration before the House of
Representatives and aims at strengthening the protection of human rights
defenders, could help improve the situation for defenders. The draft
legislation reaffirms the rights of human rights defenders when carrying out
their peaceful and legitimate activities. It also imposes an obligation on the
Government to take all precautionary measures to ensure the protection of human
rights defenders against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de
jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of their legitimate activities.

The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is
to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
For
more information, please contact:
• FIDH: Samuel Hanryon: +33 6 72 28 42 94 / Audrey
Couprie: +33 6 48 05 91 57 
• OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39




[1] For more background information, see
in particular Observatory Mission Report, The
Philippines: Human rights defenders at the forefront despite an ongoing culture
of violence and impunity, February 2015. 