Joint NGO Response to the Draft Copenhagen Declaration on the European Convention on Human Rights system
February 14, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2018 / FebruaryJoint NGO Response to the Draft Copenhagen Declaration on the European Convention on Human Rights systemCommentary and Proposal on the Draft Copenhagen Proposal12 pages / 602 KB
The AIRE Centre, Amnesty
International, the European Human Rights Advocacy Centre, the European
Implementation Network, Fair Trials, the International Commission of Jurists,
Open Society Justice Initiative and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) welcome this opportunity to respond to the Draft Copenhagen Declaration
on the European Convention on Human Rights system presented by the Danish
Chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers on 5 February 2018. The aforementioned
organisations recognise and appreciate the open approach of the Danish Chairmanship
in the development of this Declaration, and in particular its willingness to
involve civil society throughout the process.
Civil society organisations,
including the undersigned, have participated in discussions on the development
and reform of the Convention system throughout its history, and in particular,
have closely followed and contributed to the current phase of the reform debate
since its initiation at Interlaken in 2010. 
From this engagement and from our collective experience in working to
protect human rights across the Council of Europe region, we are more convinced
than ever that the viability and health of the Convention system is crucially
dependant on better national implementation of the Convention rights. Accordingly,
practical action to implement the Convention rights at national level, and to
support and supervise this implementation, must be the urgent and sustained
priority of the State Parties in their efforts to strengthen the Convention
system.  
We therefore welcome the sections
of the draft Declaration that address national implementation and execution of
judgments.  However we regret that, in
contrast to the 2015 Brussels Declaration, the overall emphasis of concern has
moved away from these urgent matters. 
Without effective national implementation, the principle of subsidiarity
is merely theoretical, and the problems of the Court’s caseload cannot be
satisfactorily or sustainably resolved. This message should be conveyed in strong
non-equivocal terms in the Declaration that is to be adopted in April.
Furthermore, we consider that effective execution of judgments, which is
closely linked to national implementation, should be prioritised and made more
prominent in the Declaration, and addressed alongside the section on national
implementation. 
Better national implementation
also depends on the effective scrutiny and supervision carried out by the
Council of Europe institutions, in particular the Court. Subsidiarity means
that the primary responsibility for the protection of Convention rights lies at
national level: it does not circumscribe the Court’s role in supervising the
observance of State Parties’ obligations under the Convention. It is vital that
the independence, authority and role of the Court be maintained, and that the
right of individual application be preserved. We therefore welcome the draft
Declaration’s acknowledgement that the right to individual application is a
cornerstone of the Convention system. However we are concerned at proposals and
language in many places in the Draft Declaration, in particular in regard to
the proposed “dialogue” between State Parties and the Court, that risk
undermining the independence and authority of the Court. It is essential that
nothing in the Declaration provides a pretext for political pressure on the
Court.  We make specific recommendations
below for amendments necessary to ensure the full respect of the Court’s
independence.
It should also be emphasised at
the outset that the integrity and authority of the Convention system, as with
any system for international human rights protection, depends on upholding the
principle of the universality of human rights. The draft Declaration’s emphasis
on subsidiarity must not lead to the fragmentation of European human rights
protection or undermine the universality of human rights.  We make specific recommendations below to
reflect this.
Finally, we are concerned that
some language of the draft Declaration, in particular references to the engagement
of “States Parties and their populations” in debates on the Convention rights,
may support claims that the interpretation of Convention rights should be
conditioned by majority views.  Given the
vital role which the Convention system has played in protecting the rights of
discriminated-against minorities across the Council of Europe region, any such
suggestion should be avoided. 
A detailed commentary and
proposals on the draft Declaration can be found in the PDF attached. 