Congo, Democratic Republic:  Assassination attempt of the wife of a police officer on the run prosecuted in the Chebeya-Bazana case
July 14, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2014 / JulyCongo, Democratic Republic: Assassination attempt of the wife of a police officer on the run prosecuted in the Chebeya-Bazana case

Paris-Geneva, 14 July 2014. While any attempt to shed light on the
double assassination of human rights defenders in 2010 seems blocked in the DRC,
and a complaint was lodged by FIDH and the families of the victims in Senegal
within the context of the same affair, the wife of a police officer who is
accused and a witness of the crime survived an attempted abduction and assassination
at Lumbumbashi. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,
joint FIDH and OMCT programme, urges the Congolese justice system to shed led
on this attempt at intimidation, that aims to prevent the witnesses from
speaking.
 
On
5 July 2014, the wife of Paul Mwilambwe, former police officer, was assaulted,
according to her testimonial, by two other former police officers, who, with
him, were sentenced to death in absentia in June 2011 by a military court for
the murder of Messrs. Floribert Chebeya,
Executive Director of « the Voice of the Voiceless » (VSV) and a member
of the OMCT General Assembly, and Fidèle Bazana, member of
the VSV. 

According to Mr. Timothée Mbuya, from the NGO Justicia asbl, shortly before,
the victim was contacted by phone by Jacques Mubago and Christian Ngoy Kenga
Kenga, two people close to the General John Numbi. The two former police
officers were asking her to convince Paul Mwilambwe to return. Messrs.
Mwilambwe, Mugabo and Ngoy are all three in flight since the double
assassination. 
 
In
view of this information, the latter two are in DRC and circulate with total
freedom despite their sentencing during the first-instance trial concerning the
double assassination of Floribert Chebeya and Fidèle Bazana in 2011. 

As she was on her way back from the market, Paul Mwilambwe’s wife was assaulted
by Jacques Mugabo who kicked her feet out from under her, snatched her bag and
threatened her of death if she did not give in. She then started calling for
help, drawing the attention of the public around her. M. Mugabo then tried to
draw his gun, without success, and finally let her go to run away with the bag
and rush into the car of a person identified by the victim as the Major Thierry
Mande, the private secretary of General Numbi. 

The NGO Justicia confirmed the presence of Messrs. Mugabo and Ngoy at
Lubumbashi for quite some time. According to the gathered information, the day
following the announcement of the action taken in Senegal within the Chebeya-Bazana
affair, Paul Mwilambwe’s wife said she received two calls from John Numbi and
Christian Ngoy themselves, and since then, she is under discreet surveillance
day and night.

On the run in Senegal, Paul Mwilambwe had testified before France 24’s camera
and had denounced, in addition to its participation, the role and implication
of senior Congolese police officers, including General John Numbi, in the assassination
and forced disappearance of the two human rights defenders, and is the subject
of a complaint filed by the families of the two defenders in Senegal on the
basis on universal jurisdiction. 

The Observatory fears that this attempt of aggression only aims at intimidating
Paul Mwilambwe so he does not testify about the role and implication of General
John Numbi in the assassination of the two human rights defenders and calls the
authorities to:
-         
ensure the security of the witnesses
and their families
-         
conduct an impartial and independent
investigation on this attempted assault
-         
proceed to the immediate arrest of
Jacques Mugabo and Christian Ngoy Kenga Kenga 


Background information:

In the night of the 1st to the 2nd June 2010, Mr. Chebeya’s body was found in
his car at the exit of Kinshasa. The body of Mr. Bazana, who was accompanying
him, has never been found. 

On 23 June 2011, the Military court of Kinshasa-Gombe recognized the civil responsibility
of the Congolese State in the assassination of Mr. Chebeya, as well as in the
abduction and illegal detention of Mr. Bazana by several of its agents. It
sentenced 5 of the 8 accused police officers, 4 of which were sentenced to the
capital sentence and one to life-imprisonment. 

A judicial observation mission of the Observatory on the trial conducted before
the military Court had revealed many dysfunctions, which prevented the judiciary
system from establishing the responsibilities of this double assassination.
Indeed, senior police officers, including the General John Numbi, suspected of
having ordered the killing, did not appear on the list of the accused. This
situation of impunity had shed serious doubts upon the full independence of the
judiciary system in this affair. The mission report called on the authorities
to re-open the investigation, ensure the independence, completeness and
impartiality of the judicial proceeding, and to bring to justice, before a
competent, independent and impartial court all the perpetrators. Three of the
people sentenced to death were in hiding, and three police officers, whose
judicial investigation had shown the role played in the disappearance of
evidence, were acquitted. 

On 7 May 2013, the High Military court, seized as an appellate instance,
declared itself incompetent to rule on two prejudicial questions that were
raised by the civil parties and decided to seize the Supreme Court of Justice,
which serves as a constitutional court, suspending the consideration of the
appeal, without giving the date of a new hearing. 

For more information, please read the 24
June 2011 Observatory
Judicial Observation Mission report. 