Incommunicado detention / Risk of torture
July 23, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Jordan / 2004 / JulyJordan: Incommunicado detention / Risk of tortureCase JOR 230704 Incommunicado detention/Risk of torture   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Jordan.   Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Jordan Society for Human Rights (JSHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest and incommunicado detention of Mr Abdul-Hamid Yassin by the Intelligence Service Department. According to information received, Mr Abdul-Hamid Yassin was arrested on 31 May 2004 in his home in Sweileh by the Intelligence Service Department. It is reported that since his arrest he has been detained incommunicado at the Intelligence Service Prison in Amman. The reason for his arrest is still unknown. The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by this case of arrest and incommunicado detention, and fears for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr Abdul-Hamid Yassin, as he is at risk of being subjected to ill-treatment and/or torture. OMCT calls for the Jordanian government to guarantee his personal integrity at all times and to order his immediate release in the absence of legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards. Furthermore, OMCT calls on the authorities to launch prompt, thorough and impartial investigations into the circumstances of this event in order to find those responsible for any violations of human rights and to bring them to justice.   Action requested: Please write to the authorities in Jordan urging them to:  i. take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr Abdul-Hamid Yassin;  ii. order his immediate release in the absence of legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times;  iii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of this event in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  iv. guarantee the respect for human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses: His Majesty King 'Abdallah bin Hussein, Office of HM the King, Royal Palace, Amman, The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Fax: + 962 6 462 7421  Mr Fayssal Al-Fayez, Prime Minister, Fax: + 962 6 569 55 41 / + 962 6 464 25 20  Mr Salah eddine Al-Bashir, Minister of Justice, PO Box 6040, Amman, The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Fax: + 962 6 464 3197  Dr Fayez Tarawneh, Chief of the Royal Court, PO Box 80, Amman, The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Fax: + 962 6 463 1452  Her Majesty Queen Rania, President of the Royal Commission on Human Rights, Office of her Majesty the Queen, Royal Palace, Amman, The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan  Please also write to the embassies of Jordan in your respective country.  Geneva, 23 July 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.   Click here for PDF version of this article. 