Swaziland:  Sentencing of Messrs. Thulani Rudolf Maseko and Bheki Makhubu to two years of prison
July 25, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Swaziland / 2014 / JulySwaziland: Sentencing of Messrs. Thulani Rudolf Maseko and Bheki Makhubu to two years of prison​












New
information
SWZ 001 /
0314 / OBS 023.5
Sentencing /
Arbitrary detention
Swaziland
July 25,
2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Swaziland.
 
New
information:
 
The Observatory has been informed about the court ruling that sentenced
Mr. Thulani Rudolf Maseko, a prominent human rights lawyer, senior
member of Lawyers for Human Rights Swaziland and the Southern Africa Human
Rights Defenders Network, as well as Mr. Bheki Makhubu, a columnist and
Editor-in-Chief of The Nation,
considered as the sole independent newspaper of the country, to two years of
prison without benefit of bail. 
 
According to the information received, on July 25, 2014, Judge Mpendulo
Simelane sentenced Messrs. Bheki Makhubu and Thulani Maseko to two years of
prison without benefit of bail. He also fined The Nation and independent
publishers to SZL 100,000 (approximately EUR 7,080) payable within one month.
This followed the writing and publication in The Nation of
articles critical of the Swazi judiciary and in particular of Chief Justice
Ramodibedi (see background information). 
 
The Observatory notes that conviction for “contempt of court” ordinarily
carries a 30-day sentence or a fine of 2,200 Euros. The judge added that the
sentence should be such that “it serves as a deterrent to others, Mr. Maseko
being a disgrace to the legal profession”. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that the two men have been arbitrarily detained since April
9, 2014 and denied bail since then.
 
The Observatory is concerned by Messrs.
Bheki Makhubu and Thulani Maseko’s sentencing, as it
only aims at sanctioning their human rights activities, and calls upon the
Swazi authorities to release Messrs. Maseko and Makhubu immediately and
unconditionally, and to put an end to the continued judicial harassment against
them.
 
Background
information:
 
On March 17 and 18, 2014 respectively, Messrs. Thulani Maseko and Mr.
Bheki Makhubu were arrested on the basis of a warrant issued by Chief Justice
Michael Ramodibedi, on charges of “scandalising the judiciary” and “contempt of
court” following the publication of articles criticising the judicial system.
 
The charges arise from articles written by Messrs. Thulani Maseko and
Bheki Makhubu in February and March 2014 in The Nation, in which they
questioned circumstances surrounding the arrest of government vehicle
inspector, Bhantshana Vincent Gwebu and criticized the lack of impartiality of
the Swazi judicial system[1].
 
On March 18, 2014, Messrs. Maseko and Makhubu, who were expected to
appear in court, were subjected to a private hearing in the Chief Justice
Ramodibedi’s chambers, in violation of Section 21 of the Constitution of the
Kingdom of Swaziland, which guarantees the right to a fair trial. The accused's
lawyers were not informed that the hearing would take place in the Chief
Justice's chambers and were only present by chance. 
 
On April 1,
2014, Messrs. Thulani Maseko and Bheki Makhubu appeared before the High Court
of Mbabane assisted by their lawyers. Their detention was extended for the
third time until the next hearing, scheduled for April 8, 2014. The decision to
extend the custody of the two human rights defenders was taken by Chief Justice
Mpendulo Simelane, who is also the former High Court Registrar mentioned in the
articles published in The Nation for which the two defenders are
prosecuted. Since he might be summoned to testify in their case, the defence
lawyers of Mr. Maseko and Mr. Makhubu have informed him of their intent to file
an application to demand his recusal. 
 
On April 4,
2014, the accused, through their lawyers, filed an application at the High
Court where they were seeking a declaratory order on the grounds that the
warrant of arrest issued by the Chief Justice was unconstitutional, unlawful
and irregular. They argued that the High Court does not have powers to issue
same, instead it was a magistrate who issued warrants.
 
On April 6, High Court Judge Mumcy Dlamini set aside the arrest warrant
of Mr. Maseko and Mr. Makhubu, following an application lodged by the two
defenders' lawyers seeking a declaratory order that the March-17 arrest warrant
issued against them was unconstitutional, unlawful and irregular. As a
consequence, Mr. Maseko and Mr. Makhubu were released on the same day. 
 
However, on April 7, Justice Michael Ramodibedi, along with the Office
of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Attorney's General Office and the
Swaziland Government, appealed against the decision of Justice Dlamini.
 
On April 9, 2014, Justice Simelane subsequently issued a ruling stating
that the April-7 appeal
had automatically suspended the April-6 decision to free the two defenders, and
that as a consequence they should be re-arrested. Both were
held overnight at the Mbabane police station before being detained in the provisional
detention centre of Sidwashini, Mbabane. 
 
On April 11, 2014, a bail application was filed by Messrs. Maseko and
Makhubu's lawyers, which was dismissed by Justice Simelane on May 6, 2014. 
 
On April 14, 2014, oral arguments were presented by Messrs Maseko and
Makhubu's lawyers concerning the application for the recusal of Justice
Simelane. Despite the obvious conflict of interests and a number of irregular
incidents proving a bias against the two defenders, Justice Simelane himself
rejected the application demanding his recusal. During the hearing, relatives
and supporters of the two defenders were barred access from the Courtroom.
Despite Mr. Maseko and Mr. Makhubu's attempts to move the hearing to a bigger
courtroom, Justice Simelane systematically refused to move the hearing. At the
same time, police forces surrounded and searched Mr. Makhubu's residence. 
 
On April 22, the trial resumed and the defenders' lawyers asked the
Court to present the reasons for the dismissal of recusal application of
Justice Simelane, in order to ascertain on which grounds they could appeal this
decision. However the Court – presided by Justice Simelane – dismissed the
request, leaving no possibility to appeal the April-14 decision. 
 
On the same day, Mr. Makhubu and Mr. Maseko pleaded not guilty for the
charges of contempt to court. Justice Simelane insisted upon Mr. Maseko's
pleading for two counts for which he was not indicted, but Mr. Maseko refused. 
 
On July 17,
2014, Messrs. Bheki Makhubu and Thulani Maseko were convicted for “contempt of
court” by Swaziland's High Court. Delivering his judgement, Judge Simelane
rejected almost all the evidence submitted by the defence and its witnesses. He
also said that the Swaziland Constitution does not grant absolute rights for
freedom of expression and deferred his judgement on the defendants’ sentencing
to a later date. 
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Swaziland, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Messrs. Thulani Maseko and Bheki
Makhubu, as well as all human rights defenders in Swaziland;
 
ii. Release
Messrs. Thulani Maseko and Bheki Makhubu immediately and unconditionally, since their detention is arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning their
human rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment -
including at the judicial level - against Messrs.
Thulani Maseko and Bheki Makhubu, and more generally against all human rights
defenders in Swaziland to ensure that
in all circumstances they carry out their activities without any
hindrances;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially: 
-     
Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels” 
-     
Article 9.3.c which states that
“Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to offer
and provide professionally qualified legal assistance or other relevant advice
and assistance in defending human rights and fundamental freedoms” 
-     
Article 12.2, which provides that
“"the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de
jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”;
 
v. Comply with the Declaration of Principles of Freedom of Expression in
Africa, adopted by the African Commission on Human and People's Rights on
October, 23, 2002, in particular:
-     
Article II, which provides that ”no one shall be subject to arbitrary
interference with his or her freedom of expression”
-     
Article IX, which states that
“attacks such as (…) intimidation of and threats to media practitioners and
other exercising their right to freedom of expression (…) undermines
independent journalism, freedom of expression and the free flow of information
to the public. States
are under an obligation to take effective measures to prevent such attacks and,
when they do occur, to investigate
them, to punish perpetrators and to ensure that victims have access to
effective remedies”.
 
vi. Respect the Constitution of the Kingdom of Swaziland adopted in
2005, notably Article 24 which protects freedom of expression and opinion,
including freedom of press and other media, defined as “freedom to hold
opinions interference; freedom to receive ideas and information without
interference; freedom to communicate ideas and information without
interference; and freedom from interference with the correspondence of that
person”. 
 
vii. More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and with international human rights instruments ratified by Swaziland.


Addresses:
 
·      
King of Swaziland, Head of State and Chief of Arm
forces, MSWATI III, Royal Palace, Mbabane, Swaziland. Email: hello@kingofswaziland.com 
·      
Prime
Minister, Mr. Barnabas Sibusiso DLAMINI, Cabinet Offices, Hospital Hill
P.O. Box 395, Mbabane, SWAZILAND. Fax: +268 2404 3943
·       Secretary to Cabinet and Head of the Public Service, Mr. Mbuso
C. DLAMINI, Fax: +24043943, E-mail: dlaminimb@gov.sz
·       Minister of Justice, Senator Mr. Sibusiso SHONGWE, Ministry of Justice Building, 5th Floor,
Mhlambanyatsi/Usuthu Link Road, P.O. 924,
Mbabane, SWAZILAND. Fax: +268 404 5626 
·      
Acting Principal Secretary to the Ministry of Justice, Mr. Siboniso MASILELA, Tel: +268 404 5159, Email: masilelasib@gov.sz
·      
Attorney
General, Mr. Majahenkhaba DLAMINI, P.O. Box 578, Mbabane, SWAZILAND. Fax: +268
4044796. Email address: matsebulasa@gov.sz
·   
H.E. Mr. Mahlaba
Almon MAMBA, Counsellor, Permanent
Mission of the Kingdom of Swaziland to the Office of the United Nations in
Geneva, Chemin William-Barbey 51, 1292 Chambésy, Geneva, SWITZERLAND. Fax: +41
22 758 94 24, Email: swazimission-geneva@dslnets.ch
·    
H.E. J.M.
Nhleko, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Head of the Mission;
Embassy of the Kingdom of Swaziland, Avenue Winston Churchill 188, 1180
Bruxelles, BELGIUM; Email: brussels@swaziembassy.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Swaziland in
your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
July 25, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.



[1] According to Mr. Makhubu, Justice
Ramodibedi arrested Chief Justice Gwebu without bringing any formal charges
against him, denied him access to a lawyer, and deprived him from the
opportunity to seek release on bail. 