Bahrain:  Rights of the defence undermined in Nabeel Rajab's trial
October 18, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / OctoberBahrain: Rights of the defence undermined in Nabeel Rajab's trial




PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
BAHRAIN: Rights of the
defence undermined in Nabeel Rajab's trial
 
Paris-Geneva, October 18, 2012. The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), deplores the violation of the rights of the defence
during the third hearing of the appeal against the three years’ imprisonment
sentence pronounced against Nabeel Rajab, who has been arbitrarily detained
since July 9, 2012.
 
On October 16, 2012, the Bahrain
Appeals Court resumed the hearing on the appeal against the three years’
imprisonment sentence pronounced against Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the
Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), Director of the Gulf Centre for Human
Rights (GCHR) and FIDH Deputy Secretary General[1],
on August 16, 2012 by the Lower Criminal Court for three cases related to his
participation in peaceful gatherings in favour of fundamental freedoms and
democracy. The hearing was attended by Mr. Antoine Aussedat, French lawyer, who
had been mandated by the Observatory to conduct an international trial
observation mission. He was the only trial observer mandated by an
international NGO. Several diplomats representing France, Germany, the United
Kingdom and the USA also attended the hearing.
 
The Observatory deplores that at
least one international defence witness was denied entry to Bahrain. Indeed,
FIDH's Representative, Stéphanie David, Head of MENA Desk, who had been called
upon to testify as a witness by the defence team, was denied entry into Bahrain
on October 16, 2012. The Observatory considers that preventing international
experts from testifying before a court amounts to a blatant violation of the
rights of the defence. Nabeel Rajab's lawyers had formally requested the Court
to issue a letter to the Customs to facilitate the entry of several
international witnesses, including Ms. David, but the court refused to issue
such a letter. Despite the Court's lack of support, FIDH, together with the
defence lawyers, decided to confirm Ms. David's travel to Bahrain for the
purpose of the trial. During the hearing, the defence lawyers' request to call
international witnesses was rejected by the Court on the ground that their
testimonies were not “relevant”.
 
In addition, the Observatory regrets
that part of the evidence have not been examined in public and that the defence
lawyers have not had access to all the evidence filed in the criminal case in
due time. Indeed, the defence lawyers asked the Court that a video that had
been used as evidence to convict Mr. Rajab be shown during the appeal hearing,
as the said video had not been shown during the first instance[2].
The Appeals Court informed the defence team that the video could not be shown
as it had disappeared from the criminal file. In addition, the Court attempted
to show a second video submitted by the Prosecutor, but which had not been
added as part of the criminal case file. After a brief attempt, the Court
suspended the hearing for more than two hours to solve technical issues. When
the hearing resumed, the court announced that the trial was again adjourned to
November 8, 2012. The Observatory calls on the judicial authorities to ensure
that Nabeel Rajab's lawyers have access to all the evidence filed in the
criminal case in due time.
 
The Observatory deplores the
above-mentioned incidents, which blatantly violate the rights of the defence,
including the principle of the equality of arms, and reiterates its call to the
Bahraini authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Rajab and
to put an end to all acts of judicial harassment against him, as his prolonged
detention seems to merely aim at sanctioning legitimate human rights activities protected
under international human rights law.
 
For more information, please contact:
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey Couprie: +
33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 (0) 22
809 49 39
 




[1] Mr. Rajab is also a member of the Advisory
Committee of Human Rights Watch's Middle East Division and Chair of CARAM Asia.


[2] The Court in first instance insisted
that the said video be only shown in camera, which was refused by the defence
lawyers who insisted on showing it in the court room in public. 