Bangladesh:  Alleged enforced disappearance of Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam in Dakha Metropolitan City, Khulna, North Shahjahanpur
May 13, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2011 / MayBangladesh: Alleged enforced disappearance of Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam in Dakha Metropolitan City, Khulna, North ShahjahanpurCase BGD 130511
Enforced
disappearance/ Fear for the safety 
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.

Brief description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by ODHIKAR, a member of
OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged enforced disappearance, from the 15
February 2011,
of Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam, a
41-year–old salesman from Dakha Metropolitan City, Khulna, North Shahjahanpur. It is reported that he disappeared
after he was arrested by Rapid Action Batalion (RAB) members. OMCT is gravely concerned because to date the
whereabouts of Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam remain unknown.
According
to the information collected by ODHIKAR, on 15 February 2011 at around 4pm, RAB
members, several dressed in plain clothes and others in uniform and riding in
three pickup vans, handcuffed Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam near his workplace, located at 620 North Shahjahanpur in Dhaka Metropolitan City, and took him to an unknown
destination without giving any reason. 
According
to the same information, on 15 February 2011, Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam's
son-in-law Mr. Mohammad Shada Mia, and Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam's employer
Mr. ASM Salem went to the RAB-3 Officelocated at Dhaka Metropolitan to look for Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam. After failing to do so, they
went to the Motijheel Police Station to file a General Diary (GD), but the
police refused to accept the GD because at first it was an
allegation against RAB and they ask them to keep searching for a while before
filing such GD. As Mr.
Mohammad Rafiqul Islam didn't reappeared, Mr. Mohammad Shada Mia returned, on 22
February 2011,
to Motijheel Police Station and eventually filed a General Diary, numbered 1574
and dated 22/02/2011. The aforementioned police reportedly informed
all police stations about Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam’s disappearance. 
                                                                                                  
It is
reported that RAB-3 Office's Commanding Officer and the Legal Media Wing of RAB
forces headquarters denied that RAB members arrested someone named Mohammad
Rafiqul Islam, on 15 February 2011. But eyewitnesses opined that on 15
February 2011,
RAB members had picked up shopkeeper Mohammad Rafiqul Islam from 620, North Shahajanpur, in front of many people and in
broad daylight. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned
about the safety of Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam and fears that he
was victim of an extra-judicial killing. 
OMCT
recalls that the authorities in Bangladesh have to fulfil their obligations
under international human rights law to protect the right to life and the right
not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment. OMCT is furthermore gravely concerned that no effective investigation
had permitted until today to find Mr.
Mohammad Rafiqul Islam.
Accordingly, OMCT calls on the competent authorities to ensure that the
investigation into the enforced disappearence of Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam is carried out promptly, effectively, thoroughly, independently and impartially, in accordance with international human rights
standards, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law. 
Action requested
Please
write to the authorities in Bangladesh urging them to:
i.                    
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam; 
ii.                  
Guarantee, in all circumstances,
the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Mohammad Rafiqul Islam; 
iii.                 
Grant Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam prompt and unconditional
access to a lawyer of his choice and his family, as well as guarantee that he
is examined by an independent doctor and receives adequate medical care, in
accordance, inter alia, the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners;
iv.                
Order his
immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent
with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him
before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee his
procedural rights at all times;
v.                  
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the enforced disappearence
of Mr. Mohammad Rafiqul Islam, in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of
which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law;
vi.                
Ensure
that an effective remedy, including the right to full redress with compensation
be granted to the victim concerned;
vii.               
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.

Addresses
Ø      Ms. Sheikh
Hasina, Prime
Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad
Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: + 880 2 8113243 Email: info@pmo.gov.bd ; pm@pmo.gov.bd
Ø      Ms. Sahara Khatun, Ministry
of Home Affairs, Bangladesh
Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka, Bangladesh Fax: +880 2
7169667 or +880 2 717 1611 Email: minister@mha.gov.bd
Ø      Mr. Shafiq Ahmed, Ministry
of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs,  Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax:
+880 2 7168557 Email: minoflaw@bdonline.com
, info@minlaw.gov.bd
Ø      Dr. Dipu Moni, Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, Honorable Minister, Dr. Dipu
Moni, Fax: + 880 2 9562188, Email:
dirfe@mofa.gov.bd
Ø      Mr. Abdus Sobhan Sikder, Secretary, Ministry
of Home Affairs, Fax: + 880
2 7164788, Email: secretary@mha.gov.bd
Ø     
Professor Dr. Mizanur Rahman, Chairman, National Human Rights
Commission, Gulpheshan Plaza (Level-11), 8, Shahid Sangbadik Selina
Parvin Sarak, Boro Magbazar, Dhaka-1217, Bangladesh. Fax: + 880 2 9137743. E-mail: nhrc.bd@gmail.com
Ø     
Mr. Mahbubey Alam, Attorney General for Bangladesh, Attorney
General's Office, Supreme Court Premises, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: + 880 2 9561568 E-mail: adv_mahbubey@yahoo.com
Ø      Mr. Hasan Mahmud
Khandoker, Inspector
General of Police, Police Headquarters, Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000,
Bangladesh, Fax:
+880 2 7125840 E-mail: ig@police.gov.bd
Ø      Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United
Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
Please also
write to the embassies of Bangladesh
in your respective country.
***
Geneva,
13 May 2011
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply. 