Iran:  Free seven human rights defenders arbitrarily detained in the latest crackdown
September  5, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2018 / SeptemberIran: Free seven human rights defenders arbitrarily detained in the latest crackdownPRESS RELEASE – THE OBSERVATORY


Paris-Geneva, September 5, 2018 - The Iranian authorities should immediately and
unconditionally release the human rights defenders arbitrarily detained over
the past few weeks and cease all acts of harassment against them, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), urged today.
 
Since August
18, 2018, at least seven human rights defenders have been arrested by Iranian
authorities. Mr. Reza Khandan, human rights defender and husband of
imprisoned human rights lawyer Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, was arrested at his
home in Tehran on September 4. He has been consistently raising concerns about
human rights violations in Iran, including the imprisonment of human rights
defenders and the prosecution of women who have campaigned against the
imposition of compulsory hijab.
 
On September
1, 2018, Ms. Hoda Amid, human rights lawyer and women’s rights defender,
and Ms. Najmeh Vahedi, another women’s rights defender, were also
arrested at their homes in Tehran. The authorities did not provide the reasons
for their arrests. The two are known for jointly organising educational
workshops about marriage and the legal status of women in Iran and have been
involved in various campaigns in defense of women’s rights in the country in
the past.
 
On August
31, 2018, Messrs. Payam Derafshan and Farrokh Forouzan-Kermani,
two human rights lawyers, were arrested in the city of Karaj, west of Tehran,
while visiting the family of fellow human rights lawyer Arash Kaykhosravi,
who was arrested in front of the Iranian Parliament on August 18, 2018 together
with another human rights lawyer, Mr. Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi. Mr Derafshan
is Mr. Kaykhosravi’s lawyer and is part of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh’s defense team.
The authorities did not provide the reasons for their arrests.
 
The Observatory expresses its
deepest concern about this ongoing wave of arrests against human rights
defenders, which appears to be aimed at punishing them for their legitimate
human rights activities, and urges the Iranian authorities to put an end to all acts of harassment against all
human rights defenders in Iran and ensure that they are able to carry out their
activities without hindrance.
 
 
For further
information, please contact:
· FIDH: Maryna Chebat Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 / Email: mchebat@fidh.org / Samuel Hanryon: +33 6 72 28 42 94/ Email: shanryon@fidh.org
· OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 / Email: dr@omct.org
 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members
of  ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society. 