Djibouti:  Reprisals against human rights defender Kadar Abdi Ibrahim upon his return from an advocacy mission in Geneva
April 18, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Djibouti / 2018 / AprilDjibouti: Reprisals against human rights defender Kadar Abdi Ibrahim upon his return from an advocacy mission in GenevaDownload full article1 page / 260 KB

Kampala-Johannesburg-Paris-Geneva, 18 April 2018 - DefendDefenders, CIVICUS and the Observatory
condemn acts of reprisals against human rights defender Mr. Kadar Abdi Ibrahim ahead
of Djiboutian Government’s oral exam before the UN Human Rights Council.
 
On
15 April 2018, just two days after coming back from Geneva, where he carried
out advocacy activities ahead of Djibouti’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR), which will take place
on 10 May before the UN Human Rights Council, Mr. Kadar Abdi Ibrahim, human rights defender and Movement for Democracy and Freedom
(MoDEL) Secretary-General, was briefly detained and
got his passport confiscated by agents of Djibouti’s Information and Security
Service (SDS), who raided his home. SDS agents provided no reason for his
arrest and the confiscation of his passport. As a result, Mr. Abdi Ibrahim is
de facto unable to leave the country. 
“That Djibouti attempts to silence the few
voices who denounce human rights violations committed in the country shows how
intolerant to criticism Ismaïl Omar Guelleh’s power is,” our organizations say. “The review that is due to take place on 10
May 2018 must shed light on the serious situation that prevails in the country
and demand reforms that guarantee the protection and promotion of human rights.”
 
Mr.
Abdi Ibrahim traveled to Geneva (Switzerland) from 9-12 April 2018 to carry out
advocacy activities, including through presenting recommendations from a joint
Defend­Defenders/CIVICUS/FIDH report and taking part in a “pre-session”
organized by the NGO UPR Info on 10 April. During his stay, he also met with
representatives of a dozen States and of the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR). 
 
DefendDefenders,
CIVICUS and the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an
FIDH-OMCT partnership) call on the Djiboutian authorities to put an end to all
forms of harassment and reprisals against Mr. Kadar Abdi Ibrahim and all human
rights defenders in Djibouti, and to give him back his passport. 
 
More
generally, our organisations urge the Djiboutian authorities to abide by the
provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN
General Assembly on 9 December 1998, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
and regional and international human rights instruments to which Djibouti is a
party. 
 
Contact
persons: 
-
For DefendDefenders : Nicolas Agostini, Representative to the United
Nations, +41 79 813 49 91 / geneva@defenddefenders.org 
-
For CIVICUS : Clémentine de Montjoye, clementine.demontjoye@civicus.org 
-
For FIDH : Samuel Hanryon : +33 6 72 28 42 94
-
For the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT): Delphine Reculeau: +41 22
809 49 39 / dr@omct.org 