Colombia:  Colombia: expulsion of several displaced families from the Metropolitan Cathedral of Barranquilla.
September  5, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2001 / SeptemberColombia: Colombia: expulsion of several displaced families from the Metropolitan Cathedral of Barranquilla.Case COL 050901 The International Secretariat of the OMCT requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Colombia  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of the OMCT has received information concerning  the expulsion of several displaced families from the Metropolitan Cathedral of Barranquilla.  According to the information received from several reliable sources, on August 26 2001 at approximately 4:30 p.m., a group of some 50 displaced families living in the “Ciudadela de Paz” Displaced People’s Settlement (Asentamiento de Desplazados), located in the  south west of Barranquilla entered the cathedral to escape the rain.  They were on a mission to advise various  bodies of the inhumane living conditions that they have endured for more than three years.  As they headed towards the Metropolitan Cathedral, looking to be heard by officials of the Ombudsman’s office, the International Red Cross, the Human Rights Commission and also by the parish priest and the Church in general, they were forced to take shelter inside by a torrential downpour.  The reports add that when they were asked by the group to leave because they were there to discuss issues concerning displaced people only,  the parishioners inside the church decided to stay in solidarity with the cause of the displaced people.  The parishioners, including a cathedral guard, reportedly shut the cathedral doors, barring them with the benches. The reports point out that the displaced persons from this Settlement live in shacks made of sticks, with no walls and with roofs made of plastic, cardboard and sacks, which were brought down in the storm, the rain destroying their scarce belongings. According to the reports, when the displaced persons found themselves entirely locked inside in the Cathedral, they asked to be heard in the presence of Ombudsman officials, the International Red Cross Committee, the Human Rights Commission and the National Director of Solidarity, Mr. Fernando Medellín.  Mr. Gustavo de la Ossa, Citizen Participation Secretary and Mr. Pedro Pérez, representing the District Administration, showed up immediately, asking the displaced persons to form a commission of 4 persons in order be able to reach agreements with them. However, the displaced persons kept their request for the presence of all the above-mentioned officials, asserting that the magnitude of the problem and the utter destitution of their situation was due to  National Government policy. Approximately 15 minutes after the District Administration officials left the Cathedral, the Police forces, under orders of the Metropolitan Cathedral representatives who had told the displaced persons through a loudspeaker: “if you want violence, we’ll get you out violently”, reportedly proceeded to break open the doors and break the stained-glass windows in order to penetrate and take the displaced persons out by force. The police beat the displaced persons with truncheons,  arrested more than 30 people and transferred them immediately quarters in Sijin, where they were locked up, charged with kidnapping. The International Secretariat of the OMCT expresses its serious concern for the violations of Human Rights arising from these acts and the wilful infringement of rules that protect those internally displaced by the social and political conflict experienced in Colombia.   Requested Action:  Please write to the Colombian Authorities urging them to:  i. take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons and to bring an end to violence against displaced persons; ii. ensure that the displaced communities receive adequate aid to rebuild their homes and lives; iii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to justice and apply the civil, penal or administrative sanctions stipulated by law; iv. fully execute the recommendations made by international and regional human rights organisations, including those of the High Commission for Human Rights, the United Nations Human Rights Commission, the Inter.American Human Rights Commission as well as national and governmental human rights organisations; v. guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental liberties in all the country in accordance with national law and international human rights norms.  Addresses  · S.E. Álvaro Uribe Vélez, Presidente de la República, Cra. 8 n .7-26, Palacio de Nariño, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 566 20 71  · Consejería Presidencial de Derechos Humanos, Calle 7 n . 6-54 Piso 3, Santafé de Bogotá, D. C. Fax: (+57 1) 337 13 51  · General Fernando Tapias Stahelin, Comandante de las Fuerzas Militares, Avenida el Dorado con Cra. 52, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 222 29 35; e-mail: siden@mindefensa.gov.co ; pilaque@cgm.mil.co · Mission Permanente de la Colombie auprès de l’Office de las Nations Unies et des institutions spécialisées a Genève. Chemin du Champ d’Anier 17-19, 1209 Genève. Tel : (+41) 22 798 4554, 798 4555. E-mail: mission.colombia@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Colombia in your respective country.  Geneva, September 5, 2001 