Call for journalists: Workshop on "Media Empowerment Against Torture - Participation in a session of the UN Committee Against Torture", Geneva, 6th to 13th of November 2013
October  4, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionEvents / Burkina Faso / 2013 / OctoberCall for journalists: Workshop on "Media Empowerment Against Torture - Participation in a session of the UN Committee Against Torture", Geneva, 6th to 13th of November 2013
CALL FOR JOURNALISTS
TRAINING COURSE ON
“MEDIA EMPOWEREMENT AGAINST TORTURE – PARTICIPATION IN A SESSION OF THE UN
COMMITTEE AGAINST TORTURE (CAT)”
Geneva,
Switzerland will play host to the 51st Session of the UN Committee against
Torture (CAT) between 28 October and 22 November 2013. Among
other nations, Burkina Faso and Kyrgyzstan will be reviewed. Accordingly, Gmedia
center and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) will organise a
workshop for journalists originating from the two for-mentioned countries in
the week running from Wednesday 6th
of November to Wednesday 13th of November 2013.
Main objective of the workshop: 
The 7-days workshop
aims to provide a comprehensive overview on the notion of torture and other
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment, and the UN Committee
against Torture (CAT). 
Methodology of the workshop:

Journalists will benefit
from debates and discussions conducted by Human Rights experts from the
Academia, Media, UN Agencies and International non governmental organizations (NGOs)
whose tasks include highlighting the doctrine, conventions, practice and
monitoring mechanisms and institutions but also sharing experiences and good
practices and challenging the role of the media as key watchdog. As part of
this project, journalists attend the CAT sessions concerning their respective
countries and take part in press conferences, side events and other meetings
with delegations according to their interests and relevancy. Journalists should
not only listen to the information provided but should also have chance to
interview, question and challenge delegations from States, IGO and NGOs.
Expected Outcome:
1.   
Improve media
human rights knowledge, in particular of the notion of torture and ill-treatment and the
obligation to prevent and protect from torture, and understanding of human
rights mechanisms and their importance for domestic reforms;
2.   
Develop media
investigating and reporting capacity of human rights abuses and violations;
3.   
Provide accurate
information/materials on the UN Human Rights mechanisms with special
consideration to the CAT and the mechanisms of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against torture;
4.   
Allow media to
directly access discussions taking place within the CAT and other institutional
apparatus in Geneva;
5.   
Facilitate
interaction between the media, governmental officials and civil society
organizations based in Geneva and/or operating in their countries;
6.    Encourage
media to follow-up and lobby for their governments’ pledges holding them
accountable for their international obligations;
7.   
Empower media as key players within civil
society. 
Journalist Selection Process
Due to the limited places available for the
Workshop, Gmedia Center and OMCT have installed a few criterias regarding the journalist selection process;
·      
Journalists
shall prove their capacity to speak and
read in English (the language of the workshop will be English and there
will be no interpretation available); 
·      
Participants
will need to prove their ‘active status’
as journalists and be in possession of a press card;
·      
Journalists
selected shall be from different mediums of communication (radio, television,
print press, online coverage);
·       The workshop shall aim to have gender balance in
the journalists selected.
Practical information: 
No cost. Applicants
will be reviewed and those qualified will be selected to receive grant
sponsorship with the number of participants subject to availability of funding.
GMEDIA and OMCT will facilitate the obtaining of a visa for
Switzerland through issuance of an official letter of invitation.
To Register
Please send relevant
information, including your curriculum vitae, a cover letter, and the registration form (see enclosed) no later than October 10th 2013 to fpiccin@gmediacenter.net
Contact persons:
For further information and/or questions, please contact Francesca
Piccin: fpiccin@gmediacenter.net 