ESCR Programme Bulletin on activities, 2008
June 26, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Statements / 2009 / JuneESCR Programme Bulletin on activities, 2008Download full article52 pages / 996 KBThis report describes how, during 2008, OMCT has worked to combat torture, cruel, inhuman  and degrading treatment or punishment, arbitrary executions, disappearances and violence  against women and children by identifying and acting on their economic, social and cultural  root causes. It shows that violence can be reduced and eliminated by addressing those root  causes. 2008 was the second year of a three-year OMCT project entitled  “Preventing torture and  other forms of violence by acting on their economic, social and cultural root causes 2007 –  2009”  that has five principal areas of activity: •  Working with NGOs to reinforce their capacity for action;•  Bringing about change through action files and other forms of intervention;•  Using the UN Treaty Bodies and other mechanisms to bring about change;•  Working with the European Union;•  Building a framework of understanding through advocacy. OMCT’s training seminars represent an important dimension of “working with NGOs to  reinforce their capacity for action”. In 2008, OMCT held two such seminars: an African  Regional Seminar in Maputo, Mozambique (7-11 May) and the second Special Procedures  Seminar in Geneva (23–27 June). These were conceived to enable national NGOs to prepare  targeted submissions calling for specific action on the economic, social and cultural root  causes of violence. This practical approach to seminars has been shown to be a highly  effective means of underlining the relevance of addressing the economic, social and cultural  root causes of violence among seminar participants and has, moreover, proven to be an  important source of material and case studies. The impact of the seminars is confirmed by  positive feedback from participants in their responses to questionnaires they are asked to  complete at the end of each seminar, and again some six months later with a view to assessing  the extent to which the themes addressed have been incorporated in their organisations’ work. This area of activity also involves enabling NGOs engaged in addressing the root causes of  torture  to remain in contact with each other and with OMCT, and to continue sharing  information, good examples and ideas. Consequently OMCT is developing a network of  NGOs with which it has worked for the purpose of facilitating information exchange. OMCT  is also extending its outreach to NGOs more directly involved in development issues through  an agreement to collaborate with FIAN (FoodFirst International Action Network) and its  national affiliates on actions in a number of areas. Violations of economic, social and cultural rights that lead or risk leading to violence occur in  a wide range of circumstances, each requiring appropriate analysis and calling for specific  reactions. This is addressed under OMCT’s activities aimed at “bringing about change  through action files and other forms of interventions”. In some cases violence is already  present or its threat is imminent, requiring OMCT to react rapidly with an urgent intervention  aimed at saving lives. Other situations require more in-depth analysis of the various  – and  often complex  - factors leading to violence, including, for example, international trade and  investment patterns, national economic policies, political relations, public security strategies  and social and cultural dynamics. They also call for identification of those responsible, by act  or omission, for this violence and for research into sustainable, long-term remedies. The need  for an appropriate tool to address situations such as these gave rise to the OMCT Action File, a six to ten page document that provides a detailed analysis of a given situation and proposes  specific remedial action. The impact of urgent interventions and action files varies from case to case, according to  factors such as the responsiveness of the government in question and  the degree to which  other actors involved, including private companies and corporations, are sensitive to  international pressure. The impact of OMCT’s actions is well illustrated by the case of the  project for an open-pit coalmine in Phulbari, Bangladesh, discussed in this report. In addition  to the concrete results that can be obtained through Action Files and urgent interventions,  these tools have an invaluable role as catalysts for reinforcing links between the OMCT  secretariat and national partners. In the context of activities aimed at “using the UN Treaty Bodies and other mechanisms to  bring about change”, in 2008, OMCT, together with national partners, submitted alternative  reports on Kenya and the Philippines, as well as a pre-sessional list of issues on Brazil to the  Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. They also submitted an alternative  report on Kenya to the Committee Against Torture. Both the reports on Kenya, while tailored  to the mandate of the respective committees, were explicitly conceived as complementary  documents with the purpose of encouraging mutually reinforcing recommendations aimed at  the economic, social and cultural root causes of violence. They were prepared following a  preparatory mission that involved a series of interactive community forums designed to  capture grassroots concerns among marginalised communities (residents of informal  settlements, indigenous groups and rural minorities).  OMCT’s strong links with national partners have been crucial in enabling the organisation to  bring up-to-date, first hand information directly to Geneva from the field. This, together with  the organisation’s capacity to analyse, contextualise and present this information in an  effective manner has brought dividends in terms of its ability to support and influence the  work of the UN human rights mechanisms. The UN Treaty Bodies have, for example, begun  to take up in their dialogues with governments many of the issues relating to the economic,  social and cultural root causes of violence presented to them by OMCT. Indeed, in 2008,  OMCT’s input can be clearly traced in the concluding observations and recommendations of  both the Committee Against Torture and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural  Rights. OMCT gives particular importance to “working with the European Union” in order to raise  awareness within its institutions of the need to fight violence by acting on its economic, social  and cultural root causes, and its contributions have been well-received. This enables the voice  of the EU to be added to that of human rights and development NGOs in urging effective  action against these root causes.  During 2008, OMCT Action Files were transmitted to the Human Rights Sub-committee of  the European Parliament, the Parliament’s Rapporteur on human rights violations deriving  from China’s investments in Africa, and members of the European Parliament in connection  with the preparation of written parliamentary questions.  OMCT also submitted a set of  amendments for inclusion in the European Parliament’s Annual Report on Human Rights in  the World for 2007 and EU Policy in that Matter, in order to support the development of EU  policy on human rights and to help EU institutions focus more attention on the links between  human rights violations and poverty, inequality and discrimination.  Most of OMCT’s  suggested amendments were included in the final text as adopted by the Parliament in plenary. In the context of the development of the mandate and work programme of the new European  Union Fundamental Rights Agency, OMCT wrote to key Parliamentarians and suggested that  the terms of reference of the agency be modified to include identifying the economic, social  and cultural factors that may constitute root causes of human rights violations. The effectiveness of action against the economic, social and cultural root causes of torture and  other forms of violence is greatly enhanced when there is a widely held understanding among  influential actors of these root causes as well as of the types of action that can be taken to  address these links. While progress is clearly being made, much still needs to be done to help  ensure that policy makers and institutions are aware of these issues and are ready to take  action. Thus OMCT seeks to contribute to “building a framework of understanding” with  UN bodies, regional institutions, human rights defenders and, to the extent possible, the  general public. In 2008, this has included making statements to the Human Rights Council,  disseminating information at the African Commission on Human and People’s Rights and the  NGO Pre-Sessional Forums and issuing press releases, notably on the International Day in  Support of Victims of Torture. OMCT has also participated in relevant international meetings  and engaged with the media in Kenya, a country in which it was particularly active in 2008. OMCT’s expertise in this field is recognised, it is invited to address seminars and other  meetings, information is requested by UN Special Rapporteurs and members of the European  Parliament and it enjoys the continuing support of the Office of the United Nations High  Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). OMCT was asked to chair the NGO  Consultation on the Draft Guiding Principles on Human Rights and Extreme Poverty  (December 2008) and present the results to the OHCHR consultation (January 2009) aimed at  preparing recommendations for the Human Rights Council.  In implementing this project, OMCT has learned that addressing the economic, social and  cultural root causes of violence through the appropriate channels has a real potential to reduce  human rights abuses, and that this in turn  increases the space for economic, social and  cultural development. This has also proven to be an effective means by which to challenge  the relativistic argument that respect for the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel,  inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment should be subordinated to economic priorities.  While the project aims to ensure respect for all human rights, and in  particular economic,  social and cultural rights in national economic, development and other policies, it does not  seek to determine what those policies should be.  OMCT has found that demonstrating that violations of economic, social and cultural rights  can lead to torture and other serious forms of violence strengthens the pressure for action not  only on States, which do not want to see their economic and social policies explicitly linked to  violence, but also, for example, on the corporate sector, banks and development agencies.  OMCT has also learned that the most promising results in terms of impact are achieved by  focusing on selected cases or situations and carrying out in-depth analysis. A situation-driven  approach such as this allows OMCT to use its understanding of the mandates, working  methods and expectations of a wide range of international organisations to tailor the use of its  tools for maximum effect.  Importantly, it has become clear in the course of 2008 that in the future realising the full value  of the project’s initial investment in research and analysis will require further investment in coordinated and sustained follow-up activities that are almost as resource-intensive as the  development of the original complaint.  Feedback from seminar participants, UN committee members and communities visited in the  field show that this project is bringing about change and making a tangible contribution to the  prevention of torture and other forms of violence by acting on their economic, social and  cultural root causes. Eric Sottas, Secretary General  Anne-Laurence Lacroix, Deputy Secretary General  The Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Team  Michael Miller, Francesca Restifo and Tom McCarthy 