Bahrain:  Ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Nabeel Rajab
August 14, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / AugustBahrain: Ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Nabeel Rajab


URGENT APPEAL -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
New Information
BHR 001 / 0512 / OBS 048.4
Arbitrary
detention / Judicial harassment
Bahrain
August 14, 2012
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial
harassment of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human
Rights (BCHR), Director of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and FIDH
Deputy Secretary General[1].
 
According
to the information received, on August 12, 2012, the Higher Appeal Court called
to the stand the only police officer responsible for the investigation of the
case related to the 3-month detention sentence issued against Mr. Nabeel Rajab
on July 9, 2012 by the 5th Lower Criminal Court for alleged libel through a
tweet posted on his twitter account on June 2 (see background information). 
 
At
that hearing, the police officer responsible for the investigation of the case
was questioned by both the prosecution and the defence. The purpose of the
hearing was to identify the possible existence of proofs that Mr. Nabeel Rajab
was indeed the author of that tweet.
 
During
the questioning, inconsistencies were noted in the statements of the police
officer. The latter stated in particular that he was not the technical expert
to determine whether Mr. Rajab was the author of the tweet, and that he was not
personally possessing such proofs.
 
The
judge is expected to issue the verdict at the next hearing, scheduled for
August 16, 2012.
 
In
addition, although Mr. Nabeel Rajab was due to appear on September 26, 2012 in
relation with three other cases pending against him (which the Lower Court had
agreed to merge on July 26 - see background information), the hearing related
to those cases took place on August 5, 2012, and another one on August 12, on
the basis of a request of the Prosecution. 
 
The
defence team consequently lodged a complaint with the Judicial Inspection
Directory to “declare the presiding judge unfit”, in accordance with Article
216 of the Bahraini Code of Criminal Procedure, on the grounds that the
presiding judge had ignored the request submitted by the defence team to
maintain the initial date of the case (i.e. September 26) as no emergency could
be justified since the defendant was not in custody, and the defence team
needed time to prepare the memos related to the three joint cases. 
 
Regarding
the case of alleged libel, however, and after the defence team informed the
presiding judge that a complaint had been lodged against him with the Judicial
Inspection Directory, the latter eventually refused to stand-by, and announced
that the verdict would also be issued on August 16, 2012 in relation to the
three other cases pending. 
 
The
Observatory denounces the ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment
of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, which seem to merely aim at hindering his human rights
activities and at stifling his attempts to fight corruption in Bahrain.
 
The Observatory calls for
the immediate and unconditional release of Mr. Rajab, and is extremely concerned
about the fact that a number of cases have been filed against him since May
2012, and that four of them are still pending. 
 
More generally, the
Observatory urges the Bahraini authorities to put an end to all acts of
harassment – including at the judicial level – against Mr. Rajab, and to comply
with the relevant international norms and standards, in particular the United
Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, and international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 
 
Background
information:
 
On
July 9, 2012, Mr. Rajab was arrested by masked police officers at his house[2]
after he had tweeted the following on June 2: "Khalifa,
leave the residents of Al Muharraq, its Sheikhs and its elderly. Everyone knows
that you are not popular here, and if it wasn't for the subsidies, they
wouldn't have gone out to welcome you. When will you step down?".
 
In
addition, four other cases were brought against Mr. Rajab over the past months:
 
-
The first of them on charges of “insulting the statutory bodies”, pursuant to
Article 216 of the Penal Code, for which the court issued its final verdict on June 27, 2012 and
sentenced him to pay a fine of 300 Bahraini dinars. Mr. Rajab was released on
the same day and the travel ban against him was lifted. Such charges had been
pressed against him in relation to tweets he posted to denounce the lack of
investigation, by the Ministry of Interior, into the killings of civilians.
 
-
The second on charges of “participating in an illegal assembly” and “calling
others to join”, in relation to a protest organised on March 31, 2012 in Manama
to denounce the detention of the founder of GCHR, former President of the
Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), and former MENA Director at Front Line,
Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja.
-
The third on charges of “involvement in illegal practices and incitement
to gatherings and calling for unauthorised marches through social networking
sites” for a protest in Manama on January 12, 2012.
 
- The fourth on
charges of “participating in an illegal
assembly” in relation to several protests that took place in Manama in February
2012. 
 
The last
three cases were merged on July 26, 2012, and were both initially re-scheduled
to September 26. However, the date was changed again to August 5, 2012, and the
latest hearing took place on August 12, 2012. 
 
Actions
requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
i.      Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel Rajab
and all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
ii.     Release Mr. Nabeel Rajab
immediately and unconditionally as his detention seems to merely sanction his
human rights activities and is contrary to national and international law;
 
iii.   Provide Mr. Nabeel Rajab with appropriate medical treatment in
appropriate medical facilities;
 
iv.    Put an end to any act of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and against all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 


v.    
Conform
in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular: 
            - its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in
association         with others, to
promote the protection and realization of human rights and        fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels” ;
-       
its Article 6 (c) which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law
and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through
these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those
matters” ;
-       
and its Article 12.2
which states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”.
 
vi.   Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 


Addresses: 
·      
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of
Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·      
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·      
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister
of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·      
Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Interior, Tel: +973  17572222 and +973 17390000. Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·      
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United
Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39,
1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax:
+ 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of
Bahrain in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
August 14, 2012 
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and
OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims
to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line:
·       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80 
·     
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22
809 49 29



[1]                 Mr. Rajab is also a member of the Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch's
Middle East Division  and Chair of CARAM
Asia. 


[2]           
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nENlacyy3Sw&feature=youtu.be 