Israel:  Israel: continuing detention of Rami Iz'oul, a 17-year old Palestinian, in Meggido prison
November 21, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2001 / NovemberIsrael: Israel: continuing detention of Rami Iz'oul, a 17-year old Palestinian, in Meggido prisonCase ISR 230101.1 / 230101.1.CC Follow-up of Case ISR 230101 Incommunicado detention/Risk of torture  Geneva, November 21st, 2001  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Israel.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), a member of the OMCT network, of the continuing detention of Rami Iz'oul, a 17-year old Palestinian,in Meggido prison in Israel.  According to the information received, Rami Iz'oul, a 17-year old Palestinian child is still being held in Meggido prison, having been arbitrarily arrested by Israeli soldiers from his home in the West Bank village of Husan near Bethlehem on 30 October 2000. It is worth noting that OMCT initially believed that he was 18-years old, but new information indicates that he was 16 at the time of his arrest. Iz'oul claims that he was beaten and had ice cold water poured over his head during interrogation. Due to the torture, Iz'oul was hospitalized for one night in Jerusalem’s Hadassa hospital. Rami Iz'oul reported that after being discharged from the hospital he was beaten again and threatened into signing a false confession.  According to the information received, on 15 January 2001, LAW learnt from the office of the Israeli Attorney General that an investigation into allegations of torture brought forward by Rami Iz'oul would not be carried out, under the pretext that it was not a matter of "public interest". The Israeli Attorney’s letter came in response to a complaint filed by LAW, through attorney Labib Habib, with the Department for Investigation of Police Misconduct on 3 December 2000. LAW had demanded an investigation into Iz'oul’s interrogation.  On 6 September 1999, the Israeli High Court issued a judgment outlawing specific interrogation methods amounting to torture. The High Court further stated that a reasonable interrogation was necessarily one free of torture, cruel and inhuman treatment. The Court highlighted that "brutal and inhuman means" were prohibited during interrogation and that human dignity includes the dignity of the suspect being interrogated.  OMCT and LAW believe that the practices used during the interrogation of Rami Iz'oul amount to "brutal and inhuman means" and are therefore in contradiction of the High Court ruling of 6 September 1999.  According to the information received, on June 28th 2001, the Public Committee Against Torture in Israel (PCATI) reportedly received a reply to LAW's appeal lodged on January 21, 2001, which stated that the medical report submitted did not show evidence of torture and asked whether LAW still insisted that the torture allegations be investigated. LAW has indicated that it will insist on an investigation. According to Iz'oul's affidavit given to PCATI on January 27th 2001, he has suffered from severe headaches and insomnia since he was subjected to torture. He has reportedly been refused access to medical assistance while in detention in Meggido prison. Furthermore, he has also reportedly been denied access to his family during his detention.  OMCT recalls that Israel is party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and, in particular, is bound by article 37 of the Convention according to which no child shall be "subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment", and when deprived of his or her liberty, to be "treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a manner which takes into account the needs of persons of his or her age".  OMCT has not been able to get more information concerning the other two persons included in the initial appeal - Ayman Al Ajluni, 28, and Yunis Al Atrash, 41.  OMCT is gravely concerned about Rami Iz'oul continuing detention, and deplores the fact that he is being detained based on false confessions given while being subjected to torture. OMCT is also gravely concerned about the Israeli Attorney General's lack of concern regarding this case in which a child has been arbitrarily arrested, detained incommunicado and tortured, and calls on the Israeli authorities to immediately launch a thorough investigation into these events, as requested by LAW. Finally, OMCT is also extremely concerned that Rami Iz'oul may again be subjected to ill-treatment and torture during his detention, as his access to the outside world is being restricted and he has already been tortured several times during his detention.  Brief reminder of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), a member of the OMCT network, of the torture of three Palestinian detainees.  According to the information received, Ayman Al Ajluni, 28, and Yunis Al Atrash, 41, were subjected to shabih (bound and blindfolded), sleep deprivation, being drenched in cold water, death threats and abusive language by Israeli Shabak (the Israeli General Security Apparatus) interrogators.  Furthermore, OMCT was informed of the Israeli Attorney General’s decision to cancel an investigation into the allegations of torture brought by Rami Iz’oul, aged 16 at the time of his arrest.  Action requested :  Please write to the authorities in Israel urging them to:  i.   take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Rami Iz'oul; ii.  order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii. intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure that he be allowed to meet with his relatives; iv.  ensure immediate access to medical care; v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and especially with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  Addresses :  ·	Ariel Sharon, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan Street, Jerusalem 91007, Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2)651 2631 E-mail: pm@pmo.gov.il or feedback@pmo.gov.il  ·	Meir Shitrit, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah al-Din Street, Jerusalem 91010, State of Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2) 62 8 54 38 or Fax: (+972 2) 628 8618 Email: sar@justice.gov.il ·	Binyamin Ben-Eliezer, Minister of Defense, Ministry of Defense, 7 "A" Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv, Israel. Fax:(+972-3)691 69 40, e-mail: sar@mod.gov.il  ·	Eli Yishai, Minister of the Interior, Ministry of the Interior, Fax: (+972 2) 670 1411 Email: sar@moin.gov.il ·	Minister of Police, Ministry of Police, PO Box 18182, 3 Sheikh Jarrah, Kiryat Hamemshala, Jerusalem 91181, State of Israel. Fax:(+ 972 2)582 67 69 ·	Elyiakim Rubinstein, Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah ad-Din Street, Jerusalem 91010, Fax: (+972 2) 628 54 38  Please also write to the embassies of Israel in your respective country.  Geneva, November 21st, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 