Cambodia:  Continued arbitrary detention and harassment faced by Messrs. Sim Somnang, Tri Sovikea and San Mala
November  9, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2015 / NovemberCambodia: Continued arbitrary detention and harassment faced by Messrs. Sim Somnang, Tri Sovikea and San Mala

KHM 004 / 1115
/ OBS 094
Judicial
harassment / Arbitrary detention / 
Obstacles to
freedom of peaceful assembly
Cambodia
November 9,
2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Cambodia.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continued
harassment faced by Messrs. Sim Somnang,
Tri Sovikea and San Mala, members of the
organisation “Mother Nature”, a local environmental group known for its efforts
to stop illegal sand dredging and the construction of a controversial hy­dropower
dam in Koh Kong Province.
 
According
to the information received, on November 4, 2015, an investigative judge
questioned Messrs. Sim Somnang, Tri Sovikea, and San Mala. The Observatory
recalls that the three were arrested on August 17, 2015, for their involvement
in protests against a company registered in Cambodia called “Direct Access”
accused of illegally dredging sand in Koh Kong Province. The three are accused
of “threatening to cause destruction, defacement or damage” and “ordering others
to do so,” under Article 424 of the Criminal Code. If convicted, they face up
to two years in prison and a fine of 2-4 million KHR (between approx. 450 and
900 Euros)[1].
 
As
of issuing this Urgent Appeal, the three remained detained in Koh Kong provincial
prison. 
 
The
Observatory notes that members of Mother Nature have been facing intense
harassment over the past months. On October 23, 2015, a team of security
officials led by a commune chief in Koh Kong Province prevented members of
Mother Nature and four students from holding a two-day training session on
freedom of expression in Botum Sakor District. Commune chief Hy Tann, who
deployed local security guards to shut down the training session, claimed that the group did not have a letter of per­mission
allowing them to conduct the training. Mr. Tann confirmed that he had received
a letter of notification from the group, signed by one of Mother Nature’s
members, but said that it was not sufficient and threatened the group with
legal action should they go ahead with the training. Interior Ministry
Spokesman Mr. Khieu Sopheak defended the local officials and stated that
“authorities have done the right thing, we know that Mother Nature always
causes problems and incites people”.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing harassment against Mother Nature, in
particular the arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Messrs. Sim
Samnang, Tri Sovichea, and Sun Mala, which only aim at sanctioning their
legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory calls on the Cambodian
authorities to release them immediately and unconditionally, and drop all
charges against them.

Background information:
 
On
August 17, 2015, Messrs. Sim Somnang, Tri Sovikea, and San Mala were arrested
in Andong Teuk over their involvement in protests against a company accused of
illegally dredging sand in Koh Kong Province. On August 31, 2015, the Koh Kong
Provincial Court denied bail to the three defenders.
 
On August 20, 2015, police in Koh
Kong Province raided a house rented by local environmental NGO Mother Nature.
About 20 police officers arrived at the Smach Meanchey commune property, but
failed to present an arrest warrant. The police checked all of the rooms, took
the names of those present, and told them to thumbprint a document, which they
refused.
 
On September 2, 2015, 17 people,
including Mr. Ven Vorn,
an Areng Valley environmental activist and a community leader for the
indigenous Chong minority in Koh Kong Province, were arrested outside Koh Kong
Provincial Court. They were protesting to demand the release of the three
jailed activists, Messrs. Sim Samnang, Tri Sovichea, and Sun Mala. Mr. Ven Vorn
was subsequently released.
 
On
September 21, 2015, the Court of Appeals in Phnom Penh denied bail to Messrs.
Sim Samnang, Tri Sovichea, and Sun Mala.
 
On
October 7, 2015, at around 12.20 p.m., Mr. Ven Vorn was rearrested and sent to
Koh Kong provincial prison. The arrest followed the decision of Investigating
Judge Mr. Min Makara, who had questioned Mr. Ven Vorn the same morning and
charged him with “harvesting timber products and/or non-timber forest products
without a permit” (Article 98 of the Forestry Law) and “destruction of
evidence” (Article 533 of the Criminal Code), as part of another investigation[2].

Both of the above-mentioned charges relate to the construction by Mr. Vorn and
a group of local activists of a small visitor centre and community meeting
place for local activists involved in a campaign against the proposed
construction of a hydropower dam in the Areng Valley. According to activists
and environmental groups, the hydropower dam poses a threat to their land,
livelihood, and the natural environment. For this project, Mr. Vorn and others
had purchased approximately 10 cubic metres of wood from a vendor in 2014, which
authorities claimed had been procured by the vendor through illegal logging. At
the time of publication of this Urgent Appeal, Mr. Vorn remained in detention.

Mr. Ven Vorn had been previously questioned on April 3, 2015 at the Koh Kong
Provincial Court in relation to the same alleged illegal logging incident
before being released on the same day.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Cambodia asking them to:
 
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of
Messrs. Sim Samnang, Tri Sovichea, Sun Mala, and Ven Vorn, as well as of all
human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
ii.
Release Messrs. Sim Samnang, Tri Sovichea, Sun Mala and Ven Vorn immediately
and unconditionally since their detention is arbitrary as it only aims at
curtailing their human rights activities;
 
iii.
Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against
Messrs. Sim Samnang, Tri Sovichea, Sun Mala, and Ven Vorn, as well as against
all human rights defenders in the country so that they are able to carry out
their work without hindrance;
 
iv.
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with its:
-
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right,
individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”,
- Article
5(a), which stipulates that everyone has the right “to meet or assemble
peacefully”,
- Article
12.1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to participate in peaceful activities against
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms.”
- Article 12.2, which says that “the State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually or in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v.
Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human
rights instruments signed or ratified by Cambodia.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 41
Russian Federation Blvd, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / +855
23 880624 (c/o Council of Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / cppparty@gmail.com
·    
Mr. Sar Kheng, Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior, 275 Norodom
Blvd, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 212708
·    
Mr. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 240
Sothearos Blvd, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 364 119
·    
Mr. Hor Nam Hong, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, 161 Preah Sisowath Quay, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 216144 /
+855 23 216141 Email: mfaic@mfa.gov.kh
·    
Mr. Mak
Sambath, President of the Cambodian Human Rights Committee, Office of the Prime
Minister, Phnom Penh, Cambodia, Fax: +855 12 813781 / +855 23 211162 / +855 23
881045 (c/o Council of Ministers)
·    
Mr. Sok
An, Deputy Prime Minister, Fax: +855 23 882065, Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh, info@pressocm.gov.kh
·    
Ambassador
Mr. Ney Samol, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva, Chemin de Taverney 3, Case
postale 213, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 788 77 74, Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh / cambodge@bluewin.ch
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective
countries.



[1] See Observatory Urgent Appeal KHM 003/1015/OBS 084, issued on October 9,
2015. Direct Access, a company that had a license to dredge for sand in
Andoung Toek estuary, accused them of intentionally damaging their property
during demonstrations against the company during which the three had boarded a
barge.


[2] Idem. 