OMCT addresses OSCE on new agenda on the eradication of torture free of political divides
September 25, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2014 / SeptemberOMCT addresses OSCE on new agenda on the eradication of torture free of political dividesOMCT Opening remark HDIM 24/09/201411 pages / 454 KB
PRESS RELEASE
OMCT addresses OSCE on new agenda on the eradication
of torture free of political divides
Warsaw, 24 September 2014
Addressing the biggest OSCE human rights meeting the OMCT Secretary
General called for a new agenda for the eradication of torture in the OSCE
region.  
In an address to the 57 participating states of the
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe OMCT Secretary General set
out key benchmarks for a new policy against torture in the region.
‘It is time for
the OSCE to re-energize its fight against torture. We need to move from the prohibition
on the books to eradication’, he stated. Welcoming the initiative of the
Swiss Chairmanship to the OSCE seeking to bring the fight against torture on
the OSCE agenda he called for a more comprehensive and holistic response to
torture.
‘We have
reformed laws and institutions in the OSCE region for the last two decades. Despite
some important progress made in some states, torture persists in large parts of
the OSCE region with impunity being the rule,’ he reminded the OSCE
participating States. 
‘Too many of the
reforms look good on paper but in an environment without real separation of
powers and controlled judiciaries they fail torture victims and risk giving the
international community a false perception of progress’.  The
OMCT calls for new and fresh approach setting out a comprehensive and holistic
agenda for change. 
Continuous support to so-called national preventive
mechanisms is vital but should address critically cases where these
institutions lack credibility, independence and resourcing be it in the East or
West of the OSCE region.  Moreover, an
approach of ‘prevention’ without ‘accountability’ as seen in many states of the
OSCE has failed. The OMCT recommends to intensify efforts to build independent
investigate structures for the crime of torture and to secure justice for its victims.
Ultimately we will need to build broader constituencies against torture, cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment. This requires a vivid civil society enabled to
work on torture. 
Responding to multiple threats to anti-torture
organisations he reminded OSCE participating states that ‘it is simply neither acceptable and nor credible to claim progress on torture
on one hand while human rights groups that document torture, assist victims and
advocate for change are harassed, closed or its leaders imprisoned on the other’.

In a number of states critical human rights groups are
targeted, defined as foreign agents and their organisations threatened with
closure including in the Russian Federation, Azerbaijan, Hungary, and the Central
Asian republics. A key example remains the clamp down on human rights activists
and organisations in Azerbaijan. The OMCT called for the release of veteran human
rights advocate Ms Leyla Yunus, member of the OMCT’s General Assembly held
under spurious charges of espionage and treason accompanied with serious
concerns over allegations of ill-treatment. 
Finally, preventing torture does not stop in the face
of national security or terrorism. To the contrary it is here that the risk of
torture is the highest and fundamental safeguards are most important. Any agenda
against torture has to cover counter-terrorism policies. Laws and policies that
reduce key safeguards in detention almost inevitably open the door to torture. ‘Intelligent’
intelligence to fight terrorist threats is fundamental but there remains a
dramatic deficit of effective legal and judicial control over intelligence and
security services. 
Referring to the US torture policies he recalled: ‘Accounting without accountability is not
enough. Remedies remain infectious even in the face of well-known abuse’. Information
that some of those who have been subjected to the CIAs rendition program, such
as in the case of Mr Al Hawsawi, are inhibited from pursuing remedies about the
treatment suffered, is further disquieting. ‘For as long as the leading democracy is unable or unwilling to ensure
accountability the ghosts of the past remain with us and we are opening up for
continuous double standard arguments’.
Addressing the issue of the abolition of the death
penalty across Europe and North America the OMCT called for an end to the inhuman
practice of executions in Belarus without any information being provided to the
families about the executions and whereabouts of their relatives.
‘The fight
against torture must become the baseline consensus free of political divides.
Nobody should have an interest in re-erecting ideological boundaries of the
cold war era when it comes to torture. The OSCE with its Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights should be equipped to lead on the eradication of
torture’, the OMCT concluded.
For further information,
please contact:
OMCT -, +41(0)22 809
49 39, omct@omct.org or gs@omct.org 