Korea, (South) Republic of:  South Korea: 7 activists arrested under the National Security Law
September  3, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Korea, (South) Republic of / 2001 / SeptemberKorea, (South) Republic of: South Korea: 7 activists arrested under the National Security LawCase KOR 030901   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in South Korea.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source, that 7 activists, six of whom are from the Pan-Korean Alliance for Reunification, or “Beomminreon”, were arrested under the auspices of the National Security Law (NSL) on August 24th, 2001 at Kimpo Airport, South Korea.  According to the information received, on August 24th, 16 delegates were taken for questioning at Kimpo Airport as they returned from a meeting held from August 15th to August 21st in Pyongyang, North Korea, to celebrate the 56th anniversary of Korean independence from Japanese colonialism. A total of 337 South Korean civic, labour and religious delegates reportedly attended the meeting. The persons that were arrested at the airport were taken for questioning about their alleged controversial activities during the event in North Korea.  According to the information received, the 6 Beomminreon members are being detained by the National Intelligence Services (ex- Korean Central Intelligence Agency, KCIA) and are charged with having violated article 6 of the NSL, which criminalizes visiting or attempting to visit North Korea. The detainees are also reportedly accused of having contacted their North Korean counterparts prior to their departure, in order to discuss their participation in a separate meeting with the North Korean Youth League. This is an offence under the Article 8 of the NSL, which prohibits meeting or communicating and attempting to meet or communicate with North Koreans. The six detainees risk being charged both with participation in the Liberation Day meeting (under article 6) and for having contacted the North Korean Youth League concerning a separate meeting (under article 8).  The seventh detainee, Mr. Kang Jeong-goo, is a Dongkuk University Professor in Seoul. He is charged with praising the late North Korean President Kim II-sung, as well as the National Defence Commission Chairman, Mr. Kim Jong-il, which is condemned under the Article 7 of the NSL. Prof. Kang is being charged with this offence due to his having written, “Let’s achieve reunification by inheriting the Mangyongdae spirit,” in a visitor’s book at Mangyongdae. The police reportedly questioned Prof. Kang and 10 others detainees about their alleged pro-North Korean activities. The police also confiscated materials, including computer files, from Prof. Kang’s house and office and from two other delegates.  The seven arrested delegates include (name, occupation, charges):   1.	KANG Jeong-goo, professor at Dongkuk University (Article 7) 2.	KIM Kyu-cheol, vice chairperson of Beomminreon (Articles 6 and 7) 3.	CHUN Sang-bong, vice chairperson of Beomminreon (Articles 6 and 7) 4.	MUN Jae-ryong, vice chairperson of the Seoul regional branch of  Beomminreon (Articles 6 and 7) 5.	KIM Seo-chang, Central Committee member of Beomminreon (Articles 6 and 7) 6.	LIM Dong-kyu, chairperson of the Kwangju-Chonnam regional branch of  Beomminreon (Articles 6 and 7) 7.	PARK Jong-hwa, general secretary of the Kwangju Chonnam regional branch of Beomminreon (Articles 6 and 7)   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned  for the physical and psychological integrity of the afore-mentioned detainees. More generally, OMCT is gravely concerned about the use of the National Security Law in order to prevent contacts between North and South Korea and as a tool to suppress opposition and activism efforts in South Korea. The NSL has reportedly been used to arrest and detain thousands of innocent person since its enactment in 1948.   Action Requested  Please write to the South Korean authorities urging them to:   i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these arrests in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	President Kim Dae-jung, The Blue House, 1 Sejong-ro, Chongno-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea, Fax : (+82 2) 770 0202, e-mail: president@cwd.go.kr ·	Minister Choi Kyung-won, Minstry of Justice, 1 Jungang-dong, Kwachon-si, Kyonggi Province, 427-760, Republic of Korea, Fax: (+82 2) 504 3337 or 503 7046, e-mail: legal_moj@moj.go.kr ·	Chief Lee Moo-young, The National Police Agency, 209 Miguen-dong, Seodaemoon-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea, Fax : (+82 2) 313 0686  Geneva, September 3rd, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 