Iran:  Continuing arbitrary detention and harassment against human rights defenders and their relatives
February 23, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2011 / FebruaryIran: Continuing arbitrary detention and harassment against human rights defenders and their relatives Continuing harassment and arbitrary detention4 pages / 59 KB
Please take action to put an end to the repression against human rights defenders in Iran.You can copy and paste the letter below and mail, fax or email it to the following authorities:
- Leader of the Islamic Republic, His
Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of the Supreme Leader,
Shoahada Street, Qom, Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21 649, + 98 21 649
/ 21 774 2228, Email: info@leader.ir / istiftaa@wilayah.org / webmaster@wilayah.org / info_leader@leader.ir
- President Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad,
the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran, Islamic
Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 649 5880. Email: dr-ahmadinejad@president.ir
- Head of the Judiciary, His
Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Ministry of Justice, Park-e Shahr, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: Irjpr@iranjudiciary.com / bia.judi@yahoo.com
- Acting Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Abdolmajid Keshk-e Mesri Av,
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 390 1999, Email: matbuat@mfa.gov
- Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Chemin du
Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
- Embassy of Iran in Brussels, 15 a avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050
Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com
Your
Excellency,
On
February 20, 2011, Ms. Narges Mohammadi, spokesperson of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), was summoned
to the Islamic Revolution Court. She appeared on February 22, 2011 before
Branch 26 of this court, on charges of “membership of the Supreme Council of
the DHRC”, “founding the National Council of Peace”, “assembly and collusion to commit offences” and “propaganda against the system”.

On February 9, 2011, her husband Mr. Taghi Rahmani, a scholar, writer, journalist and human rights defender had been
arrested by four plain-clothed individuals, ahead of the demonstrations planned
for February 14. His
family’s apartment was searched
and his documents were confiscated. No information could be obtained to date as
to his place of detention.
 Furthermore,
the health condition of Mr. Mansour Osaloo (a.k.a Osanloo),
President of the Syndicate of Workers of Tehran and Suburbs Bus Company (Sherkat-e Vahed) and currently
detained, has been deteriorating over the past two weeks. He has reportedly
suffered several heart attacks and was transferred to hospital on several
occasions, but the Ministry of Intelligence interrogators have systematically
intervened to stop his treatment and to return him to prison. Most recently, he
was transferred to Rajaie Hospital in Karaj on February 12, 2011, where he was
handcuffed and foot-shackled to the bed. His family was prevented from meeting
him at the hospital. He is currently deprived of phone calls to his family. 
In
addition, Mr. Gholamreza Gholamhosseini, another member of Sherkat-e Vahed, arrested on November
3, 2010, remains in detention in Rajaeishahr prison,
without charges.Further, from December 5 to 19, 2010, Mr. Reza
Shahabi, the Treasurer of Sherkat-e Vahed, detained upon order of the Ministry of Intelligence in Evin Prison
since June 12, 2010 without charges , went on a two-week hunger strike, and
spent a week in hospital after his health deteriorated. Mr. Ebrahim Maddadi,
Deputy Head of Sherkat-e Vahed, is also still being detained on the basis of a 3,5-year imprisonment
sentence issued against him on December 27, 2008. 
I
am deeply concerned by the constant
harassment against these human rights defenders and their relatives
and urges your
Excellency to immediately and unconditionally release
Messrs. Gholamreza Gholamhosseini, Reza Shahabi, Ebrahim Maddadi, Mansour
Osaloo, and Taghi Rahmani. I also call upon your Excellency
to release all human rights defenders presently detained in the country, to put
an end to any kind of harassment against them and to guarantee in all
circumstances their physical and psychological integrity, in conformity with
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights instruments ratified
by Iran.
Yours sincerely,


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

IRN 001 / 0211 / OBS 024
Arbitrary detentions / Harassment
Deterioration of health status
Iran
February
23, 2011
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Iran.

Description of the situation:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the continuing arbitrary detention and harassment against human rights defenders and their relatives in
Iran, including journalists and trade-unionists.
 
On
February 20, 2011, Ms. Narges Mohammadi, spokesperson of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), was summoned
to the Islamic Revolution Court. She appeared on February 22, 2011 before
Branch 26 of this court, on charges of “membership of the Supreme Council of
the DHRC”, “founding the National Council of Peace”[1], “assembly and collusion to commit offences” and “propaganda against
the system”. The Observatory recalls that Ms. Mohammadi was imprisoned on June
10, 2010 in relation to her human rights activities[2], before being released on bail on July 1, 2010.
 
On
February 9, 2011, her husband Mr. Taghi Rahmani[3], a scholar, writer, journalist and human rights defender had been
arrested by four plain-clothed individuals, ahead of the demonstrations planned
for February 14. These individuals entered his family’s apartment, without
showing identification cards or an
arrest warrant. The residence was subsequently searched and his documents were confiscated.
No information could be obtained to date as to his place of detention.
The
Observatory has also been informed that the health condition of Mr. Mansour Osaloo (a.k.a Osanloo),
President of the Syndicate of Workers of Tehran and Suburbs Bus Company (Sherkat-e Vahed) and currently
detained, has been deteriorating over the past two weeks. One of the arteries
of his heart is said to be blocked. He has reportedly suffered several heart
attacks and was transferred to hospital on several occasions, but the Ministry
of Intelligence interrogators have systematically intervened to stop his
treatment and to return him to prison. Most recently, he was transferred to
Rajaie Hospital in Karaj on February 12, 2011, where he was handcuffed and
foot-shackled to the bed. His family was prevented from meeting him at the
hospital. He is currently deprived of phone calls to his family. 
Mr.
Osaloo had spent eight months in detention from January to August 2006,
following a protest by the members of his Union against the non-payment of
wages, poor working conditions and the company's refusal to recognise the
Union, established in May 2005. He was then re-arrested in July
10, 2007 and has remained arbitrarily detained since then[4] in the remote top-security Rajaeishahr prison,
where he is serving a five-year imprisonment under extremely harsh conditions,
for “propaganda” and “activities against the State”. 
From
1 to 8 January, 2011, Mr. Osaloo spent one week in solitary confinement for
speaking at a funeral that other prisoners of conscience had held inside the
prison in memory of a political prisoner, Mr. Ali Saremi, following his
execution. His pregnant daughter-in-law, Ms. Zoya Samadi, had suffered a
miscarriage on June 23, 2010, after being attacked by Intelligence Ministry
agents on the street[5], with the apparent aim to punish the human rights activities of her
father-in-law.
In
addition, Mr. Gholamreza Gholamhosseini, another member of Sherkat-e Vahed, arrested on November
3, 2010, remains in detention in Rajaeishahr prison,
without charges.Further, from December 5 to 19, 2010, Mr. Reza
Shahabi, the Treasurer of Sherkat-e Vahed, detained upon order of the Ministry of Intelligence in Evin Prison
since June 12, 2010 without charges , went on a two-week hunger strike, and
spent a week in hospital after his health deteriorated. Mr. Ebrahim Maddadi,
Deputy Head of Sherkat-e Vahed, is also still being detained on the basis of a 3,5-year imprisonment
sentence issued against him on December 27, 2008. 
The
Observatory is deeply concerned by the constant harassment against these human rights defenders and their relatives and urges the Iranian authorities to immediately and unconditionally
release Messrs. Gholamreza Gholamhosseini, Reza Shahabi, Ebrahim Maddadi, Mansour
Osaloo, and Taghi Rahmani. The Observatory calls upon the authorities to
release all human rights defenders presently detained in the country, to put an
end to any kind of harassment against them and to guarantee in all
circumstances their physical and psychological integrity, in conformity with
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights instruments ratified
by Iran.
Actions requested:
Please
write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
i.                    
Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Narges Mohammadi, Ms. Zoya Samadi, Messrs. Gholamreza Gholamhosseini, Reza Shahabi,
Ebrahim Maddadi, Mansour Osaloo, and Taghi Rahmani
as well as all human rights defenders in Iran;
ii.           
immediately and unconditionally
release Messrs. Gholamreza
Gholamhosseini, Reza Shahabi, Ebrahim Maddadi, Mansour Osaloo, and Taghi Rahmani since their detention is
arbitrary;
iii.                 
Put an end to acts of harassment -
including at the judicial level - against them as well as against all human
rights defenders in Iran;
iv.                
Conform in any circumstances with
the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on
December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular its:
-         
Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote
the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”;
-         
Article 5 (b) which provides that “for the purpose of promoting and protecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, at the national and international levels to form, join
and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations or groups”;
-         
 Article 6  (b) and (c) which states that “Everyone has the
right, individually and in association with others, as provided for in human
rights and other applicable international instruments, freely to publish,
impart or disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on all human
rights and fundamental freedoms;  to study, discuss, form and hold
opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to
draw public attention to those matters”,
-         
and Article 12.2 which provides that
“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Iran.
Addresses:
- Leader of the Islamic Republic,
His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of the Supreme Leader,
Shoahada Street, Qom, Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21 649, + 98 21 649
/ 21 774 2228, Email: info@leader.ir / istiftaa@wilayah.org / webmaster@wilayah.org / info_leader@leader.ir
- President Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad,
the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran, Islamic
Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 649 5880. Email: dr-ahmadinejad@president.ir
- Head of the Judiciary, His
Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Ministry of Justice, Park-e Shahr, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: Irjpr@iranjudiciary.com / bia.judi@yahoo.com
- Acting Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Abdolmajid Keshk-e Mesri Av,
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 390 1999, Email: matbuat@mfa.gov
- Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Chemin du
Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
- Embassy of Iran in Brussels, 15 a avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050
Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective
countries.
***
Paris-Geneva,
February 23, 2011
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43
55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80Tel and fax OMCT: +
41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29



[1]               A broad coalition
against war and for the promotion of human rights.


[2]               See Observatory
Press Release of July 2, 2010 and the Observatory Annual Report 2010.


[3]               Mr. Rahmani has
worked closely with DHRC and was due to be awarded the DHRC prize for the 60th
anniversary of the Universal Declaration for Human Rights (UDHR) in 2008, when DHRC
was closed down. He is also a member of the National Religious Alliance.


[4]               See Observatory
Annual Reports 2007 and 2009.


[5]               See Observatory
Urgent Appeal IRN 004 / 0710 / OBS 084. 