Iran:  Ongoing restrictive and arbitrary conditions of detention imposed on Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh
November 22, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / NovemberIran: Ongoing restrictive and arbitrary conditions of detention imposed on Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh


URGENT APPEAL -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
IRN 006 / 0910 / OBS 108.4
Arbitrary detention / 
Violation of her right to regular visits by her
family
Iran
November 22, 2012
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in
the following situation in Iran.
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by the Iranian League for the Defence of Human
Rights (LDDHI) of the ongoing restrictive and arbitrary conditions of detention
imposed on Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, human rights
lawyer known for defending juveniles facing death penalty, prisoners of conscience,
human rights activists and children victims of abuse and being a member of the
Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), winner of the 2012 prestigious
Sakharov human rights prize awarded by the European Parliament.
 
According
to the information received, on November 20, Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, who is
serving a six-year imprisonment sentence in Evin prison, was finally allowed to
receive a visit from her husband and children, in the presence of security
officers. Ms. Sotoudeh is extremely thin now and weighs 43 kilos and continues
her hunger strike to protest against the pressures inflicted against her
children and husband. 
 
For
a few weeks, her family members had been denied the right to visit her, except
on November 12 when only her children could visit her. 
 
The
Observatory further recalls that Ms. Sotoudeh has been on unlimited hunger
strike since October 17, 2012 to protest against these measures restricting her
right to visitation, and the pressures on her children and husband.
 
Following
her hunger strike, the prison authorities issued a three-week punitive sentence
of solitary confinement against Ms. Sotoudeh[1].
On October 31, a while after she had started her hunger strike, she was
illegally transferred from Women's Section to Section 209[2]
instead of Section 240, which is the “ordinary” solitary cells section of the
prison, and is under the prison - and therefore judicial – administration until
November 19. Her transfer to Section 209 was therefore illegal. 
 
The
Observatory therefore reiterates its demand on the Iranian authorities for the
immediate and unconditional release of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, and, more
generally, of all human rights lawyers and defenders currently detained in Iran
in relation to their human rights activities.
 
Background information:
 
On
August, 28, 2010, Ms. Sotoudeh's office and home were searched by members of
the services of intelligence and her assets frozen.
 
On
September 4, 2010, Ms. Sotoudeh went to Prosecutor's Office based in Evin
prison, where she had been summoned on allegations of “propaganda against the
system” and “collusion and gathering with the aim of acting against national
security” following interviews given to international media as well as for
“membership in an illegal organisation” [the Defenders of Human Rights Centre
(DHRC)]. After her questioning by a magistrate, Ms. Sotoudeh was arrested. Her
lawyer was not permitted to be present during the questioning.
 
Before
her arrest, she had reported several times, including in an interview with Radio
Farda on May 2, 2010, that the authorities were using tax harassment
against human rights lawyers in order to limit their working conditions. She
gave the example of Ms. Shirin Ebadi who was subjected to the payment of
a tax bill of hundreds of thousands of dollars on the money she had been
granted for her Nobel Peace Prize.
 
During her detention she was held for long periods in
solitary confinement and denied contact with her family and lawyer. She came
close to death after three dry hunger strikes to protest her prison conditions
and violations of due process. She was reportedly tortured in order to force
her to confess. 
 
On
November 28, 2010, Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh appeared before the Tehran Islamic
Revolution Court. At the hearing, her lawyers requested her release on bail,
which was denied by the court.
 
On
January 9, 2011, Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh was sentenced by Branch 26 of the Islamic Revolution Court to
11 years of imprisonment, and banned from practicing law and traveling abroad
for 20 years on charge of “acting against national security” “propaganda against the system”, “collusion and gathering with the aim of
acting against national security” and “membership in an illegal organisation”. On September 14, 2011, her sentence was reduced by Branch 54 of the
Appeals Court to six years imprisonment and 10 years ban on practicing law. She
was also fined by another court for “not wearing hijab during a videotaped
message”.
 
On July 11, 2012, the authorities banned Ms.
Sotoudeh's husband and 12-year-old daughter from travelling abroad. This case
has now been referred to the Islamic Revolution Court (Branch 28), which has
summoned them to appear.
 
In September – October 2012, Ms. Sotoudeh's visiting
day was changed from Sunday to Wednesday without any legitimate ground being
provided by the prison authorities. In addition to being deprived of
face-to-face family visits, the new measure, which contravened the prison's
rules, made it more and more difficult for her to receive visits from her
family over the past three months. However, after she went on hunger strike,
the authorities changed her visitation days back to Sunday. It is also to be
recalled that Ms. Sotoudeh has been banned from making phone calls since May
2011. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh as well as all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
ii.             
Release her, as well all
human rights defenders in Iran, immediately and unconditionally, since her
detention is arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning their human rights
activities;
 
iii.           
In the meantime, provide
her with all the medical treatment she would require during her detention;
immediately disclose her whereabouts and grant her family unhindered visitation
with her; 
 
iv.            
Put an end to acts of
harassment - including at the judicial level - against her as well as against
all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
v.             
Conform in any
circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in
particular:
-               
article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to
promote the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms
at the national and international levels”, 
-               
article 5(c), which
reads that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, at the national and international levels, [...] to communicate with
non-governmental or intergovernmental organizations”, 
-               
article 9 which notably
states that  “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, inter alia […] to offer and
provide professionally qualified legal assistance or other relevant advice and
assistance in defending human rights and fundamental freedoms,
-               
and article 12.2 which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”;
 
vi.            
Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights instruments ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
Leader of the Islamic
Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of the
Supreme Leader, Shoahada Street, Qom, Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21
649 5880 / 21 774 2228, Email: info@leader.ir /  webmaster@wilayah.org 
·      
President Mr. Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 649 5880. Email:
dr-ahmadinejad@president.ir
·      
Head of the Judiciary,
His Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, c/o Public Relations Office, Number 4,
2nd Azizi Street, Vali Asr Ave., north of Pasteur Street
intersection, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3
311 6567, Email: info@dadiran.ir/ bia.judi@yahoo.com /
info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
·      
Minister of Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Ali Akbar Salehi, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Imam
Khomeini Street, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 6674 3149,
Email: matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
·      
Secretary General, High
Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Jayad Larijani, [Care of] Office of the
Head of the Judicary, Pasteur St, Vali Asr Ave, South of Serah-e Jomhouri,
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
·       H.E. Mr. Seyed Mohammad Reza Sajjadi, Permanent Mission of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax:
+41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
·       Embassy of Iran in
Brussels, 15 a avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050
Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com
 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of the Islamic Republic of Iran in your respective
countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
November 22, 2012
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43
     55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80Tel and fax OMCT: +
     41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29



[1] When a detainee
goes on hunger strike, the prison authorities may issue a punitive sentence against them of up to one month in solitary confinement.


[2] Section 209 is a
detention centre that belongs to the Ministry of Intelligence. Its only
relationship to Evin prison is that it is located within the prison premises,
but the prison officials and most of the time the judiciary do not have access
to prisoners in Section 209. This Section usually holds detainees in pre-trial
detention, i.e. before they are sentenced. 