Philippines:  Philippines: torture of Mr Alfredo Bantecil by two policemen
October  2, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2001 / OctoberPhilippines: Philippines: torture of Mr Alfredo Bantecil by two policemenCase PHL 021001 Torture, Death threats   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Philippines.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a member of the OMCT network, of the torture of Mr Alfredo Bantecil.  According to the information received, Alfredo Bantecil, 26, resident of Sity Day-as in the Cebu Province, was severely beaten by two National Philippines Police officers on September 18, 2001 after a quarrel with neighbour Roselio Dehito.  Mr Roselio Dehito reportedly borrowed fishing equipment from Mr. Bantecil, who is a fisherman, and when he returned it to Mr. Bantecil, it had reportedly been damaged. Mr. Bantecil then got angry and had an argument with Dehito. His wife, named Simpling Dehito, is said to have reported the incident to the police, adding that Mr. Bantecil was a rebel supporter and owned a fragmentation grenade.    According to our sources, two officers, Pedro Azarcon and Dandan Villardar, arrived at Bantecil’s house at 7 pm the same day. At this time, Mr. Bantecil was putting his three years old son Eury to bed. Policemen ordered him to complete this task rapidly, so that they could have a talk with him. Once he had put his child to bed, they immediately handcuffed him. The policemen then allegedly struck his face with the butt of an M16 rifle. They questioned him about his alleged involvement with the New People’s Army. As he denied the allegations of involvement, one of the policemen fired into the ground close to Mr. Bantecil’s feet. Marilou Bantecil, the victim’s wife, reportedly tried to intervene, but she couldn’t approach her husband as the policemen threatened to kill him if she did. The policemen reportedly beat Mr. Bantecil on different parts of his body every time he denied their allegations.   According to our sources, police officers Azarcon and Villardar then dragged Mr. Bantecil to their car and transported him to the police station, where they continued interrogating him, but found no evidence of his being a supporter of the New People’s army. He was consequently released and no charges were filed.  Our sources report that after these events, Mr. Bantecil was not able to go fishing and could hardly walk due to the injuries sustained at the hands of the afore-mentioned policemen.  The International secretariat of the OMCT is gravely concerned about the beatings inflicted upon Mr. Bantecil, and their use of death threats, which, together, constitute torture.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in the Philippines urging them to:  1.	guarantee that Mr. Bantecil be provided with access to the appropriate medical care; 2.	guarantee adequate reparation for Mr Bantecil; 3.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events and bring police officers Pedro Azarcon and Dandan Villardar before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  4.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	H.E. President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President, Republic of the Philippines, New Executive Building, Malacanang Palace Compound, J.P Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, Philippines, Fax : (++63-2) 929 3968, e-mail : opnet@ops.gov.ph ·	Sec. Jose D. Lina, Jr., Department of the Interior and Local Government, A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, EDSA corner Mapagmahal St., Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines, Fax : (++63-2) 925 0332, e-mail : dilgmail@dilg.gov.ph  ·	Sec.TeofistoT.Guingona, Department of Justice, Padre Faura St., Manila, Philippines, Fax: (632) 521-1614, e-mail : doj@erap.com ·	Santiago Y. Toledo, Director, National Bureau of Investigation, Department of Justice, NBI Bldg., Taft Avenue, Ermita, Manila, Fax : (++63-2) 521 2402 ·	Hon. Pablo Garcia, Governor, Province of Cebu, Provincial Capitol, Osmena Blvd., Cebu City, Philippines, Fax : (++63-32) 255 0642 ·	Cong. Loretta Ann Rosales, Committee on Civil, Political and Human Rights, House of Representatives, Batasan Hills, Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: (0063-2) 951 4330 ·	Aurora Reciña, Chairperson, Commission of Human Rights, SAAC Bldg, UP Complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: (++63-2) 929 0102, e-mail : apnr@chr.gov.ph  Please also write to the embassies of Philippines in your respective country.  Geneva, October 2, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply 