United Arab Emirates:  Mission report illustrates difficulty of verifying conditions of detention and trial of Ahmed Mansoor, serving 10-year sentence for human rights reporting
June 20, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / United Arab Emirates / 2018 / JuneUnited Arab Emirates: Mission report illustrates difficulty of verifying conditions of detention and trial of Ahmed Mansoor, serving 10-year sentence for human rights reporting(The Press Release is also available in Arabic here: UAE_Publication_Press_Release_2018.06.20_Arabic)20-June-2018
 
Fifteen months after the arrest of prominent
human rights defender Ahmed Mansoor
in the United Arab Emirates (UAE), human rights organisations still have no
confirmation of his exact detention location, nor the condition in which he is
being held. There are few details about the trial of Mansoor, who was sentenced
to 10 years in prison on 29 May 2018 for his human rights activities, apart
from what has been reported in the media.
 
On 26 February 2018, two lawyers from Ireland
approached the UAE Ministry of the Interior in an attempt to determine the
exact whereabouts of Mansoor, and to visit him if possible. Today, the Gulf
Centre for Human Rights (GCHR), the Martin Ennals Foundation, Front Line
Defenders, the International Service for Human Rights (ISHR) and the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), reiterate their calls to
free Mansoor, as they release a report of the mission, “Ahmed Mansoor, the
Missing Prisoner”.
 
Mansoor, who has been detained since 20 March
2017 for his human rights activities, received the Martin Ennals Award for
Human Rights Defenders in 2015, and is a member of the GCHR advisory board. He
is the father of four young boys.
 
According to local media reports, on 29 May
2018, Ahmed Mansoor was convicted of various charges and sentenced to 10 years
by the State Security Chamber of the Federal Supreme Court. [1] He was also fined one million Dirhams (USD
$272,294.00) and the court ordered him to be put under surveillance for three
years upon his release. Local media have said that Mansoor was convicted of
“insulting the 'status and prestige of the UAE and its symbols' including its
leaders” and of “seeking to damage the relationship of the UAE with its
neighbours by publishing false reports and information on social media.” Under
new laws in the UAE, Mansoor will be entitled to appeal the verdict.
 
“This trial raises a number of concerns,” says
the mission report, calling it “grossly unfair.” The mission report said,
“There was no public announcement that the trial would take place. The
conviction and sentence were reported in the media, but there has been no public
pronouncement or information on the trial itself. While Mansoor was represented
by a lawyer, this was only announced in the press after the fact. Furthermore,
it appears that the appeal process would be held in the same court.”
 
The mission report concludes: “Given the widely
documented use of torture and solitary confinement by UAE authorities, and the
lack of any independent information regarding Mansoor, there are grave and
solidly founded fears for his safety. His place of detention remains unknown, although
it is believed that he is being held in a prison that belongs to the State
Security Apparatus. There is no information on how he is being treated, or
whether he is in solitary confinement.”
 
On 12 June 2018, UN human rights experts urged the UAE authorities to immediately free
Mansoor and “reverse the decision against him.” They state: “The sentencing of
Ahmed Mansoor represents an unacceptable attack on freedom of expression and
freedom of association, as well as on human rights defenders in the United Arab
Emirates as a whole.” The UN experts added, “Not only is such a sentence
unreasonably severe but Mr. Mansoor should never have been detained in the first
place for legitimately exercising the freedoms that all people, including human
rights defenders, are entitled to.” 
 
The mission report is available: in English: UAE _Mission Report_2018.06.20_Englishin Arabic: UAE _Mission Report_2018.06.20_Arabic


[1] https://www.gc4hr.org/news/view/1875 