Uzbekistan:  Uzbekistan: arbitrary arrest and ill-treatment of Sultan Sharmatov and Sadybakas Madimarov
November 24, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2000 / NovemberUzbekistan: Uzbekistan: arbitrary arrest and ill-treatment of Sultan Sharmatov and Sadybakas MadimarovCase UZB 241100   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Sultan Sharmatov and Sadybakas Madimarov.  According to the information received from the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of the OMCT network, Sultan Sharmatov and Sadybakas Madimarov were arrested by Uzbek special service officers on the territory of Kygyzstan. The two of them were arrested by officers of the Vadil District Department for Struggle against Corruption and Smuggling of Uzbekistan. When arrested, they were beaten with machine guns and were allegedly falsely accused of stealing. Subsequently, Madimarov and Sharmatov were detained in a regional investigation and isolation facility where they were beaten severely for several hours every day. Sadybakas Madimarov is now in a hospital of the isolation facility as a result of torture and he is said to be close to death.    Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Uzbekistan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Sultan Sharmatov and Sadybakas Madimarov and ensure that they receives immediate and adequate medical care, as well as authorize visits from their families; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid charges and guarantee an immediate investigation into these allegations of torture and ill-treatment, circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses  President of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Islam Abduganievich KARIMOV, Respublika Uzbekistan, 700000 g. Tashkent, pr. Uzbekistansky, Rezidentsia prezidenta, Prezidentu Respubliki Uzbekistan, KARIMOVU I.A. Fax: ( 998 71) 139 53 15  Minister of Justice of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Siradzhuddin MIRSAFAYEV, Respublika Uzbekistan,700047 g. Tashkent. ul. Sayilgokh, 5 Ministerstvo yustitsii Respubliki Uzbekistan Ministru MIRSAFAYEVU S. Fax: (998 71) 133 51 76  Oliy Majlis Commissioner for Human Rights, Sayora RASHIDOVA (Ms), Respublika Uzbekistan, 700008 g. Tashkent, pl. Mustakillik, 2 Oliy Majlis Respubliki Uzbekistan, Upolnomochennoy po pravam, cheloveka pri Oliy Majlis, RASHIDOVOY S. Fax: (998 71) 139 85 55  Geneva, November 24, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 