Chile : September 11th 1973- September 11th 2003, thirty years of impunity.
September  9, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / 2003 / SeptemberChile : September 11th 1973- September 11th 2003, thirty years of impunity.PRESS RELEASE   To the members of the press  Geneva, September 9, 2003    Chile : September 11th 1973- September 11th 2003, thirty years of impunity.  The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) notes with regret, on  the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the military coup perpetrated by the General Augusto Pinochet led junta, that the fight against impunity on the South American continent has achieved few results.   In the past decade, all the former dictatorships in South America have been replaced by democracies. Despite this, these democracies remain fragile because most of them have not taken cognisance of or been willing to confront the demons of the past by allowing themselves to be judged for the crimes committed during the dark years. To the contrary, a number of these states created legislation that guaranteed impunity to those responsible. The victims and their families, who understandably harbour deep-seeded resentment toward the former authorities who failed to provide them with justice, are still unable to come to terms with the events of the past.   OMCT welcomes the recent abolition of the so-called “Full Stop” and “Due Obedience” laws in Argentina that will open the door to holding the guilty parties accountable. In Peru, the Truth Commission has issued its report incriminating the Shining Path guerrillas as well as the authorities, who were both accused of having perpetuated a veritable state of terror during the two decades of political violence.   However, other countries such as Chile, Paraguay, Uruguay, Brazil, Mexico, and Guatemala are proof of a chronic lack of willingness to pass judgement on those responsible for human rights violations. The former Guatemalan dictator Rios Montt has just received a favourable judgement from the Supreme Court, which authorises him to enter the general elections in November of 2003; though this is against the provisions of the Guatemalan constitution as he organised the coup d’état that brought him to power in 1982. Additionally, General Rios Montt has never been judged for his crimes.   In Chile, after a series of procedural disputes General Pinochet has been determined by experts to be mentally senile, thereby ruling out any chance of  trying him in a court of justice in his country.     OMCT reaffirms its commitment to the battle against impunity, as it believes that a successful democratic transition can only be achieved with national reconciliation, which recognises victims and brings criminals to justice.     Contact OMCT : Christine Ferrier  +41 22 809.49.39 