United Arab Emirates:  Arrest and disappearance of Mr. Nasser Bin Ghaith
August 20, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / United Arab Emirates / 2015 / AugustUnited Arab Emirates: Arrest and disappearance of Mr. Nasser Bin Ghaith ARE 001 / 0815 / OBS 069
Detention in a secret
location /
Risk of torture
and ill-treatment
United
Arab Emirates 
August 20, 2015
The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
Description of the situation:
The Observatory
has been informed by reliable sources about the arrest and disappearance of Mr.
Nasser Bin Ghaith, a pro-democracy activist and prominent professor, who has
been promoting democratic reforms and the respect of freedom of expression in
his country for several years. 
According to
the information received, on August 18, 2015 at around 2 p.m. the State
Security Authority arrested Mr. Bin Ghaith while he was leaving his office in Abu
Dhabi. Two hours later, around 13 State Security agents in plain clothes
conducted house search at Mr. Bin Ghaith's domicile in the absence of the latter, after he refused to collaborate. The
house search lasted for more than four and a half hours, and the agents
allegedly seized personal material. During the search, the agents would have
put USB sticks amongst his belongings. At around 8.30 p.m. the State Security
agents brought him to an unknown location. Since then, his family and his
lawyer has not heard from him.
The reason for
the arrest remains unknown as of today. His family was not informed of any   charges brought against him. Nevertheless,
according to local sources, the arrest would be linked to some tweets
criticising the Egyptian authorities said to have been written by Mr. Bin
Ghaith at the occasion of the second anniversary of the repression of peaceful
protesters in Egypt on August 14, 2013 (known as the Rabaa massacre)[1].
The Observatory
would like to recall that this would not be the first time that Mr. Ghaith is
targeted for expressing his opinions on-line. Indeed, he was detained between
April and November 2011 together with four other freedom of expression and
democracy activists, including human rights defender and Martin Ennals Award
2015 final nominee Mr. Ahmed Mansoor[2], in a case known as the “UAE5”, for having
signed an online petition calling for a democratic reform of the Federal
National Council. They were charged under Art. 176 of the Penal code of
“publicly insulting” UAE’s rulers. They were pardoned on November 28, 2011 by
the UAE President Khalifa bin Zayed al-Nahyan.
The Observatory
is deeply concerned about Mr. Ghaith's physical and psychological integrity,
due to previous accusations of alleged use of torture and ill treatment by
State Security Authority against detainees held in secret locations. In
addition, Mr. Bin Ghaith suffers from high blood pressure and needs to take the
necessary medication.
If the alleged
accusations were confirmed, this case could be another illustrative example of
a wider repression campaign targeting human rights defenders and activists
criticising the current regime in the country since the “Cybercrimes Law” was
passed in 2012. UAE authorities have increasingly used this law to clamp down
on all forms of online dissent, especially via Twitter, which is used
widely in the United Arab Emirates, and to prosecute social media users
criticising the country's human rights offences[3].
The Observatory expresses its concern
regarding the arbitrary arrest and secret detention of Mr. Nasser Bin Ghaith,
which seems to aim only at preventing him from carrying out his peaceful human
rights activities, and calls upon the UAE judicial authorities to immediately
and unconditionally release him. 
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of the
United Arab Emirates asking them to:
i.     
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Nasser Bin Ghaith and all human rights defenders in UAE;
ii.    
Release Mr. Nasser Bin Ghaith immediately and unconditionally, since his detention
is arbitrary as it seems to only aim at curtailing his human rights activities; 
iii.  
Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Mr. Nasser Bin Ghaith and all human rights defenders in UAE;
iv.   
Review the “Cybercrimes Law” passed in 2012 in order to guarantee to all
UAE citizens their freedom of expression, both off line and online;
v.    
Undertake a prompt, immediate, independent, and exhaustive investigation
on allegations of acts of torture and ill treatment committed by the State
Security Authority against detainees held in secret locations;
vi. Comply with all the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-   
its Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-   
its Article 6(a), which
foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-   
its Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
vii.Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by the United Arab Emirates.
Addresses
: 
·
President of the United Arab Emirates, Mr. Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al
Nahyan, Ministry of Presidential Affairs, Corniche Road Abu Dhabi, P.O. Box 280
United Arab Emirates. Fax: +971 2 622 2228. Email: ihtimam@mopa.ae 
· Crown
Prince of Abu Dhabi, Mr. Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Crown Prince Court
Bainunah Street, Abu Dhabi, P.O. Box 124, United Arab Emirates. Fax: +971 2 668
6622. Twitter: @MBZNews 
· Vice-President and Prime
Minister, MR Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashid al-Maktoum, Office of the Prime
Minister, Dubai, P.O. Box 2838, United Arab Emirates. Fax: + 971 4 353 1974.
Email: info@primeminister.ae
· Minister of Justice, Sultan bin
Saeed Al Badi, Al Khubirah, Sector 93, Street 5, P.O. Box 260, Abu Dhabi,
United Arab Emirates. Fax: +971 2 681 0680. Email, via website: http://ejustice.gov.ae/portal/page/portal/eJustice%20MOJ%20Portal/HomePages/Contact%20Us/Feedback 
· H.E.
Mr. Obaid Salem Saeed Al Zaabi, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations in Geneva, 58 Rue de Moillebeau, 1209 Geneva,
Switzerland. Fax: +41.22.734.556. E-mail: mission.uae@ies.itu.int
·
H.E. Mr. Sulaiman Hamid Salem Almazroui,
Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates in Brussels, 11 Rue des Colonies, 1000
Brussels, Belgium. Fax: 02 646 24 73. E-mail: consbruxelles@mofa.gov.ae 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of UAE in your
respective country.



[1]           
Unofficial translation of the tweet:
“On this day, worshipers were murdered and a mosque was burnt down by the
Mongols of this age…It happened in Egypt”.


[2]            See
the OMCT Press Release of April 22, 2015, http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/statements/guinea/2015/04/d23103/


[3]           
See also the Urgent Appeal of the Observatory ARE 001 / 0814 / OBS 069, of August 6, 2014. 