Thailand:  Thailand: Ammon Suwanachoke confesses to killing Burmese migrant worker
September 16, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2003 / SeptemberThailand: Thailand: Ammon Suwanachoke confesses to killing Burmese migrant workerCase THA 050903.1 VAW Follow-up to Case THA 050903VAW Violence against Women  Geneva, September 16, 2003  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Thailand.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Commission, a member of the OMCT network, that Mr. Suwannachote, who is accused of killing the Burmese migrant worker Ms. Sandar Hlaing, confessed to the local Thai police on  September 7th, 2003.  According to the information received, the accused, the 40-year old Thai national Ammon Suwanachoke  worked at the factory as a security guard. He was detained and questioned over the death of Sandar Hlaing who was found raped and killed on September 1st, 2003. He said that he was infatuated with the victim but she was falling in love with a Burmese. He was aggrieved by this, gave her a motorbike ride and killed her. However, he denied that he raped the victim before she was murdered. Also, he insisted that he killed the victim alone but according to witnesses, these were two unknown persons riding motorbikes, who followed Mr. Suwannacchote that night.  The parents of Sandar Hlaing were not allowed to see the autopsy. On September 8th, 2003, they handed over future legal procedure to the Law Society of Thailand.   OMCT remains concerned that Burmese people are routinely raped and murdered in this region without any consequences for the perpetrators and reiterates that Thailand has an obligation under international law to prevent, prosecute and punish acts of violence with due diligence, irrespective of whether these acts have been committed by State or non-State actors. OMCT will continue to monitor the situation.  Brief reminder of the situation:  Ms. Hlaing worked at a knitting factory in Mae Sot on the Burmese-Thai border. On August 31st, 2003, when she left work in the evening, Amorn Suwannachote, a factory security guard was outside on a motorbike. On September 1, the body of Ms. Hlaing was found about 2 kilometers from the factory near the Mae Sot-Phop Phra Highway. Her body was taken to the hospital and an autopsy revealed that she had been assaulted (her ribs were broken), raped, and stabbed in the neck.   When Ms. Hlaing’s fellow workers heard about her death, about 1000 of them went on strike fearing that the police would not treat the case seriously. It was also reported that Mr. Suwannachote was attacked by the workers. He was rescued from the attack, taken to the police for interrogation, and was claiming innocence.  Remarks  The International Secretariat of OMCT wishes to thank all tthose institutions, organizations and individuals who intervened on their behalf.  Geneva, September 16, 2003 