Philippines:  Assassination of environmental activist Gloria Capitan
July  8, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2016 / JulyPhilippines: Assassination of environmental activist Gloria Capitan

PHL 001 /
0716 / OBS 057
Murder
The Philippines
July 8, 2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention
in the following situation in the Philippines. 
 
Brief
description of the situation: 

 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources,
including the Medical Action Group (MAG), the Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA) and the
Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), about the assassination of Ms. Gloria Capitan, 55, President of
“Samahan ng Nagkakaisang Mamamaya ng Lucanin” (SNML - United Citizenry of
Lucanin) and environmental activist opposed to the construction and presence of
coal stockpile facilities in Lucanin, in the Mariveles neighbourhood, Bataan province.


 

According
to the information received, on July 1, 2016, at around 7:30 p.m., Ms. Gloria
Capitan was shot and killed by two unidentified men riding a motorcycle. The
two assailants had been waiting near the entrance to the family’s business
establishment in Purok 2, Barangay Lucanin, Mariveles municipality, Bataan
province. One of the men entered the establishment and shot her four times in
the neck and arm, in front of her cousin and two of her grandchildren, one of
who was also hit by a bullet shell and sustained minor injuries. Ms. Gloria
Capitan was first transported to a small clinic in Lucanin and later
transferred to MAHESECO Multipurpose Cooperative Hospital in Mariveles. She
died of multiple gunshot wounds shortly before arriving at MAHESECO hospital.
 
Family
members living in the family’s compound nearby heard the gunshots followed by
the witnesses’ screams. Ms. Gloria Capitan’s sons decided to chase the gunmen
but lost them after the perpetrators turned off their vehicle’s lights. They
went to the nearby police cluster[1]
to ask for help. The police allegedly failed to respond quickly and did not set
up a checkpoint. According to reports, the police in
Mariveles are currently conducting investigations into Ms. Capitan’s
killing. 
 
Ms.
Gloria Capitan faced intimidation and threats since 2015 in relation to her
campaign activities opposing the construction and presence of the open coal
storage facility located inside the Seafront Shipyard and Port Terminal
Services Corporation, near their neighbourhood owned by the Limay Bulk
and Terminal Handling Corporation. Ms. Gloria
Capitan had led the community to file a petition to the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) and the Commission on Human Rights
(CHR), calling for the permanent closure of the open storage facility after
members of the community complained of an increase in the number of severe
asthma cases and respiratory diseases. There is also an ongoing case with
the Ombudsman against the local government regarding the issue.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the killing of Ms. Gloria Capitan and calls upon the authorities of the Philippines
to conduct an immediate, thorough, effective, and impartial
investigation in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before a
civil competent and impartial tribunal, and apply the penal sanctions provided
by the law.


 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities in the Philippines, urging them to:
 
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all
SNML members as well as all human rights defenders in the Philippines,
including land and environmental rights activists;
 
ii.
Carry out an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into
the killing of Ms. Gloria Capitan in order to identify all those responsible,
bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them in accordance with
the law; 
 
iii.
Provide adequate reparation and compensation to Ms. Gloria Capitan’s relatives;
 
iv. Put an end to any kind of
harassment against all human rights defenders in the Philippines, recognise
their legitimate role, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able
to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance or fear of
reprisals;
 
v.
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, adopted by the
UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
vi.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by the Philippines.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
H.E. Rodrigo Roa Duterte, President
of the Republic of the Philippines, Fax: +63 2 736 1010
·    
Justice Secretary Vitaliano N.
Aguirre II, Secretary, Department of Justice (DOJ) of the Philippines,
Fax: +63 2 523 9548, Email: communications@doj.gov.ph
·    
Secretary Regina Paz L. Lopez,
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) of the Philippines, Fax:
+63 2 920 4301, Email: osec@denr.gov.ph
·    
Secretary Ismael D. Sueno,
Secretary, Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG Philippines), Fax:
+63 2 925 0332
·    
Hon. Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon,
Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights (CHR) of the Philippines, Fax: +63
2 929 0102, Email: chairgascon.chr@gmail.com
·    
H.E. Ambassador Victoria S Bataclan,
Embassy of the Philippines in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 345 64 25, Email: brusselspe@gmail.com
·    
H.E. Ms. Cecilia B. Rebong,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19 32, Email: geneva.pm@dfa.gov.ph
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of the Philippines in your respective country.



[1] A
police cluster is a small police station that can only accommodate three to
five police officers. 