Bangladesh:  New alleged extrajudicial killing
January 15, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / JanuaryBangladesh: New alleged extrajudicial killing
Case BGD 150113
Alleged
extrajudicial killing/ Risk of impunity
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.

Brief
description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by ODHIKAR, a member of
OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged extrajudicial killing, on 18
September 2012, of Mr. Mohammad Rahat
Ali, a 53-year-old
farmer from Bashbaria village in Kushtia district.
According
to the information received, on 16 September 2012, at around 8:00 pm a group of
individuals in plainclothes, who identified themselves as DB police (Detective
Branch) picked up Mr. Mohammad Rahat Ali from a tea stall located at shop 15
and 16 of Shah Ali Mazar Market without providing any information. They took
him with them on a grey microbus to an unknown location. 
On the
same day, when Mr. Mohammad Rahat Ali’s wife learned about the arrest of her
husband she contacted the police with the help of a local journalist. The
police reportedly told them that Mr. Mohammad Rahat Ali will be brought to
Mirpur Police Station and that they have to pay for him to be released. However,
the very next day, when she contacted Mirpur Police Station the police said
that he was not with them. 
According
to the testimonies of Mr. Mohammad Rahat Ali’s wife and two other interviewed
witnesses, on 18 September 2012, at around 3:45 am some gunshots were heard
coming from Kursha Eidgah field, just beside Mr. Mohammad Rahat Ali’s house. All
the testimonies confirmed that the police shot Mr. Mohammad Rahat to death and
took the body away on a van to Kushtia General Hospital for a post mortem. The
body was later handed over to his family. 
According
to the same information received, the police forces denied having arrested Mr.
Mohammad Rahat Ali from Mazar Market on 16 September 2012. Furthermore, the
police claimed that Mr. Mohammad Rahat Ali was a regional activist and leader
of Purbo Bangla Communist Party (ML-Red Flag), one faction of the Purbo Bangla
Communist Party[1]
and that he was shot and killed in “crossfire” after he and other members of
the party, while having a meeting at Kursha Eidgah field regarding some
destructive mission, opened fire at them on 18 September 2012 at around 3:45
am. 
The
International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the circumstances
surrounding the arrest and killing of Mr.
Mohammad Rahat Ali, which seem to suggest that he may have been victim of an
extrajudicial killing. The police has repeatedly used “crossfire killing” to
cover extrajudicial killing. OMCT calls upon the competent authorities to
carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into
the circumstances of these events, in accordance with international human
rights standards, such as the UN Principle on the Effective Prevention and
Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of
which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law.
OMCT recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their obligations under
international human rights law to protect the right to life and to bringing to
justice those responsible for violating this right.
Action requested
Please
write to the authorities in Bangladesh urging them to:
i.              
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and
impartial investigation into the circumstances of the arrest and killing
of Mr. Mohammad Rahat Ali, in
accordance with international human rights standards, such as the UN Principle
on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and
Summary Executions, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring
those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and
apply adequate sanctions as provided by law;
ii.             
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the
physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mohammad Rahat Ali’s family members;
iii.           
Ensure
that an effective remedy, including the right to full redress with
compensation, be granted to the victim’s
family;
iv.           
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.

Addresses
Ø Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona
Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +880 2 8113243,
Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
Ø Mr. Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, Minister for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, H-16, R-25, B-A, Banani Dhaka-1213,
Bangladesh, Tel: 880-2-8821334, 9883737, Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com
Ø Barrister Shafique Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and
Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs,
Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +88-02-7168557, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
Ø Mr. Hassan Mahmood Khandker, Inspector General of Police, Police
Headquarters, Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Fax: +88-02-9563362,
9563363, Email: ig@police.gov.bd
Ø Ambassador Mr. Abdul Hannan, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
Please
also write to the embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country.
***
Geneva,
15 January 2013
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.



[1] The PBCP is a political party founded in the year 1968 following a split in the
Bangladesh Communist Party (BCP). With a revolutionary agenda it is outlawed
since the time of the military regime of Zia-ur-Rehman. 