Pakistan:  Pakistan : forced disappearance of M. Akhtar Baloch
March 26, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Pakistan / 2003 / MarchPakistan: Pakistan : forced disappearance of M. Akhtar BalochURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  PAK 001 / 0303 / OBS 015  Forced disappearance Pakistan 26th March 2003  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint  program of FIDH and OMCT, requests your URGENT intervention in the  following situation in Pakistan.   Brief description of the situation:  The Observatory has been informed by the Human Rights Commission of  Pakistan (HRCP) of the forced disappearance of M. Akhtar Baloch,  coordinator of the Hyderabad office of HRCP on 23rd March 2003.  According to the information received, on 23rd March, M. Baloch left  the annual meeting of HRCP in Hyderabad with a colleague who was  driving him home. At around 7 pm., their car was forced to stop by  two armed men who were driving a motorcycle. Then a car arrived with  three other armed men who threatened the driver and asked him to  leave. M. Baloch was forced into a car that drove to an unknown  destination.  According to the former chairperson of HRCP and Special Rapporteur of  the United Nations Commission on Human Rights on extrajudicial,  summary or arbitrary executions, Ms. Asma Jahangir, this act could be  a message to intimidate the HRCP for its criticism of State practices  and denunciation of human rights violations by the government of  Pakistan. HRCP had published its annual report in early March.  Despite several enquiries with official agents, HRCP has not received  an answer as to the wherabouts of M. Baloch. The Observatory is  extremely concerned by the physical and psychological integrity of M.  Baloch and reminds the State that according to article 12.2 of the  Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General  Assembly on 9 December 1998 "the State shall take all necessary  measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of  everyone, individually or in association with others, against any  violence, threats, retaliation, de facto o de jure adverse  discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a  consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred  to in the present Declaration.".  Action requested:  i. take all measures to find the whereabouts of M. Akhtar Baloch,  release him and guarantee his physical and psychological integrity;  ii. identify and sanction those responsible for his disappearance;  iii. Conform to the provisions of the Declaration on Humans Rights  Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on  December 9, 1998, in particular article 1, which states that  "everyone has the right, individually or in association with others,  to promote the protection and realization of human rights and  fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels";  article 12.2 which provides that "the State shall take all necessary  measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of  everyone, individually or in association with others, against any  violence, threats, retaliation, de facto o de jure adverse  discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a  consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred  to in the present Declaration."; and article 6b mentioned above;  iv. more generally, conform to the provisions of the Universal  Declaration on Human Rights and international instruments relating to  Human Rights which bind Pakistan;  Addresses:  President Pervez Musharraf President's House, Islamabad, Pakistan  Fax : 92 51 9201051 E-mail: ce@pak.gov.pk  Minister of Interior   Fax: 92 51 9202624  Inspector General of Police Syed Kamal Shah Fax: 92 21 9212051 Email: igp@sindhpolice.gov.pk   Paris - Geneva, 26th March 2003  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the  code number of this appeal in your reply. The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the  protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete  support in their time of need.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT :  (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 