Syrian Arab Republic:  Abducted Activists’ Whereabouts Remain Unknown
December  9, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2016 / DecemberSyrian Arab Republic: Abducted Activists’ Whereabouts Remain Unknown3 Years
on, No Word on Douma 4
The
prominent Syrian human rights defenders Razan
Zaitouneh, Samira Al-Khalil,
Wa’el Hamada and Nazim Hammadi, who remain missing
three years after armed men abducted them, should be released immediately, 56
human rights organizations said today, on the anniversary of their abduction. 
   
On
December 9, 2013, a group of armed men stormed into the office of the Violations
Documentation Center (VDC) in Syria, a local human rights monitoring group in Douma, in the Damascus countryside. They abducted Zaitouneh, the head of the center, her
husband, Wa’el Hamada, and colleagues, Samira
Al-Khalil and Nazem Hamadi. There has been no news of
their whereabouts since then. 
 
The
armed groups exercising de facto control over Douma at the time include the
Army of Islam, which is part of the Islamic Front, a coalition of armed groups.
The groups should immediately release the four human rights defenders if they
are in the groups’ custody, or work toward ensuring they are released unharmed
and without delay. Countries that support these groups, as well as religious
leaders and others who may have influence over them, should also press for the
immediate release of the four activists and for an end to abductions of
civilians. 
 
 Zaitouneh had defended
political prisoners in Syria since 2001 and played a key role in the promotion
and protection of human rights through her brave work as a lawyer, activist and
journalist. Since
the beginning of the crisis in 2011, Zaitouneh had played a key role in efforts
to defend human rights for all and to protect independent groups and activists
in Syria. Along with a number of other activists, she established the VDC,
which monitors human rights violations and records casualties in Syria.
 
She
also co-founded the Local Coordination Committees (LCCs), which coordinates the
work of local committees that document human rights violations in various
cities and towns across Syria. And she established the Local Development and
Small Projects Support Office (LDSPS), which assists non-governmental
organizations in besieged Eastern Ghouta. As a result of her work, she
had been threatened by both the Syrian government and armed opposition groups
in Douma several months before her abduction.
 
 Al-Khalil had been a longtime political
activist in Syria. The Syrian government detained her between 1987 and 1991 for
her activism. She later worked in a publishing house before shifting her
efforts to working with the families of detainees and writing about detention
in Syria. Before her abduction, she was working to help women in Douma support
themselves by initiating small income-generating projects. 
 
 Hamada was also an activist before the 2011
uprising in Syria. When peaceful protests first broke out in the country in
2011, the government detained and later released him. He was an active member
and co-founder of the Local Coordination Committees and the VDC. Before his
abduction Hamada had been working to provide desperately needed humanitarian
assistance to the residents of besieged Eastern Ghouta.
 
Hammadi,
a lawyer and poet, was one of the most prominent volunteer defenders of
political prisoners before and after the 2011 uprising in Syria. He contributed
to founding the Local Coordination Committees and also worked to provide
humanitarian assistance to residents of Eastern Ghouta.
 
Zaitouneh and her colleagues appear to have been abducted and
arbitrarily deprived of their liberty as punishment for their legitimate
activities as human rights defenders. Such actions are prohibited by
international humanitarian law and are contrary to international human rights
standards. The armed groups in control of the area and the governments who
support them should do everything in their power to facilitate the release of
Zaitouneh, Hamada, Al-Khalil and Hamadi. 
 
List of 56 signatories:
Amnesty International (AI)Arab Foundation for Development and CitizenshipArticle 19Association for Women's Rights in Development (AWID) Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR)Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS) Center for Documentation of Violations in Syria (VDC)Center For Women s Equality (CWE)CIVICUS: World Alliance for Citizen ParticipationDigital LighthouseEnglish PENEl Nadim Center for Rehabilitation of Victims of ViolenceEuroMed RightsEuropean - Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR)FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights DefendersFront Line Defenders (FLD)Foundation to Restore Equality and Education in Syria (FREE-Syria)Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)Hivos InternationalHuman Rights Watch (HRW)Index on CensorshipInstitute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR)International Center for Supporting Rights and Freedoms (ICSRF)International Civil Society Action Network (ICAN)International Media Support (IMS)International Service for Human Rights (ISHR)Iraqi Al-Amal AssociationIraqi Journalists Rights Defense Association (IJRDA)Iraqi Network for Social Media (INSM)Justice for Life observatory in DeirEzzor – SyriaKvinna till KvinnaLawyers for Lawyers (L4L)Lawyer's Rights Watch Canada Libya's Future Center for Media and CultureMaharat FoudnationMartin Ennals FoundationMENA Media Monitoring  Metro Centre to Defend Journalists in Iraqi KurdistanNGOs Platform of Saida (Tajamoh)Palestinian Center for Development and Media Freedoms (MADA)PAXPEN InternationalRAW in WAR (Reach All Women in War)Reporters Without Borders (RSF)Sisters' Arab Forum for Human Rights (SAF)SKeyes Center for Media and Cultural FreedomSyria Justice and Accountability Center (SJAC)Syrian Center for Legal Studies and ResearchesSyrian Center for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM)Syrian Centre for Democracy and Civil RightsSyrian Network for Human Rights (SNHR)Syrians for Truth and Justice (STJ)Vigilance Association for Democracy and the Civil State in TunisiaVivartaWorld Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights DefendersUmammu Organisation in Syria 