Greece:  Slanderous statements against the Greek Helsinki Monitor / Obstacles to freedom of association
February 18, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2010 / FebruaryGreece: Slanderous statements against the Greek Helsinki Monitor / Obstacles to freedom of associationCASE GRE 180210
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Defamation / Obstacles to freedom of association
Geneva, February 18, 2010
The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Greece.
Description of the situation:
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about slanderous statements against GHM by the Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr. Spyridon Kouvelis, in an intervention in the Greek Parliament. GHM monitors, lobbies and publishes human rights issues, in particular minorities’ rights, in Greece and in the Balkans, and has already been attacked in the past by Government officials[1].
According to the information received, on February 5, 2010, in a parliamentary session, Mr. Spyridon Kouvelis informed that the Government wanted to “include in the register [of NGOs] historical data on the relations with the NGOs”, adding that the fact that GHM slanders Greece will be introduced in this register, which, will be taken into consideration when deciding whether to fund it. This statement followed a question asked to Mr. Kouvelis by Mr. Adonis Georgiadis, Member of the Parliament and member of the Popular Orthodox Party Alert (LAOS), who accused Mr. Panayote Dimitras, GHM Spokesperson and member of OMCT General Assembly, of using GHM to “defame Greece wherever he goes”. In particular, he accused Mr. Dimitras of “appearing on television saying “how racist [Greek officials] are…”. He further stated: “Anything he can do against Greece, he does it”, and reminded that GHM brought Greece before the European Court of Human Rights on several occasions[2]. Subsequently, Mr. Georgiadis asked whether the Government was intending to continue to fund Mr. Panayote Dimitras and GHM.
OMCT express its deepest concern about the above statements made by the Deputy Foreign Minister Mr. Spyridon Kouvelis, which seem to merely aim at hindering the human rights activities of the Greek Helsinki Monitor as well as try to delegitimize its activities in denouncing human rights violations of minority rights in the country and in the Balkans, and therefore violates international human rights standards on freedom of association, and in particular Article 5 of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others [...] to form, join and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations or groups”.
In addition, OMCT recalls that Article 22.2 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) provide that no restrictions may be placed on freedom of association other than those which are necessary in a democratic society. OMCT also points out that as a Participating State of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Greece must conform with paragraph 8 of the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly Resolution on Strengthening OSCE Engagement with Human Rights Defenders and National Human Rights Institutions[3], which states that the OSCE Participating States recognise “the need for particular attention, support and protection for human rights defenders by the OSCE, its Institutions and field operations, as well as by participating States”.
The Observatory therefore urges the Greek authorities to put an end to all forms of harassment against the Greek Helsinki Monitor, and ensure in all circumstances that its members are able to carry out their work freely without any hindrances.
Action requested:
Please write to the authorities in Greece urging them to:

 Put an end to all forms of harassment against the Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM), and ensure in all circumstances that its members are able to carry out their work freely without any hindrances;
 Conform with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, and Article 12.2, which states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 Comply with the provisions of the Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the 2nd Conference on the Human Dimension of the Cooperation and Security Conference in Europe (CSCE) (1990), and uphold in all circumstances the principles and provisions enshrined in the international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Greece and which, in particular, guarantee freedoms of association, expression and opinion, in particular the European Convention on Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
 More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Greece.

Addresses:

Mr. George A. Papandreou, Prime Minister, Prime Minister’s Office at the Hellenic Parliament, Greek Parliament Blgd, Constitution Square, Athens, Greece. Fax: +30 210 3238129, Email: internationalmediaoffice@primeminister.gr; pressoffice@primeminister.gr
Ms. Andreas Loverdos, Minister for Employment and Social Protection of the Hellenic Republic, Stadiou str. 29, 10110 Athens, Greece. Fax: + 302 10 321 3688
Mr. Charalampos Kastanidis Minister of Justice of the Hellenic Republic, Mesogeion 96 Av. , 11527 Athens, Greece, Fax +30 2107755835
Mr. Yorgos Kaminis, Ombudsman for Human Rights, Fax 30 210 7289643
Mr. George J. Kaklikis, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations in Geneva, Rue du Léman 4, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Email: missionofgreece@bluewin.ch, Fax: +41 22 732.21.50
Permanent Mission of Greece to the European Union, 25 rue Montoyer, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 512 79 12 / + 32 2 551 56 51. Email: mea.bruxelles@rp-greece.be

Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Greece in your respective countries.

Geneva, February 18, 2010
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 

[1] To that extent, two trials for “defamation” against GHM are scheduled to take place this year: one of them involves Ms. Ioanna Despotopoulou, former Secretary General for Social Solidarity, for statements she made in 2005 against GHM (see http://www.osce.org/documents/odihr/2007/10/27075_en.pdf), and which was postponed until December 17, 2010; the other trial involves Ms. Evgenia Tsoumani, Member of Parliament and former Secretary General for Gender Equality, for statements she made in 2007 against GHM (see http://www.osce.org/documents/odihr/2008/09/33643_en.pdf), and which was suspended on February 17, 2010 because of Ms Tsoumani's parliamentary immunity since her election in October 2009. 
[2] See Galotskin v. Greece, at http://cmiskp.echr.coe.int/tkp197/view.asp?action=html&documentId=861025&portal=hbkm&source=externalbydocnumber&table=F69A27FD8FB86142BF01C1166DEA398649.
[3] Adopted by the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly in Kiev on July 10, 2007. 