Cambodia:  Press release: Eleven human rights defenders jailed
November 13, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2014 / NovemberCambodia: Press release: Eleven human rights defenders jailedCambodia_1311141 page / 127 KBBangkok-Geneva-Paris-Phnom
Penh, November 13, 2014. The Cambodian Government must end the repression of
land rights defenders and immediately release those imprisoned on November
11-12, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an
FIDH-OMCT joint programme, said today.
 
“The
government’s latest wave of repression of peaceful protests is extremely
troubling. Under no circumstances should an individual be put in jail for a
year for demonstrating over the authorities’ inaction to prevent floods,”
said FIDH President Karim Lahidji.
 
On 11
November 2014, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced seven women, all human
rights defenders from the Boeung Kak Lake community, to a year in prison and a
two-million riel (about US$500) fine after finding them guilty on charges of
obstructing public traffic under Article 78 of the Traffic Law.
 
The seven
women human rights defenders were identified as Nget Khun, Tep Vanny,
Song Srey Leap, Kong Chantha, Phan Chhunreth, Po Chorvy,
and Nong Sreng. They are currently detained in Prey Sar Correctional
Center 2 Prison in Phnom Penh.
 
On 10
November, mixed security forces arrested the seven women in front of Phnom Penh
City Hall after the group had placed a bed frame in the middle of Monivong
Boulevard. The peaceful protest was designed to draw attention to the chronic
and severe flooding of their neighborhood during the rainy season. Residents
blame the flooding on the filling-in of Boeung Kak Lake by Shukaku, a housing
construction company owned by Cambodian People’s Party (CPP) Senator Lao Meng
Khin. The protesters also demanded that local authorities immediately fix
inadequate drainage in the neighborhood.
 
Nget Khun,
Tep Vanny, Song Sreyleap, Kong Chantha, and Phan Chhunreth had previously been
jailed for more than a month in May 2012 on charges of obstructing public
officials and illegally occupying land when they protested against forced
evictions in Boeung Kak Lake to make way for the development project
implemented by Shukaku.
 
On the morning of 11
November, authorities detained four other persons – three women land rights
activists Heng Pich, Im Srey Touch, and Phoung Sopheap and
Buddhist monk Seung Hai from Stung Meanchey Pagoda – who gathered
outside of Phnom Penh Municipal Court to protest the arrest of the seven women.
On 12 November, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced all four to a year in
prison and a two-million riel (about US$500) fine on charges of aggravated
obstruction of public officials under Article 504 of the Criminal Code.
 
“If the
imprisonment of the seven women activist is deplorable, the incarceration of
the other four three women and the monk for protesting a day later is even more
shocking,” said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “The
government must immediately and unconditionally release them.”
 
For
more information, please contact:
-·FIDH:
Arthur Manet/Audrey Couprie: +33 1 43 55 25 18
-·OMCT:
Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +41 22 809 49 24 