India:  Alleged unlawful killings of Mr. Sah Alam Mal, Mr. Miltan Sk., and Mr. Sentu Sk by Border Security Force (BSF)
February 15, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2011 / FebruaryIndia: Alleged unlawful killings of Mr. Sah Alam Mal, Mr. Miltan Sk., and Mr. Sentu Sk by Border Security Force (BSF)test take actionletter​Case IND 150211Unlawful
killing/ Lack of a proper investigation
The International
Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requestsyour
URGENT intervention in
the following situation in India/ West Bengal.
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by Banglar Manabadhikar
Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), a
member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the killings of Mr. Sah Alam Mal, Mr. Miltan Sk., and Mr. Sentu Sk., in events
occurred in Murshidabad District, West Bengal. OMCT is gravely
concerned that to date, there has been reportedly no effective investigation
into these killings. 
According to the information received, on
9 November
2010, at about 2.30 a.m., Mr.
Sah Alam Mal, about 40 years old, resident of Atarpara, a village in the
Rajshani District, Bangladesh, was shot in the back of his head by a Border
Security Force (BSF) Constable posted at BSF outpost no-IV under Dayarampur BSF
Camp, in Murshidabad District, West Bengal. Mr. Sah Alam Mal was reportedly trying to smuggle cattle through
the aforementioned outpost with some other smugglers on the night of 9 November 2010. When the BSF Constable tried to catch the cattle, the smugglers
jumped into the river, thereupon he allegedly fired at them without any warning
from a distance of 200-300 metres, and killed Mr. Sah Alam Mal. Members of the
BSF subsequently took Mr. Sah Alam Mal’s body and brought it to the
Sadhikardiar Hospital, where he was declared dead by the on-duty medical officer.
The body was handed over to the family in Bangladesh on 14 November 2010. 
The same day of the shooting and death of
Mr. Sah Alam Mal, a complaint was filed by Mr. Surjeet Singh, Company
Commander, Dayarampur BSF Camp, at Jalangi Police Station on the abovementioned
incident, depicting the incident as an encounter and accusing the victim, among
other things, of attempted murder. The police investigation is still pending
and there’s currently no information available on the progress of the
investigation. 
According to the same information, on 28 December 2010, between 4.30
a.m. and 5 a.m., Mr. Miltan Sk., about 22 years old, from Budhurpara Village, Murshidabad District, West Bengal, and Mr. Sentu Sk., about 27 years old, resident of
Dakshin Char Majher Diar, Murshidabad District, West Bengal, were killed by a shot in the chin. It is reported that
the victims were present near the BSF outpost no. IV, Kaharpara BSF Camp, Murshidabad
District with smugglers. The on-duty BSF members apprehended the victims and
then allegedly shot at them. BSF members informed the policemen at Raninagar
Police Station, who then transported the two bodies to the Godhanpara Primary
Health Centre, where they were declared dead. The Raninagar Police Station
registered the two deaths as unnatural death cases. 
On the next day, on 29
December 2010, a
written complaint was filed before the Raninagar Police Station by the brother
of Mr. Sentu Sk., Mr. Bajlur Rahman, accusing the BSF of murdering his brother
and the other victim without a valid justification (case No 705/2010). Another
written complaint was filed before the same police station by BSF Company
Commander Mr. Amba Dutta on the same incident alleging that Mr. Miltan Sk. and Mr.
Sentu Sk. both died as a result of an encounter. The police investigation on
the first complaint is still pending, and no further information is available
on the progress of the investigation.
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the alleged aforementioned facts and recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their obligations under the Indian
Constitution[1] and under international
human rights law to protect the right to life. State authorities must
ensure that security forces comply with international human rights standards on
law enforcement, in particular those relating to the use of force. 
OMCT is also deeply concerned by the delays in
initiating an effective investigation into the circumstances surrounding the
killings of Mr. Sah Alam Mal, Mr. Miltan Sk., and Mr. Sentu Sk.. Accordingly, OMCT calls on the competent
authorities to ensure that the investigation is carried out promptly, effectively, thoroughly, independently and impartially, in
accordance with international human rights standards, inter alia, with the UN Principle on the Effective Prevention and
Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of
which must be made public, in orderto
bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law. 
Action requested
Please write to the
authorities in India/ West Bengal urging them to:
i.          Carry
out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation
into the killings of Mr.
Sah Alam Mal, Mr. Miltan Sk., and Mr. Sentu Sk., in accordance with
international human rights standards, inter
alia, with the UN Principle on the Effective Prevention and Investigation
of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of which must be
made public, in orderto bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iii.        Ensure
that an effective remedy as well as the right to full redress, including
compensation, is granted to the victims’ families concerned; 
iv.        Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø     
Mr. Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, Fax:
+ 91 11 2301 6857;
Ø      Mr. P. Chidambaram,
Union Minister of Home Affairs,
Ministry of Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979; 
Ø      Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.H. Kapadia, Chief Justice
of India, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi
-1, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in; 
Ø     
Justice K. G. Balakrishnan, Chairperson,
National Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House, Copernicus
Marg, New Delhi 110 001, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: chairnhrc@nic.in; 
Ø     
Jusice N. C. Sil,
Acting Chairman, West Bengal Human Rights
Commission,
Bhabani Bhaban, Alipur, Kolkata -27. Fax +91 33 24799633, Email: wbhrc@cal3.vsnl.net.in; 
Ø      M. K. Narayanan, Governor, West Bengal, Raj Bhaban,
Kolkata – 62, Phone:
+91 33-2200 1641, Fax: +91 33 – 2200 2444 / 2200 1649, secy-gov-wb@nic.in; 
Ø     
Mr. Sri Buddhadeb
Bhattacharjee, Chief Minister, Government of West Bengal, Writers’
Buildings, BBD Bagh, Kolkata – 1, Fax - +91 33 22145480, Email -
cm@wb.gov.in, sechome@wb.gov.in; 
Ø      Permanent
Mission
of India
to the United Nations (Geneva),Rue
du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Tel: +41 22 906 86 86, Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
Please also write
to the diplomatic mission or embassy of India in your respective
country.
*******
Geneva, 15 February 2011.
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that “No person shall be deprived of
his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law”. 