Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Myanmar: further information concerning the case of Dr. Salai Tun Than
February 11, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2002 / FebruaryMyanmar (ex-Burma): Myanmar: further information concerning the case of Dr. Salai Tun ThanCase MMR 010202.1 Follow-up to Case MMR 010202 Incommunicado detention  Geneva, February 11th, 2002  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Burma (Myanmar).  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Commission HK of further information concerning the case of Dr. Salai Tun Than in Burma. It should be noted that the Professor’s correct name is Dr. Salai Tun Than, and not Dr. Salai Than Tun as stated in the initial appeal.    According to the information received, Dr. Than was arrested on November 29, 2001. The exact date of his arrest was previously unknown. Following his arrest, Dr. Than was kept in incommunicado detention in an undisclosed location, where his family was not told of his whereabouts until two weeks after his arrest.  Since his detention in the infamous Insein Prison, Dr.Than has had no access to visitors, however, has begun to receive medicine for a chronic eye condition, which his family was able to have delivered through the International Committee for the Red Cross.  According to the information received, Dr. Than was both an active and distinguished civil servant.  Some of his more notable acomplishments included his founding of the Myanmar Integrated Rural Development Association (MIRDA), established in collaboration with the Mennonite Central Committee, World Council of Churches, DIAKONIE and Swiss Aid for regional development of sustainable agriculture, as well as having received the Good Public Servant Conduct Medal and the Peaceful and Justifiable Service Medal.    The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Dr. Salai Tan Than and fears that he may be subjected to ill-treatment and torture due to the historical precedent of the treatment of political activists in Burmese prisons. Furthmore, OMCT condemns the government’s continuing use of arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detention of political activists in order to silence their public opposition to the military dictatorship.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, Dr. Than, a 74 year old retired rector of the Yezin University in Pyinmana (Upper Burma), was arrested in late November while handing out copies of a petition that called on the military regime to return power to civilian rule. Dr. Than, who is not affiliated with any political movements, was petitioning the government in his own name. In essence, Dr. Than’s petition called on the military regime to hold multiparty elections within a year.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Burma urging them to:  ·	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Dr. Salai Tun Than; ·	intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure that Dr. Than be allowed to meet with his relatives; ·	order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; ·	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Senior General Than Shwe, Chairman, State Peace and Development Council, Office of the Prime Minister, Yangon, Myanmar  ·	Lieutenant General Khin Nyunt, Secretary 1, State Peace and Development Council, C/o Ministry of Defense, Signal Pagoda Road, Yangon, Union of Myanmar, Fax: 95 1 222 950 ·	U Win Aung, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Yangon, Myanmar, Email: mofa.aung@mptmail.net.mm ·	Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro, Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Palais des Nations, 8-14 Avenue de la Paix, CH 1211 Geneve, SWITZERLAND, FAX: +41 22 9170213, Email: secrt.hchr@unog.ch (please mark ATT: MR. PINHEIRO) ·	National League for Democracy, 97B West Shwegondaing Street, Bahan Township, Yangon, MYANMAR  Please also write to the embassies of Burma in your respective country.  Geneva, February 11th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 