TB-Net Statement on the 30th meeting of Chairpersons of the Human Rights Treaty Bodies
May 29, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / 2018 / MayTB-Net Statement on the 30th meeting of Chairpersons of the Human Rights Treaty BodiesThis is a joint statement on behalf of seven
organizations[1], which form the NGO Network on UN Treaty Bodies
(TB-Net). Created in February 2017, TB-Net is an informal group of
international NGOs and networks who work closely with the UN treaty bodies and
have specialised expertise on their procedures and substantive work. 
Our mission
Our mission is to support and enhance the
effectiveness of the UN treaty bodies so that they can better contribute to the
realisation of the human rights of all persons. 
Our vision
We believe that treaty bodies to be effective need to:
·       
Have quality, independent and diverse
membership;
·       
Develop clear, coherent and context-relevant
recommendations; 
·       
Have transparent, accessible, inclusive and
rights-holder-oriented processes and procedures;
·       
Create spaces for meaningful and safe engagement
of civil society and human rights defenders and consider their views;
·       
Be visible and vocal within the broader UN human
rights system and at the country level.
 
We believe there is a need to move towards thinking of
the treaty bodies as a system, rather than individual silos and this includes
the way NGOs work with the system. Working together as a group, we have a
holistic and in depth view of the treaty body system, enabling us to identify
trends, good practices and comprehensive approaches, common challenges and
avenues for shared learning and collaboration across treaty bodies. Further,
together we can improve, outreach to, and accessibility for, rights-holders and
civil society at the national level, across the system.
In support of our vision and mission, we as TB-Net are
pursuing two main projects including co-leading and facilitating two key
meetings: one on the follow-up procedures and one on treaty body membership. In
addition, TB-Net has been monitoring the provision of Webcasting of treaty body
public meetings, and we are concerned by the lack of information on funding for
its continuation and by shortcomings in its current provision.
 
1.         Follow-up procedures
Together with the OHCHR, the Geneva Academy, the Open
Society Justice Initiative and Judgment Watch, TB-Net organised a meeting in
October 2017 attended by members of all treaty bodies, and discussed the
measures treaty bodies take to monitor the States parties’ implementation of
recommendations. It affirmed that the follow-up procedures in the treaty body
system are crucial for the effective implementation of the recommendations as
they allow treaty bodies to maintain a dialogue with States during the period
between the State review and the next periodic report and to support them with
the compliance of their obligations under the respective treaties. It also
stressed the need for treaty bodies to streamline their procedures.  
Recommendations
·     
The follow-up
procedure should be adopted by all the treaty bodies as a crucial element
of the reporting cycle; 
 
·     
Treaty bodies
should in their concluding observations invite States to inform them  about their implementation plans for all
recommendations, including those identified for follow-up;
·     
Treaty bodies should
work towards an aligned, coherent and transparent follow-up and assessment
procedure, based on existing good practices, and adopt joint guidelines as
recommended in the report of the expert meeting on follow-up to treaty body
recommendations (HRI/MC/2018/CPR.2).
 
2.         Quality, Independent and Diverse Treaty Body
Membership    
In order to ensure quality, independent and diverse
treaty bodies, TB-Net focuses on the promotion of transparent and participatory
nominations and elections processes. Last November, we organised an event on
promoting quality, independence and diversity in treaty body membership[2] and we will do so again in a side event to this
Chairperson’s meeting to start discussions about the role of treaty bodies in
relation to elections. We believe that multi-stakeholder cooperation between
States, civil society, the OHCHR as well as the treaty bodies in nomination and
election processes are the only way to ensure a pool of highly qualified
independent and diverse candidates. 
Recommendations
·      Treaty bodies should call on States to organise open,
participatory, transparent and structured national nomination processes to
ensure public scrutiny of the candidates prior to their nomination;
 
·      Treaty bodies should encourage States to ensure in
both nominations and elections that the candidates are persons of high moral
standing, have recognised competence and experience in the human rights field
covered by the relevant treaty, and are independent as well as to give
consideration to equitable geographic distribution and balanced gender
representation, and diverse backgrounds and experiences;
·     
Before every election, treaty
bodies should assist States in identifying the most appropriate candidate by
recalling the key requirements for treaty body membership i.e. availability to dedicate time, sensitiveness to cultural
differences, etc., and by encouraging States to take into account the current
composition of the concerned treaty body and its outgoing members as well as
the current and potential gaps in expertise, regional and gender balance. 
 
3.         Official Webcast of Treaty Bodies public
meetings
TB-Net appreciates the advancements by treaty bodies
in ensuring that UN Web TV provides 
official webcast of public meetings, in English and in relevant
languages for the country (whether in another UN language with interpretation
provided by UNOG, or a non-UN national language when States provide for
interpretation- e.g. CEDAW Committee on Republic of Korea). This is key to
allow civil society and the right-holders of each State to access the
substantive discussions on their rights.
However, TB-Net is extremely concerned that funds
would only be available for webcast till June 2018, with no available
information indicating continuation. In terms of current -and future-
operation, we believe that procedures for the provision of alternative UN
languages and of national language must be improved to allow for timely
dissemination of related information and prevent any inconvenience, gap of
transmission or confusion of the users of the webcast during the public
sessions. 
Recommendations
·     
Treaty bodies
should seek to request and ensure that funding is immediately available to
continue with the provision of official webcast by UN Web TV, in a foreseeable
and sustainable manner. 
 
·     
Treaty bodies,
involving their Secretariats, should develop and formalise clear protocols to definitively
institutionalise the practice of providing, when relevant, webcast in
alternative UN languages and in non-UN national languages when States provide
for interpretation. In this last case, prior communication with States (to
check if they will provide interpretation in their national language) and UN
departments involved (for inclusion of the national language in the options of
languages in UN Web TV) is key to ensure in advance notice to the potential
audience at the national level (e.g. in informative notes by the treaty bodies)
and proper provision of webcast.   
 
We hope you will consider our recommendations and we look
forward to continued engagement on these issues.
 
Thank you,
The NGO Network on UN Treaty Bodies (TB-Net)
 
 




[1] Centre for Civil and
Political Rights (CCPR-Centre), Child Rights Connect, the Global Initiative for
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (GIESCR), the International Disability
Alliance (IDA), the International Movement Against All Forms of Discrimination
and Racism (IMADR), International Women’s Rights Action Watch Asia Pacific
(IWRAW-Asia Pacific) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)


[2] “Promoting Quality,
Independence and Diversity in Treaty Body Membership: the Importance of
Transparent and Participatory Nominations and Election Processes”, https://www.facebook.com/notes/tb-net/event-report-promoting-quality-independence-and-diversity-in-treaty-body-members/2017859365128158/ 