Saudi Arabia:  Condemnation of Mr. Raif Badawi to 10 years’ imprisonment and 1,000 lashes
May 27, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2014 / MaySaudi Arabia: Condemnation of Mr. Raif Badawi to 10 years’ imprisonment and 1,000 lashes​













SAU 001 /
0514 / OBS 048
Arbitrary
detention / Sentencing /
Corporal punishment
Saudi Arabia
May 27, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Saudi Arabia.
 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the recent condemnation of
Mr. Raif Badawi, blogger and creator of the website Free Saudi
Liberals, to 10 years’ imprisonment and 1,000 lashes for promoting freedom
of speech in Saudi Arabia. 
 
According
to the information received, on May 7, 2014, the Jeddah Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Raif Badawi to
10 years of imprisonment, 1,000 lashes and a fine of one million riyals
(200,000 €) for “insulting Islam and religious authorities”. This verdict is
the outcome of continuous judicial harassment targeting the human right
defender since he created at the beginning of 2006 the website Free Saudi
Liberals. This liberal blog promoted freedom of expression and fostered
public debate about religion in Saudi Arabia, but was closed by the authorities
in July 2013. 
 
Mr. Raif Badawi is kept in detention in the Jeddah prison
since his arrest on June 17, 2012. He was tried for apostasy - punishable by
death penalty in Saudi Arabia - and setting up an illegal website. Pursuant to
those charges, he was initially sentenced to seven years in jail and 600 lashes
by the District Court in Jeddah on July 29, 2013. However, the verdict cleared
him from the capital sentence encompassed by the charge of apostasy. 
 
With the help of his lawyer, he appealed against his
conviction. On December 12, 2013, the Court of Appeals quashed the first
instance verdict and sent the case back to retrial. Eventually, the Jeddah
Criminal Court handed down a harsher sentence by increasing the prison term to
10 years and the number of lashes to 1,000. Mr. Raif Badawi appealed the
decision. 
 
As Saudi Arabia adopted a new anti-terrorist law in 2014
hostile to human rights defenders[1], the conviction of Mr. Raif Badawi appears as one of
many attempts to silence human rights activists in the country. The Observatory
expresses its deep concern regarding his conviction, which seems to be aimed at
preventing Mr. Raif Badawi from carrying out his legitimate and peaceful human
rights activities in Saudi Arabia. 
 
In particular, the Observatory is alarmed by the sentencing
of Mr. Raif Badawi to 1,000 lashes and the use of corporal punishment as a
criminal sanction. The Observatory recalls Saudi Arabia has adhered to the
Convention Against Torture in 1997, which prohibits torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. 
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities in Saudi Arabia asking them to:
 
Guarantee in
     all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Raif
     Badawi, as well as all human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia;
 
Quash the
     conviction and sentencing of Mr. Raif Badawi, which only serves to prevent
     him from carrying out his peaceful human rights work, and release him
     immediately and unconditionally, as well as all human rights defenders
     arbitrarily detained in Saudi Arabia;
 
Put an end
     to all acts of harassment and intimidation, including at the judicial
     level, against Mr. Raif Badawi and all human rights defenders in Saudi
     Arabia, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out
     their work without unjustified hindrance and fear of reprisal;
 
Comply in all circumstances with
     all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on the Right and
     Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and
     Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,
     adopted by consensus by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
     particular its:
 
-  
Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-  
Article 6(a), which
foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-  
Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
Comply with
     the provisions of the Arab Charter, in particular its article 32 which
     protects “the right to information, freedom of opinion and freedom of expression, freedom to seek, receive and
     impart information by all means, regardless of frontiers”. 
 
More generally, ensure in all
     circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
     accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, ratify
     international and regional human rights instruments and harmonise its
     domestic law with international human rights instruments.
 
Addresses:
 
·
His Majesty, King Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud, King of
Saudi Arabia and Custodian of the two Holy Mosques, Office of His Majesty the
King, Royal Court, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Fax: (via Ministry of the
Interior) +966 11 403 3125
·
H.E. Shaykh Dr Mohammed bin Abdulkareem Al-Issa, Minister
of Justice, Ministry of Justice, University Street, Riyadh 11137, Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia. Fax: + 966 11 401 1741 / + 966 11 402 0311
·
His Royal Highness Prince Mohammed bin Naif bin Abdul Aziz
Al Saud, Minister of Interior, Ministry of the Interior, P.O. Box 2933, Airport
Road, Riyadh 11134, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Fax: +966 11 403 3125
· H.E. Mr. Faisal Bin
Hassan Trad, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to
the United Nations Office in Geneva, Route de Lausanne 263, 1292 Chambésy,
Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 758 00 00. Email: saudi.mission.ch@mofa.gov.sa
· H.E. Mr. Abdullah bin Yahya AL-Mualemy, Ambassador, Embassy of Saudi
Arabia in Brussels, Avenue Franklin Rosevelt, 45 1050 Brussels – Belgium. Fax:
+32 2 6468538. Email: beemb@mofa.gov.sa 
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Saudi Arabia in your respective
countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
May 27, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of human rights
defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.


[1] In April 2014, Saudi Arabia passed a new terrorism law
labeling anyone who “calls for atheist thought in any form, or calling into
question the fundamentals of the Islamic religion” as a terrorist. 