Iraq:  Letter to the European Union’s Special Representative on Camp Ashraf
November 10, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Iraq / 2011 / NovemberIraq: Letter to the European Union’s Special Representative on Camp Ashraf​The World Organisation Against Torture8, rue du Vieux-Billard, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, 
Tel:
+41 22 809 49 39, Fax: +41 22 809 49 29
www.omct.org
H.E. Mr. Jean
De Ruyt
European
Union’s Special Representative on Camp Ashraf 
Via fax :
+32 2298 7172
Geneva, 10 November 2011
Re: Fear for the safety
of Camp Ashraf’s residents
Your
Excellency,
The World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest Network of NGOs fighting against torture,
summary executions, enforced disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment in the world, welcomes your appointment as
the European Union’s special representative on Camp Ashraf, and wishes to avail
itself of this opportunity to express its deepest concern about the safety of
Camp Ashraf’s residents, in Diyala province, 90 km north-east of Bagdad.
Camp Ashraf is home to 3,400 unarmed
civilians, members of the People’s Mojahedin Organisation of Iran (PMOI), an
Iranian opposition group. In July 2004, Camp Ashraf residents were entitled as “protected persons” to the
protections provided in the Fourth Geneva Convention (1949). The United States of America (USA) administration also signed an agreement with each resident to protect
them until their final disposition. In January 2009, the USA handed the protection of Camp Ashraf over to the authorities of Iraq. However, despite guarantees by the Iraqi
government, the camp has been raided on two occasions since 2009 in
view of expulsing its residents and closing the camp. The attacks led to the deaths of 47
residents and hundreds of injured. 
On 28
July 2009, the Iraqi security forces entered
Camp Ashraf with
bulldozers, and used grenades, teargas, water canons and pepper spray against
Ashraf residents. Eleven people were reportedly killed and several injured
during the raid. Furthermore, 36 residents were arrested and first taken to an
unknown location before being transferred to a police station in the town of
al-Khalis, outside Camp Ashraf. Reports
indicate that they were subjected to torture and other ill-treatment.
The residents of Camp
Ashraf
have since reportedly been deprived of basic needs, such as medical care, fuel
and necessary supplies for the camp. Since 2010, they have also been subjected
to numerous acts of harassment, among others, family members or lawyers being
prevented from entering the camp and the use by Iraqi forces of
powerful loudspeakers to psychologically harass them. According to the same
information received, on 8
April 2011, around 2500 soldiers of the Iraqi
armed forces entered anew Camp
Ashraf.
The soldiers reportedly fired indiscriminately at the residents killing 36
residents, among them at least four women, and leaving over 325 injured
persons. 
OMCT has
expressed, on several occasions, its concern over the safety of Camp
Ashraf’s
residents. The Iraqi government has repeatedly stated that the camp should be
closed and its residents expelled from Iraq.
The recent statement by Iraqi’s Prime Minister, Mr. Nouri Al-Maliki, to close
down the camp by the end of 2011 without a safe solution for its residents, is
all the more alarming and causes an acute risk of further serious human rights
violations.
OMCT recalls
that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) declared in a
statement issued on 13 September 2011 that the residents of Camp Ashraf are
“formally asylum seekers” and called on the government of Iraq to extend “the
deadline for the closure of the camp” in view of examining the request for
refugee status in a timely and proper manner. 
In view of the latest events and
considering the urgency of preventing future attacks and serious human rights
violations, OMCT hopes that you will raise our concerns with the Iraqi
authorities to 
-         
guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Camp Ashraf residents, including by not forcibly
returning any resident to Iran, where she/he would be at risk of torture and
other ill-treatment, in line with Iraq’s obligations to ensure the protection
of human rights to all those under its jurisdiction; 
-         
lift the self-proclaimed deadline to close Camp Ashraf and ensure that the
UNHRC can carry out individual interviews in a safe, neutral and confidential
location; 
-         
allow the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to monitor the human rights
situation in Camp Ashraf
until all its residents have been safely resettled. 
We thank you for your
consideration of our concerns and recommendations. We are at your disposal
should you have any questions.
Sincerely yours,
Gerald Staberock
Secretary General 