Colombia:  European parlamentarians express concern for the situation of human rights defenders in Colombia
March 20, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2018 / MarchColombia: European parlamentarians express concern for the situation of human rights defenders in ColombiaLetter European Parliament_2018.03.165 pages / 1002 KB27 MEPs belonging to 4 different political groups express their serious concern regarding the situation of human rights defenders in Colombia, highlighting the situation of the comunidad de Paz and the human rights defenders in Uraba and Buenaventura among others. They also ask the Colombian authorities to establish guarantees for the work of Human Rights Defenders and to put an end to all acts of stigmatisation against them.Brussels March 16, 2018
The Honourable President Santos 
 
Dear Ministers
 
Dear Public Prosecutor’s Office
 
The Members of the
European Parliament who have signed below write to you to express our concerns about the increase of assassinations and aggressions
against human rights and environmental defenders as well as social and
community leaders in Colombia. In particular, we have noted a serious
increase in assassinations of those who defend their own or collective rights
or those who support policies based on the Peace Agreement between the
government and the FARC-EP.
 
As you are aware the
European Parliament continues to support the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. This support has been ratified in a Resolution[i]
that was approved unanimously in January 2016 and then reiterated by the High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the
European Union during a plenary debate in the EU Parliament in January
2018.  
 
However, despite the
faith we have in the Peace Agreement, and the fact that the homicide rate in
Colombia is the lowest it has been in 40 years, every week we receive news of
the deaths of human rights defenders and social leaders; so far in 2018, every 48 hours a human rights defender has
been assassinated in Colombia.[ii]
According to the Colombian Public Prosecutor´s Office, between 2017 and 2018,
101 social, political and communal leaders have been killed;[iii]
while the Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office makes the figure 204.[iv]
Therefore, according to Frontline Defenders, Colombia is the most dangerous country in the world to defend human
rights, with 50% of global cases of murdered activists. Add to this increases in forced displacement, sexual violence,
threats, defamation campaigns, amongst other issues.
 
It concerns us that the
majority of these assassinations occurred after repeated reports of previous
threats made to the victim, meaning that many of these crimes could have been
avoided. There is still a lack of adequate
planned prevention programs; and many of the programs that do exist are not
capable of providing the necessary guarantees for the defence of human
rights because they lack the application of a territorial, differentiated and
gender-orientated approach and that respond to challenges in the current
context.  
 
Therefore, we reiterate
the importance of making progress in the implementation of collective measures,
that respond to the demands and current challenges. An example of these
challenges is the assassinations of the land restitution leaders Mario Castano[v]
and Hernan Bedoya[vi]
that occurred in Uraba respectively on the 26th of November and the 8th of
December last year, as well as the recent assassination of Temistocles Machado[vii]
in the city of Buenaventura on the 27th of January. These three leaders had
previously reported death threats made against them; however, it still wasn’t
possible to implement safeguarding measures to protect their lives.   
 
The results in terms of the investigation, trial and sanctioning of
those responsible, still do not seem sufficient to ensure the non-repetition of
the crimes and end the high-rates of impunity that still surround these types
of crimes. We are aware that
Colombia is facing multiple challenges in the context of the implementation of
the Peace Agreement; however, we have noted with great concern, the
proliferation of illegal armed groups in all parts of Colombia. Parallel to
this, we have seen a lack of adequate response on behalf of the Colombian
state.  
 
In particular, we regret
the continuing reports of links between sectors of the Security Forces,
political and economic elites and paramilitary successor groups. We have yet to
see results in terms of the sanctioning of those responsible.  An example of this is the recent attempt on
the life of the Legal Representative of the Peace Community of San Jose de
Apartado (finalist for the Sajarov prize sponsored by the EU Parliament) German
Graciano Posso,[viii]
which occurred on the 29th of December and the concerning issue that the
Community might be being re-victimized after the attack.  A few days before, Graciano Posso received a
threat based on a possible plan to assassinate him, which he subsequently reported.
The plan was subsequently carried out, although unsuccessfully.  
 
We celebrate the expedition of Directive 002/2017 from the Attorney
General's Office containing guidelines on the protection of human rights
defenders; however, we regret the comments made by high-ranking government and
state public servants[ix]
that stigmatise the defence of human rights and play down the problem that
exists. These attitudes are
contrary not only to internal guidelines but international guidelines that
exist on the issue of human rights defenders. The United Nations has
characterised the situation as “very serious” and has reiterated that the
“consequences of the assassination of a human rights defender are much more
serious than certain government public servants make them out to be”.[x]
At the beginning of March a delegation of the INTA Committee of the European
Parliament visited Colombia, and got the insurance from the Highest Authorities
of the country that concrete actions would be taken soon to comply with the
obligations of the free trade agreements, including Human Rights and Democracy
related obligations as fundamental elements of the Treaty, reiterating that the
obligatory Sustainable Development Chapter and the Road Map have been mutually
agreed. Another worrying example of stigmatisation and disqualification of the
work that human rights defenders do is the exclusion of the magistrates who
have previously worked for human rights organisations in the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace (JEP).[xi]  
 
We are also pleased by the
new Public Prosecutor’s Office's guidelines[xii]
under which prosecutors would have to contemplate as a first hypothesis that
the crime against a human rights defender was due to that person’s activity as
a human rights defender. We stress the importance of investigations not only
resulting in the trial and conviction of the actual perpetrators but
contributing to the dismantling of the political, economic and military
structures that are behind these crimes, the lack of which encourages them.
Therefore, in order to stop these crimes, it is fundamental to identify and
sanction the individuals who are behind them and who benefit from these violent
actions, that are contrary to the creation of a sustainable and long-lasting
peace. 
 
Yours sincerely
 
SIGNATURES
1.     
ALBIOL Marina (GUE/NGL), Spain 
2.      ANDERSON
Martina (GUE/NGL), United Kingdom
3.     
BENITO Xavier (GUE/NGL), Spain
4.     
BOYLAN Lynn (GUE/NGL),  Ireland
5.     
CARTHY Matt (GUE/NGL), Ireland
6.      CHOUNTIS
Nikolaos (GUE/NGL), Greece
7.     
CORRAO Ignazio (EFDD), Italy
8.     
COUSO PERMUY Javier (GUE/NGL), Spain 
9.      DURAND
Pascal (Greens/ALE), France
10.  
GONZALEZ PEÑAS Tania (GUE/NGL), Spain
11.  
JOLY Eva (Greens/ALE), France
12.  
LOCHBILHER Barbara (Greens/ALE), Germany
13.  
LOPEZ BERMEJO Paloma (GUE/NGL), Spain 
14.  
LÖSING Sabine (GUE/NGL), Germany
15.  
NÍ RIADA Liadh (GUE/NGL), Ireland
16.  
PAPADIMOULIS Dimitrios (GUE/NGL), Greece
17.  
PANZERI Pier Antonio (S&D), Italy
18.  
RIVASI Michèle (Greens/ALE), France
19.  
SÁNCHEZ CALDENTEY Lola (GUE/NGL), Spain 
20.   SCHOLZ
Helmut (GUE/NGL), Germany
21.  
SOLÉ JORDI España (Greens/ALE), Spain
22.   TAYLOR
Keith (Greens/ALE), United Kingdom
23.   TERRICABRAS
Josep-Maria, (Greens/ALE), Spain
24.  
URBAN CRESPO Miguel (GUE/NGL), Spain
25.  
VALLINA DE LA NOVAL Angela (GUE/NGL), Spain
26.  
VERGIAT Marie-Christine (GUE/NGL),  France
27.   WARD
Julie (S&D), United Kingdom
 
 
 



[i]                                   Parlamento Europeo, Resolución de
Apoyo al Proceso de Paz en Colombia, January 2016


[ii]                                 
https://colombiaplural.com/enero-lider-asesinado-48-horas/


[iii]                                 https://www.fiscalia.gov.co/colombia/seccionales/comunicado-de-prensa-178/


[iv]                                https://canal1.com.co/noticias/204-lideres-sociales-han-sido-asesinados-en-23-meses-defensoria-del-pueblo/ 


[v]                                 OINGs y Redes
internacionales,
Organizaciones internacionales repudian el asesinato del líder reclamante de
tierras Mario Castaño Bravo, 1st of December 2017


[vi]                                Peace Brigades
International, Pronunciamiento
Público, 13th of December 2017


[vii]                               Naciones Unidas, La Oacnudh y Acnur se pronuncian sobre homicidio de don
Temístocles Machado, 31st of January 2018 


[viii]                              Observatorio para la
Protección de los Defensores de Derechos Humanos, FIDH-OMCT, Colombia:
Intento de asesinato de Germán Graciano Posso, Representante Legal de la
Comunidad de Paz de San José de Apartadó, 2nd of January 2018


[ix]                                El Espectador, Asesinatos de
líderes son por líos de faldas: Ministro de Defensa, 17th of December 2017


[x]                                 Naciones Unidas ONU Derechos
Humanos expresa preocupación por homicidios, estigmatización y  hostigamientos a defensores y defensoras de
derechos humanos en Colombia, 20th of December 2017


[xi]                                Observatorio
para la Protección de los Defensores de Derechos Humanos, OMCT-FIDH, Comunicado de prensa:
¡Basta de estigmatización a las personas defensoras de derechos humanos!, 20th of November 2017.


[xii]                               El Tiempo, Colombia
adopta estándar internacional para crímenes contra defensores, 1st of December 2017 