'Israel: detailed list of deaths and injuries caused to Palestinians, including children, by Israeli forces
October  6, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2000 / October'Israel: detailed list of deaths and injuries caused to Palestinians, including children, by Israeli forcesCase ISR 021000.2 Second Follow-up to Case ISR 021000  Geneva, 6th October 2000.  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Israel.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received the following reports over the last few days from the Palestinian Society for the Protection for Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), a member of the OMCT network, detailing the deaths of and injuries caused to Palestinians, including children, by Israeli forces using live ammunition.  The International Secretariat of OMCT repeats its grave concern over these killings and injuries and call on the Israeli authorities to put an immediate end to this use of excessive force against Palestinian demonstrators.  On October 3 2000, in Gaza, Fahmi Abu Amune, 28, from Al-Nusairat Refugee Camp died from missile fire. Omar Abdlerahim Sulieman, 20, from Jabalyia Refugee Camp died from a gunshot to the head. A third unidentified civilian died after being shot in the face. Ismail Shehdeh Ismail died from a gunshot wound to the head and Sharif Abdullah Ashour was pronounced clinically dead.  According to the information, in Hebron, Muhammad Younis Mahmoud Ayaish Al- Zama’reh, 21 from Halhoul, died of injuries sustained on Friday. 60 people were injured.  In Jenin, Khadra Ahmad Hussein Salameh, 57, from Jenin, died from complications of tear gas inhalation.  In Israel, Ramez Abbas Bushnaq from Kufur Manda were reported dead.  As a result of the shooting, 20 people were reported injured in Nablus.  LAW’s field worker in Nablus has reported that the Israeli Forces raided a home near Josephs Tomb. 7 were injured as a result.  In Tulkarem 17 were reported injured, including. Bader Yousef Deeb Ahmad, who was seriously injured in his hand and stomach.  Another three persons were identified the next day as having been killed: Mohannad Fares, 24, from Deir Al Ghusoun in the district of Toulkarem and a member of the Palestinian national forces, died from gunshot wounds in his liver, lungs and abdomen. Ayman Aloh, 20, from Hai Adurj, was shot in the chest and died instantly. Inside the green line, Mohammad Khamaiseh, from Kufur Kana, died from injuries sustained the previous day.  Another 15 people were reported injured in Ramallah and another 50 in Bethlehem.   Reports of October 4 2000 noted the deaths of four persons: Muhammed Fauzi Al Sarkhi, 22, from al Sawahre Jerusalem, Mamoud Ibrahim Emwasi, 23, from Betuina, Ramallah, both shot when Israeli Military Forces attacked them at dawn in Betunia, and Ala Hassan Jabber Al- Barghuthi, 24 from Abud, Ramallah, shot in the chest by soldiers in Beit El near the City Inn. In Gaza, 12-year-old Muhhamed Yousef Abu Asi from Beni Suhaila, was shot in the chest by a bullet fired at him at the Shuhada Triangle, near the Netzarim Settlement.  Israeli Helicopters continued firing at civilians with 500 mm machine guns and Israeli Occupation Forces bombed an iron factory with rockets fired from the air and land. In a disturbing development, settlers from the Netzarim settlement fired at civilians as well, with out the intervention of the Israeli Occupation Forces.  According to information collected by LAW¹s field researchers in Bethlehem, Nablus and Ramallah; Israeli snipers are using silencers when shooting at Palestinians. Direct hits are only noticed after ambulances arrive to collect the dead and injured. It was also reported that the Occupation Forces left the City Inn in Ramallah, only to situate themselves at Occupation Headquarters nearby. They are reported to have installed new fortified protective barriers from which they fire at Palestinian civilians.  The total injured on 4 October 200 was noted as 117 persons, making a grand total of 2657 persons.  October 5 2000: LAW reported the death of three more Palestinians making a total of 64 to this date: Mustafa Al Fararja, 22, from the Dheisheh Refugee Camp in Bethlehem, Mahmoud Istayeh, 26, from Gaza, and Arafat Al Atrash, 18, from the city of Hebron. Al Fararja, a member of the Palestinian National Forces, was shot in the chest by an Israeli sniper as he was standing in the vicinity of the Beit Jala Tunnel. His colleague, Akram Sha’fout, was also hit with a bullet in the chest in the same location.   A Palestinian who had sustained serious injuries died yesterday. Salameh Zeyadat, 20, from the Aqabet Jaber Refugee Camp in Jericho, was injured on 2 October 2000.  Actions requested  Please continue to write to the authorities in Israel urging them to:  i.	put an immediate end to the use of excessive force and the use of live ammunition against demonstrators in accordance with international human rights standards, in particular Articles 9, 10 and 11 of the United Nations Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials;   ii.	 ensure that all law enforcement agencies conform to international human rights standards and a thorough and impartial investigation into all deaths and injuries in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, in particular the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  Furthermore, please write to your respective governments calling on them to put pressure on the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to come to an agreement in order to put an end to this confrontation.  Addresses   Ehud Barak, Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan Street Hakirya, Jerusalem 91007, Israel, Faxes: +972 2 566 4838 and  +972 3 691 7915   Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 29 Salah al-Din Street,  Jerusalem 91029, State of Israel.  Fax : + 972 2 6285 438   Minister of Defense, Ministry of Defense, 7 "A" Street, Hakirya,  Tel Aviv, Israel. Fax: +972 3 697 62 18.  Minister of Police, Ministry of Police, PO Box 18182, 3 Sheikh  Jarrah, Kiryat Hamemshala, Jerusalem 91181, State of Israel. Fax  : + 972 2 5826 769.   The Embassy of Israel in your respective countries.   Geneva, 6th October 2000   Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 