China : Condemnation of Zheng Enchong
November  7, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2003 / NovemberChina: China : Condemnation of Zheng EnchongURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  CHN 001 / 0803 / OBS 041.3 Arbitrary detention / Sentencing China November 7th, 2003  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint program of FIDH and OMCT, requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in China.  New information :  The Observatory has been informed by Human Rights in China (HRIC), that Mr. Zheng Enchong, a Shanghai lawyer involved in the defence of economic and social rights of displaced persons, was sentenced on October 28th, to three years in prison and deprivation of his political rights for one year, on charges of “illegally providing state secrets to entities outside of China” (article 111 of the Criminal Law of the PRC) by the Shanghai Second Intermediate People’s Court.  According to the information received, Zheng Enchong was accused of sending two communications to HRIC, the name of the organisation being referred to 12 times in the judgement. The first one refers to a message from Zheng Enchong about the surrounding by 500 policemen of more than 500 workers who were striking on 9 May 2003 following the announcement that three-quarters of Shanghai Yimin Food Product No. 1 factory’s workers would be laid-off. The second document on which the conviction was based was a copy of an internal article of Xinhua News agency entitled “Reporters covering conflict sparked by forced removal come under attack”. However HRIC never received this article from him and the Court acknowledges that this document never reached the organisation. Both communications were considered as “state secrets” by the Shanghai State Secrets Bureau.   According to HRIC, this judgment highlights once again the Chinese government’s efforts to suppress the right to information and freedom of the press under the guise of protecting state secrets. In this particular case, both “secrets” referred to incidents that occurred in public, and of which countless ordinary citizens were already fully aware.  The Observatory points out that this sentence is a flagrant violation of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular of its article 5.c which states that “for the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and international levels, to communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental organisations”, as well as of its article 6.b, according to which “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms”.   Background information :   Mr. Zheng Enchong had been arrested on June 6 after assisting displaced families in more than 500 cases relating to Shanghai’s urban redevelopment projects. He was imprisoned at the Shanghai Public Security Bureau Detention Center. His first family visit was allowed on 20th August only. His house was searched at least twice; during the searches, Public Security police warned his wife, Mrs Jiang Meili, not to speak to the foreign media or other parties outside of China.   According to the information received, Mr. Zheng's license had been revoked in 2001 in relation to cases he was handling for people displaced by urban redevelopment. In spite of Mr. Zheng’s deprivation to practice law and increasing official persecution, he continued to provide legal advice to people, even though he could not represent them in court.  Before being arrested Mr. Zheng was advising families involved in a lawsuit alleging corrupt collusion between officials and a wealthy property developer, Mr. Zhou Zhengyi.   Mr. Enchong was tried behind closed doors on August 28th, on charges of “illegally providing state secrets to entities outside of China” at the Shanghai Second Intermediate People’s Court in Zhongshan North Road. Mr. Enchong’s wife, Jiang Meili, and other observers were barred from the court on the grounds that the case involved state secrets. However, it is reported that the proceedings were monitored by representatives of the Shanghai municipal government. Represented in court by his lawyers, Mr. Enchong pleaded not guilty in the trial, which lasted for more than five hours and reportedly involved vigorous legal arguments.  According to the information received, more than 300 people to whom Mr. Enchong had been providing legal advice gathered to protest outside of the court. The court called in some 200 police officers to control the crowd, and more than 100 protesters were arrested and taken away in police vehicles.  Action requested :  Please write to the authorities of China urging them to :  i.	Guarantee in all circumstances Mr. Zheng Enchong’s physical and psychological integrity; ii.	Drop the charges against him as they are arbitrary, and release him immediately;  iii.	Ensure that Mr. Enchong be immediately given back his lawyer license, as well as rehabilitated in his political rights; iv.	Put an end to any form of harassment against lawyers and human rights defenders in China; v.	Conform to the provisions of the Declaration on Humans Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular article 1, which states that "everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels” and 9.3.c above mentioned; vi.	Conform with the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers; vii.	Conform to the provisions of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and international human rights standards;  Addresses :  President Hu Jintao, People's Republic of China, c/o Embassy of the People's Republic of China; 2300 Connecticut Ave., NW, Washington, D.C., 20008, USA, Fax: +01 202 588-0032  President Hu Jintao, People's Republic of China; c/o Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, Case postale 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 7937014, E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int  Ministry of Justice of the People's Republic of China, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People's Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65 292345    Paris - Geneva, November 7th, 2003  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 