Bangladesh:  Ongoing arbitrary detention, judicial harassment, and ill-treatment of Mr. Mahmudur Rahman
May  4, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2016 / MayBangladesh: Ongoing arbitrary detention, judicial harassment, and ill-treatment of Mr. Mahmudur Rahman
New information

BGD 001 / 0516 / OBS 037

Arbitrary detention /

Judicial harassment / Ill-treatment

Bangladesh
May 4, 2016

 

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the 
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new 
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation 
in Bangladesh.

 

New information: 

 

The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing 
arbitrary detention, judicial harassment, and ill-treatment of Mr.  
Mahmudur Rahman, Acting Editor of the Amar Desh newspaper, 
who has been detained since 2013 for various fabricated and politically 
motivated charges relating to his work as a journalist.

 

According to the information received, on May 4, 2016, Mr. Mahmudur Rahman 
was brought before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate's (CMM) Court of 
Dhaka, after having spent five days under remand by the Detective Branch 
(DB) Police. The police requested another seven days' remand from the 
CMM to continue interrogating Mr. Rahman regarding a case that is widely 
acknowledged as fabricated and politically motivated. At the courthouse, Mr. 
Rahman appeared very frail and said that under remand he had been 
interrogated for long periods late at night and had been deprived sleep. 
 Nevertheless, Metropolitan Magistrate Mr. Pranab Kumar Hui ordered Mr. 
Rahman to be remanded for five more days without examining the 
latter’s medical condition.

 

The Observatory recalls that Mr. Rahman has been detained since April 11, 
2013 and has now spent over three years in arbitrary detention linked to 73 
criminal cases. Mr. Rahman has been repeatedly granted bail by the Courts, 
but each time bail is granted the police present a new criminal case against 
him in order to prevent him from being released (see background 
information). His latest transfer to police remand took place on April 29, 
2016, when Mr. Rahman was brought from Kashimpur Jail 2, Gazipur, to the 
Detective Branch (DB) of Police in Dhaka. While under remand in DB custody 
at Minto Road, Dhaka, he was denied any visits from either his relatives or 
his lawyers.

 

The Observatory expresses its deep concern about Mr. Mahmudur 
Rahman’s prolonged detention and current custody under remand, which 
are illegal according to both the Criminal Procedure Code and the 
Constitution of Bangladesh. The Criminal Procedure Code clearly states that 
if a trial cannot be completed within a specific time (in this case 180 
days) the accused person should be released on bail.

 

The Observatory also fears that Mr. Rahman may be subjected to further 
acts of torture and ill-treatment while under remand. It recalls that Mr. 
Rahman was already tortured in police custody in 2010 and 2013, which 
resulted in injuries to his face and shoulder which still plague him today. 
Sources linked to the government and law enforcement officials have 
indicated that Mr. Rahman will likely be subjected to additional 
ill-treatment or torture while under remand if he does not confess to the 
latest criminal accusations against him.

 

Accordingly, the Observatory reiterates its call to the authorities of 
Bangladesh to release Mr. Mahmudur Rahman immediately and unconditionally 
and to drop all charges against him, as they seem only aimed at sanctioning 
his human rights activities. Pending his release, the Observatory further 
urges the Bangladeshi authorities to guarantee Mr. Rahman’s physical 
and psychological integrity.

 

Background information
[1]:

 

Mr. Mahmudur Rahman has been detained since April 11, 2013, after he 
was charged with sedition and unlawful publication of a Skype conversation 
between International Crimes Tribunal (ICT) Judge Md Nizamul Huq and an 
external consultant in December 2012. At the time of his arrest, the  
Amar Desh office and its press were raided by the police, journalists 
and press-operators were beaten and driven out, and the press building was 
sealed. It has remained closed since. From April 11 to 24, 2013, 
Mr. Rahman was subjected to torture while in police custody.

 

On August 13, 2015, Mr. Mahmudur Rahman was sentenced to three years 
in prison by a Dhaka Court for charges brought against him in 2010 by the 
Bangladesh’s Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC), which accused him of 
failing to submit his wealth statement.

 

Prior to his arrest in 2013, Mr. Rahman had already been the target 
of judicial harassment in relation to defamation and sedition cases brought 
against him by the Bangladeshi authorities, notably for publishing a report 
on alleged corruption practices of the Prime Minister and her relatives. He 
was subjected to torture and ill-treatment while he was arbitrarily detained 
in relation to these charges from June 2010 to March 2011.

 

The Government has now mounted 73 fabricated and politically motivated 
cases against Mr. Rahman. Over the past three years, he has had to 
travel three to four times a week from Kashimpur Jail 2 to the court of the 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka, for hearings on these cases. Each 
journey, covering a total distance of almost 100 kilometres a day, took more 
than four hours each way in a hot and humid prison van with very little 
ventilation. This type of ill-treatment was especially concerning due to 63 
year-old Mahmudur Rahman's health, as he suffers from various ailments 
aggravated by the torture he suffered while in police custody and over three 
years of confinement at Kashimpur Jail 2. In addition, his family members - 
including his wife and his mother - have also been threatened and harassed 
by the Government.

 

Actions requested:

 

Please write to the authorities in Bangladesh, urging them to:

 

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity 
of Mr. Mahmudur Rahmanas well as of all human rights defenders in 
Bangladesh;

 

ii. Drop all charges against Mr. Mahmudur Rahmanand, in the meantime, 
ensure that any judicial proceedings against him are carried out in full 
compliance with the defendants' right to a fair trial, as protected 
under international law;

 

iii. Release Mr. Mahmudur Rahmanimmediately and unconditionally, since his 
detention is arbitrary as it only aims at curtailing his human rights 
activities;

 

iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 
9, 1998, especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;

 

v. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments 
ratified by Bangladesh.

 

Addresses:

 

·Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister of Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 
8113243, Email: pm@pmo.gov.bd

·Professor Dr. Gowher Rizvi, Adviser to the Prime Minister 
(International Affairs), Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9111312 Email: 
advinternational@pmo.gov.bd

·Mr. Asaduzzaman Khan, State Minister for Home Affairs of 
Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9515541. Email: stateminister@mha.gov.bd


·Mr. Anisul Huq, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary 
Affairs of Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 7168557. Email:  
minoflaw@law.com

·Md. Shahriar Alam, State Minister for Foreign Affairs of 
Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9562188. Email: fm@mofa.gov.bd

·Mr. Mahbubey Alam, Attorney General for Bangladesh, Email:  
adv_mahbubey@yahoo.com

·H.E. Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the 
People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail:  
mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int

·Embassy of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in Brussels, 
Belgium, Fax: +32 2 646 59 98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be


 

Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Bangladesh in 
your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or 
embassies in Bangladesh.


 



[1] 
                
See Observatory Press Release, August 14, 2015 as well as Observatory and 
Asian Human Rights Commission Joint Press Release, February 3, 2016. 