Uzbekistan:  Uzbekistan: attempt upon the life of a human rights defender
March 14, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2001 / MarchUzbekistan: Uzbekistan: attempt upon the life of a human rights defenderURGENT APPEAL – THE OBSERVATORY  NEW INFORMATION UZB 002/ 0201 / OBS 015.01 Attempted murder Uzbekistan 14th March 2001  The Observatory for the protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the FIDH and the OMCT, requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.   New Information  The Observatory has been informed by the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan (HRSU) of an attempt upon the life of Elena Urlaeva, member of the HRSU in Uzbekistan.  According to the information received, in the night of March 8th to 9th, 2001, there was an arson attempt on the flat of HRSU's worker Elena Urlaeva, while she and her family were asleep. The flat of Mrs. Urlaeva was poured over with benzine (petrol) and set on fire. Neighbors said, they smelled benzine at about 2 to 3 o'clock in the morning.  Fortunately, nobody in Mrs. Urlaeva’s family was injured.  The Observatory shares HRSU's concern for the safety and work conditions of its members and believes Mrs. Urlaeva’s flat was set on fire because of her recent participation in a picket near the City council on March 7, 2001. It should also be noted that her passport has not yet been given back to her (see case UZB / 002/ 0201 / OBS 015).   Brief reminder of the situation  The Observatory had been informed by the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan of the harassment and the detention of two of its members, Elena Urlayeva and Tulkun Karaev.  On 19th February 2001, Elena Urlayeva, consultant to the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan on filing individual complaints to the United Nations Committees, was arrested at 11:40am in Saylgoh Square, Tashkent.  As she headed to the OSCE office, she was arrested by four militia workers, following the verification of her documents.  Three of them have been identified as Abdurashidov Sh. U, Mahkamov U.R and Haydarov.  She was taken to Yunusabad district department of internal affairs where the following documents were immediately withdrawn and recorded as anti-constitutional, with the intention of filing a criminal case against her (which could result in 15 years imprisonment): -Report of Press Center of HRSU by Ruslan Sharipov (dated February 16, 2001).  The militial workers asked for contact details of the Head of the Press Center Ruslan Sharipov, further expressing their anger that the HRSU were distributing their reports on the internet. -United Nations Covenant on Civil and Political Rights -A letter from the Committee of the Red Cross (dated January 9, 2001 TAS 01/41 -Individual (confidential) complaint to the United Nations Committee for Human Rights in Geneva from Stepanov Konstantin Yur’yevich, violating secrecy of correspondance.  The militia workers recorded his contact details and ‘promised to deal with him very soon’. -Urgent appeal of the World Organisation Against Torture (dated November 13, 2000) regarding the ill-treatment and torture of her brother in detention. -Letter addressed to President Karimov. -Letter to the Ombudsman of Uzbekistan -Uzbekistan legislation regarding the right of citizens to appeal.  Once all the documents were withdrawn, militia workers demanded that Elena U. write an explanatory paper and admit that she was spreading anti-constitutional literature and had prepared a coup d’etat.  Elena Urlayeva was also escorted to the office of the public prosecutor of Yunusabad district.  Elena Urlayeva was detained for 7 hours during which she was given no water, nor medication for a heart condition, even when her health deteriorated.  She was told ‘you’ll have enough time to take medicines in prison’. Throughout her detention, Elena was threatened with physical punishment. She had a pistol, rubber truncheon and belt shown to her. She was endlessly taken from one room to another during which time no notes were taken on the questions she was asked nor her arrest recorded. Elena was not provided with a lawyer, was unable to call the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan or the OSCE.  At 18:45, Elena Urlayeva was taken to the office of Colonel Djurabayev D. A who told her that she was not guilty and would be freed. However, she did not have her documents or passport returned.  On February 15th 2001, Tulkun Karaev, member of Kashkadar’ya regional department of HRSU, was detained by the militia at Tashkent airport at 17:30 as he returned from a human rights course organized by the organisation “Memorial” in Ekaterinburg.  Customs detained T. Karaev and handed him over to a militia worker on duty who took him to the militia department in the airport.  T. Karaev was carrying human rights literature and other documents in his bag, amongst which was an appeal of a number of non-governmental organisations (Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights, HRSU, Memorial Centre and others) to the government of Uzbekistan and other Central Asian States and international organisations entitled “The Civil War in Uzbekistan can still be prevented!” as well as documents of the Helsinki International Foundation for Human Rights “United Nations system of human rights protection”.  The militia declared the following literature as unconstitutional and called for official from the department for the prevention of religious extremism and terrorism.  The officials informed Karaev that he would be imprisoned for this literature and demanded that he write an explanatory paper.  After 3 hours he was allowed to call the HRSU office.  Karaev was finally released at 9pm in the evening and his passport and other documents were returned to him by lieutenant Ulugbek Asadov.  The Observatory recalled that HRSU is still refused legal registration by the Uzbekistan authorities (see urgent appeal UZB 001 / 0101 / OBS 001).     Actions requested :  Please write to the Uzbekistan authorities urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Elena Urlaeva and her family; ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; also guarantee adequate reparation to Elena Urlaeva and her family; iii.	put an end to all harassment against HRSU and its members; iv.	ensure the full freedom of action of human rights defenders in Uzbekistan in conformity with the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9th 1998 in particular Article 1 which states that “Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels” as well as Article 6b; v.	generally, guarantee the effective respect of fundamental human rights and freedoms in accordance with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international and regional Pacts and Covenants ratified by Uzbekistan.   Addresses :  President of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Islam Abduganievich KARIMOV, Respublika Uzbekistan, 700000 g. Tashkent, pr. Uzbekistansky, Rezidentsia prezidenta, Prezidentu Respubliki Uzbekistan, KARIMOVU I.A. Fax: ( 998 71) 139 53 15  Minister of Justice of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Siradzhuddin MIRSAFAYEV, Respublika Uzbekistan,700047 g. Tashkent. ul. Sayilgokh, 5 Ministerstvo yustitsii Respubliki Uzbekistan Ministru MIRSAFAYEVU S. Fax: (998 71) 133 51 76  Oliy Majlis Commissioner for Human Rights, Sayora RASHIDOVA (Ms), Respublika Uzbekistan, 700008 g. Tashkent, pl. Mustakillik, 2 Oliy Majlis Respubliki Uzbekistan, Upolnomochennoy po pravam, cheloveka pri Oliy Majlis, RASHIDOVOY S. Fax: (998 71) 139 85 55   Geneva - Paris, 14th March 2001  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer  them concrete support in their time of need. 1998 Human Rights Prize of The French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Fax :  +33  (0) 1 55 80 83 92 Tel:  FIDH +33 (0) 1 48 55 20 11       OMCT: +41 (0) 22 809  49 39  E.Mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 