Bahrain:  Bahrain: arbitrary arrests and detention
July 18, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2000 / JulyBahrain: Bahrain: arbitrary arrests and detentionBahrain:  arrests and arbitrary detention of several Bahrain citizens  Case BHR 180700  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by reports from the Bahrain Human Rights Organisation (BHRO), a member of the OMCT network, of a series of arrests and detention as well as torture in Bahrain.  According to the information received, at the beginning of July 2000, security forces attacked several houses in Bilad al-Qadim and arrested a number of citizens, releasing them a couple of days later.  The International Secretariat has received the names of the following persons: Jaafer Mohammed Alhamdi,  30 years old, Abd Ali Ahmed Almarhoon, 31 years old, Mohammed Jaafer Jassim, 19, Khalil Ibrahim Almotowaa, 19.  In one incident it is reported that Mohammed Abdul Jabbar Ibrahim Aldurazi, 19 years old, fell from the top floor of his house after being chased by security men, breaking his arm and pelvis.  In spite of his injuries, it is further reported that security men beat him and tortured him severely on the scene.  He was later transferred to hospital.  Furthermore, on 30th June 2000, mercenaries reportedly attacked the house of Saeed Ali Hassan Khalaf, 22 years old from Bilad al-Qadim, who had apparently been detained for 3 years previously. Since Saeed wasn't there, they confiscated his car and took his brother Mirza as a hostage.   It is further reported that on 1st July 2000, Mr. Shakir Abdul Jalil Abbas was arrested on the Bahrain-Saudi causeway while on his way from Kuwait, where he works, to see his family.  According to further information received, on 4 July 2000, detainee Maitham Badr Al-Shaikh was transferred from prison to the military hospital as a result of his deteriorating health.  It is reported that he was subjected to severe torture.  In addition, the International Secretariat has been informed that Hussain Al-Tattan, arrested in December 1994, has been transferred to solitary confinement.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is further concerned by reports that there has been a change in policy for dealing with detainees.  According to BHRO detainees are kept in jail for short periods and subjected to torture. There has also been a change in method of torture; they use means that do not leave long-term signs on the body. That includes, in most cases, deprivation from sleep, slapping, beatings on the head, punching in sensitive places, deprivation from using toilet, abusing integrity by insults and indecent phrases and touching, taking all clothes off and threatening of sexual assault, and threatening of long term incommunicado detention. They are also forced to sign a pledge not to engage to any kind of anti-government activity, which means that they could be arrested any time on suspicion.  In addition, these persons were arrested under the 1974 State Security Law which allows for the detention of a person without charge or trial for up to three years and sets a special court system "the State Security Court", a procedure of which falls short of International standards for fair trial.    OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of these detainees.  Actions requested  Please write to the Bahrain authorities urging that they :   i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the aforementioned persons held in detention, and order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights in all times;  ii.	carry out a full and impartial investigation into the alleged arbitrary detentions, ill-treatment and torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iii.	put an immediate end to the use of arbitrary detention of  people by the police and abrogate 1974 State Security Law and all national laws which are not in compliance with international human rights standards.   iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses:  His Highness Ilamad Bin Issa Al Khalifa, Office of His Highness the Amir, P.O. Box 555, The Amiri  Court, Rifa'a Palace, Bahrain. Fax : + 973 668884. Telex : 8666 Qasar BN; 8500 Qasar BN  His Excellency Al-Shaikh Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa, Prime Minister, P.O. Box 1000, al-Manama, Bahrain. Telex : 9336 PROM BN or 7889 PMPO BN. FAX: + 973 533033.  His Excellency Al-Shaikh Mohammed Bin Khalifa Al Khalifa, Minister of Interior, P.O. Box 13, al-Manama, Bahrain. Fax : + 973 276765 or 290526 or 754303. Telex : 9572 PSMKT BN OR 8333 ALAMAN BN  Geneva, 18th July 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 