Thailand:  Harassment against migrant and worker rights defender Mr. Andy Hall
August 20, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Thailand / 2015 / AugustThailand: Harassment against migrant and worker rights defender Mr. Andy HallThailand Open Letter8 pages / 2.65 MB
August
19th, 2015
To
Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha:
We, a coalition of international labor
and human rights organizations, wish to express our sincere condolences about
the tragic bombing that took place this week in Bangkok. It was a brutal attack
on a country about which we all care very deeply. We also wish to convey our
concern about the prosecution of migrant and worker rights defender Andy Hall.
The charges against Mr. Hall were brought in relation to the publishing and
dissemination of a report to which Mr. Hall contributed research by a Finnish
NGO called Finnwatch on conditions at Natural Fruit Factory. Natural Fruit has
initiated two criminal defamation charges, a criminal charge under the Computer
Crimes Act and two civil defamation actions. Unfortunately, the Thai government
effectively endorsed the criminal proceedings against Mr. Hall when the Office
of the Attorney General joined as co-prosecutor with Natural Fruit in the
criminal cases.
For more than a year, we have called for
the unjust and abusive charges against Mr. Hall to be withdrawn. August 24th
marks a critical point when a decision will be made as to whether to indict Mr.
Hall on the most severe of these charges. Persecuting researchers and
whistle-blowing activists who reveal cases of labor exploitation is hardly a
recipe for effective work against human trafficking. If Thailand is serious
about improving its record in combatting human trafficking and proving it takes
its human rights obligations seriously, you should act to ensure that such
human rights defenders are protected against retaliation, including judicial
harassment. .
We were particularly shocked and dismayed
by the action of the Office of the Attorney General in January to appeal the
court’s dismissal of the first case against Mr. Hall, which had been thrown out
on October 29th, 2014 due to an unlawful interrogation. The Attorney General's
s appeal in that case, involving an interview Mr. Hall gave to Al Jazeera from
Yangon, Myanmar, has no merit and should be dropped. Officials within your
government have repeatedly stated to NGOs in various meetings on this matter
that the Thai government is an impartial observer, unable to interfere as the
case moves through the judicial system, but appealing this case seems punitive and
unnecessary. We call on your government to withdraw its appeal before a
decision is issued on September 25th, 2015. 
Further prosecution of the charges
against Mr. Hall will damage Thailand’s international image and violate
Thailand’s obligations under international law. Thailand is obligated to
protect against human rights abuses by business enterprises, including cases in
which businesses use domestic laws to intimidate human rights advocates and
suppress freedom of expression. This duty has been recognized as part of
states’ obligations under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which Thailand has
ratified, as well as the UN Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights, and has been affirmed by a number
of decisions of international human rights bodies, including the UN Human
Rights Council. The ICCPR also requires Thailand to ensure freedom of
expression and the right to a fair trial.
The criminal defamation charges brought
against Mr. Hall contravene the ICCPR. As emphasized by the UN Special
Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression in 2012, “criminal prosecution for
defamation inevitably becomes a mechanism of political censorship, which
contradicts freedom of expression.” The Special Rapporteur accordingly
“call[ed] on all States to repeal criminal defamation provisions allowing
prosecution of authors of media content . . . .” Regardless, Thailand has
continued to allow the criminal defamation cases against Mr. Hall to proceed.
The charges under the Computer Crimes Act also present serious
concerns centered on the law’s overly broad and vague wording as well as its
threat of disproportionately harsh criminal sanctions. Finally, Mr. Hall is
being denied protection due to him as a human rights defender pursuant to the
UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
which recognizes the legitimacy and importance of the activities of human
rights defenders, including their right to expose violations of rights, and
calls on all States, including Thailand, to ensure that human rights defenders
can carry out their human rights research and advocacy without
fear of reprisals. 
The UN Guiding Principles on business and human rights provide that States
have the duty to protect human rights against human rights abuses by
corporations and reaffirms that to meet this duty, States should, “a) Enforce
laws that are aimed at, or have the effect of, requiring business enterprises
to respect human rights, and periodically to assess the adequacy of such laws
and address any gaps…” Accordingly, the Thai government has the obligation to
protect against human rights violations perpetrated by business enterprises
such as Natural Fruit. This includes preventing business enterprises from
manipulating domestic laws to intimidate, punish the lawful exercise of freedom
of expression and stifle research into labor abuses in Thailand. 
Thailand’s failure to uphold human rights
obligations in this case has already had very real consequences. In deciding to
leave Thailand on Tier 3 of the 2015 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) report, the
U.S. Department of State noted the defamation proceedings against Mr. Hall as a
key consideration, noting that “the prosecution of journalists and advocates
for exposing traffickers . . . undermined some efforts to identify and assist trafficking
victims and apprehend traffickers.” Mr. Hall’s case has made world news as “an international and national disgrace,” and hundreds of thousands
of people from around the globe have sent messages to Natural Fruit and
officials within your government urging for the charges to be dismissed. 
The best way to bring an end to this
negative publicity and fulfill Thailand’s obligations under international law
is to ensure that Andy Hall is released from all charges stemming from his
human rights work, and to, “cease prosecuting criminal defamation cases against
researchers or journalists who report on human trafficking,” in accordance with
recommendations from the TIP Report. We also call on the Thai government to
comply with the ICCPR, the Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights to ensure that criminal defamation offenses,
the Computer Crimes Act, and civil
defamation laws are not used to punish lawful freedom of expression.
We hope that the government of the
Kingdom of Thailand will protect the right to freedom of speech and not curtail
legitimate research that documents when companies mistreat workers and violate
labor laws. Moreover, we wish to see Thailand promote workers’ rights by
ensuring that companies are well regulated to provide safe and healthy working
conditions for workers.
We
look forward to your response.
Sincerely,(for the complete list of all the signatory organisations see the PDF document) 