Nepal:  Nepal: release of Ravi Kiran Regmi
September 17, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2003 / SeptemberNepal: Nepal: release of Ravi Kiran RegmiCase NPL 120903.1  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Nepal.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Committee, a member of the OMCT network, of the release of Ravi Kiran Regmi in Nepal.  According to the information received, On September 15th, 2003, Ravi Kiran Regmi was released from the barrack of Bharatpur. His son indicates that he is in good health. He feels that he may be at risk of being arrested again.  Remarks  The International Secretariat of OMCT welcomes the release of Ravi Kiran Regmy and wishes to thank the individuals and institutions that intervened on his behalf. OMCT will continue to monitor the situation of the other people being arrested arbitrarily in Nepal.  Brief reminder of situation  On September 4th, Mr. Ravi Kiran Regmi (alias Nirjeeb), age 59, was arrested at home around 6:00 a.m. by the army security forces. He was then brought to the Bharatpur Army Barrack. No one, including his family members, had been permitted to see him. Mr. Regmi was accused by the army security forces of supporting the Maoists, which have been declared terrorists by the Nepalese government. He had also been involved in human rights activities in his local area for a long time.   Since 1996, many innocent Nepalese people have suffered from the violent conflict between the government and the Maoists. The Nepalese government declared a cease-fire to start peace talks with the Maoists from January to August 2003. However, the cease-fire was broken on August 27th, 2003, and Nepalese civilians are once again at risk, especially children and women. Army soldiers and police officers frequently arbitrarily arrest people without due process.  Geneva, September 17, 2003 