Nepal:  Alleged torture and ill-treatment inflicted on Mr. Atiram Rana in custody_No proper medical care and no investigation into the allegations
May 18, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2011 / MayNepal: Alleged torture and ill-treatment inflicted on Mr. Atiram Rana in custody_No proper medical care and no investigation into the allegationsNPL 180511
Torture and other forms of
ill-treatment in custody with the purpose of extracting a confession/ No
adequate medical care/ Risk of impunity
                                               
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in Nepal.
Brief description of the
situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by a reliable source and Antenna International, a member organisation
of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged torture and ill-treatment
inflicted on Mr. Atiram Rana, 28 years old, resident of Shamsergunj
VDC-7, Banke district, by police officers with the purpose of extracting a
confession. OMCT is gravely concerned about his health condition. 
According to the information received, on
12 April 2011, Mr. Atiram Rana was arrested at his shop in Shamsergunj VDC-7,
Banke district, by officers of the District Police Office (DPO), Banke and
illegally detained during six days (he was only given an arrest warrant and a
detention letter on 18 April 2011) on suspicion of being involved in a murder,
which took place on 31 March 2011. 
According
to the same information received, on 12 April 2011, at around 10
p.m.,
Mr. Atiram Rana was transferred by several policemen to the DPO top floor. They
reportedly blindfolded him and started to interrogate him on the murder case.
Mr. Atiram Rana was allegedly forced to lie on the floor, then his hands and
legs were caught and he was beaten on the soles of his feet with sticks. Furthermore,
the policemen put chili powder and poured water into his nose and mouth when he
denied the allegations made against him. Mr. Atiram Rana reportedly started to suffocate.
Later, the policemen allegedly applied electronic shocks on his right toe, punched
him on different parts of his body, kicked on his groin, stepped on his body
and, finally, he was threaten with forcing water into his penis with a pipe.
Mr. Atiram Rana subsequently fell half unconscious. He would not remember how
long they tortured him, the questions they asked and the responses he
supposedly gave. However, Mr. Atiram Rana supposes that he was tortured until
around 2 a.m. 
On 14 April 2011, Mr. Atiram Rana hired a lawyer who filed a writ of habeas
corpus on the same day before the Appellate Court in Nepalgunj. At the court
hearing, which took place on 17 April 2011, the judge reportedly ordered
the policemen to stop any further acts of torture and ill-treatment on Mr.
Atiram Rana, given his poor physical and mental condition. Mr. Atiram Rana was
later remanded in custody three times, and, on 11
May 2011,
he was transferred to Banke District Jail, awaiting trial. 
According
to the same information received, Mr. Atiram Rana was transferred to Bheri
Zonahl hospital, on 20 April 2011. However, he was reportedly
not seriously examined, although he would suffer, among others, of a swollen
penis, from pain all over his body, a headache and a dry tongue and mouth. OMCT
has also been informed that, to date, no investigation was initiated into the
aforementioned allegations and no adequate steps were taken against the alleged
perpetrators. 
The
International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern about the
allegations of torture and ill-treatment inflicted upon Mr. Atiram Rana and the
lack of adequate medical care he has received. 
OMCT recalls that
the authorities are legally bound to effectively ensure the physical and
psychological integrity of all persons deprived of liberty in accordance with
international human rights law, and in particular, the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
OMCT recalls that, in line with their obligations
under the abovementioned treaties, it is incumbent on the competent Nepalese
authorities to consider seriously any allegations of torture and other forms of
ill-treatment, and to undertake a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent
and impartial investigation in this
regard, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and
apply adequate sanctions. 
Finally, OMCT recalls Article 11 of the Convention against Torture which stipulates that “Each
State Party shall keep under systematic review interrogation rules,
instructions, methods and practices as well as arrangements for the custody and
treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, detention or imprisonment
in any territory under its jurisdiction, with a view to preventing
any cases of torture” and
article 15 of the said Convention, “Each State Party shall ensure that any statement which is established
to have been made as a result of torture shall not be invoked as evidence in
any proceedings (…)”.
Action requested
Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them
to:
i.                    
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Atiram Rana; 
ii.                  
Guarantee full access to his lawyer and family, as
well as guarantee that he is examined by independent doctors and receives
adequate medical care, in accordance, inter
alia, with the recommendations of the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners; 
iii.                 
Order
his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent
with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him
promptly before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee
his procedural rights at all times;
iv.                
Carry
out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into
the aforementioned facts, including the allegations of torture and
ill-treatment inflicted upon Mr. Atiram Rana, in accordance with international
human rights standards, the result of which must be made public, in order to
bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; 
v.                  
Guarantee that no evidence obtained under torture
and other forms of ill-treatment, or threats thereof, be used in court
proceedings against Mr.
Atiram Rana as stipulated in Article 15
of the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment;
vi.                
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to
the victim concerned;
vii.               
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, in
particular ensure that all acts of torture, and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment and punishment are clearly defined in law as offences in accordance
with the provisions set out in Articles 1, 4 and 16 of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and that
they be made punishable with appropriate penalties which take into account the
grave nature of the crimes as required.
Addresses
Ø      Ministry of Home Affairs,
Singha Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: +977 1 4211211 / 4211264, Fax: +977 1 42
11 232
Ø      Inspector General of Police,
Ramesh Chand Thakuri, Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box
No.: 407, Fax: +977 1 4 415 593. Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø      Attorney General, Mr. Yuv Raj
Sangraula, Office of Attorney General Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +977
1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np, info@attorneygeneral@gov.np
Ø      DSP Bishwa Adhikari, Human
Rights Cell, Nepal Police, Kathmandu, Nepal PO. Box. No.: 407, Fax: +977 1
4415593 E- mail: hrcell@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø      Chairman of the National Human
Rights Commission, Mr. Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email:
nhrc@nhrcnepal.org and also complaints@nhrcnepal.org, Fax: +977 1 5547973
Ø      Chief of Army
Staff (CoAS), Mr. Gen Chhatra Man Singh Gurung, Nepalese Army HQ, Bhadrakali,
Kathmandu, Tel: 977-1-4246140,4241731(DPR), Fax: 977-1-4269624, Email: dpr@nepalarmy.mil.np
Ø      Ministry of
Defense, Mr. Singha Durbar, Kathmandu, Tel: 977-1-4211290, 4211289, Fax:
977-1-4211294, Email: mod@mos.com.np
Ø      Permanent Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la
Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: +4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int 
Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your
respective country.
***
Geneva, 18 May 2011
Kindly inform us
of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 