Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: Further arrests of demonstrators and upcoming trial for Mr. Azimbek Beknazarov
February  1, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2002 / FebruaryKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: Further arrests of demonstrators and upcoming trial for Mr. Azimbek BeknazarovCase KGZ 290102.1 Follow up case to Case KGZ 290102 Continuing hunger strikes / Arbitrary arrests / Incommunicado Detention / Fair trial  Geneva, February 1st, 2002  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights, a member of the OMCT network, that the trial of Kyrgyz Parliamentarian Deputy Mr. Azimbek Beknazarov is set to take place in around one month in Kyrgyzstan. According to the information received, the Southern Jalal-Abad Province Prosecutors submitted their investigation documents concerning Deputy Beknazarov to the Toktogul District court on January 29th, 2002.  According to reports, on February 1st, 2002, 45 persons were demonstrating against Deputy Beknazarov’s arrest. 35 of them were reportedly arrested by the authorities and were taken to an unknown destination. There are grave fears for their physical and psychological integrity, as a statement released by the President’s Administration on January 31st, 2002, indicated that severe measures would be taken against demonstrators protesting in favour of Mr. Beknazarov. Only 15 of the 35 persons’ names are currently available, and they are: Sakeev Maksatbek; Tilekova Jamilia; Sapenova Gulsara; Viilchieva Venera; Nazaralieva Asbubu; Babataev Jalynbek; Ormonbekov Bazarkul; Kerimbekov Hurlan; Kerimbekova Mahabat; Tazabekova Mirgul; Itibaev Ergeshbek; Sarykulov Bayal; Itibaev Timur; Kekebaeva Chinara; Yrysaliev Zeinep. In addition, Mr. Bakyt Amanbaev, a radio journalist working for the “Azattyk” radio station, was reportedly arrested during the demonstration and taken Regional Department of Internal Affairs, where he was detained for two hours before being released. Two audio cassettes that contained recordings from the demonstration were reportedly confiscated from him during that time.  Deputy Beknazarov was reportedly arrested on January 5th, 2002, and was charged under two clauses of the Kyrgyz Criminal Code: clause 177(2) – abuse of power; and clause 185(2) – deliberate detention of an innocent person, following allegations that he had mishandled a murder case, which took place in February 1995, when Mr. Beknazarov was an investigator at the office of the Toktogul District Prosecutor. It is, however, believed that Mr. Beknazarov’s arrest is largely politically motivated, and is a result of his recent criticism of the Government, most notably the Kyrgyz-Chinese agreement, under to which a section of Kyrgyz territory (some 125,000 hectares) was transferred to China, and more recently, he publicly opposed a similar Kyrgyz land transfer to Kazakhstan.  According to the information received, since Deputy Beknazarov’s arrest, the number of people who have engaged in protest hunger strikes around the country, has risen to 386 by January 31st, 2002. Sixty-one people continue hunger strikes in Bishkek, nine in the Sokuluk district of the northern Chui Province and 317 people in the Jalal-Abad town and the different villages of the Aksy and Bazar-Korgon districts of the Jalal-Abad Province. The hunger strikes in Bishkek began on January 10th, 2002. Furthermore, a protest picket that began on January 7th, 2002, continues to be held in front of the Prosecutor General’s office in Bishkek. The Kyrgyz authorities have reportedly threatened, arrested and even sentenced protestors to short prison terms, in blatant violation of these persons’ rights to the freedom of assembly and expression.  The International Secretariat of OMCT welcomes the guarantee of a trial, however, still remains deeply concerned by the Kyrgyz authorities arrest and detention of Mr. Azimbek Beknazarov, and fears that, due to the suspected political agenda that is thought to have motivated his arrest, Deputy Beknazarov will not be afforded a fair trial. OMCT is also gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the arrested demonstrators and all the persons engaged in hunger strikes, and condemns the Kyrgyz authorities’ use of arbitrary arrests, detention and harassment of persons connected with or protesting in favour of Mr. Bernazarov.  Brief reminder of the situation  In relation with the arrest of Deputy Bernazarov it is reported that Mr. Japaraly Kamchybekov (who was involved in the murder case in 1995 – see Urgent Appeal KGZ 290102 for further details) and his father, Mr. Janatbek Kamchybekov (who is a pensioner), have been arrested and tortured by the Kyrgyz authorities, in order to force them to give false evidence against Deputy Beknazarov. Furthermore, on January 17th, 2002, Mr. Chynybekov Talant, who had been conducting a hunger strike for eight days, was arrested in the street by militia officers and taken to an undisclosed location.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan urging them to: ·	order the immediate release of Mr. Azimbek Beknazarov, Mr. Chynybekov Talant, Mr. Japaraly Kamchybekov, Mr. Janatbek Kamchybekov, and all other persons arrested in connection with this affair, in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; ·	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Japaraly Kamchybekov, Mr. Janatbek Kamchybekov, and Mr. Chynybekov Talant and the detained demonstrators; ·	guarantee adequate reparation to the afore-mentioned persons and all of the protestors who have been injured by the authorities; ·	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, including the rights to the freedom of assembly and opinion.  Addresses ·	Mr Askar Akayev, President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996 312 218 627, Email: ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su ·	Mr. Amangedi Muraliev, Prime Minister, Fax: 996 312 218 627 ·	Mr. Omurbek Kutuev, Minister of the Interior, Fax: 996 312 663 031, 996 312 288 788 ·	Mr. Nelya Beishenalieva, Minister of Justice, Fax: 996 312 663 044  Please also write to the embassies of Kyrgyzstan in your respective country. Geneva, February 1st, 2002 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 