Iran:  Judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of several human rights lawyers
September 14, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2018 / SeptemberIran: Judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of several human rights lawyers ​IRN 004 / 0918 / OBS 115Arbitrary detention / 
Release
on bail / 
Judicial
harassment
Iran
September 14, 2018

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Iran.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the League for the Defence of Human
Rights in Iran (LDDHI) about a series of recent acts of judicial harassment and
arbitrary detention targeting several lawyers for taking up human rights cases
and representing other human rights lawyers prosecuted for their work.
 
According to the information received, on
September 8, 2018, Messrs. Payam Derafshan and Farrokh
Forouzan-Kermani, who had been arrested on August 31, 2018[1],
were released on bail of 110 million tomans and 120 million tomans respectively, after
being charged with “insulting judicial authorities”. 
 
Mr. Derafshan is one of
the lawyers for imprisoned human rights lawyer Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh as
well as of lawyers Messrs.
Mohammad Najafi and Arash Kaykhosravi. He had also previously represented the family of Mr. Kavous Seyed-Emami
and filed a complaint against the State-owned Islamic Republic of
Iran Broadcasting (IRIB) for
airing a film in which Mr. Seyed-Emami was portrayed as a spy.
 
On September 2, 2018, Mr. Mohammad Hossein
Aqassi was threatened with detention during the first court hearing of an
intellectual property rights case against the national
radio and TV IRIB, in which he is
representing Mr. Mohammad Reza Shajarian, a prominent singer of Iranian
traditional music.
 
On July 26, 2018, the Criminal Court Branch 102
in Arak, Markazi Province, sentenced Mr. Mohammad Najafi to a total of
three years of custodial imprisonment, including two years for “publishing lies
and disturbing the public opinion” and one year and 74 lashes for “disrupting
[public] order”. Mr. Najafi will appeal this first instance decision. The charges
were related to Mr. Najafi’ acting as a defence lawyer in the case of the death
of a protester in police custody in January 2018 in Arak. Mr. Najafi was
represented by Mr. Arash Kaykhosravi in addition to Mr.  Derafshan.  Mr.
Najafi has been detained several times before, the last time being from January
15, 2018 to April, 17, 2018, in relation to the above-mentioned case. 
 
On July 26, 2018, Mr. Mostafa
Tork-Hamedani disclosed that he had been summoned by the Office of the
Prosecutor for Culture and Media for questioning and accused of “spreading
false information”. The accusations are related to tweets he published about university professor and environmental activist Mr. Kavous
Seyed-Emami, who died while in custody of the Islamic
Revolution Guards Corps (IRGC), and his criticism of the judiciary for
barring him and other defence lawyers from defending environmental activists.
Mr. Tork-Hamedani was not detained following the questioning and it is not
known if any charges have been or will be lodged against him.
 
On July 10, 2018, Mr. Hossein
Ahmadi-Niaz was summoned for questioning by the Islamic Revolution Court
Branch 4 of Sanandaj (the capital of Kurdistan Province) after signing an open
letter criticising the Head of the Judiciary for exerting restrictions on
thousands of lawyers in national security-related cases. Mr. Ahmadi-Niaz was
not detained following the questioning, but it is not known if any charges have
been or will be raised against him. Recently, Mr. Ahmadi-Niaz represented Mr. Ramin Hosseinpanahi,
an Iranian Kurdish political prisoner who was executed along with two other
Kurdish political prisoners on September 8, 2018.
 
On July 8,
2018, Mr. Mostafa Daneshju
(aka Daneshjoo) was arrested by armed security
forces who broke down the door of his mother’s home in Tehran. Security forces
presented an arrest warrant from Branch 3 of the Prosecutor’s Office based in
Evin prison. After spending 45 days in solitary confinement in Ward 209, he was
transferred to Evin prison’s Quarantine Ward before being taken to Ward 4.
Although the authorities have not provided any reasons for Mr. Daneshju’s
arrest, he is believed to be detained based on a case brought against him in
late 2017 or early 2018, the exact date and details of which are not available.
Mr. Daneshju is suffering from cardiac problems and asthma, and authorities are
denying him proper medical care. On July 21, 2018, Mr. Daneshju was taken to
Taleqani hospital and returned to prison without receiving care. Over the
years, Mr. Daneshju has defended numerous Gonabadi Dervishes and served several
prison terms. He had last been released in May 2015[2].
 
The Observatory recalls that at least five other
human rights lawyers, Mr. Arash Kaykhosravi, Mr. Ghasem
Sholeh-Saadi[3], Mr. Abdolfattah Soltani, Ms. Hoda Amid and Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh[4], also remain in arbitrary detention. 
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern
about the ongoing wave of arrests, detentions, and acts of judicial harassment
against human rights lawyers, which appear to be aimed at punishing them for
their legitimate human rights activities, and urges the Iranian authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release all the above-mentioned detained human rights lawyers
and to guarantee in all circumstances their physical and psychological
integrity.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Iran asking them to:
 
i.
Immediately and unconditionally release Messrs. Mostafa Daneshju,  Arash Kaykhosravi, Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi, Abdolfattah Soltani, Ms. Hoda Amid, and Ms.
Nasrin Sotoudeh as well as all human rights
defenders arbitrarily detained in Iran; 
 
ii.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of
Messrs. Mostafa Daneshju, Hossein Ahmadi-Niaz, Mohammad Najafi, Mostafa
Tork-Hamedani, Payam Derafshan, Farrokh Forouzan-Kermani, Mohammad Hossein
Aqassi, Arash Kaykhosravi, Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi, Abdolfattah Soltani, Ms. Hoda Amid, and Ms.
Nasrin Sotoudeh and all human rights
defenders in Iran;
 
iii. Put
an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against
Messrs. Mostafa Daneshju, Hossein Ahmadi-Niaz, Mohammad Najafi, Mostafa
Tork-Hamedani, Payam Derafshan, Farrokh Forouzan-Kermani, Mohammad Hossein
Aqassi, Arash Kaykhosravi and Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi, Abdolfattah Soltani, Ms. Hoda Amid, and Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh as well as all human rights defenders
arbitrarily detained in the country;
 
iv.
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular its Articles 1, 6, 9, 11 and 12;
 
v. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:

• Leader of the Islamic Republic, H.E. Ayatollah Sayed
Ali Khamenei, Fax: + 98 21 441 2030, Email: info_leader@leader.ir; Twitter:
@khamenei_ir
• President Hassan Rouhani, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 644 54811;
Email: media@rouhani.ir; Twitter: @HassanRouhani (English) and @Rouhani_ir
(Persian).
• Head of the Judiciary, H.E. Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Islamic Republic of
Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: info@dadiran.ir /
info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
• Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad Zarif, Islamic Republic of Iran,
Fax: +98-21-66743149; matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
• Secretary General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad
Larijani, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
• H.E. Mr. Javad Amin-Mansour, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41
22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
• H.E. Mr. Peiman Seadat, Ambassador, Embassy of Iran in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: secreteriat@iranembassy.be
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective
countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, September 14, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.  




[1] See Observatory Press
Release, September 5, 2018.


[2] See Observatory Press
Release, July 22, 2013. 


[3] See Observatory Urgent
Appeal IRN 003 / 0818 / OBS 106, August 23, 2018. 


[4] See Observatory Urgent
Appeal IRN 001 / 0618 / OBS 085, June 15, 2018. 