Consultancy: Baseline studies on CAT implementation – 15 countries
December  7, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionLinks / 2018 / DecemberConsultancy: Baseline studies on CAT implementation – 15 countries
WORLD ORGANISATION AGAINST TORTURE
SHORT–TERM CONSULTANCY ANNOUNCEMENT
** Consultancy: Baseline studies on
CAT implementation – 15 countries **
The World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) is the largest international coalition of
nongovernmental organisations fighting against torture, summary executions,
forced disappearances and all other forms of cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment.
In the framework of OMCT’s
mainframe anti-torture programme, the Convention Against Programme (CAT), OMCT
functions as the main civil society coordinator during country reviews by the
UN Committee against Torture. The CAT Programme’s primary project during
2017-2020 is the “Civil Society United Against Torture Initiative,” (the
Project) the main objective of which is to contribute to the greater prevention
of, and accountability and redress for torture and other cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment or punishment around the world, enabled by empowered
national civil society organisations (CSOs) advancing the implementation of the
Convention Against Torture, in particular in challenging environments and for
sectors with specific and/or multiple vulnerabilities.
Within the framework of the
Project, the OMCT is commissioning a set of baseline studies on the current
state of the implementation of the Convention against Torture in the 15 focus
countries of the Project. This will enable a more standardized understanding of
where these countries are today on the road towards compliance with the
Convention and the recommendations of the CAT Committee. They will provide a
structured basis to monitor and evaluate progress, regression, and changes
regarding these countries’ compliance during and after the completion of the
Project. Moreover, they will guide the OMCT in developing country specific
strategies and in planning and targeting activities.
OBJECTIVE
OF THE CONSULTANCY
The OMCT is seeking to
contract a Consultant to gather data, information, and statistics against a
standard set of key indicators on each of the 15 countries being targeted for
increased compliance with the Convention under the United Project, including:
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Philippines, Togo, the Ivory Coast,
Honduras, Mexico, the Russian Federation, Guatemala, Democratic republic of the
Congo, and other countries to be determined.
RESPONSIBILITIES
OF THE CONSULTANT
To participate in the identification and articulation of parameters for
the baseline studies.To conduct research and gather verifiable data
and information enabling us to understand where the country is in 2018 on these
key parameters.To work with the CAT Programme Director and
others in the CAT Programme team at the OMCT to review, revise, refine, and
ensure accuracy and usefulness of the data and information gathered.To finalize the Baseline Studies and present
them with the CAT Team to the OMCT Secretary General and other OMCT teams,
exploring ways for their collective use in their respective planning,
implementing, monitoring, evaluation, and learning on the focus countries.To ensure that all deliverables are provided on or before agreed
deadlines.
RESPONSIBILITIES
OF THE OMCT
To provide all available raw materials needed
for the CONSULTANT to comply with her/his/their responsibilities – background
documents, highlights, language, verbal input, etc.To be available for consultation on the
countries and indicators as well as on-going, back-and-forth revisions and
improvements.To provide timely payments upon receipt of appropriate
and satisfactory deliverables.

KEY DELIVERABLES
Up to 15 completed OMCT CAT Programme Country
Baseline Studies (expected to be approximately 3-4 page documents).An indicator glossary – brief description of
each of the generic indicators chosen and used in the baseline studies.
DURATION
AND BUDGET OF THE CONSULTANCY
The Consultancy must begin
work as soon as possible (starting 10 January 2018), in order to deliver
the first draft of the Impact Report by 10 February. The consultant will
then continue work through the 28 February in order to further revise and
finalize the Baseline Studies, and complete any and all related deliverables.
The available budget for this contract is CHF 7,500.00 The most competitive
consultancy proposals will be those with the highest quality proposal that are
budgeted within this amount.
LOCATION
OF WORK AND SUPERVISION
The consultancy will be based
in the International Secretariat of the OMCT, located in Geneva, Switzerland.
The CONSULTANT will work under guidance and supervision of the Director of the
OMCT Convention Against Torture Programme.
To be
considered eligible, candidates must possess the following:
A valid permit to work in Switzerland (required);Experience in the field of human rights, in
particular with the UN Committee Against Torture (required);At least one previous experience compiling /
writing reports or project evaluations for a recognized national, regional, or
international NGO or IGO (required);Masters’ Degree or equivalent in law, international
affairs, project management, or related field (required);Excellent fluency in oral and written English
(required), with additional fluencies in French and Spanish as important assets
(preferred);Experience with research,
data-gathering and statistical analysis is an asset (highly valued)Experience with simple graphic design tools (highly valued).
APPLICATION
DEADLINE:
Applications for this consultancy will be considered on a first-come
first-assessed basis, but should be sent by the 14 December 2018. Interested applicants must
submit a CV, anExpression of
Interest detailing the proposed methodology, time frame, and fee (maximum 3
pages), and the full names and contact details of two relevant references, to Halima Dekhissi : hd(at)omct.org. Applications
can be submitted in either French or English. Please use “CAT Baseline Studies Consultant” as the
subject of your email. Please appreciate that due to the volume ofapplications, only short-listed
candidates will be contacted. We cannot answer phone enquiries. Thank you for
your understanding. 