European Union (EU):  Joint submission for the FREMP-COHOM joint session: Civil Society Recommendations for a coherent EU approach to combat torture
June  8, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / European Union (EU) / 2015 / JuneEuropean Union (EU): Joint submission for the FREMP-COHOM joint session: Civil Society Recommendations for a coherent EU approach to combat tortureJoint Position paper_FREMP-COHOM_2015.06.081 page / 423 KBEU should
define a more comprehensive internal human rights strategy that mirrors its
external strategic framework and devise a corresponding action plan to guide
collective EU action. 
The
undersigned organisations would like to raise the importance of streaming the
fight against torture across all EU policies both internally and externally. 
Torture is
a paradigmatic example on why such a strategy is crucial at this stage. While
it is true that most competencies remain with Member States, it is essential that
the EU consolidates its leading role in the fight against torture also within
its borders:
·       Statistics show that ¼ of migrants
have been subjected to torture worldwide. This proportion increases in conflict
zones. However, the EU is not an exception: international bodies such as the CPT have raised
their concern about the conditions of administrative detention of migrant
population, including
unaccompanied minors, in various EU countries.
·       The EU has established a firm
compromise to promote the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention Against Torture (OPCAT) by third countries. However, 4 EU Member
States are still to ratify it: Latvia (current Presidency of the Council),
Belgium, Slovakia (Presidency in 2016) and Ireland.
·       The EU has led the fight
internationally for the transposition in national legislation of a definition
of torture in compliance with the Convention Against Torture (UNCAT). Our
organisations welcome the current trend of including the crime of torture in
national criminal legislation such as the cases of Sweden and Italy.
·       Judicial cooperation between EU
Member States will remain a concern for human rights organisations until clear
regulations at EU level upholding international standards in areas such as but
not limited to conditions of detentions are enacted. International and regional
bodies have reiterated their concern about conditions of detention amounting to
torture or ill treatment in various EU countries. Therefore, EU Member States
could be violating their international commitments if transferring detainees to
other Member States. 
 
Therefore, our
organisations recommend to COHOM and FREMP:
1.     To closely work with the LIBE
Committee in the development of a comprehensive internal human rights strategy
that mirrors its external strategic framework.
2.     To promote legislative reform across
the EU Member States concerning the definition of torture and its
criminalization in domestic legislation, in compliance with UNCAT. 
3.     To promote ratification of OPCAT by
all Member States.
4.     To jointly work with FRA in order to
ensure the full implementation of all recommendations to EU member states by
international and regional bodies[1].
5.     To ensure that the EU renews its
commitment to allocate adequate funding with regards to prevention, monitoring
and rehabilitation of torture victims.



[1] Such as
the European Court of Human Rights, the Council of Europe Committee for the
Prevention of Torture CPT, the UN Committee Against Torture, the UN
Sub-Committee for the Prevention of Torture and the Human Rights Committee. 