Joint Open Letter to the EU: HONDURAS: Visit to Brussels of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Honduras
June  7, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / European Union (EU) / 2017 / JuneJoint Open Letter to the EU: HONDURAS: Visit to Brussels of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Honduras2017.06.07 Honduras_OpenLetter_EU3 pages / 852 KB​














Ms Federica Mogherini
High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
Vice-President
of the European Commission
Ms Cecilia Malström
Trade
Commissioner 
Mr. Neven Mimica
International
Cooperation and Development Commissioner
Ms Sofia Sakorafa
Member
of the European Parliament / Chair of the Delegation 
for
Relations with the Countries of Central America
Brussels,
June 7, 2017
RE: Open letter on the visit of María Dolores Agüero, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Honduras
Dear High
Representative Mogherini, 
Dear
Commissioners Mälstrom and Mimica,
Dear
MEP Sakorafa,
Our
organisations have followed with concern the human rights situation in Honduras
and particularly the situation of human rights defenders (hereinafter “HRDs”) in
the country for several years. Ahead of the official visit of María Dolores
Agüero, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Honduras to Brussels, we would like to
urge you to take this occasion to lead the EU institutions and its member
states in demonstrating a solid commitment to the promotion of human rights in
Honduras.
The
predicament of HRDs in Honduras received a great deal of international
attention in 2016, following the murder of Berta Cáceres, an emblematic Lenca
indigenous defender. This crime is just the tip of the iceberg; the high levels
of violence directed against HRDs in Honduras have made it one of the most
dangerous countries in the world for human rights defence as declared in August
2016 by Mr. Michel Forst, UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human
Rights Defenders, and Mr. José de Jesús Orozco Henríquez, IACHR’s Rapporteur on
the Situation of Human Rights Defenders[1].
According
to Global Witness report more than 120 people have died since 2010 for standing
up to companies that grab land and harm the environment[2].
According to the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an
OMCT-FIDH partnership) since 2001, 17 defenders who were beneficiaries of Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) precautionary measures have been murdered -
an average of one per year[3].. Moreover,
between May 2015 and December 2016 at least 16 killings of human rights
defenders have been registered - almost one per month[4]. These
figures clearly demonstrate that the situation is becoming more acute.
Attacks
against HRDs tend to go unpunished, largely due to inefficiencies in the
administration of justice as
well as a number of other structural factors, such as the militarisation of the
State, the lack of a truly independent judiciary, systematic stigmatisation of
defenders and institutional failings on the part of the State with respect to
human rights. Many of these cases were preceded by public stigmatization of
those who defended and promoted human rights, particularly when members of
economic or political power where involved or potentially affected. Initiatives
of the authorities such as the Law for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, Journalists, Social Communicators and Justice Practitioners are
positive steps, but are not enough to tackle the current situation.
Taking into account that land and environmental
human rights defenders are the most vulnerable group in the Honduran context it
is important to recall the recent recommendation by the UN Special Rapporteur
on the rights of indigenous peoples during her visit to Honduras urging
the government to increase its dialogue with Indigenous and Afro-Honduran
communities before a bill on prior, free an informed consent is voted on, as
many communities feel that they have been left off the process.
On
February 21st, the Congress of Honduras adopted a reform over
article 335 of the penal code, which typifies the criminal offence of terrorism.
On February 22nd, in the same law, it was added and approved article
335 B which typified the criminal offence of apology and incitation of
terrorism acts. In this context, on February 2017, the IACHR, and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR) in
Honduras expressed their concerns over the adopted reforms in the Honduran
penal code, which may lead to a negative impact in the legitimate exercise and
enjoyment of the guarantees and fundamental rights, the protection and
promotion of freedom of expression in the country[5].
The EU
has in the recent past played an active role, including at the highest level of
the EU institutions, in the
denunciation of the situation of human rights defenders in Honduras including
through the European Parliament Resolution adopted in April 2016. Several
members of the European Parliament recently took a clear stand on the
investigation of the assassination of Berta Caceres as well as well as
denounced the general human rights situation in the country through
a video produced by various civil society organisations[6].
In the
context of the visit of the Honduran Ministry of Foreign Affairs to Brussels,
including bilateral meetings with the European Commission, the European External
Action Service (EEAS) and an extraordinary meeting of the Delegation with
countries of Central America (DCAM) in the European Parliament, it is essential
that the EU institutions and its member states take the opportunity to renew
its commitment with the human rights situation in Honduras by placing this
matter at the centre of the agenda. Therefore, the signatory organisations call
on you to:
-       
Urge the Honduran authorities for immediate,
independent and objective investigations on all attacks against HRDs in order
to bring their intellectual and material authors to justice. In particular, express
your concern over the weaknesses and shortcomings in the investigation of the
assassination of Berta Caceres including the refusal by the authorities to
allow an international and independent body to support the investigation; as
well as support the results of the investigation led by International
Expert Advisory Panel (GAIPE).
-       
Urge the Honduran authorities to guarantee the
effective participation of civil society in the new reforms of criminal code
and the implementation of the Law for the Protection of Human rights Defenders,
Journalists, Social Communicators and Justice Practitioners and to allocate
sufficient resources for its implementation including the development of
comprehensive measures that go beyond the policing approach. Develop a
contingency plan that reinforces the protection of human rights defenders in
the context of the upcoming general elections in which it is likely that
attacks against them increase.
-       
Encourage the state of Honduras to adopt any effective
measure to prevent members of the armed forces and police to engage in criminal
activities and to support and investigation on the act of corruption linked
to concessions granting extractive projects by the Mission to Support the Fight
against Corruption and Impunity in Honduras (MACCIH).
-       
Show the concern of the EU regarding the reform of
the penal code in Honduras and urge the Honduran authorities to carry out, hand
in hand with civil society, a purging of the articles of the penal code that,
due to their broadness or vagueness, can be manipulated and result in a
disregard for the judicial and due process guarantees and/or the
criminalisation of human rights defenders.
-       
Encourage the implementation of the UN Special Rapporteur
on Indigenous Rights recommendations, in particular regarding the adoption of a
law on free, prior, informed consent which has to be agreed with indigenous and
Afro-American peoples.
-       
Continue monitoring the situation on human rights
and attacks to human rights defenders in Honduras and use all the instruments
available at EU and EU Delegation levels to address these situations, in
particular through its political dialogue with the State of Honduras. 
Signed by:
·      
ACT Alliance EU
·      
CIDSE
·      
CIFCA
·      
FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
·      
Front Line Defenders
·      
GRUPO SUR
·      
Misereor
·      
Protection International
·      
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within
the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders



[1]                OHCHR Press release, 18/06/2016 Honduras, one of the most dangerous countries for human rights defenders
– Experts warn - See more at: http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20397&LangID=E#sthash.Zt9hJILt.dpuf


[2]                Global Witness, The deadliest country in the world for
environmental activism. 


[3]                The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OMCT-FIDH), “HONDURAS: Human rights
defenders between a rock and a hard place”, Fact-Finding Mission Report published
in December 2016. Available at: . http://www.omct.org/files/2016/12/24083/report_honduras_en_web2.pdf 


[4]                The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OMCT-FIDH), “HONDURAS: Human rights
defenders between a rock and a hard place”, Fact-Finding Mission Report published
in December 2016. Available at: http://www.omct.org/files/2016/12/24083/report_honduras_en_web2.pdf 


[5]                                JOINT PRESS RELEASE, http://www.oas.org/en/iachr/expression/showarticle.asp?artID=1054&lID=1


[6]                Grupo Sur, Parlamento
Europeo apoya peticiones COPINH – Honduras, Mayo 2017. http://www.gruposur.org/parlamento-europeo-apoya-peticiones-copinh-honduras/ 