Uganda:  Press Release: Police raids Uganda Pride event, arrests several human rights defenders and assaults participants
August  9, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uganda / 2016 / AugustUganda: Press Release: Police raids Uganda Pride event, arrests several human rights defenders and assaults participantsUganda_2016.08.09_PR2 pages / 134 KB​














Paris-Geneva, August 9, 2016 – The Ugandan police must
stop the harassment against the LGBTI community and LGBTI rights defenders, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT
partnership) demanded today following a police raid in a Gay Pride Event in a
nightclub. During the raid several participants were humiliated and assaulted
while being retained and at least 16 human rights defenders, were arrested and
questioned for three hours and subsequently released without charges. 
 
On
August 4, 2016, at 11:30 pm, the police raided at an event organised at the
occasion of Ugandan LGBTI Pride celebrations in Kampala's Venom nightclub. Ms. Clare
Byarugaba, Equality & Non-Discrimination Coordinator at Chapter Four
Uganda, and two leaders of the Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG), Messrs. Pepe
Julian Onziema and Franck Mugisha, were arrested together with other
activists. They were questioned at the police station for three hours. They were all released without charges but they said that
during their detention, they were slapped and pushed around by officers.                                
 
The other 200 people attending the
pride show were locked up in the building for two hours and humiliated.
Transgender women were particularly harassed by the police who sexually
assaulted several of them by touching their breast and butts to “confirm their
identity”. 
 
At 1 am, the police decided to cancel
the event, and before leaving the place, took pictures of all the participants
threatening to publish them and confiscated journalists' cameras and
recordings. 
 
Kayima Emilian, the police spokesman,
explained that the police had to intervene as the organisers did not notify the
event to the authorities. The police claimed that the event was promoting
homosexual relations and that they had received information regarding a gay
wedding to be held during the party. However, the police had been duly informed
of the event, and the prior Pride events which had been organised in the
previous days were conducted without any incidents. 
 
“This brutal raid is a clear violation
of the right to peacefull assembly. It appears as an attempt to repress sexual
minorities and rights defenders, in a context where LGBTI citizens routinely
face violence and discimination. The police should protect them, not attack
them”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidhi. 
 
It has to be reminded that
homosexuality is a sensitive issue in Uganda where same-sex relationships are
illegal. On August 1, 2014, the Constitutional Court of Uganda invalidated an
anti-LGBTI law adopted by the Parliament on December 20, 2013. 
 
“The Government of Uganda should ensure that rights
defenders do not face any acts of intimidation. An immediate, thorough,
impartial and transparent investigation should be conducted into the August 4
brutal incidents in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before
an independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
The Observatory calls upon the Uganda authorities to
put an end to the harassment against LGBT rights activists and protect them, as
well as all other human rights defenders in the country. 
 
 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.
 
For more information, please contact:
• FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33 143552518
• OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +32 4966903 / Delphine Reculeau: +41
228094934 