Kazakhstan:  Harassment on the part of the Kazakh tax authorities against human rights NGO "International Legal Initiative"
April 12, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2017 / AprilKazakhstan: Harassment on the part of the Kazakh tax authorities against human rights NGO "International Legal Initiative"



URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
KAZ 001 /
0417 / OBS 040
Restrictions to freedom of association
Kazakhstan
April 12, 2017
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Kazakhstan.

 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the harassment on the
part of the Kazakh tax authorities against human rights NGO "International Legal Initiative" (ILI)[1].
                 
According to
the information received, on April 6, 2017, the Inter-District Economic Court
of the city of Almaty concluded that ILI had failed to pay corporate income
tax. To date, the total due amount equals 3,900
euros, including a fine and penalties.
 
This Court
decision is the result of a lawsuit which was filed by ILI to contest the outcome of a
tax audit conducted by the Department of State Taxes of the Ministry of
Finances from August to December 2016. The audit had been triggered on the
basis of a letter from a Kazakh citizen requesting tax authorities to inspect
NGOs receiving foreign funding. In the letter, the individual referred to an
anonymous Internet article reporting about “unclear amounts of funding” granted
to “unclear NGOs of Kazakhstan” that “"may work against the main value of
Kazakhstan – stability”" and asked the authorities to verify whether three
NGOs, ILI, “Kadyr Kasiet" and “Liberty”, were paying their taxes. 
 
In an official notification of the audit results
received by ILI on January 9, 2017, the tax audit concluded that grants
received by ILI between 2011 and 2015 from certain donors, including the
National Endowment for Democracy (NED), Freedom House, embassies and others,
should be subject to income tax under Article 96 of the Tax Code.
 
The trial hereby set a precedent by de facto
depriving ILI of its non-profit status, since corporate income tax is only
imposed by governments on profit. ILI intends to appeal the decision of the
Inter-District Economic Court of the city of Almaty. 
 
During the trial, references of funding
terrorism through NGOs came up often as an argument by the Ministry of Finance,
despite the fact that the trial related to a tax issue. It is important to
emphasise that the Internet article that was officially cited as a reason for a
tax audit also linked terrorism funding with grants allocated to NGOs. In his
final speech, the representative of the Ministry of Finance requested the court
to take into account the fact that the “foreign grant donors, including NED,
Freedom [House] and embassies were also present in Ukraine when that moment
happened”, insinuating the role of the latter donors in events in Ukraine,
without giving any facts.
 
The two other human rights NGOs mentioned in the
letter "Kadyr Kasiet" and "Liberty" - were also subjected
to similar audits. While the audit of the former is still ongoing, the NGO
“Liberty” already filed a lawsuit challenging the legality of a decision to
impose on them a corporate income tax, but in the meantime its bank accounts
have already been frozen and the head of the organisation risks being subject
to a travel ban. In the case of non-payment of the tax, all three NGOs
eventually risk closure. 
 
The
Observatory denounces the sentence handed down against ILI as it sets a
negative precedent by de facto depriving an NGO of its non-profit
status, and urges Kazakh authorities to put an end to all acts of harassment,
including at the judicial and administrative level against ILI and all human
rights organisations operating in the country as to ensure the respect for
freedom of association in Kazakhstan.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Kazakhstan asking them to:
 
i.
Put an end to all acts of harassment, against ILI and all human rights
organisations in Kazakhstan; 
 
ii.
Revise tax legislation to ensure its compliance with international standards of
freedom of association;
 
iii.
Unfreeze the bank accounts of human rights organisation "Liberty" since this measure violates
the right to freedom of association as protected by international law;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of
the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly
of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially Articles 1, 5, 6 and
12.2; and
 
v. More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Kazakhstan.
Addresses:
Mr. Nursultan NAZARBAEV, President of the
     Republic of Kazakhstan. Fax: + 7 3172 32 61 82, 007 / 3172 / 32 40 89 Mr. Kalmukhanbet Kassymov, Minister of
     Internal Affairs of Kazakhstan. Email: Kense@mvd.kzMr. Zhakyp Assanov, Prosecutor General of
     Kazakhstan. Fax: +7 7172 506 402Mr. Askar Shakirov, Human Rights
     Commissioner of Kazakhstan. Fax: +7 7172 74 05 48Ambassador Ms. Zhanar Aitzhanova, Permanent
     Representative of the Republic of Kazakhstan to the UN Office and other
     international organizations in Geneva. Fax: +41 (0) 22 788 66 02. Email: mission@kazakhstan-geneva.chAmbassador Mr. Almaz KHAMZAYEV, Embassy of
     Kazakhstan in Brussels. Email: brussels@mfa.kz.Permanent Delegation of the Republic of
     Kazakhstan to the OSCE in Vienna. Fax: +43 1 890 80 08 20. Email:
     kzosce@kazakhstan.at
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Kazakhstan in your
respective country.
***
 
Paris-Geneva, April 12, 2017
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is
to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line:
•   E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
•    
•   Tel
and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
•    Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                
ILI aims to promote the observance of due process of the law in Kazakhstan. The
organisation promotes freedom of assembly by monitoring peaceful gatherings and
demonstrations, providing strategic legal aid and maintaining a network of
observers. 