Gambia:  The Unfair Prosecution of two Women Human Rights Defenders Must Stop
January  9, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Gambia / 2012 / JanuaryGambia: The Unfair Prosecution of two Women Human Rights Defenders Must Stop
PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
THE GAMBIA: The Unfair Prosecution of two Women Human Rights 
Defenders Must Stop
 
Paris-Geneva, January 9, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection 
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for 
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), denounces 
the interminable judicial harassment faced by two women human rights defenders 
in The Gambia.
 
On January 11, 2012, the criminal case “the State versus Dr. Isatou 
Touray and Amie Bojang-Sissoho” will resume, marking the 41st hearing 
since the opening of the trial in November 2010 before the Banjul Magistrates’ Court. Dr. Isatou 
Touray and Ms. Amie Bojang-Sissoho, respectively Executive Director 
and Programme Coordinator of The Gambia Committee on Traditional Practices 
Affecting the Health of Women and Children (GAMCOTRAP), an organisation working 
on sexual and reproductive health and rights of women and children, are 
prosecuted on charges of “theft” for the alleged embezzlement of 30,000 euros 
received in 2009 from “Yolocamba Solidaridad”, a Spanish development NGO. The 
judicial harassment has been going on for more than a year and a half, when the 
police started interrogations of GAMCOTRAP staff.
 
On January 31, 2011, Ms. Begoña Ballestros Sanchez, Director of 
Yolocamba Solidaridad, denied accusing anyone associated with GAMCOTRAP of theft 
and submitting a complaint in relation thereof during a hearing at Banjul 
Magistrate’s Court. During interrogation, which took six hearings, Ms. Isatou 
Touray had to respond to very precise questions by the Prosecutor covering all 
aspects of GAMCOTRAP's activities, staff and resources that are unrelated to the 
charges. He also repeatedly made depreciating comments about the work of 
GAMCOTRAP's programme to eradicate female genital mutilation. 

 
The Observatory believes that the criminal case against Dr. Isatou 
Touray and Amie Bojang-Sissoho merely aims at intimidating them and impeding 
GAMCOTRAP from carrying out its activities for the promotion and protection of 
human rights. More generally, it also aims at intimidating the Gambian civil 
society and, more particularly, those who stand up for human 
rights.
 
The Observatory firmly denounces this continuing judicial harassment 
and calls upon the Gambian authorities to guarantee that human rights defenders 
can carry out their activities free of any hindrances and stop any kind of 
harassment - including at the judicial level - against human rights defenders, 
in line with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the 
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and international human rights instruments ratified by The Gambia. 

 
For more information, please contact:
·    FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
·    OMCT: 
Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39 