Algeria:  Stop the Harassment Campaign against Union Activists!
September 30, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Algeria / 2011 / SeptemberAlgeria: Stop the Harassment Campaign against Union Activists!
 
ALGERIA: Stop the Harassment Campaign against Union Activists!
 Copenhagen,
Paris, Geneva, Algiers, September 30, 2011 – On the eve of the first meeting of the European Union-Algeria Subcommittee
on ‘political dialogue, security, and human rights’, to be held in Algiers on
October 3, the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN), the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), the Action Group of Families of the Disappeared in
Algeria (Collectif des Familles de Disparus en Algérie,  CFDA), and the Algerian Human Rights League
(Ligue Algérienne pour la défense des droits de l’Homme,
LADDH) strongly condemn the intensifying harassment campaign against trade
unionists and human rights defenders in Algeria.
On the
evening of September 25, a police officer from the General Intelligence Service
(Renseignements généraux) came to the residence of the
owners of the building, housing the Maison des Syndicats also national
headquarters of the National Independent Union of Civil Servants (Syndicat
national autonome des personnels de l’administration publique,
SNAPAP), located in Dar El Beida (east of Algiers), in an
attempt to convince them to evict the union from the premises.
Several
people, including SNAPAP Secretary General, Nacera Ghozlane, witnessed
this incident and identified the police officer as Akroune Belgacem. Eye
witnesses also reported that the officer made slanderous statements against the
main leaders of SNAPAP, characterising them as ‘depraved’ and ‘hoodlums’.
The officer also accused SNAPAP with maintaining relations with foreign entities
providing it with illegal funding. He added that the police had been given
instructions ‘from the office of the
President of the Republic’ to put an end to SNAPAP’s activities and ransack
its offices in search of important documents.
The officer
openly uttered a death threat against SNAPAP President, Rachid Malaoui. Already, on 15 July of this year, an attempt was made
to sabotage Rachid Malaoui’s car. A
complaint was made at the time and our organisations call upon the Algerian
judicial authorities to follow up on that complaint without delay.
The same
day, Mourad Tchiko, also a SNAPAP member, was summoned to the Hadjout police
station (in Tipaza, west of Algiers), where he was questioned about his trade union
activities. Mr Tchiko has been the target of uninterrupted judicial harassment
since 2004 and has been deprived of his passport since August 2010, a measure
intended to punish him for his union activities.
In
addition, on September 20, Malika Fallil,
Chair of the National Workers’ Committee on Precarious and Pre-employment (Comité
national des travailleurs du pré-emploi et filet social – travail précaire),
was arrested at a sit-in held in front of the Labour Ministry building. Ms
Fallil was the target of intimidation attempts by the police, aimed at ending
her activities as a union militant, and in particular her relationship with
SNAPAP. She was released a few hours later. 
Our organisations call upon the Algerian Government to:
- Put an end to all harassment directed against human rights defenders,
including union leaders and to suspend all judicial procedures launched against
them;
- Allow the judicial authorities to
conduct exhaustive, independent, and impartial investigations into the attempt
to sabotage of Rachid Malaoui’s car and on the litigations involving the
associations’ centre (Maison
des Associations)
and the independent unions’ centre (Maison des Syndicats autonomes) in Dar El Beida;
- Guarantee the physical and
psychological integrity of all human rights defenders including union members in
Algeria at all times, along with the security of headquarters and offices of
unions and organisations of human rights defenders; 
- Implement the provisions of the
United Nations’ Declaration on human rights defenders (1998).
Our organisations also request that, at the first meeting of the Subcommittee
on ‘political dialogue, security, and human rights’, the European Union firmly call
upon the Algerian government to implement its human rights commitments, and in
particular to stop harassing human rights defenders, in particular union
leaders. Our organisations also call upon the European Union effectively to
implement the EU’s Guidelines on human rights defenders. 

For more information:
Despite the
emergency rule was lifted on 24 February 2011, freedom of association and
assembly, in Algeria are constantly violated. Union Activists and Human Rights
Defenders are the target of harassment, intimidation and even death threats. 
Attacks
against union freedoms have multiplied since the beginning of 2011. The SNAPAP
offices were broken into during the night of May 8, 2011. Computers were stolen,
but valuable objects were left on the scene. There has been no police follow-up
of the complaint filed in the wake of this break-in.
As to the
litigations surrounding the closure by administrative order of the Maison
des Associations (Oran, 2002) and the Maison des Syndicats
(Algiers, 2010), they are still pending. In the case of the Maison
des Associations, the matter has been lying with the State
Council for several years.[1]
_ _ _ 
As part of the Association Agreement in effect since 2005, Algeria and
the EU have recently established a Subcommittee on ‘political dialogue,
security, and human rights’. Its members meet at least once a year, alternating
between Algeria and the European Union. Senior officials from the two parties
alternatively chair the meetings. 
 
Contacts:
EMHRN: +45
32 64 17 00
FIDH:
Karine Appy / Arthur Manet - + 33 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39
CFDA: + 33 1
43 44 87 82
LADDH: +
213 21 23 80 86

[1] See joint Press Release (in French)
by EMHRN-OBS (joint programme of FIDH-OMCT) on May 14, 2010 : http://www.euromedrights.org/fr/dernieres-nouvelles/emhrn-releases/communiques-du-remdh-2010/5855.html 