Sri Lanka:  42 human rights defenders and political activists detained to prevent them from participating in a peaceful protest in Jaffna on Human Rights Day
December 15, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2011 / DecemberSri Lanka: 42 human rights defenders and political activists detained to prevent them from participating in a peaceful protest in Jaffna on Human Rights Day
PRESS RELEASE - 
THE OBSERVATORY
 
SRI LANKA: 42 human rights defenders and political activists detained 
to prevent them from participating in a peaceful protest in Jaffna on Human 
Rights Day
 
Geneva-Paris, December 15, 2011. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights 
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), strongly condemns the 
detention of 42 defenders and political activists to prevent them from 
participating in a peaceful protest in Jaffna on Human Rights Day, as well as 
the violent dispersal of the protest.
 
On December 10, 2011, 42 human rights defenders and opposition 
activists from the southern part of Sri Lanka were detained by the police in the 
northern town of Jaffna as they were about to attend a protest to mark the 
international human rights day. 
 
The protest was organised by a collective of Tamil and Sinhala civil 
society groups and activists including Right to Life, the International Movement 
against Discrimination and Racism (IMADR), the Committee to Investigate 
Disappearances (CID), families of the disappeared, and opposition political 
parties including the Tamil National Alliance (TNA), the Trotskyite Nava Sama 
Samaja Patshaya (NSSP), the Socialist Party of Sri Lanka and the Ceylon 
Communist Party of Sri Lanka (Maoist). The objective was to highlight key human 
rights issues and ongoing violations, in particular in the north of Sri 
Lanka.
 
Events to mark Human Rights Day including protests in other parts of 
Sri Lanka such as in Colombo, Kandy and Kurunegela were allowed without 
disruption. However, in Jaffna the police detained human rights defenders 
travelling to the protest and also attempted to disperse those who had gathered 
at the main protest venue in Jaffna town. In addition, on the day of the 
protest, unusual heavy security and military presence was observed in Jaffna. 
All buses entering the city were checked by police, and riot police were seen on 
the streets while army officers were seen inside the Jaffna main police station. 

 
At around 9.00 am on December 10, a bus carrying 42 human rights 
defenders, journalists and political activists from Colombo and other parts of 
the country was stopped at a police sentry in Navathkuli, an entry point to 
Jaffna. A policeman stepped in the bus and seized a copy of Puthiya 
Samathanamam, a Tamil newspaper published by the NSSP. Although none 
of the police officers at the sentry point spoke Tamil and appeared not to be 
able to read Tamil, they claimed that the newspaper was illegal and contained 
anti-Government material. Following a brief discussion, the police allowed the 
bus to proceed at around 9.45 am.
 
The group finally reached Jaffna but at around 10.30 am, it was 
stopped by about 20 police officers led by a Sub-Inspector at the Vembaddi 
Junction opposite the Nurses Training College (NTC) in Jaffna. The police 
ordered the group to get down from the bus, and searched everyone as well as the 
bus, confiscating material worth around Rs.30,000 (about 203 €) including 99 
copies of Puthiya Samathanamam, around 500-600 leaflets calling for 
investigations into disappearances, several placards and posters including 
photographs of disappeared persons, and two banners of the NSSP and the CID. The 
materials were thrown out of the bus and later loaded into a police vehicle. No 
receipt was given for the material confiscated by the police. 

 
The group was then detained for over two and a half hours on the road 
opposite the NTC, being surrounded by around 15 policemen. Later, around 10 
armed army officers joined the police cordon. No one was allowed to leave the 
place and the police refused to allow anyone to attend the protest. No reason or 
justification was given for such a treatment. The police told the group that any 
gathering of more than five people could not take place in Jaffna without prior 
police permission, although there is no particular law providing that you 
require police permission to conduct an event or protest in Jaffna. The police 
added that any member of the group who tried to leave the place of detention 
would be remanded. The Sub-Inspector and an Assistant Superintendent of Police 
(ASP) who was present at the scene accused the defenders of trying to provoke 
ethnic tensions and undoing what the military had achieved after years of 
struggle against so-called terrorism. He said that they would be answerable to 
the nation for their actions. All were released at 12.45 pm and finally allowed 
to join the protest. As they were leaving Vembaddi Junction, the ASP said in 
Sinhala that "when you come to our area you must behave in a manner that is 
suitable to us", adding "this is not Colombo, this is 
Jaffna".
 
Meanwhile, the police tried to disperse the protest that was taking 
place at the central bus stand. Several activists were forced by the police to 
leave the venue, who threatened to hit those who remained there. According to 
reports, the police would also have hit and pushed some women to the ground, 
mostly mothers and relatives of the disappeared. Yet, the protest at the central 
bus stand continued, despite police controls and attempts to disperse or disrupt 
the protest. Demonstrators were crowded into a small space of around 20 yards by 
the police, who prevented the protest from expanding. 
 
On December 13, 2011, Messrs. Mahindran from the CID, Ajith 
Rupesignhe from the Ceylon Communist Party (Maoist), Mahinda Devage from the 
Socialist Party of Sri Lanka and Janaka Silva, Janagan and Perumal Koominathanan 
from the NSSP filed a complaint with the Inspector General of Police (IGP) 
against the treatment by the police and asked the IGP to conduct an inquiry into 
the incident and to return the confiscated materials, particularly the 
photographs of disappeared persons to the group. The Officer in Charge of the 
Special Investigation Unit recorded the complaint and told the group that he had 
informed the IGP by telephone and obtained a special order from the IGP to the 
area Deputy IGP to investigate into the incident. The same group also plans to 
complain to the Sri Lanka's National Human Rights Commission regarding the 
incident. 
 
The Observatory expresses its deep concern about the above-mentioned attempts to hinder the freedom of peaceful assembly of human rights defenders in Jaffna, and calls upon the Sri Lankan authorities to put an end to all acts of 
harassment against all human rights defenders in Sri Lanka, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals, in line with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders 
adopted by the General Assembly on December 9, 1998. 
 
For further information, please contact:
·         
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39
·         
FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 