China:  Ongoing arbitrary and incommunicado detention of Mr. Wang Quanzhang
September 19, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2017 / SeptemberChina: Ongoing arbitrary and incommunicado detention of Mr. Wang Quanzhang





CHN 003 / 0917 / OBS 101
Arbitrary
detention /
Torture /
Judicial harassment
China
September 19, 2017
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in China.
 
Brief description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the
ongoing arbitrary and incommunicado detention of Mr. Wang
Quanzhang, a human
rights lawyer with Fengrui Law Firm in Beijing. Mr. Wang was
detained in the context of the “709 crackdown”[1].
 
According to
the information received, since Mr. Wang
Quanzhang’s arrest by police in August 2015, Chinese authorities have
repeatedly prevented his wife and his lawyers from having access to him.
 
After he was taken into custody on August 3, 2015, Mr.
Wang was held under “residential surveillance at a designated location” (RSDL)
for six months, until he was formally arrested on January 8, 2016 and
transferred to Tianjin No. 2 Detention Center. His family
assumes he is still detained at Tianjin No. 2 Detention Center but neither his
wife nor his lawyer has been able to meet him since his transfer to Tianjin. On some
occasions, Tianjin police claimed they did not know where Mr. Wang was.
 
On February 14,
2017, Mr. Wang was indicted on
charges of “inciting subversion of State power” (Article 105 of the Chinese
Criminal Law), punishable with prison terms ranging from 10 years to life
imprisonment.
 
Moreover, it
is strongly believed that Mr. Wang was subjected to various forms of ­torture,
including electric shocks, while in custody. Since his arrest, his relatives
have also been subjected to harassment. In particular, his wife, Ms. Li Wenzu, has
been constantly monitored, and was arbitrarily detained on several occasions.
Their son has also been forcibly removed from kindergarten by police order.
 
Mr. Wang has
been practicing law since 2003, and has represented a wide array of clients in
human rights cases, including Falun Gong practitioners, members of the New
Citizens’ Movement, housing rights activist Ni Yulan, and journalist Qi Chonghuai. He also wrote or
co-authored many articles on the legal profession and human rights, and led
many human rights and legal training sessions for less experienced human rights
defenders around China. He has faced constant harassment and suffered
retaliation for his work.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the arbitrary detention of Mr. Wang Quanzhang,
and urges the Chinese authorities to immediately and unconditionally release
him, ensure his right to access to his relatives and a lawyer of his own or his
family’s choosing, and respect his rights including those stipulated in
the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the UN Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and the UN Basic Principles on
the Role of Lawyers.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of the People’s Republic of China to
urge them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Wang Quanzhang as well as that of all human rights defenders
in China;
 
ii. Immediately disclose Mr. Wang Quanzhang’s
whereabouts and release him immediately and unconditionally as his
detention is arbitrary since it only seems to aim at punishing him for his human
rights activities;
 
iii.
Guarantee the access of Mr. Wang Quanzhang to his family members and
to a lawyer of his own or his family’s choosing;
 
iv.
Carry out an immediate, thorough, impartial, and transparent
investigation into the above-mentioned allegations of torture in
order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent
tribunal, and sanction them as provided by law;
 
v. Put an
end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level
- against Mr. Wang Quanzhang and all human rights defenders
in the country so that they are able to carry out their work without
hindrance, and put an end to reprisals against family members seeking justice
on behalf of detained or disappeared human rights defenders;
 
vi. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2;
 
vii. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human
Rights and other international human rights instruments signed or ratified by
China.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Li
Keqiang, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 659 611
09 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs), Email: premier@mail.gov.cn
·    
Mr. Guo
Shengkun, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Fax:
+86 10 63099216, Email: gabzfwz@mps.gov.cn
·    
H.E.
Mr. Zhaoxu Ma, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
China to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 793 70 14,
E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn
·    
H.E.
Mr. QU XING, Ambassador, Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32-2-7792895; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
representations of China in your respective countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, September 19, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society. 
 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·    
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·    
Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29·     Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1] The term “709” refers to the start of the
crackdown on July 9, 2015. About 300 rights lawyers and ­activists were
detained, interrogated or threatened in one of the harshest crackdowns on human
rights and civil society in decades. For more information, see the Joint Statement
issued on January 15, 2016. 