Burkina Faso:  OMCT and GMEDIA concluded their third workshop for journalists on "Media empowerment against torture"
November 11, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Burkina Faso / 2013 / NovemberBurkina Faso: OMCT and GMEDIA concluded their third workshop for journalists on "Media empowerment against torture"Press statement1 page / 99 KB
PRESS RELEASE
OMCT
AND GMEDIA CONCLUDED THEIR THIRD WORKSHOP FOR JOURNALISTS ON “MEDIA EMPOWERMENT
AGAINST TORTURE”
Geneva (Switzerland), November 11th,
2013. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and GMEDIA concluded on
November 8th, 2013 their third workshop for journalists on “Media
Empowerment Against Torture” that was held in Geneva from November 4th
to November 8th, 2013. 
The joint
five-days workshop, which was held in parallel with the 51st Session
of the United Nations (UN) Committee Against Torture (CAT), had the main
objective to provide selected journalists with a comprehensive overview on the
prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment (“ill-treatment”) and relevant international human rights protection
and promotion mechanisms, notably the CAT. 
Nine
journalists from Burkina Faso participated in the joint workshop and attended
in parallel the CAT sessions on Burkina Faso. The journalists benefited from
debates and discussions conducted by human rights experts from civil society,
media, the CAT and permanent missions on various topics such as the absolute
prohibition of torture and ill-treatment, UN human rights mechanisms, and the
significant role that media can play in addressing the challenge of torture and
impunity. Journalists also had the opportunity to share their experiences and
expectations towards national and international civil society and UN
mechanisms. 
“…Thanks
to this training, we have gained crucial knowledge about the promotion and
protection of human rights. The training enabled us to reinforce our knowledge
of the phenomenon of torture. We will be at the forefront of the application by
our country of its commitments…” wrote a participant from Burkina Faso. 
The joint
workshop will result in the publication of articles that will be available online[1].
The
workshop was organised thanks to the support of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of Denmark and the German Federal Foreign Office. Its content is the sole
responsibility of OMCT and Gmedia. 
For further information on the
workshop, please contact:

GMEDIA: Francesca Piccin, Tel. +41 22 809 49 33
OMCT: Alexandra Kossin, Tel. +41 22 809 49 39




[1]
www.gmediacenter.net 