India:  Refusal to renew the licence of the Centre for Promotion of Social Concerns (CPSC)
November 11, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / NovemberIndia: Refusal to renew the licence of the Centre for Promotion of Social Concerns (CPSC)

IND 006 / 1116 / OBS 095
Obstacles to freedom of association / 
Harassment
India
November 11, 2016

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in India.
 
Brief description of the situation: 

 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the refusal by the Ministry of Home Affairs of India to renew the
licence of the charitable trust Centre for Promotion of Social Concerns (CPSC) under the Foreign Contributions (Regulations)
Act (FCRA) of 2010. The CPSC’s program
unit, ‘People’s Watch’, carries out
human rights monitoring, education and rehabilitation activities all over India
from its headquarters in Madurai, Tamil Nadu. 
 
According to the information received, on October 29,
2016, the Ministry of Home Affairs announced on its website its refusal to
renew the registration of the CPSC under the FCRA, simply indicating: “On the basis of field agency report, the
competent authority has decided to refuse your application for renewal”. No other reasons were given. As a consequence, the
CPSC’s FCRA licence expired on October 31, and it can no longer receive foreign
funding.
 
On November 7, 2016, the Delhi High Court held a
hearing to review the challenge lodged by the CPSC against the decision to
cancel their foreign funding registration under the FCRA. In its plea, the CPSC
asked to be provided with the reasons for the refusal to renew their
registration. 
 
During the brief hearing, Central Government Standing
Counsel Anil Soni told the court that the Government was exempted from
providing reasons for refusing to renew FCRA registrations, adding that the
decision was based on “inputs of intelligence agencies”. However, the Presiding
Judge insisted that the Ministry provide the Court with the reasons for not
renewing CPSC’s registration before the next hearing on November 18, 2016.
 
The CPSC also filed a petition regarding this case
with the National Human Rights Commission of India on November 1, 2016.
 
The Observatory recalls that the FCRA licence of the
CPSC had already been suspended on three occasions in 2012 and 2013, for a total period of 24 months, until the Delhi High
Court ruled in its favour in March 2014.
 
The Observatory expresses
its deepest concern about the obstacles to freedom of association and access to
funding faced by the CPSC and its
program unit People’s Watch, which seem to be merely aimed at sanctioning the
organisation's human rights activities. Accordingly, the
Observatory calls upon the Indian authorities to immediately and
unconditionally renew the CPSC’s FCRA registration, in order to allow this
prominent organisation to carry out its legitimate human rights work. 
 
The Observatory further
calls upon the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) of India to investigate
the denial to renew the registration of the CPSC under the FCRA and to take all
appropriate and necessary actions to protect human rights defenders and
organisations in India, including the right of defenders and organisations to
access funding in order to carry out their work. In particular, the NHRC could
consider passing interim orders directing the Ministry of Home Affairs to allow
the CPSC to continue implementing its projects that are underway as per
existing contracts, and for that purpose to permit
the receiving of funds only for those projects till the larger question of the
refusal of the FCRA to the CPSC is settled by the NHRC.
 
The Observatory is all the
more concerned that the situation faced by the CPSC takes place in the
framework of a wider repression on NGOs in India, including through the use of
the FCRA. Most recently, on
November 5, 2016, media announced the decision by the Government of India not
to renew the registration of 25 NGOs under the FCRA for allegedly indulging in “activities not conducive to national
interest”. The Ministry of Home Affairs had earlier announced that it
had cancelled the FCRA licences
of more than 11,000 NGOs for failing to apply for renewal of their licences by
the June 30 deadline. 
 
Background information:
 
In India, NGOs eligible for foreign funding are
required to renew their registration under the FCRA every five years, which is
justified by the Indian authorities by the need to “preserve national
security”. The FCRA also provides that any NGO whose registration certificate
has been cancelled or revoked may register or obtain prior authorisation for a
maximum period of three years from the date of cancellation. 
 
The impact of this law on Indian NGOs that receive
external funding is very harmful. 
 
In a
statement released on June 16, 2016, United Nations (UN)
Special Rapporteurs on the situation of human rights defenders, Mr. Michel
Forst, on freedom of opinion and expression, Mr. David Kaye, and on the rights
to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, Mr. Maina Kiai, called upon
the Government of India to repeal the Foreign Contributions (Regulation) Act
and said that they “are alarmed that FCRA provisions are being used more and
more to silence organisations advocating civil, political, economic, social,
environmental and cultural priorities, which may differ from those backed by
the Government”. According to the UN
experts’ statement, FCRA is being “increasingly used to obstruct civil
society’s access to foreign funding, and fails to comply with international
human rights norms and standards”. They encouraged the authorities of India “to
ensure a safe and enabling environment for human rights defenders and civil
society, which play a critical role in holding the Government to account and
buttressing Indian democracy”.
 
In April 2016, the UN
Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of
association published a legal
analysis of the FCRA and stated that the statute is “not in conformity
with international law, principles and standards”. The Special Rapporteur
further mentioned in the report that “[the FCRA] appears to give the government
broad discretionary powers that could be applied in an arbitrary and capricious
manner”.
 
Accordingly, the Observatory calls on the Indian
authorities to review the FCRA, and to amend the law and related implementing
policies to ensure that they are in conformity to international law and human
rights standards.
 
Actions
requested: 
 
Please write to the
authorities in India, urging them to:
 
i. Immediately
and unconditionally renew the CPSC’s FCRA registration, since the denial of its
renewal seems only aimed at sanctioning its legitimate human rights activities;
 
ii. Put an
end to all acts of harassment, including judicial harassment, against all human
rights defenders and organisations in India, and remove all legal and
administrative obstacles so that they are able to carry out their work without
hindrances;
 
iii. Review the
FCRA and amend the law and related implementing policies to ensure that they
are in conformity to international law and human rights standards;
 
iv. Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its
Articles 1 and 12.2; and
 
v. More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
India.

Addresses: 
 
·    
Mr.
Shri Nanredra Damodardas Modi, Prime Minister of India, Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857.
E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·    
Mr.
Raj Nath Singh, Union Minister of Home Affairs of India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979.
Email: dirfcra-mha@gov.in
·    
Sh. B. K. Singh, Under Secretary
(FCRA), Ministry of Home Affairs, Email : usfcra-mha@gov.in 
·    
Justice
T.S. Thakur, Chief Justice of India, Supreme Court, of
India, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·    
Justice
Shri H.L. Dattu, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission
of India, Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.in
·    
Mr.
Srinivasa Kammath,
Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National Human Rights Commission, of
India, Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·    
H.E.
Mr. Ajit Kumar, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the United
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·    
Embassy
of India in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of India in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, November 11, 2016
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society. 