Philippines:  Publication of a report: Human rights defenders remain steadfast in their struggle for justice amid pervasive culture of violence and impunity
July  9, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Philippines / 2015 / JulyPhilippines: Publication of a report: Human rights defenders remain steadfast in their struggle for justice amid pervasive culture of violence and impunityOBS_Report_Philippines_English52 pages / 1.33 MB
Geneva-
Paris, July 9, 2015 – Human rights defenders in
the Philippines, in particular those advocating for land and environmental
rights, remain under serious threat, the Observatory said in a new report
launched today. Defenders are systematically vilified, intimidated, and
targeted both by state and non-state actors.
 
The mission, conducted in the
Philippine’s Northern Mindanao region and South Cotabato Province found that
land rights defenders as well as indigenous rights defenders peacefully
campaigning to protect their ancestral lands from the impact of mining,
deforestation, and other development projects are the most targeted categories
of human rights defenders. They face extrajudicial killings, enforced
disappearances, intimidation, torture, fabricated criminal charges and threats.
Land rights defenders are also constantly stigmatised
through long periods of incarceration on false and trumped-up charges.
 
“The
report clearly shows that laws and the criminal justice system are on most
occasions used to harass, detain, and imprison human rights defenders, effectively
removing them from the human rights arena. Despite the chilling effect that
those actions have on the whole Filipino human rights community, human rights
defenders remain steadfast in their struggle
for justice”, stated OMCT
Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
“Killings
and attacks on Filipino human rights defenders are not isolated incidents. They
reflect a pattern of threats, intimidation, physical assaults, extra-judicial
killings, and enforced disappearances against farmer leaders and peasants who
assert their legal rights stemming from the state’s agrarian reforms
programme”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji.

The
culture of violence and impunity continues due to the
lack of accountability for past human rights violations which is the result of
chronic failure on the part of the police to rigorously investigate those
abuses. In addition, lack of impartial police investigations and protracted
judicial proceedings inspire little faith in the criminal justice system.
 
In this regard, the report points to
serious structural shortcomings in the Philippines’ criminal justice system:
the lack of adequate remedies for human rights defenders to counter false
accusations and arbitrary detentions; the insufficient number of judges leading
to interminable delays in trials; the absence of competent, committed, and
affordable legal representation; and the constant threats faced by lawyers
representing human rights defenders.
 
 
The report is available here: OBS_Report_Philippines_English 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders.
 
For more information, please
contact:
·   
   OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49
24
·   
   FIDH: Lucie Kroening/Arthur Manet: + 33 (0) 1 43 55
25 18 