The OMCT is launching today a call for participation for its new "Torture & Terrorism" Working Group
October  2, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionReports and Publications / 2018 / OctoberThe OMCT is launching today a call for participation for its new "Torture & Terrorism" Working Group 

PRESS RELEASESpeaking out against torture in times of terrorism                                                                         
The OMCT launches a global call for participation in its new Torture and
Terrorism Working Group 
Geneva, Tunis,
Brussels, October 2nd, 2018
Geneva, Tunis,
Brussels: The OMCT
is opening today a call for participation to members of its global SOS-Torture Network
and interested partners to join the new OMCT Network Working Group on Torture and
Terrorism. The initiative will gather and build on the experiences of members
and partners affected by terrorist acts and counter-terrorism policies to
develop effective strategies to protect against torture in volatile security contexts.
“The banalisation of torture through counter-terrorism is taking a
dangerous dimension globally, said Hina Jilani”, the OMCT President. Explaining the reasons for this new
initiative, she continued “Torture is never good for security; it makes
us less secure. So many of us have seen this first-hand in our societies.
But the truth of the matter is: we are not being heard.”
Terrorism
and terrorist acts are today a reality in many parts of the world; so are
counter-terrorism laws and policies that undermine human rights and the
absolute prohibition of torture. A logic of ‘us and them or a ‘war against
terrorism’ rhetoric poses severe advocacy and communication challenges to
anti-torture activists. It undermines the impact of our work and ability to be
heard. This corrosive discourse not only expose them to various threats and
attacks, but it legitimizes regressive legal and policy initiatives that create
an environment for torture to re-emerge and persist.
‘It is time the SOS-Torture Network comes,
to share our collective experiences, to develop new, compelling, and more
innovative narratives countering such discourses, and to prevent legitimate
security concerns from destroying the foundation of human rights,” explained
Hina Jilani. 
Over the
next three years the OMCT will convene a core group of 10-12 anti-torture
advocates from its global SOS-Torture Network and prospective members. The Working
Group will seek to build impactful, collective network initiatives through a diverse but integrated set of actions and
tools including research, advocacy techniques
and joint campaigning strategies. 
Initiative
under patronage of UN Rapporteurs on Torture & Terrorism and Human Rights 
The OMCT is
pleased and honoured that this initiative will stand under the patronage of its
President, Ms Hina Jilani; the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture, Mr
Nils Melzer; and the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights while countering terrorism, Ms Fionnuala Ní Aoláin. Further details for SOS-Torture
Members and other interested partners on the application process and the terms
of reference for participation in the Group can be found below. 
For
more information, please contact: 
Camille
Henry, Working group coordinator, ch@omct.org | +216
27 842 197


Created in 1985, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is today
the main coalition of non-governmental organisations (NGO) fighting against
torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and all other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment. With more than 200 affiliated organisations in its
SOS-Torture Network, OMCT aims
at accompanying, reinforcing and
protecting anti-torture organizations around the world and more especially in erosive environment.




The
OMCT ‘Torture and Terrorism’ Working Group in 3 questions

What is its mandate? 
This working group, by creating a
space to exchange experiences, will aim to provide strategic guidance, advice,
and support for our SOS-Torture Network Members around the world dealing
with issues related to the absolute prohibition of torture while countering
terrorism. The mandate of the group will be to embark on: 
1.     Mapping
civil society organisations’ challenges in
combatting torture and terrorism and identifying research areas and needs;
2.     Providing
advocacy support and legal policy advise to Members of the SOS-Torture
Network affected by terrorism and counter-terrorism laws, practices, and
policies; 
3.     And
developing counter-narratives, effective communications and campaign
strategies against torture and terrorism.
What is its methodology? 
The
methodology will be participatory and geared toward experience- and
expertise-sharing, group learning, and acting collectively and in coordination
across boundaries. It will initially be made up of 12 members of the
SOS-Torture Network, prospective members, or partner organisations with
particular interest and experience in this issue, selected through an open
process. In the course of the work, the group may identify additional research
and may conduct further consultations with the broader membership of the OMCT
to draw on specific, real-life stories and experiences of working against
torture in volatile security contexts. 
The
group will meet at least three times in person with an in an additional set of
webinar meetings during the three initial years of operation. The working
languages will be French and English. 
How is the selection process going to
work? 
The working group will be composed
of 12 NGOs members, including SOS Torture Network Members, prospective
members or other partner organisations with particular interest and experience
in the issue, representing
all regions of the world, and selected through an open process based on a list
of objective criteria: field experience, expertise, motivation, capacity to
work in a group, language, gender, age and geographical balance. 
The decision will be taken by a
collection committee of the OMCT Executive Council formed by three members with
particular exposure to the issue including the two Vice Presidents of the OMCT,
convened by the OMCT Secretary General. 
The working group composition will
be publicized on the OMCT website. 
To
read more: 
-       
Working Group terms
of references
-       
Call
for participation 