Bangladesh:  OMCT welcomes the Asian Development Bank’s suspension of support for the Phulbari coal mine project
July  3, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / 2008 / JulyBangladesh:  OMCT welcomes the Asian Development Bank’s suspension of support for the Phulbari coal mine projectDownload full article18 pages / 660 KBGeneva, 3 July 2008: The project for an open-pit coal mine in Phulbari – promoted by  British company GCM Resources - has provoked widespread concern over its potential  socio-economic, environmental and human rights impact. Protests against this project  have already resulted in loss of life and injury. OMCT has contacted all parties involved,  including the Government of Bangladesh, private financial institutions and the Asian  Development Bank, to express its deep concern at the risk of further violence associated  with the project. OMCT has insisted that a decision on the future of the Phulbari mine  should only be taken once a thorough, transparent and independent investigation into its  human and environmental impact has been carried out, with the full and informed  participation of all local communities.  The mining project, human rights and violenceIn December 2007 and January 2008 OMCT acted to prevent further killings and violence in  connection with the Phulbari mining project - Dinajpur District of Bangladesh - and to ensure  respect  for the human rights of the local communities and indigenous peoples directly  affected. In August 2006, several persons had been killed and many injured as a result of  action by police and personnel of the Bangladesh Rifles against demonstrations of opposition  to the proposed large scale open-pit coal mine. Local NGOs approached OMCT to express  their serious concern that further violence, ill-treatment and even deaths could result from  Government reaction to the expression of opposition by the local communities and indigenous  people directly affected.  The information reported to OMCT stated that if the proposed Phulbari mine was carried out  it would negatively affect  between  50,000 and 500,000 people through  mass evictions,  destruction of agricultural land and the pollution that would result from extraction activities.  The mine would also seriously compromise the rights to health and to an adequate standard of  living of those affected (including access to housing, land, adequate food and clean water). In  addition, concern was expressed at the failure to carry out serious environmental impact  assessments, and the lack of  adequate information and consultation with the affected  communities about the project and its potential consequences was criticised. OMCT acts to prevent further violence  OMCT carried out in-depth research into the mining project itself, its implications for the  human rights of the affected populations, local resistance to the project, the limits imposed by  the Government on expression of opposition and the specific impact on the economic, social  and cultural rights of those affected. OMCT identified how those human rights violations  were connected to past violence and created the risk of further violence in the future.  OMCT also investigated the corporate structure of the mining operation, the planned support  of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and that of private banks as shareholders in the  mining company in order to identify the specific responsibilities of each. This research resulted in an OMCT Action File (BGD 21 12 07) (annex 1). This Action File  focussed attention on preventing violence by addressing the economic, social and cultural root  causes and was seen by OMCT as adding a crucial  dimension to the efforts of other  organisations objecting to the potentially negative impacts of the proposed mine. OMCT’s Action File called on the Government of the Peoples’ Republic of Bangladesh to  suspend the mining project and to initiate a thorough and independent investigation into the  human and environmental impact of the project and to request the assistance of the Office of  the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in that connection. It also called on  the Government to ensure the full and informed participation of all local communities in the  investigation, to make the report public and abide by its recommendations. It also called on  the Government to lift restrictions on public demonstrations and take all necessary steps to  prevent future violence. See annex 1 for further recommendations to the Government. The Action File called on Global Coal Management Resources Plc (GCM), the company  responsible for the project, to suspend its activities pending the human and environmental  impact report, to fully respect the land rights, resources and livelihoods of all affected  communities and to provide fair and adequate compensation. The File also called on the major  shareholders in GCM (UBS, RAB Capital and Barclays) to ensure that GCM abided by the  impact report and respected national laws and international human rights standards. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) was scheduled to approve in June 2008 a US$ 100  million loan and a US$ 200 million political risk guarantee for the project. This led OMCT to  contact the ADB, transmit the Action File and request the Bank to recognise the discontent of  the majority of the local population at the manner in which the preparatory phases of the  Phulbari project have been conducted. OMCT asked the ADB to insist on the production of a  comprehensive human rights and environmental impact study with the full and informed  participation of all local communities as a fundamental condition for financial support. OMCT transmitted the Action File along with requests for specific action to the President of  Bangladesh and relevant Government ministers, the Chief Executive of the mining company  GCM, the Chief Executives of the above mentioned financial institutions, together with that  for Credit Suisse, another shareholder (calling attention to the Equator Principles and the UN  Global Compact) and the President of the ADB (see annex 1).  The Action File was also transmitted to the UN Special rapporteurs on Indigenous People and  Adequate Housing and the UN Special representative on Transnational Corporations and  Human Rights. In addition, the Action File was transmitted to the chairs of the European  Parliament Committees on International Trade and Development and the Subcommittee on  Human Rights. Finally, the file was transmitted to the 282 national NGOs in OMCT’s SOS- Torture Network with the request that they, in turn, seize the appropriate authorities.  The reaction  GCM Resources, the company which was awarded the licensing agreement for mining the  Phulbari deposit through Asia Energy Corporation, its wholly-owned subsidiary, contacted  OMCT and proposed a meeting to discuss the issues raised in the Action File. As a result, on  26 February 2008 OMCT staff met with the Sustainable Development Manager of GCM  Resources in Geneva. The main points made by GCM at that time are summarised in the  attached note (annex 2) that has been shared with and approved by GCM. That includes  information on GCM’s Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), the level of  compliance’ with  both ADB’s Safeguard Policies and the Equator Principles, planned  engagement with local stakeholders and plans concerning compensation of affected  communities and local businesses. These points do not necessarily reflect the views of  OMCT. OMCT also received responses from Barclays PLC, RAB Capital, Credit Suisse and UBS, the  main financial institutions involved. Unfortunately, and notwithstanding some references to  the Equator Principles and the Global Compact, the responses to a large extent reflected a lack  of transparency and a failure to take responsibility for the shares held in the name of clients.  That constitutes a real challenge to ensuring that financial institutions take responsibility for  the human rights implications of their investment decisions. At the request of the Chair of the European Parliament Committee on Development, OMCT  provided additional information on the Phulbari case. OMCT was subsequently requested to  keep the Committee informed of further developments. The Committee Chair transmitted the  Action File to the Secretariats of the South Asian Delegation and the Human Rights  Subcommittee. The Asian Development Bank’s decision  At the beginning of April 2008, the ADB decided to suspend its support for the project. In a  statement, the ADB said, “We think it is premature to continue dialogue with the private  sector under current circumstances. So, at this stage we are open to suggestions of the  government of Bangladesh, civil society and other stakeholders and prepared to review our  engagement in this project to ensure that all sensitivities, including concerns relating to  safeguard issues, are fully considered.” (See http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2008/apr/06/mining.bangladesh)The ADB's decision bears testament to the potential of concerted civil society action to  influence an issue with serious human rights implications.  The future  OMCT, together with its national NGO partners, will remain vigilant to help ensure that any  future work on the proposed mine respect the rights of local communities and international  human rights standards in the matter. 