Iran:  Press Release: Ongoing harassment against prominent human rights defenders Nargess Mohammadi, Mahdieh Golrou and Mohammad Seifzadeh
January 21, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2015 / JanuaryIran: Press Release: Ongoing harassment against prominent human rights defenders Nargess Mohammadi, Mahdieh Golrou and Mohammad SeifzadehIran_2101152 pages / 158 KBParis-Geneva, January
21, 2015 - The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), deplores the continuing harassment against
prominent human rights defenders Nargess Mohammadi, Mahdieh Golrou and Mohammad
Seifzadeh in Iran.
 
Last week, Ms. Nargess Mohammadi, Spokesperson and
Vice-President of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), was summoned to
the Islamic Revolution Prosecutor's Office based in Evin prison, where she was
requested to submit her final statement against the criminal charges she is
facing, which include “propaganda against the Islamic Republic,” “assembly and
collusion against the national security” and “opposition to the death penalty
and membership of the LEGAM group”[1].
Subsequently, the Prosecutor's Office referred Ms. Mohammadi's case to the
Islamic Revolution Court for trial, commenting in its report that Ms.
Mohammadi’s “opposition to death penalty means that she is opposed to qesas[2],
established by a Sharia decree, and that she must therefore account for this.”
Whereas the Iranian authorities consider qesas as part of the ‘divine
laws’, the Prosecutor’s Office seems intent on exposing her to further judicial
harassment in an attempt to sanction her human rights activities.
 
Ms. Mohammadi had
also been detained and harshly interrogated for a few hours by the Ministry of
Intelligence officials on December 26, 2014, while on her way to take part in
an event commemorating the anniversary of the killing of an individual during
protests in 2009[3]. 
 
The Observatory is
also concerned about the refusal of judicial officials to allow DHRC founding
member Mr. Mohammad Seifzadeh, currently in arbitrary detention, to seek
medical care for his kidneys, even though prison doctors have confirmed that he
needs to be treated outside of prison. It is also worth noting that although
Mr. Seifzadeh had an appointment with a dentist on January 7, 2015, prison
officials failed to send him to the dentist’s office. In late September 2013,
Branch 54 of the Appeals Court upheld a sentence of six years’ imprisonment
earlier imposed on Mr. Mohammad Seifzadeh on February 20, 2013[4].
Finally, the Observatory is also concerned about the
condition of Ms. Mahdieh Golrou (also spelled Golru or
Golroo), women's rights activist who was arrested on October 26, 2014, at her
home in Tehran after she took part in a peaceful protest outside of the Iranian
Parliament on October 22, 2014, to denounce a series of recent acid attacks
against women in Esfahan, in central Iran. Ms. Golrou spent two months in
solitary confinement in Section 2A of Evin prison, which is controlled by the
Islamic Revolution Guards Corps, before being moved to a shared cell in the
same section of the prison. On January 12, 2015, Ms. Golrou's case was referred
to Branch 15 of the Revolutionary Court of Tehran. However, she has not yet
been allowed to meet with the lawyer hired by her family to represent her. 
The Observatory calls
upon the Iranian authorities to release Mr. Seifzadeh and Ms. Golrou
immediately and unconditionally, as their detention is arbitrary since it
appears only aimed at sanctioning their human rights activities. The
Observatory also calls on the Iranian authorities to put
an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level – against Mr.
Seifzadeh, Ms. Nargess Mohammadi, Ms. Mahdieh Golrou and all human rights
defenders in Iran.
 
For more
information, please contact:
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet /
Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·      
OMCT: Miguel Martin
Zumalacarregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24
 




[1]     The LEGAM group is a campaign for a
step-by-step abolition of the death penalty, which has been established by
several human rights defenders and activists, including Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh.


[2]     Qesas is equivalent to retribution
in kind, providing for “eye for an eye” retaliatory punishment for crimes.


[3]     See The Observatory press release of
November 7, 2014.


[4]     See The Observatory press release of
October 18, 2013. 