Peru:  Human rights defenders stigmatised, criminalised and repressed - Preliminary findings of international fact-finding mission
June 26, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Peru / 2018 / JunePeru: Human rights defenders stigmatised, criminalised and repressed - Preliminary findings of international fact-finding missionPeru_2018.06.26_CP_ENG2 pages / 177 KB

PRESS RELEASE – THE OBSERVATORY

 
Geneva-Paris, 26 June 2018 – Human
rights defenders and social protestors in Peru face daily stigmatisation,
criminalisation, punishment and repression. The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (OMCT-FIDH) which has carried out a fact-finding mission to the country,
denounces a complete lack of protection from the authorities.
 
The
situation of human rights defenders in Peru is not well known among the
international community despite the enormous difficulties faced by those who
defend human rights in the country. According to figures from the National
Human Rights Coordination Group (Coordinadora
Nacional de Derechos Humanos), 119 defenders have been killed since 2011,
and in 2017 more than 800 defenders faced criminal proceedings.
 
During its
international fact-finding mission, the Observatory identified five main causes
for defenders’ vulnerability.
 
Firstly, the
Observatory highlights the considerable stigmatisation of people and
organisations that defend human rights, by both the media and public
authorities and officials. The constant references to human rights defenders as
agitators and to human rights organisations as defenders of terrorists creates
an environment that facilitates attacks against them.

Secondly, a series of constitutional and legal modifications have been made in
Peru over the last few years that have reduced guarantees for citizens and, in
particular, have created a punitive legal framework for the defence of human
rights. The types of crimes generally used against defenders have been modified
and now have excessively broad definitions that lack the principle of legality.
Another alarming aspect in the transformation of the Peruvian justice system is
the creation of a system that enables “preventive complaints” to be filed with
the Prosecutor’s Office for the Prevention of Crime. The Observatory has
documented the way in which this system has been used in a number of cases to
intimidate people who plan to exercise their right to social protest, as they
have been reported in advance for possible crimes that they could commit during
protests, including extortion, kidnapping and damage to property. Although
these criminal proceedings do not come to fruition, they are like swords of
Damocles hanging over the heads of people who wish to exercise the right to
protest. 
 
Thirdly, the
criminalisation of human rights defence work is particularly worrying. In Peru,
this affects different kinds of defenders, including journalists, trade
unionists, defenders of victims of the internal armed conflict and communities
defending land and territory. Community leaders, indigenous defenders and
peasant patrols (ronderos) are
particularly affected by this criminalisation due to the use of criminal
offences against them including extortion and kidnapping. In addition, there
are concerns about the trend in using the crime of defamation against human
rights defenders.
 
Fourthly,
the mission has been able to confirm that the role of the security forces does
not comply with international human rights standards, particularly in the
mining region in the south of the country and in other conflictive areas. The
mission has identified shortcomings in the structure of the security forces,
their bias in favour of business groups as a result of agreements between
companies and the police, as well as their tendency to use excessive force to
suppress protest, as seen, for example, in regions like Espinar and
Chumbivilcas in the Department of Cusco, and against the small-scale farming
movement, the women’s movement and the LGBTI movement. Finally, the fact that a
State of Emergency has been called preventively is cause for alarm and was one
of the central issues addressed in meetings with the different Peruvian
authorities. The Observatory welcomes the recent decision not to expand the
state of emergency in the mining region but calls for clarification over which
authorities were responsible for the previous declarations, and for guarantees
of non-repetition.
 
Finally, the
Observatory expresses concern about the alarming lack of action on the part of
the Peruvian authorities to establish guarantees for the defence of human
rights and to make progress in fighting against impunity in cases of attacks
against human rights defenders. It is important to highlight the fact that Peru
has no state protection mechanism or public policy on human rights defenders,
despite the fact that a number of States in the region are making progress in
this regard.
 
Context:
 
The
Observatory carried out an international fact-finding mission to evaluate the
situation of people and organisations that defend human rights in the Republic
of Peru. The mission was held between the 4 and 9 June in the Departments of
Lima and Cusco, with the support of the National Human Rights Coordination
Group (Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos
Humanos - CNDDHH) and Human Rights without Borders (Derechos Humanos Sin Fronteras - DHSF). 
 
The
delegation was composed of Claudia Virginia Samayoa (from Guatemala, President
of UDEFEGUA and member of the OMCT’s Executive Board) and Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui (from Spain, Director of the OMCT’s Brussels Office and OMCT’s
Human Rights Advisor for the Observatory). The mission was also accompanied by Jorge
Bracamonte, Executive Secretary of the CNDDHH.
 
In the next
few months the Observatory will publish a report detailing its findings and
specific recommendations on the situation of human rights defenders in Peru.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by OMCT and FIDH.
The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations
of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of
ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
For further information, please contact:
OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui / Delphine
Reculeau: (+41) 22 809 49 39
FIDH: José Carlos Thissen: +51 95 41 31 650 