Bahrain:  Urgent Appeal for the Release of Human Rights Defender Nabeel Rajab
September  2, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2016 / SeptemberBahrain: Urgent Appeal for the Release of Human Rights Defender Nabeel Rajab

HM Shaikh Hamad
bin Isa Al Khalifa
Office of HM the
King
P.O. Box 555,
Rifa’a Palace
Kingdom of
Bahrain
 
Cc. The Rt Hon
Boris Johnson MP
Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
Foreign &
Commonwealth Office
King Charles
Street, London SW1A2AH
 
Cc. The
Honorable John F. Kerry
Secretary of
State
United States
Department of State
2201 C Street
NW, Washington, DC 20520
 
Cc. Federica
Mogherini
High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
 
Cc. Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
 
2
September 2016
 
Urgent Appeal for the Release of Human Rights Defender Nabeel Rajab 
Your Excellency,
 
In light of
recent alarming events in Bahrain, the undersigned NGOs express our deepest concerns
about the ongoing detention of prominent human rights defender Nabeel Rajab based on his peaceful
exercise of the right to freedom of expression. We urge the government of
Bahrain to immediately and unconditionally release Rajab.
 
On 13 June 2016,
the authorities arrested Rajab, who serves as President of the Bahrain Center
for Human Rights (BCHR), Founding Director of the regional Gulf Center for
Human Rights (GCHR), Deputy Secretary-General of FIDH, and a member of the
Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch’s Middle East Division. Rajab’s arrest
is one in a series of repressive actions to severely restrict the work of human
rights defenders and civil society members in the Kingdom of Bahrain. 
 
In the wake of
an unprecedented crackdown, we believe the detention of Rajab to be an act of
reprisal for his work to promote fundamental human rights in Bahrain, as well
as a means to restrict Rajab’s freedom of expression and speech. He is charged
for tweets and re-tweets about allegations of torture in Bahrain’s Jau Prison,
which were investigated by many local and international NGOs, and about the
widely reported and criticised human rights violations during the war in Yemen.
In total, Rajab could serve up to 15 years in prison for his statements via Twitter.

 
Rajab faces up
to 10 years in prison if convicted of spreading “false or malicious news,
statements, or rumours” under article 133 of Bahrain’s penal code; a further
two years imprisonment if convicted under article 215 of the penal code for
“offending a foreign country [Saudi Arabia]” for tweets related to the
Saudi-led war in Yemen and an additional three-year sentence if convicted of
“offending a statutory body” under article 216 of the penal code for comments
relating to Jau prison in Bahrain. 
 
In
addition to these charges, he may also face a trial on charges of “spreading
false news” for similar statements made during televised interviews last year.
That case has not yet been referred to court, but is believed to have served,
among others, for his arrest on 13 June.
 
Due to the poor
detention conditions, Rajab’s health has been severely deteriorating since the
time of his arrest. He continues to be held at West Riffa police station and
family visits are being monitored very closely, according to his lawyers. His
cell does not meet the requirements for long-term detention and the sanitary
facilities are unhygienic. He has lost eight kilos since his arrest. Rajab has chronic
inflammation in his lower back requiring urgent surgery, which has been delayed
by the authorities until early September. In addition, he is also suffering
from an irregular heartbeat, which has decreased below the normal range during
his detention, and has also suffered from chest pains recently, having required
a visit to the clinic. Despite the fact that he requires urgent medical treatment, prison
authorities do not appear to provide sufficient medical assistance for most of
these ailments. In the meantime, Rajab is dependent on his family to provide
him with painkillers and bandages for his bleeding due to his ulcer.
 
Following his
arrest, Rajab’s case has received widespread international attention by
government officials and UN dignitaries, inter
alia, by the spokesperson of the US State Department, the spokesperson of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, as well as by members of the European Parliament, who adopted an urgent resolution
condemning the Bahraini authorities’ crackdown on civil society and on the
political opposition. 
 
As a signatory to
international human rights conventions, the Government of Bahrain is bound to
guarantee the right to freedom of expression for all in Bahrain, including
Nabeel Rajab. Depriving Rajab of his liberty for peaceful social media posts
goes against Bahrain’s commitment to uphold these international conventions and
raises the question of its ability to respect its legal obligations within the
wider international community.
 
To date, the
government in Bahrain has repeatedly demonstrated unwillingness to comply with
international legal standards, despite promises made at the United Nations
during its Universal Periodic Review, and during its own national inquiry, the
Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry (BICI). 
 
We therefore
urge you to abide by the principles of democracy and human rights and to
safeguard freedom of expression in Bahrain, as enshrined in international human
rights legislation, by dropping all charges against the human rights defender,
Nabeel Rajab and ensure his immediate and unconditional release.
 
Sincerely,
 
Americans for
Democracy and Human Rights in Bahrain (ADHRB)
Bahrain Center
for Human Rights (BCHR)
Bahrain
Institute for Rights and Democracy (BIRD)
Bahrain Press Association (BPA)
Brian Dooley,
Human Rights First
Canadian Journalists
for Free Expression
CIVICUS
Committee
for the Respect of Liberties in Tunisia
English
PEN
European-Bahraini
Organisation for human rights (EBOHR)
European Center
for Democracy and Human Rights (ECDHR)
FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Gulf Centre for
Human Rights (GCHR)
Human Rights
Sentinel
IFEX
Index on Censorship
International Press Institute (IPI)
Jesper Højberg, Executive Director,
International Media Support
Khiam Rehabilitation Center for Victims
of Torture
Lawyers Rights Watch Canada
Libya Al-Mostakbal Centre for Media & Culture
MADA Palestinian Center for Development & Media Freedoms
Maharat
Foundation
Moroccan
Association for Human Rights (AMDH)
No
Peace Without Justice
Pakistan
Press Foundation
Project
on Middle East Democracy (POMED)
Reporters
Without Borders (RSF)
Salam
for Democracy and Human Rights
Tunis Centre for Press Freedom 
Tunisian League for Human Rights (LTDH)
Tunisian Forum for Economic and Social Rights
Vigilance
for Democracy and the Civic State
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 