Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: Continuing harassment of KCHR activists/continuing legal proceedings
August 24, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2000 / AugustKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: Continuing harassment of KCHR activists/continuing legal proceedingsURGENT ACTION - THE OBSERVATORY  New Information  KGZ 001 / 0005 / OBS 036.07 Continuing harassment of KCHR activists/continuing legal proceedings Kyrgyzstan 24th August 2000  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH and OMCT venture, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  New Information  The Observatory has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) that on 21st July 2000, Albert Korgoldoev, KCHR coordinator in Jalal-Abad region, was summoned before A. Kurmanbekov, deputy of the region’s governor.  He was questioned as to the kind of information the KCHR sends to foreign organistions and who finances the activities of the KCHR.  He was accused of working as a spy and told that he would be arrested.  After this Korgoldoev was forced into hiding and his mother was repeatedly questioned by police as to his whereabouts.  His staff were given leave and he has only been able to resume his work since 21st August 2000.  Previously, Korgoldoev has repeatedly been accused of carrying out human rights activities and warned that if he continued, he would be arrested and convicted too.  In 1998 he was arbitrarily arrested and put in the Jalal-Abad IVS (solitary confinement) for 13 days.  Elsewhere, I. Kamarda, the KCHR lawyer, was recently summoned to the prosecution office of the Pervomai district of Bishkek and was told by the prosecutor that even if the criminal case was halted because the action of the court did not directly refer to Dyryldaev and his office (if the charges be found to be fabricated and false), then criminal proceedings would be commenced based on other actions or existing complaints.  These ‘other actions’ seem to be essentially the same issues.  For instance, if Ramazan Dyryldaev does not pay $840 to Eliseev, former deputy director of KCHR (see below) then a criminal case would be opened against him..  According to further information from the KCHR, following pressure from the international community, about 10 days after the KCHR offices were originally sealed and put under 24 hour surveillance (Gulhan Borubaeva was trapped inside for 4 days without food – See case KGZ 006 / 0007 / OBS 036.06), the surveillance of the KCHR office was eased and the Prosecutor General of Kyrgyzstan, Abyshkaev stated on three occasions that there was no arrest warrant for Ramazan Dyryldaev.  However, he confirmed that an investigation for the criminal case against Dyryldaev was continuing and that there was a search warrant for his office, issued by Prosecutor Toktomambetov.  Toktomambetov also noted that as soon as the investigations were over, the case would be taken to court.  Toktomambetov has accused Almaz Dyryldaev of preventing a search of the office.  It therefore seems that there is no intention by the Kyrgyz authorities to allow the KCHR to resume its normal operations, nor guarantee the safety of its leader, Ramazan Dyryldaev or any other members of the organisation.  The Observatory wishes to reiterate its concern that these legal proceedings and all other acts of intimidation were in fact directed at the activities of KCHR, which have previously been subjected to similar attacks.  (See Annual Report 1999 of the Observatory and appeals KGZ 001/0005/OBS 036).  More generally, the Observatory considers such actions to be a part of a concerted policy on the part of the authorities, to constantly harass and place obstacles in the work of legitimate human rights organisations, and this, in flagrant violation of the principle international human rights instruments, and notably the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly in December 1998.  Brief reminder of the situation  The Observatory was KCHR that on 20th July 2000, at around 5pm, about 20 militiamen, who arrived in 5 or 6 cars, surrounded the KCHR office on Ivanitsin Street 123# 87.  Thereafter the offices were sealed.  There, allegedly under the orders of the investigator of Pervomai ROVD (district militia department), Kojonaliev, they detained Almaz Dyryldaev and for 50 minutes pressured him to open the office.  Almaz Dyryldaev was also subjected to an interrogation of one and a half hours by officers of the ROVD, during which he was reportedly beaten up.  Following this, Almaz was forced into hiding as he was still being actively pursued.  Gulhan Borubaeva, member of the KCHR, remained trapped inside the sealed office without food for 4 days until the offices were unsealed and she was allowed to return home.  During this time the office was placed under surveillance by the militia who also asked neighbours and children to monitor Gulhan’s movements in the apartment.   It is further reported on 20th July 2000 that an arrest warrant had been issued for Mr R. Dyryldaev.    In particular, the Observatory has been gravely concerned by legal proceedings and harassment against Eleman Mambetaipov and Ramazan Dyryldaev.  In the case of Mambetaipov, according to KCHR, on 14th July 2000, Judge Sydykov, of the Pervomai District Court of Bishkek city sentenced Eleman Mambetaipov, former deputy chair of the KCHR and responsible for administrative issues at the KCHR, to one year of imprisonment with a delay to execute the sentence for one year.  This means that Mr. Mambetaipov will not be able to leave Bishkek city for one year and must register with the Interior Ministry which will control his movements during this time.  Mambetaipov was charged with illegal actions towards property.  The property in question in fact belongs to the Ministry of Agriculture.  KCHR offices are at the Agriculture Ministry where they rent a room as a reception dealing with complaints of individuals.  The furniture, inventoried on March 24th 1999, and used in accordance with the lease agreement Number 21 of January 1, 1999, is, according to KCHR, still in its place.    In the case of Dyryldaev, on Thursday 13th July 2000, the legal executor Aidarov, from the Pervomai district court, visited Dyryldaev’s apartment and attempted to make an inventory of his personal property.  Also, on 13th July 2000, officers from the Pervomai ROVD (district militia department) visited the offices of the KCHR asking for the whereabouts of Ramazan Dyryldaev and details regarding the action of Eliseev.  The Observatory recalls that Dyryldaev faces charges based on a complaint made by Eliseev, former acting deputy chair of the KCHR who was fired from his position in December 1997 when Dyryldaev’s KCHR had been de-registered and replaced by a bogus association directed by Botaliev.    According to the KCHR, the harassment of human rights defenders has increased following a recent visit of the OSCE representative delegation which raised its concern about the harassment of KCHR and R. Dyryldaev with the Kyrgyz authorities.  On this occasion, President Akayev declared that he would take appropriate measures to “correct mistakes”.     Action requested  Please write to the Kyrgyz Authorities demanding that they:  i	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all members of the KCHR and put an end to all forms of harassment of human rights defenders and their organisations, in particular the current legal proceedings against the KCHR and its members;  ii.	ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9 1998 (Declaration concerning the rights and responsibilities of individuals, groups and institutions to promote and protect universally recognised human rights and fundamental liberties ) in particular its Article 1 which provides that « Every person has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national and international level. »  iv.	guarantee the effective respect of fundamental rights and liberties in accordance with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international and regional Pacts and Covenants ratified by Kyrgyzstan.  Addresses  The President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Askar Akayev, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205  Fax: + 996 (312) 218 627 E-mail:ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su   Geneva, Paris, 24th August 2000.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken, quoting the reference number given above.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection  of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.  The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line : Fax : +033 (0) 1 55 80 83 92  Tel : FIDH 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11	OMCT +41 22 809 49 39 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 