Open letter to the EU on the closed trial of three pro-democracy bloggers
July 31, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / European Union (EU) / 2012 / JulyOpen letter to the EU on the closed trial of three pro-democracy bloggers

  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

JOINT
OPEN LETTER – THE OBSERVATORY

 
Attn : Heads of Missions
Embassies of Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America, and the Delegation of the European Union to Viet Nam
 
July 31, 2012
Re:
Closed trial of three pro-democracy bloggers on August 7, 2012
Your
Excellency,
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), together with the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights
(VCHR), wish to draw your attention to the upcoming trial of three
pro-democracy Vietnamese bloggers.
On
August 7, 2012, Mr. Nguyen Van Hai (aka Dieu Cay), Mr. Phan Thanh Hai
and Ms. Ta Phong Tan are scheduled to be tried by the Ho Chi Minh
People’s Court at 8am. They have been charged under Article 88 of the Penal
Code for “conducting propaganda against the state” for their peaceful online
criticisms of the government. They face a maximum of 20 years in prison if
convicted. 
The
trial was originally scheduled for May 15, 2012, but the Court notified the
defendants’  lawyers that it would be
postponed indefinitely. The Observatory and VCHR have learned that the Public
Security Bureau has requested the Court to sentence the bloggers “harshly”, but
the People’s Prosecutor’s Office and the Court reportedly prefer lighter
sentences. It appears thus that a guilty verdict has already been decided in
advance. Moreover, the lawyers and the family of Mr. Dieu Cay have reported
that during his detention he has been subjected to intense pressure to plead
guilty to the charges laid against him, which 
he has systematically refused. His lawyers also stated that Mr. Dieu Cay
went on hunger strike in prison in March 2012 to protest his detention, and had
to be hospitalised. Mr. Dieu Cay was previously convicted after a manifestly
unfair trial in 2009 and his imprisonment was declared by the United Nations
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention to be arbitrary and in violation of
international law (Opinion 1/2009). Before his arrest, he had written articles
calling for human rights and democratic reforms posted on the Internet, and
staged demonstrations during the Beijing Olympic games. Mr. Phan Thanh Hai and
Ms. Ta Phong Tan were arrested respectively on October 18, 2010 and on
September 5, 2011, and have since been in pre-trial detention in Ho Chi Minh
City. Mr. Phan Thanh Hai published in particular an analysis outlining that
Article 88 of the Criminal Code violates the right to freedom of expression
enshrined in the Constitution, and that it shall be abrogated. Ms. Ta Phong Tan
posted articles on police abuse and violations of human rights by the State[1].
On July 30, 2012, Ms. Ta Phong Tan’s mother (Mrs. Dang Thi Kim Lieng) immolated
herself outside the People’s Committee Headquarters in Bac Lieu to protests her
daughter’s unfair imprisonment. She had suffered repeated police harassments
and interrogations since her daughters’ arrest. She died later the same day.
The
trial will reportedly be closed to the public. The indictment against the three
bloggers dated July 19, 2012 and sent by the Ho Chi Minh City People’s Court to
Dieu Cay’s lawyer, Mr. Ha Huy Son, specifically states that no witnesses will
be allowed to testify at the trial, and no family members will be allowed to
attend the proceedings. The right to a fair and public trial is guaranteed
under Article 131 of the Vietnamese Constitution of 1992 and Article 14 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which Viet Nam
is a State party. 
The
Observatory and VCHR consider that the judicial action against the three
bloggers is merely aimed at punishing the peaceful exercise of their right to
freedom of expression, and thus violates Viet Nam’s obligations under
international human rights law 
It
is feared that the scheduling of the trial during the summer holidays, when
many members of the diplomatic community are on leave from Hanoi, may aim at
minimising international attention. Their trial is also another chilling
harbinger of the new draft Decree on Management, Provision, and Use of Internet
Services and Information on the Network, which, if passed in its current form,
would significantly increase the government’s legal arsenal to censor and
criminalise online speech. 
Therefore,
the Observatory and VCHR respectfully ask your Embassy to:
·      
Urge the Government of Viet Nam to
drop all charges against Ms. Ta Phong Tan, Mr. Nguyen Van Hai and Mr. Phan
Thanh Hai, and release them immediately and unconditionally
·      
Send high-level embassy officials to
the Ho Chi Minh People’s Court to attend the trial on August 7, 2012
We
thank you in advance for your attention and for taking urgent and necessary
actions to secure the freedom of the three bloggers 
 
Sincerely
yours,
 
Souhayr
Belhassen
President
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
 
Gerard
Staberock
Secretary-General
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
 
Vo Van Ai
President
Vietnam
Committee on Human Rights (VCHR)
 
 
Copied to:
Ms. Matilda Bogner
Regional Representative to South
East Asia
Office of the United Nations (UN)
High Commissioner for Human Rights
 
Ms. Pratibha Mehta
UN Resident Coordinator
UN Country Team in Viet Nam
 



[1]                  For
background information of the case, see Observatory Urgent Appeal of April 30,
2012, available at: http://bit.ly/OwUS0O. 