Highlights of activities, 2009
March 26, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Statements / 2010 / MarchHighlights of activities, 2009Highlights of activities of OMCT’s project on Addressing the Economic, Social and Cultural Root Causes of Torture and other forms of Violence
Action to prevent and end torture and other forms of violence by addressing their economic, social and cultural root causes 



Strengthening NGO capacity to
	act on the economic, social and cultural root causes of violence
Latin American Regional
		Seminar on addressing the economic, social and cultural
		root causes of violence aimed organised in Buenos Aires, May 2009
		to enable 18 NGOs from Latin America to prepare cases together with
		recommendations for action addressing the root causes to
		governments, the UN system (Special Procedures, Treaty Bodies),
		international financial and development institutions and private
		sector actors.
Third Special Procedures
		Seminar organised in Geneva June 2009 to enable 15 national
		NGOs to understand the UN Special Procedures system, meet with
		mandate holders and prepare cases relating to the economic, social
		and cultural root causes of violence for submission to mandate
		holders, governments and others together with practical
		recommendations for action. Mandate holders dealing with safe water
		and sanitation, violence against women, violence against children,
		human rights and extreme poverty and human rights defenders and the
		former chair of the working group on arbitrary detention met and
		discussed with the participants who also attended a session of the
		annual meeting of mandate holders. OMCT presented to that meeting a
		position paper based on contributions from participants.
Asian Regional Seminar
		on addressing the economic, social and cultural root causes of
		torture and other forms of violence held in Manila, the Philippines
		from 26-30 October. The seminar was organised by the World
		Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the Philippines Alliance of
		Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), in cooperation with the Commission
		on Human Rights of the Philippines (CHRP); the country’s
		independent national human rights institution. It was attended by
		20 participants from 10 countries from across Asia. Substantive
		presentations were made by the Head of Delegation of the European
		Union, the Chairperson of the CHRP and on behalf of the United
		Nations Resident Coordinator. The aim of the seminar was to explore
		the ways in which violations of economic, social and cultural
		rights are linked to violence and how acting on those root causes
		can in turn reduce levels of violence.  Each participant presented
		a short country report analyzing the links between violations of
		economic, social and cultural rights and violence in that country
		which were discussed with a view to preparing action files or other
		forms of interventions. The participants also drafted the Manila
		Declaration on Addressing the Economic, Social and Cultural Root
		Causes of Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
		or Punishment a companion to the Maputo Declaration adopted by the
		African Regional Seminar in 2008.
Functioning of the network
		support group made up on seminar participants enabling an
		exchange of information and suggestions for action between members.
In connection with the creation
		of OMCT’s economic, social and cultural rights database of
		a questionnaire to members of the economic, social and cultural
		network and the SOS-Torture network surveying their needs. 
		




Bringing about change through
	Alternative reports, action files and other forms of intervention
Preparatory
		missions to Brazil and the Philippines were organised to
		gather with national partners information for alternative reports
		to be submitted to the UN Committee on Economic, Social and
		Cultural Rights and the Committee against Torture. During these
		missions, OMCT staff met in forums with persons directly affected
		by the violence caused by violations of economic, social and
		cultural rights.
Drafting and
		submission of an alternative report on the Philippines
		to the UN Committee against Torture and the oral presentation to
		the Committee of the report by national partners (April - May
		2009). This was a companion report to that submitted in 2008 to the
		Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. A press release
		was issues in this connection.
Drafting and
		submission of an alternative report on Brazil (“The
		Criminalisation of Poverty”) to the UN Committee on Economic,
		Social and Cultural Rights and oral presentation to the Committee
		of the report by national partners (May 2009).
Three month
		follow-up field presence in Kenya to assist and
		catalyse national partners in promoting with the Government the
		implementation of the recommendations of the UN Committee on
		Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Committee Against
		Torture, in particular relating to the economic, social and
		cultural root causes of violence (April - June 2009). English and
		Kiswahili versions of both reports published and distributed.
Follow-up
		mission to the Philippines headed by the President of OMCT
		to examine the progress made in the implementation of the
		recommendations of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
		Rights and the Committee Against Torture relating to the economic,
		social and cultural root cause of torture and violence. The
		recommendations of both committees were dealt with together in
		order to encourage the cross-cutting and mutually reinforcing
		action necessary to effectively address to root causes of violence.
		Working closely with the Commission on Human Rights of the
		Philippines, the team met with representatives of a wide range of
		civil society organisations from the Manila area and elsewhere,
		with the Philippine National Economic Development Agency (NEDA),
		with the staff of the Philippine Senate Committee on Justice and
		Human Rights, the UN Resident Coordinator/UNDP Resident
		Representative, the Asian Development Bank and the Chair and senior
		staff of the CHRP.
Drafting and
		sending of 2 Action Files and one
		follow-up (Bangladesh and India) and five appeals
		and one follow-up (Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico)
		asking government action in relation to violence connected with
		failures to respect economic, social and cultural rights. These are
		submitted to governments, UN special procedures mandates and others
		and circulated to OMCT’s SOS-Torture Network asking for members
		interventions. The actions of 2009 related to killings, torture and
		severe brutality committed against peasant farmers, indigenous
		people and others by military and private forces in connection with
		the forced occupation of indigenous land by non-indigenous people,
		threatened eviction of some 5000 indigenous people in violation of
		international standards when violence had been used in the past
		(the eviction was suspended), demonstrations against the
		authorisation of mining activities threatening the water and
		environment, opposition to high energy prices and the violent
		expulsion of small farmers from their land in connection with the
		concentration of their land for agribusiness.
Submission to
		the Special Rapporteur onextrajudicial,
		summary or arbitrary executions prior to his visit
		to Kenya of the two alternative reports and relevant action files
		dealing with the root causes of violence in Kenya.




Advocacy and
	outreach
OHCHR Seminar
		on the Draft Guiding Principles on “Extreme Poverty and Human
		Rights: The Rights of the Poor (January 2009). OMCT
		presented the conclusions of the October 2008 NGO consultation on
		the subject. 
		
Organisation in
		Geneva of the launch of the first issue of the publication “Right
		to Food and Nutrition Watch” prepared by FIAN
		International in cooperation with a number of international NGOs
		including OMCT. That issue contains the alternative report on
		Brazil to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
		entitled “The Criminalisation of Poverty” prepared by OMCT and
		its national partners.
OMCT also
		encouraged ratification of the Optional Protocol to the United
		Nations International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
		Rights.




Working with the
	European Parliament
Preparation and
		submission to the European Parliament of a report on
		the economic, social and cultural root causes of violence in the
		Philippines along with recommendations for action (January 2009)
		with presentation to the European Union (EU) Parliament
		Subcommittee on Human Rights and subsequent adoption of a
		resolution reflecting issues and recommendations contained in
		OMCT’s submission. A press release was issues in this connection. 