Philippines:  Slanderous comments made by two high-level Government officials against human rights NGOs
March 28, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2018 / MarchPhilippines: Slanderous comments made by two high-level Government officials against human rights NGOsPHL 002 / 0318 / OBS 034Smear campaignPhilippinesMarch 28, 2018The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership
 of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in the Philippines.Brief description of the situation:The
 Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about slanderous 
comments made by two high-level Government officials against human 
rights non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in the Philippines.According
 to the information received, on March 26, 2018, President Duterte’s 
Spokesman Harry Roque said in a statement that the Government did not 
“discount the possibility that some human rights groups ha[d] become 
unwitting tools of drug lords to hinder the strides made by the 
administration”, as “the attacks against the President’s war on drugs 
have been vicious and non-stop”. He added that “to continue to do and 
thrive in the drug business, these drug lords can easily use their drug 
money to fund destabilisation efforts against the Government”.The
 statement was issued after Foreign Affairs Secretary Alan Peter 
Cayetano claimed on March 25, 2018 that some human rights groups were 
being unwittingly used by drug lords to destabilize the Governmentand 
discredit its war on drugs.On
 March 27, 2018, Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency(PDEA) Spokesman 
Derrick Carreon said the agency would “dig further” into the supposed 
links between human rights organisations and drug lords. Mr. 
Carreonadded that the agency was not discounting the possibility that 
drug lords were using critics to attack the Government’s war on drugs.The
 Observatory strongly condemns the above-mentioned statements against 
human rights organisations in the Philippines, which take place in the 
context of a surge of attacks against human rights defenders under 
President Duterte[1].The
 Observatory recalls that President Duterte himself has repeatedly 
threatened to kill human rights defenders who criticize the alleged 
extrajudicial killings committed by police and vigilantes as part of his
 Government’s “war on drugs”. For instance, on August 16, 2017, he 
suggested that human rights activists were “obstructing justice” and 
urged police to “shoot them”.The
 Observatory considers that such statements manifestly aim at 
discrediting and hindering the peaceful and legitimate human rights 
activities of human rights defenders andput their lives and safety at 
risk.The
 Observatory calls upon the authorities of the Philippines to guarantee 
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all 
human rights defenders in the Philippines and to put an end to 
defamation and harassment against them, in line with the UN Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the General Assembly on December 9,
 1998.Actions requested: Please write to the authorities in the Philippines, urging them to:i.   
 Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological 
integrity of all human rights defenders in the Philippines;ii. Recognise that human rights defenders play a legitimate role in ensuring peace, justice, and democracy;iii.
 Put an end to any harassment against all human rights defenders in the 
Philippines, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry
 out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of 
reprisals;iv.
 Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 
December 9, 1998, in particular with Articles 1 and 12.2;v.
 Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by the Philippines.Addresses:·      
 H.E. Rodrigo Duterte, President of the Republic of the Philippines, 
Fax: (+632) 742-1641 / 929-3968, E-mail: op@president.gov.ph or send 
message through http://president.gov.ph/contact-us/·      
 Hon. Jesus Dureza, Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process, Fax: +63 
(2) 638 2216, Email: stqd.papp@opapp.gov.ph, feedback@opapp.net·      
 Ret. Maj. Gen. Delfin Lorenzana, Secretary, Department of National 
Defense, Fax: +63(2) 982-5600, Email: info@dnd.gov.ph, 
webmaster@dnd.gov.ph·       Hon. Vitaliano Aguirre, Secretary, Department of Justice, Fax: (+632) 521-1614, Email: communications@doj.gov.ph·      
 Hon. Jose Luis Martin Gascon, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, 
Fax: (+632) 929 0102, Email: chairgascon.chr@gmail.com·      
 H.E. Mr. Evan P. Garcia, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the 
Philippines to the United Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: 
+41 22 716 19 32 Email: mission@genevapm.ph·       Embassy of the Philippines in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 02 345 64 25, E-mail: brusselspe@gmail.comPlease also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Philippines located in your country.***Geneva-Paris, March 28, 2018Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the 
Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against 
Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to prevent 
or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT 
and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.[1] For
 more information, see Observatory Urgent Appeal PHL 001 / 0318 / OBS 
032, March 19, 2018 and Press Release, September 8, 2017. 