Syrian Arab Republic:  Canadian government asked for support to help free Syrian human rights defender Razan Zaitouneh on 2-year anniversary of abduction
December  9, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2015 / DecemberSyrian Arab Republic: Canadian government asked for support to help free Syrian human rights defender Razan Zaitouneh on 2-year anniversary of abductionLetter from Razan’s sister to Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau152 KB
 On the second
anniversary of the abduction of Syrian human rights lawyer Razan Zaitouneh, the undersigned human rights organizations reiterate their call for her
immediate release, as well as that of her missing colleagues Samira Khalil, Nazem Hamadi and Wa’el Hamada, her husband. The organizations join Zaitouneh’s family in Canada
in urging Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and the Canadian government to bring
attention to the abduction and disappearance of the four human rights defenders
and to seek their immediate release.On 9 December 2013, the
four human rights defenders were abducted by a group of armed men who raided the offices of the Violations Documentation Centre (VDC)
in Duma, near Damascus. There has been no news of their whereabouts in the past
two years but the family is concerned for Zaitouneh’s health and well-being
given the absence of any information.
At the time of the
abduction, Zaitouneh was head of the VDC, and had been awarded the 2011 Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought and the 2011 Anna Politkovskaya Award of Reach
All Women in War (RAW in WAR) among other accolades, for her human rights work.

She has family living
in Canada who wish to draw attention to her case at a time when the Canadian
public is welcoming thousands of Syrian refugees. Her parents arrived in Canada
from Syria in 2014, as did her sister Reem Zaitouneh, with her husband and two
children. Since settling in Canada, Reem Zaitouneh has continued her activist
work with the VDC. Her sister Rana Zaitouneh is a Canadian citizen living in
Canada with her husband and four children. 
In a letter to the
Canadian government, Rana Zaitouneh writes: “Razan is a hero back home in
Syria. She dedicated all of her time to help political prisoners. She spent her
time helping them, their cases and their families. Razan met with them, took
their cases to court, and she was in hiding most of the time because of her
work.” 
Canadian born niece Laura Rawas observes: “I was born and raised in Canada, a country
that prides itself on being 'free'. I never had to fear my own voice; in fact,
I prided myself on it, seizing any opportunity to use it, whether through
speech or song. This was not the case for my aunt Razan. She did not have the
right to speak, though she fought for it daily.” 
The VDC is
active in monitoring and reporting on human rights violations in Syria and the
undersigned organizations believe that the abduction of the four human rights
defenders was a direct result of their peaceful human rights work. Their
ongoing detention forms part of a wider pattern of threats and harassment
against human rights defenders by both government forces and non-state actors.
In the months prior to
her abduction, Zaitouneh informed human rights defenders outside Syria that she
had received threats from local armed groups in Duma. The most powerful armed
group operating in Duma at the time of the abductions was the Army of Islam
(Jaysh al-Islam) headed by Zahran Alloush. The Zaitouneh family holds Zahran
Alloush responsible for the safety of Zaitouneh and her colleagues, given the
large presence his group maintained in the area.
Just prior to her
abduction, Zaitouneh, in a video interview with FIDH, said, “Nothing, not even our 100,000 deaths
or harsh siege, or betrayal of the international community can ever defeat the
will of people who have a dream and faith in the future.” 
Razan Zaitouneh has
been one of the most prominent and effective lawyers defending political
prisoners in Syria since 2001. She has played a key role in efforts to defend
the universality of human rights and support independent groups and activists
in Syria. Along with a number of other activists, she established the VDC and
co-founded the Local Coordination Committees (LCC),
which co-ordinate the work of local committees in various cities and towns
across Syria. She also established the Local Development and Small Projects
Support Office, which assists non-governmental organizations in besieged
Eastern Ghouta.
The undersigned
organizations urge the Government of Canada to take all steps to ensure that Razan
Zaitouneh, Samira Khalil, Nazem Hamadi and Wa’el Hamada are located and
released immediately in accordance with the requirements of international law. 
Signed:
Amnesty International
Amnesty International Canada
Canadian Journalists
for Free Expression (CJFE)
FIDH under the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
Human Rights Watch (HRW)
Lawyers Rights Watch
Canada (LWRC)
PEN Canada
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) under the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders 