Cameroon:  Arbitrary detention, judicial harassment and ill-treatments against Mr. Franklin Mowha
July 22, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2014 / JulyCameroon: Arbitrary detention, judicial harassment and ill-treatments against Mr. Franklin Mowha

​The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, joint programme of
the International Federation of Human Rights leagues (FIDH) and of the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), ask you to intervene urgently on the following
situation in Cameroon. 
Brief description of the situation:
The Observatory was informed by the
Central Africa Human Rights Defenders Network (REDHAC) of the arbitrary
detention, judicial harassment and ill-treatments inflicted on Mr. Franklin
Mowha, president of Frontline Fighters for Citizens Interests (FFCI), a
human rights organisation operating in the Western region of Cameroon[1].

According to the information
received, Mr. Franklin Mowha is being detained and prosecuted since
December 2013 for « destruction of public goods » and
« insulting a public officer during the performance of his duties »
based on articles 187 and 154 of the Penal Code, and is facing sentences of up
to 2 years of imprisonment and 20 000 to 20 million FCFA. In view of these
articles’ dispositions, it is feared that a heavy fine impossible to pay for
Mr. Franklin will be inflicted on him with the aim of maintaining him in
detention. 
On 4 December 2013,
Mr. Franklin Mowha was arrested while he was at the Ter Brigade of the
Bangangté Gendarmeerie, head town of the Ndé department, in order to visit
Mr. Nouyep Serge, member of the Cameroun Peasants Movement (M-PAC),
detained in custody because of an inter-community dispute. 
Furthermore, in a letter adressed on
1 February 2010 to the sub-prefect of the Bangangté neighbourhood, and in
another one dating from 26 December 2013 to the President of Cameroon,
Mr. Franklin Mowha denounced acts of torture and other abuses against
indigenous Bororos people, on instructions from the Bangangté superior official[2].
On the day of his arrest,
Mr. Franklin Mowha was publicly beaten in the Brigade Ter yard by
gendarmes of that group, who would have acted following orders of the Ter de la
Gendarmerie brigade administrative authorities and the Superior official of
Bangangté. Mr. Mowha was sustained injuries in the nose and ribs, and was
still under perfusion during a visit of the REDHAC on 23 June 2014. 

Mr. Franklin Mowha was initially brought in front of Bangangté’s
Prosecutor of the Republic on 6 December 2013 at 7:30 am, who did not uphold
any charges against him. The Brigade Ter gendarmes then took him back to his
cell before bringing him the sale day in front of the Prosecutor of the
Bafoussam (Western Cameroon) military Court, despite the fact that this affair
should come under the remit of ordinary criminal courts, in total contradiction
with the general principles of law that a military juridiction can only judge
soldiers. 
The Observatory firmly denounces
this dysfunction of the working of justice, and recalls that article 14 of the
International treaty and convention on civil political rights specificies that
« Everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing by an independent and
impartial tribunal » . The Observatory also recalls that the Human
Rights Committee of the United Nations had already noted, in its general
observation n°32 on the interpretation of article 14 of the International
treaty and convention, that « the trial of civilians by military or
special courts can raise serious problems as far as the equitable, impartial
and independent administration of justice is concerned ». 
Following his appearance before the
Military court prosecutor on 6 December 2013, Mr. Mowha was transfered to
the central prison of Bafoussam, where he is being maintained in preventive
detention since more than seven months ago. Mr. Franklin Mowha recently
received an order for reference before the military court but, until today, no
audience has yet been set for hearing. 
The Observatory is deeply concerned
by the arbitrary detention and ill-treatments inflicted on Mr. Mowha
Franklin, and by the acts of judicial harassment against him on the basis of
false accusations with the goal of impeding his activities as a human rights
defender. The Observatory is particularly concerned by the unfair use of
military justice against a civilian, moreover against a human rights defender,
so as to deny his most fundamental rights. The Observatory urges the
cameroonese authorities to release him immediately and unconditionally. 
Actions requested: 
The Observatory urges you to write
to the authorities of Cameroon asking them to : 
i.    Guarantee in
all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Franklin
Mowha and of all human rights defenders in Cameroon;
 
ii.   Release
Mr Franklin Mowha immediately and unconditionally since his detention is
arbitrary as it only aims to impede his human rights defender activities ;
 
iii. Put an end
to all forms of harassment against Mr. Franklin Mowha and all human rights
defenders in Cameroon ;
 
iv.  Comply with
article 14 of the International treaty and convention on civil political
rights, which provides that « everyone is entitled to a fair and public
hearing by a competent court », and with the general observation n°32 of
the Human Rights Committee, that underlines also that « the trial of
civilians by military of special courts can raise serious problems concerning the
« fairness », impartiality and independence of the working of
justice » (para. 22) ;
 
v.   Comply with
the dispositions of the Declaration on Human Rights defenders, adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly on 9 december 1998, and more
specifically :
- its article specifying that « everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, (a) to know, seek, obtain, receive and hold
information about all human and fundamental freedoms, including having access
to informatio nas to how those rights and freedoms are given effect in domestic
legislative, judicial or administrative systems 
-     
(b) As provided for in human rights and other
applicable international instruments, freely to publish, impart of disseminate
to others views, information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental
freedoms ;
-     
(c) to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the
observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw public
attention to those matters »
-     
and its article 12.2 which provides that « The
state takes all necessary measures to ensure that the competent authorities
protect everyone, individually and in association with others, from all acts of
violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure discrimination, pression or
other arbitrary actions in the framework of the legitimate exercise of rights
referred to in the present Declaration ». ;
 
vi. More generally, comply with the dispositions of
the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and regional and international human
rights instruments ratified by Cameroon. 
Adresses : 


·      
Mr. Paul Biya, President , Présidence de la
République, Palais de l’Unité, 1000 Yaoundé, Cameroun, Fax +237 222 08 70 
·      
Mr. Philémon Yang, Prime ministre et Head of the
gouvernement, Primature du Cameroun, Fax : +237 22 23 57 35 et
courriel : spm@spm.gov.cm 
·      
Mr. Laurent Esso, Justice Minister, Garde des
Sceaux, Ministère de la Justice, 1000 Yaoundé‚ Cameroun, Fax : + 237 223
00 05 
·      
Mr. Alain Edgard Mebe Ngo’o, Minister delegate at
the Presidency of the Republic in charge of Defense B.P1000 Yaoundé‚ Cameroun,
Fax +237 223 59 71 
·      
Mr. SADI René Emmanuel, Minister of the
territorial Administration and Decentralisation, Fax : + 237 222 37 35 
·      
President of the National Commission for Human rights
and Liberties (CNDHL), Tel : +237 222 61 17, Fax : +237 222 60 82,
E-mail : cndhl@iccnet.cm 
·      
Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cameroun to the
United Nations Office in Geneva, rue du Nant 6, 1207 Genève, Suisse, Fax :
+ 41 22 736 21 65, Email : mission.cameroun@bluewin.ch 
·     Embassy of
the Republic of Cameroon in Brussels, 131 av. Brugmann, 1190 Forest, Belgium,
Fax : + 32 2 344 57 35 ; Email : ambassade.cameroun@skynet.be 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Cameroon in your
respective countries. 
 



[1] 

Since its creation in 2010, FFCI is committed to
the promotion of indigeneous people’s rights in the region of Western Cameroon,
FFCI denounces particularly the expropriation and marginalisation of the Bororo
people, with the complicity and silence of the traditional and administrative
authorities in this region.
 


[2] 

Traditional administrative autority enhaced with
moral, spiritual and legal powers. 