Bahrain:  Joint Open Letter: Authorities to lift the arbitrary travel ban on human rights defender Nabeel Rajab
January 21, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2016 / JanuaryBahrain: Joint Open Letter: Authorities to lift the arbitrary travel ban on human rights defender Nabeel Rajab OL Nabeel Rajab2 pages / 210 KB
His Majesty Sheikh Hamad
bin Issa Al Khalifa,
King of Bahrain
Fax: +973 176 64 587
CC. His Excellency Lieutenant General Rashid bin
Abdullah Al Khalifa 
Minister of Interior
Email: info@interior.gov.bh
His Excellency Sheikh
Khaled Bin Ahmad Al Khalifa
Minister of Foreign
Affairs
Fax: 00973 17 21 05 75; ofd@mofa.gov.bh
And
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva
Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50; Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
 
21 January 2016
 
Your Majesty,
 
We, the undersigned NGOs, call on the Bahraini
authorities to lift the arbitrary travel ban on human rights defender Nabeel Rajab in order that he be able
to travel abroad with his family for the purpose of securing medical assistance
for his wife, Sumaya Rajab. 

Nabeel Rajab is President of the Bahrain Centre for
Human Rights, Founding Director of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights, Deputy
Secretary General of the International Federation for Human Rights and on the
Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch’s Middle East Division. 

A public prosecutor imposed the travel ban on Nabeel Rajab
without any judicial determination on July 13 2015, the day that Your Majesty pardoned
him and ordered his release following his conviction for “publicly insulting official
institutions” by criticizing the government on social media. The travel ban is related
to two other speech-related charges that led to his arrest on April 2 2015, charges
which prosecutors have not dropped. 

The first
outstanding charge is for allegedly “insulting a statutory body”, under article
216 of Bahrain’s Penal Code, based on his social media comments about the alleged torture of detainees in Jaw Prison in March 2015.
The second accuses him of “disseminating false rumours in times of war,” under
article 133 of the Penal Code, based on social media posts criticizing Saudi
Arabia-led coalition air strikes in Yemen. Violations of articles 133 and 216
carry maximum sentences of 10 and three years in prison, respectively. Neither
of the alleged acts upon which these charges are based were in any way
recognisable criminal offences under international human rights law, and both
involved the peaceful exercise of internationally protected rights to freedom
of expression and to promote and protect human rights.

In November 2015, Sumaya Rajab was diagnosed with
medical conditions requiring urgent and highly specialized treatment according
to the medical expert team monitoring her condition. She was told that this
treatment is not available in Bahrain. 

In December 2015, Nabeel Rajab’s lawyers submitted
their fourth appeal against the travel ban – they have submitted two requests
to the attorney general, one request to the investigating prosecutor and one
request to the Public Prosecution Office - requesting that it be lifted so he could
accompany his wife. The Bahraini authorities have not responded to these
appeals and the travel ban remains in place.

In November 2015, 81 Members of the European
Parliament called on Your Majesty to
lift Nabeel Rajab’s travel ban. The European Parliament passed
a resolution in July 2015, shortly prior to Nabeel Rajab’s pardon, calling for
his immediate and unconditional release alongside other prisoners of
conscience. The same month, 44 members of the UK Parliament called on the government of
Bahrain to drop Nabeel Rajab’s current charges and to release all political prisoners and those
imprisoned for exercising their right to freedom of expression. After his release, three UN human rights experts – Michael Forst,
David Kaye, and Maina Kiai – called
for Nabeel Rajab’s charges to be dropped. This followed the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein, call for the release of all those detained in relation to
their peaceful activities in Bahrain in June. 

We, the undersigned,
therefore call on the Bahraini authorities to:
Drop all pending free speech-related
charges against Nabeel Rajab;Lift the travel ban immediately
and unconditionally, thus allowing Nabeel and Sumaya Rajab to travel; andGuarantee in all circumstances
that human rights defenders in Bahrain are able to carry out their legitimate
human rights activities without fear of reprisals, and free of all restrictions
including judicial harassment.
 
Signatories:
Americans for Democracy
and Human Rights in Bahrain (ADHRB)
Amnesty International
Arabic Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI)
Bahrain Institute for
Rights and Democracy (BIRD)
Bahrain Center for Human
Rights (BCHR)
Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS)
Canadian Journalists for
Free Expression (CJFE)
CIVICUS
English PEN
European Centre for
Democracy and Human Rights (ECDHR)
FIDH, within the framework
of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Freedom House
Front Line Defenders
Gulf Centre
for Human Rights (GCHR)
Human
Rights Watch
Index on
Censorship
International
Media Support (IMS)
International
Service For Human Rights (ISHR)
Lawyer's
Rights Watch Canada (LWRC)
Maharat
Foundation
No Peace
Without Justice
PEN
International
Physicians
for Human Rights
Rafto
Foundation for Human Rights
Salam for
Democracy and Human Rights
SENTINEL
Human Rights Defenders
World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders 