Korea, (South) Republic of:  Lack of consultation with national NGOs in the framework of an international conference hosted by the NHRCK raises further concerns about the NHRCK’s independence and credibility
April 14, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Korea, (South) Republic of / 2011 / AprilKorea, (South) Republic of: Lack of consultation with national NGOs in the framework of an international conference hosted by the NHRCK raises further concerns about the NHRCK’s independence and credibilityPRESS 
RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA: Lack of consultation with national NGOs in 
the framework of an international conference hosted by the NHRCK raises further 
concerns about the NHRCK’s independence and 
credibility
 

Geneva-Paris, April 14, 2011. The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), expresses
its deep concern about the lack of consultation with South Korean NGOs in the framework of the “Consultation of International Civic Groups to
Strengthen the United Nations Human Rights Treaty Body System” gathering civil
society representatives and Treaty Bodies experts that is to take place in
Seoul on April 19 and 20, 2011 and is hosted by the National Human Rights
Commission of Korea (NHRCK).
The “Consultation
of International Civic Groups to Strengthen the United Nations Human Rights Treaty
Body System” takes place as a follow-up
to the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights’ call in 2009 to strengthen and
streamline the UN human rights treaty body system, which was followed by a
series of consultative meetings of former and current members of UN treaty
bodies in 2009 and 2010. In that framework, consultation meetings with NGOs
were scheduled in Seoul in April mainly for international NGOs and in Pretoria
for national NGOs from all over the world (in June 2011). A consultation
meeting is also planned in May 2011 for States parties to the different UN
human rights treaties.
However, even though the conference is mainly about forging cooperation with
international NGOs to strengthen the international human rights treaty body
system, the NHRCK has prepared the event without any advance preparations or
consultation whatsoever with South Korean human rights organisations. Indeed, the
latter were first made aware of the consultation through press coverage. A few days later, on
March 21, 2011, six South Korean human rights NGOs received an email invitation
to attend the meeting and a programme of the conference in English, i.e. less
than a month before the event, but without being informed of the exact
contents, composition and position of the conference.
Given the lack of sufficient information they
received from the NHRCK, 57 human rights NGOs, including five out of the six
NGOs that were arbitrarily selected by the NHRCK to attend the Consultation,
decided to boycott the coming consultation, in particular as they were fearing
that the NHRCK’s real intention is to improve its international image one month
before the meeting of the Sub-Committee on Accreditation of the International
Coordinating Committee of National Human Rights Institutions (ICC) in May,
where the NHRCK’s special review of its status as an National Human Rights
Institution (NHRI) is expected to be discussed.The Observatory recalls that the credibility and independence of the NHRCK
have been seriously challenged since the appointment in July 2009 of Mr. Byung-Chul Hyun, who lacked experience
and expertise in the field of human rights, as new Chairperson of NHRCK. Mr.
Byung-Chul Hyun’s appointment was considered by many civil society organisations as further evidence
of the subordination of NHRCK to the ruling
administration. Since then, the NHRCK has neglected and disregarded cooperation with the
civil society. These concerns were backed up
by the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights when considering the third periodic report of the
Republic of Korea at its 43rd session in 2009.
In addition, to protest the current malfunctions of the NHRCK, and in
particular the dismissal of a human rights investigator who was the leader of
the Commission labour union, which had criticised Mr. Hyun’s management of the
NHRCK, three Commissioners, including two standing Commissioners, and 61
members of the special committee, the advisory committee and the consultation
committee have resigned from their posts. Subsequently, two new Standing
Commissioners were appointed and have taken office: one was appointed by the
South Korean President and the other was appointed by the ruling party. Neither
one has any substantive human rights experience.
The Observatory regrets that South Korean human rights NGOs that have
been actively
engaged with various UN human rights treaty bodies for many years are not in a
position to participate in such an important Consultation, and accordingly urges the NHRCK to make
sure it adheres to the United
Nations principles regulating the status and functioning of NHRIs (“Paris Principles”) and
its original mission to promote and protect human rights as an independent
watchdog.
“The lack of communication and consultation of local NGOs in such an
important human rights meeting violates the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders and the spirit of the Paris Principles, and we regret that this
Consultation be a lost opportunity to trigger an efficient discussion at the local
level on reforms towards a strengthened Human Rights Treaty Body System”, deplored Eric Sottas, Secretary General of OMCT.
“We strongly urge the South Korea to conform with the provisions of
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
instruments ratified by the Republic of Korea”,
concluded Ms. Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President.
For further information, please contact:
OMCT:
     Eric Sottas, Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39FIDH: Karine Appy, Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 