Azerbaijan:  Press Release: Intigam Aliyev sentenced to 7.5 years of jail for human rights work
April 22, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / AprilAzerbaijan: Press Release: Intigam Aliyev sentenced to 7.5 years of jail for human rights workAzerbaijan_2015.04.221 page / 182 KBParis-Geneva, April 22, 2015 – The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights  Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), strongly condemns the seven and a half
year jail sentence handed down today by the Baku Grave Crimes Court against
Intigam Aliyev. The conviction of the human rights defender, arbitrarily
detained since August 2014, should be overturned and he should be immediately
and unconditionally released.
 
On April 22, 2015, the Baku Grave Crimes Court sentenced Intigam
Aliyev to seven and a half year imprisonment on trumped-up charges of “tax
evasion, “abuse of authority”, “illegal entrepreneurship”, and “appropriation”.
Head of the Legal Education Society and human rights lawyer, Mr. Aliyev has
represented over 100 victims before the European Court of Human Rights. This
verdict comes a week after human rights defender, Rasul Jafarov, was
sentenced to six and a half years in jail, on April 16, 2015[1].
 
“Yet another
shameful sentence against a prominent human rights lawyer in Azerbaijan”, - declared FIDH President, Karim Lahidji.
 
Since the beginning of his detention, Mr. Aliyev's health has severely
deteriorated. Members of his family who visited him on November 7, 2014, have
reported that after two hours, he was neither able to talk nor to stand up. He
suffers from violent headaches, loss of appetite and insomnia. A medical exam
ran at the end of October, revealed that he was suffering from cervical
oesteochondrosis and of intervertebral disc disorders – which require
hospitalisation.
 
An Observatory delegation visited Baku in January 2015 to meet with
civil society actors in order to first-hand witness the impact of the Azeri
government crackdown on independent voices. The delegation also tried to visit
jailed human rights defenders, including Intigam Aliyev. Despite having
submitted several official requests, access to the prisons was impossible. Following
this mission, the Observatory released a report on April 21, documenting the repression against human rights defenders
in Azerbaijan and denouncing its intensification ahead of the European Games of
Baku, to be held in June 2015.
 
“Less than three months before the European Games start in Baku, it is
time for the authorities in Azerbaijan to immediately release Intigam Aliyev and all the other
arbitrarily detained defenders, including: Rasul Jafarov, Leyla
Yunus, Arif Yunusov, Khadija Ismayilova, Anar Mammadli, Hilal Mammadov and Rauf
Mirqadirov, as well as to put an end to any kind of harassment against all
human rights defenders in the country” concluded OMCT Secretary General, Gerald Staberock.
 
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders.
 
For more information, please contact :
FIDH: Arthur
     Manet / Lucie Kroening (French/English/Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57
     (Paris) / Arthur Manet (French/English/Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94
     (Paris)OMCT: Miguel
     Martín Zumalacárregui (French/English/Spanish) - Tel: +41 22 809 49 24
     (Geneva/Brussels)



[1]      See the Observatory's Press
Release, April 16, 2015. 