Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Myanmar: house arrest lifted against Aung San Suu Kyi, others still detained
September 15, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2000 / SeptemberMyanmar (ex-Burma): Myanmar: house arrest lifted against Aung San Suu Kyi, others still detainedCase MMR 050900.1 Follow-up to Case MMR 050900  Geneva, 15th September 2000  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Myanmar.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has learnt that on 14th September 2000, the restriction of movement of Aung San Suu Kyi and some other members of the National League for Democracy (NLD) was reportedly lifted after almost two weeks of virtual house arrest.  It was announced that "those senior NLD members were no longer required to stay at their respective residences resuming their daily activities as usual."  No information, however, has been received regarding the 16 members of the NLD Youth members and two leaders who were reportedly imprisoned on 2nd September 2000.    1- Htun Zaw Zaw ( Rangoon division) 2- Myo Nyunt (Rangoon division) 3- Htun Myint (same) 4- Thein Lwin (same) 5- Aung Htoo (same) 6- Khin Oo (same) 7- Moe Thaw (a) Pauk Pauk (same) 8- Myint Kyaw (same) 9- Shwe Gyo (same) 10- Than Htut (same) 11- Nyan Lin Aung (same) 12- Aye Myein Lin (same) 13- Than Htun (same) 14- Thein Swe (Irrawaddy Division) 15- Zaw Min Kyaw (same) 16- Min Aung Nyo (Mon State)  U Soe Myint (a member of Central Executive Committee member and Chairman of Rangoon Division NLD), and Dr. Myo Aung (member of Rangoon Division NLD organising committee) are also reportedly detained in Insein prison.  OMCT remains gravely concerned for their physical and psychological integrity.  Brief reminder of the situation  Previously, it had been announced that by the government that the 10 members of the Central Executive Committee, including Aung San Suu Kyi and U Tin Oo, had been confined to their homes, although it was not clear whether they were under house arrest or not, and access to them had been denied.  This followed an incident on 2 September 2000 when around midnight when nearly 200 riot police raided the NLD roadside convoy, led by Aung San Suu Kyi and U tin Oo, vice chairman, and forced them to return to the capital, ending a nine-day standoff.  It is also reported that security personnel beat up the NLD youths, guarding the leaders, causing head wounds and injuries to nine.  They were not hospitalised and were sent to Insein prison.  It is reported that the following NLD youths are detained in Insein jail:  The government says it is investigating links between the NLD and an armed rebel group, God's Army, based on the Burmese border.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Myanmar urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all members of the National League for Democracy, in particular the above-mentioned persons; ii.	order the immediate release of all those detained and put an end to the harassment of all members of the National League for Democracy; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into this situation and reported acts of violence in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  Lieutenant General Khin Nyunt, Secretary 1, State Peace and Development Council, c/o Ministry of Defence, Signal Pagoda Road, Yangon, Union of Myanmar Faxes: + 95 1 229 50  Colonel Hla Min, Office of Strategic Studies, Department of International Affairs, c/o Ministry of Defense, Signal Pagoda Road, Dagon Post Office, Yangon, Union of Myanmar Faxes: + 95 1 229 50  Geneva, 15th September 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 