Honduras:  Open letter to the European Union and its Member States on the worrying human rights situation in Honduras during the post-electoral period.
February  7, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / Honduras / 2018 / FebruaryHonduras: Open letter to the European Union and its Member States on the worrying human rights situation in Honduras during the post-electoral period. ​













6 of February 2018 
European
networks and international human rights organizations express their deep
concern over the disproportionate and sometimes fatal use of force employed by
security forces of the state against protesters, as well as other attacks on
human rights defenders in the context of the post-election crisis in Honduras.
We call on the European Union to condemn these incidents, to publicly support
the defenders, and to request the Honduran State ensure that international
human rights obligations are fully respected. 
On November 26, 2017, general elections were held
in Honduras. Four weeks later, on December 18, Juan Orlando Hernández (National
Party of Honduras) was declared president by the Supreme Electoral Tribunal
(TSE). During the electoral process, the EU Election Observation Mission
(EOM-EU) and the Electoral Observation Mission of the Organization of American
States (EOM-OAS) observed irregularities during the process, which led the
Secretary General of the OAS to call for a repeat of the general elections[1].
Since November 27, numerous protest have taken
place across the country to demand a transparent electoral process and credible
results. As a response, on December 1, 2017, the government of Honduras
declared itself in a state of emergency and decreed a temporary suspension of
constitutional guarantees. Since then, human rights organizations have
registered 30 killings -21 at the hands of the Military Police of Public Order
(PMOP), about 232 people injured and 1085 detained[2].
Up until January 4, 2018 24 violent deaths have been recorded by the Director
of Forensic Medicine of the Public Prosecutor's Office. To date, human rights
organizations do not know if the Public Prosecutor's Office has launched the
appropriate investigations for these cases. 
On its behalf, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner in Honduras has documented more than 50 cases of intimidation
and harassment against human rights defenders, social leaders and journalists.
This has led to a joint appeal from the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights (IACHR) and the Office of the High Commissioner[3],
requesting that the State of Honduras guarantee the right to peaceful
demonstration, as well as all fundamental rights. This appeal has also been
requested by several international civil society organizations[4].

In light of the ongoing tensions that have occurred
since the general elections and its impact on human rights, the government
announced the creation of a Human Rights Secretariat as an entity that is
separate from the current Secretariat for Human Rights, Justice, Governance,
and Decentralization of the government of the Republic of Honduras. The new
agency begins operations on January 27, 2018. 
Nonetheless, the disproportionate use of force
employed by security units of the state, attacks against human rights
defenders, the lack of adequate response from institutional structures, as well
as uncertainty over broad sectors due to the lack of application of
international standards in recent electoral processes (2009, 2013 and 2017),
they are generating a lack of confidence among the population in respect to the
principles of democracy and the rule of law, as well as in Honduran
institutions. 
In the
framework of relations with Honduras and foreign policy on human rights, we
urge the European Union to: 
 
·      
Issue a public statement at the highest
level that: 
o  
Recognizes the work of human rights
defenders and shows their concern for the events that occurred in the
post-electoral stage;  
o  
Calls on the Republic of Honduras to
abstain from excessive use of force against the population as well as respect
the right of citizens to demonstrate and express themselves freely;  
o  
Requests the Republic of Honduras to
investigate immediately and diligently all reported acts of violence, in order
to identify of the alleged perpetrators.  
·      
Urge the government of Honduras to
include testimonies of the victims and human rights defenders in any dialogue
initiative aimed at resolving the crisis and discovering the truth of the
events that have taken place in the electoral context.  
·      
Request that the Republic of Honduras
collaborate with human rights observation missions led by international and
regional human rights organizations.  
 
Additionally,
in the framework of cooperation to strengthen the justice system (Eurojusticia)
and the guidelines on defenders, we demand the Delegation of the European Union
in Honduras and the Embassies of European countries in the country:  
 
·      
To formally request information from
the Ministers of Security and Defense on the current protocols that are being
applied in the framework of the demonstrations, as well as request information
on the steps being taken to ensure investigations into these reported incidents
are prompt and effective in identifying those responsible and brought to trial.
 
·      
Adopt the necessary measures that make
visible EU support for the defenders, that contribute to a new public discourse
that recognizes their work and guarantees a safe environment for the exercise
of their function.  
·      
Promote a favorable space for the work
of the defenders, among others: facilitate a meeting between the National
Protection System and beneficiaries in order to ensure an effective,
appropriate and urgent response in this context.  
·      
Continue to promote participatory
spaces for political dialogue and regular consultations with civil society
organizations, including the exchange mechanism with civil society on human
rights issues, - the 'Enlace Group'.  
 
To the
European Parliament and the national parliaments of the European Union, we
request they monitor the human rights situation and, if deemed relevant, issue a
parliamentary resolution on the situation of human rights, promote
opportunities for discussion with civil society organizations. 
 
Signed
 
EU- LAT Network,
Advocacy Network Europe-Latin America (former CIFCA and Grupo Sur) 
PROTECTION INTERNATIONAL 
FRONTLINE DEFENDERS 
OMCT, World
Organization Against Torture 
CIDSE, International
Cooperation for Development and Solidarity 
 
 
 
Contact :
·      
EU-LAT Network, Marta Ibero, Senior
Policy Officer, marta.ibero@cifcaeu.org; +32
5361912 
·      
Frontline Defenders, Emma Achilli, Head
of EU Office, emma@frontlinedefenders.org, +32
2 230 93 83 
·      
Protection International, Tatiana
Villacieros, Programme Coordinator for Latin tvillacieros@protectioninternational.org,
+32 2 609 44 05 
·      
OMCT, Miguel Martín, Head of EU Office,
omct@omct.org, (+32) 2 218 37 19 / (+41) 22 809
49 39 
·      
CIDSE, Stefan Reinhold - Corporate
Regulation and Extractives Officer –
reinhold@cidse.org +32 (0) 22.82.40.71 
 



[1]                 Statement
by the OAS General Secretariat on the Elections in Honduras. December 17, 2017.
Available in: http://www.oas.org/en/media_center/press_release.asp?sCodigo=E-092/17


[2]                 Alert:
International concern regarding the serious increase of attacks against human rights
defenders in Honduras' post-electoral context, January 22, 2018. http://www.pbi-
honduras.org/fileadmin/user_files/projects/honduras/files/Alertas/180122HOP_Alerts_8_DefendersSituationPost-Electoral_01.pdf


[3]                 IACHR
and OHCHR Express Concern over Post-Election Violence in Honduras, January 19,
2018 : http://www.oas.org/en/iachr/media_center/PReleases/2018/007.asp


[4]                 See
letter from CEJIL and others, 25/01/18,
https://www.cejil.org/es/estado-hondureno-continua-violacion-derechos-humanos-denuncian-
organizaciones-internacionales 