Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrghystan: assaults and threats against Mr. Ibragim Ashurov
November 10, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2004 / NovemberKyrgyzstan: Kyrghystan: assaults and threats against Mr. Ibragim AshurovCase KGZ 101104 Assault/ Threats  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Commission on Human Rights (KCHR),a member of the OMCT network, of the assault of and threats to Mr. Ibragim Ashurov, a journalist, in Kyrgyzstan.  According to the information received, Mr. Ibragim Ashurov, the operator of the information program “Ala Too” of the Kyrgyz National television and radio corporation, was assaulted on 3 November 2004 by Mr. Kabylev Ukulov and Ukulov’s relative, Mr. Kurmanbek Ukulov. Mr. Kabylev Ukulov is an employee of the southern department of financial police of the Kyrgyz Republic and Mr. Kurmanbek Ukulov is the chairperson of joint-stock company “Osh-Electrics”.   Allegedly, the two perpetrators, Mr. Kabylev Ukulov and Mr. Kurmanbek Ukulov, presented themselves as members of the militia (equivalent to police in Kyrgystan), chasing the victim in a government automobile with the license plate reading O 37-73 C. When the chase ended they forcefully removed Mr. Ashurov from the automobile without presenting any accusations and then began to beat him. They then allegedly took the victims cellular phone and the keys from the automobile, and threatened Mr. Ashurov if any complaints were to be made against them. The two perpetrators then left the scene in the direction of Osh city. Later, it is alleged that Osh militia arrested one of the attackers, Mr. Kalybek Ukulov.  According to Mr. Ibragim Ashurov, the attack may be connected to his professional activities. Mr. Ibragim Ashurov is well-known in the southern parts of Kyrgyzstan because of his harsh reporting on the different aspects of public life throughout the region. Threats have allegedly become a normal issue in their profession. More specifically, at the time of the incident Mr. Ashurov, was preparing critical reports for a television broadcast covering the abuses by officials who work in the energy sphere, where Mr. Kurmanbek Ukulov is a chairperson of a joint-stock company. The investigation of this case was handed to Ashim Raiymberdiev, a member of oblast administration of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ibragim Ashurov and other journalists in similar situations, as threats are alleged to be a normal occurrence in this line of work and the threats are frequently followed by violent action. OMCT calls on the authorities to launch a prompt, thorough, and impartial investigation of this event in order to find those responsible for any violations of human rights and to bring them to justice.   Action requested Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan urging them to:  i. take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ibragim Ashurov;  ii. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, notably the allegations of torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  iii. guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victim of this abuse;  iv. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.   Addresses Mr Askar Akayev, President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996 312 218 627, Email: ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su  Mr. Nikolai Tanaev, Prime Minister, Fax: 996 312 218 627 · Mr. Bakirdin Subanbekov, Minister of the Interior, Fax: 996 312 663 031, 996 312 288 788  Mrs. Neila Beishenalieva, Minister of Justice, Fax: 996 312 663 044 · Mr. Myktybek Abdyldaev, General Prosecutor of Kyrgyz Republic, Fax: 996 312 665411  Ambassadeur, Zeinep Shaimergenova, Mission permanente de la République kirghize, Rue Maunoir 26, 1207 Genève, Suisse, e-mail: kyrgyzmission@bluewin.ch, Fax : +4122 707.92.21  Please also write to the embassies of Kyrgyzstan in your respective country.   Geneva, 10 November, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 