Cameroon:  Violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people: organisations suggest concrete steps the government can take to counteract these violence
September 12, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2013 / SeptemberCameroon: Violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people: organisations suggest concrete steps the government can take to counteract these violenceOpen letter6 pages / 191 KB
September
11, 2013
His
Excellency Paul Biya 
President
of the Republic of Cameroon
Office
of the President
P.O.
Box 100
Yaoundé,
Republic of Cameroon
Via facsimile to the Permanent Mission of
Cameroon to the United Nations: 
+1-212-249-0533
His Excellency Philémon Yang
Prime Minister
Star Building
P.O. Box 1000
Yaoundé, Republic of Cameroon
Via email: via bikoro5@yahoo.fr
Via facsimile: +237-2223-5765
His Excellency Laurent Esso
Minister of Justice
Yaoundé, Republic of Cameroon
Via email: via alexmayang@yahoo.fr 
Via facsimile: +237-3223-5559, +237-2223-0005
His
Excellency Pierre Moukoko Mbonjo
Minister of External Relations
Yaoundé, Republic of Cameroon
Via facsimile to the
Permanent Mission of Cameroon to the United Nations: 
+1-212-249-0533
Excellences:
We write to you on behalf of 12 Cameroonian
and international human rights organizations that have carefully documented
many cases in which Cameroonians have been subjected to violence because of
their sexual orientation or gender identity, or because of their activism on
behalf of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) people in
Cameroon. We respectfully urge you to accept and adopt recommendations, put
forth at the May 2013 Universal Period Review (UPR) at the United Nations Human
Rights Council, to prevent violence
against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people, to
hold accountable the perpetrators of homophobic violence, and to ensure the
protection of human rights defenders that work with these marginalized groups.
Below, we suggest concrete steps the government of Cameroon can take to
counteract homophobic violence.
We are particularly shocked and saddened by the
recent murder of Eric Ohena Lembembe, executive director of the Cameroonian
Foundation for AIDS (CAMFAIDS), who was brutally assaulted and killed in July
2013. No one has been arrested, but Lembembe’s friends suspect he was killed
because of his outspoken advocacy on behalf of LGBTI people. Unfortunately, the
government of Cameroon has not publicly condemned this killing, and police
investigations have failed to produce results. The government’s inaction risks
sending a signal to all Cameroonians that they can violate the law with
impunity if they target people on the basis of their real or perceived sexual
orientation and/or gender identity. 
Lembembe’s case may be the most extreme, but
unfortunately, it is not exceptional. The 2010 report Criminalizing Identities, published by Alternatives-Cameroun, the
Association for the Defense of Gays and Lesbians (ADEFHO), the International
Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (IGLHRC) and Human Rights Watch, documented
cases in which individuals were beaten by mobs, neighbors, police officers, and
family members because they were suspected of being gay or lesbian.[1] In
October 2012, Human Rights Watch and CAMFAIDS conducted additional interviews
with LGBTI people in Cameroon who had been beaten because of their sexual
orientation and gender identity, including one person who was stabbed in the
head. Amnesty International’s 2013 report Making
Love a Crime includes reports of discrimination, harassment and abuse of
individuals because of their real or perceived sexual orientation or gender
identity, including abuse by police officers and family members.[2]
Other worrisome recent incidents include the
following, all of which our organizations have already brought to the attention
of the Cameroonian authorities:
·     
A
series of death threats sent by email and SMS to human rights lawyers Alice
Nkom and Michel Togué, including threats to kill their children. Both lawyers
have filed complaints with police and prosecutors, with no effect. Human Rights
Watch issued an open letter to President Paul Biya on February 13, 2013, to
bring these threats to his attention and to ask the government to address these
threats. We received no response.[3]
·     
A
burglary at Michel Togué’s office on June 16, 2013, in which sensitive legal
documents related to his work defending LGBTI clients were stolen.[4]
·     
 A fire at the Access Center, where
Alternatives-Cameroun conducts HIV testing and prevention work among both gay
and heterosexual clients, on June 26, 2013.[5]
Further, a Cameroonian association organized a
“national day of action against homosexuality.” A march, authorized by the
authorities, was held in the streets of Yaoundé on August 21, during which the association’s
leaders made speeches inciting violence against LGBTI people and announced the
establishment of a militia aimed at tracking down LGBTI people.
The threat of violence and accompanying
climate of impunity has jeopardized the work of Cameroonian associations that
conduct HIV prevention among men who have sex with men (MSM), including several
of the signatories to this letter. With no guarantees that the government
officials responsible for public safety will protect them, several of the
organizations have been forced to scale back outreach activities that are
essential in Cameroon’s fight against HIV/AIDS.
The arbitrary application of article 347 bis
of the Penal Code, which criminalizes “sexual relations between persons of the
same sex,” has the pernicious effect of legitimizing acts of violence against
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex people. As our organizations
have documented, including in the March 2013 report Guilty by Association, by Alternatives-Cameroun, ADEFHO, CAMFAIDS
and Human Rights Watch, dozens of people in Cameroon are arrested and
prosecuted based on the simple suspicion that they are gay. In this context,
many LGBTI people are afraid to report crimes to the police. When they do,
sometimes they are treated as criminals themselves and arrested. Such arrests
violate Cameroon’s own constitution and its international human rights
obligations, and incite hatred and violence against LGBTI people. 
The Cameroonian government has an obligation
to protect all of its citizens – not
just heterosexual citizens – from violence. The chair of the African Commission
on Human and Peoples’ Rights, Catherine Dupe Atoki, recently stated that the
Commission vehemently opposes violence on the basis of sexual orientation.[6] Cameroon
should make a similarly unambiguous statement in order to deter homophobic and
transphobic violence.
The upcoming Human Rights Council meeting in
Geneva provides an opportunity for Cameroon to take a clear stance against
violence. We strongly urge you to accept
recommendations regarding violence against LGBTI people, particularly the
recommendations to protect LGBTI from
violence from other members of the society (Germany); to adopt appropriate measures to tackle social
prejudices, stigmatization, harassment, discrimination and violence against
individuals because of their sexual orientation (Uruguay); to adopt necessary measures to avoid
discrimination, and to protect and integrate the LGBT population
(Argentina); to investigate police
violence that took place on persons because of their actual or perceived sexual
orientation (Belgium); to ensure
adequate protection of defenders of human rights that help LGBT persons
(Belgium); and to continue to investigate
acts of threats and aggression against human rights defenders and journalists
and bring to justice those perpetrators (Spain).[7]
In order to implement these recommendations,
we suggest the following specific steps:
·     
Publicly
condemn the killing of human rights activist and community health worker Eric
Ohena Lembembe, and call for a prompt, effective, independent and impartial
investigation and for those responsible to be brought to justice. 
·     
Collaborate
with Cameroonian civil society organizations and the media to develop and
implement a large-scale public awareness campaign about the basic humanity,
dignity, and rights of sexual and gender minorities.
·     
Conduct
trainings for the police, the gendarmerie, and the judiciary on sexual
orientation, gender identity, and LGBTI rights, including the right to access
to justice. Collaborate with civil society organizations working on LGBTI
rights to offer these trainings.
·     
Pass
laws prohibiting incitement of violence and hate crimes, including crimes
motivated by the actual or presumed sexual orientation or gender identity of
the victim.
·     
Take
all necessary measures, including legislative and administrative ones, to
prohibit and eliminate discriminatory treatment on the basis of sexual
orientation and gender identity, at every stage of the judicial process. 
·     
Establish
and provide funding for a working group, composed of government and civil
society representatives that will create a National Plan of Action to eliminate
discrimination against sexual and gender minorities, with clear benchmarks for
each aspect of the plan.
·     
Allow
organizations working on issues related to sexuality, sexual orientation, and
gender identity to officially register as non-profit organizations.
We look forward to your positive response with
regard to this matter, and we are happy to meet to discuss these
recommendations further.
Sincerely,
Serge Yotta, Executive Director
Affirmative
Action
Andre Banks, Executive Director
All
Out
Parfait Behen, President
Alternatives-Cameroon
Netsanet Belay, Director, Africa Program
Amnesty
International
Stéphane Koche, Vice President
The
Association for the Defense of Gays and Lesbians (ADEFHO)
Eitel Joris Ella Ella,
Executive Coordinator
Cameroonian
Foundation for AIDS (CAMFAIDS)
Karim Lahidji, President
The
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
Daniel Bekele, Director, Africa Division
Human
Rights Watch
Jules Eloundou, President
Humanity
First Cameroon
The
International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA)
Gerald Staberock, Secrétaire général
World
Organization Against Torture (OMCT)
Rev. Canon Albert Ogle, President
St.
Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation
cc: 
H..E.
Mr. Anatole Fabien Marie Nkou, Ambassador
Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Cameroon to the United Nations Office in Geneva
Avenue de France 23, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland
Facsimile: + 41 22 736 21 65, 
Email: mission.cameroun@bluewin.ch
Mr. Chemuta Divine Banda, President
Commission nationale de droits de l’Homme et des libertés
Yaoundé, Cameroon
Facsimile: +237.22.22.60.80
Email: cndhl@iccnet.cm



[1]
Human Rights Watch, Cameroon - Criminalizing Identities: Rights Abuses in Cameroon based
on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity, November 2006, http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/cameroon1010web.pdf.


[2] Amnesty
International, Making Love a Crime: Criminalization of Same-Sex Conduct
in Sub-Saharan Africa, June 2013, http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/AFR01/001/2013/en/9f2d91b7-bc0e-4ea7-adae-7e51ae0ce36f/afr010012013en.pdf.


[3] Letter from
Human Rights Watch to Paul Biya, president of the Republic of Cameroon,
February 13, 2013,
https://www.hrw.org/news/2013/02/13/letter-paul-biya-president-republic-cameroon.


[4] “Cameroon: Spate of Attacks on Rights
Defenders,” Human Rights Watch news release, July 1, 2013,
https://www.hrw.org/news/2013/07/01/cameroon-spate-attacks-rights-defenders.


[5] Idem.


[6] Dupe Atoki’s
statement is available at https://www.dropbox.com/s/8hd9qao6pcjtt74/Vidéo%2011-04-13%2014%2050%2007.mov
(accessed September 5, 2013).


[7] The full set of
recommendations made to Cameroon at the May 2013 UPR hearing regarding sexual orientation
and gender identity are as follows. Although this letter focuses specifically
on the urgent problem of violence against LGBTI people and their defenders, the
signatories to this letter support all of these recommendations: Decriminalize consensual sexual relations
between adults of the same sex; protect LGBTI from violence; Undertake public
actions aimed at eliminating discrimination based on sexual orientation; Take
all necessary measures, including legislative and administrative, to prohibit
and eliminate all discriminatory treatment based on sexual orientation; Respect
article 12 of the Constitution, which protects privacy, and eliminate abuses of
this article that lead to arbitrary arrests and prosecutions on charges related
to consensual same sex relations; Investigate police violence that took place
on persons because of their actual or perceived sexual orientation; Ensure
adequate protection of defenders of human rights that help LGBT persons.
See A/HRC/24/15, United Nations Human Rights Council, July 5, 2013,
http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G13/154/72/PDF/G1315472.pdf?OpenElement. 