Egypt:  Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Yara Sallam and 23 protesters including Sanaa Seif
December 29, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2014 / DecemberEgypt: Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Yara Sallam and 23 protesters including Sanaa Seif058.4 EGY_002_0614_OBS 058.4 - ARabic4 pages / 18.99 MBNew informationEGY 002 / 0614 / OBS 058.4Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment
/Obstacles to freedom of peaceful assemblyEgyptDecember 29, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the continued arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment of Ms. Yara Sallam, Transitional Justice Officer at the
Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR), as well as 23 protesters[1] including Ms. Sanaa Seif, a member of
the “No to Military Trials for Civilians” movement and sister of blogger Alaa
Abdel Fattah[2].

 
According to the information received, on
December 28, 2014, the Heliopolis Appeal Misdemeanour Court reduced the
sentence against Ms. Yara Sallam, Ms. Sanaa Seif and 22 other protesters to two
years' imprisonment, and two years' police surveillance. They had been
sentenced in first instance on October 26 to three years in prison, to an additional three years
of police surveillance, to a 10,000 EGP fine (1,000 euros), and to repayment
for property damages they allegedly caused, in relation to their alleged
participation in a protest on June 21, 2014 (see background information). 
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the sentencing of
Ms. Yara Sallam, Ms. Sanaa Seif and the 22 other protesters, and considers that
they are targeted solely for exercising their right to freedom of expression
and assembly, and that their detention and sentencing only aim to sanction
their legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory calls on the
authorities to drop all charges held against them, and immediately and
unconditionally release them.
 
The Observatory is further concerned by the handling of the case by the judicial authorities and the
numerous breaches to the right to fair trial as well as the lack of evidence
against the defendants.  
 
The Observatory recalls that the
restrictive protest law has been used by the authorities as a tool to imprison
human rights defenders. This controversial law bans gatherings of 10 or more
people without a permit issued by the authorities. 
 
Background information:
 
On June 21, 2014, the police dispersed by using tear gas a peaceful
march that was organised in the Heliopolis neighbourhood in Cairo to demand the
repeal of the Law 107 of 2013 on demonstrations and public rallies (the
“Anti-Protest Law”) as well as the release of those detained under said law. In
this framework, the police arrested more than 30 individuals, including Ms.
Yara Sallam and her cousin Shehab Fakhry Ismail.
It should be highlighted that the two were picked up in the vicinity of the
protest between 7 and 8 pm by security forces as they were buying drinks from a
local kiosk and not while participating in any demonstration. 
 
Some of the detainees reported insults and
ill-treatment, including beatings by “muwatinin shurafa” (plain-clothed police
collaborators) during and after the arrest. Those arrested were questioned
without the presence of their lawyers, mostly individually, by men in civilian
dress who did not introduce themselves or clarify their official positions. The
arrestees were asked whether they participated in the protest and were
questioned about their political affiliations and opinions about the protest
law. According to testimonies, officials pressured them into confessing their
participation and threatened to charge them with belonging to the banned Muslim
Brotherhood and/or the 6th of April Movement. Later the same day, eight of the
arrestees were released without charges, including Ms. Sallam's cousin. On June
22, 2014, 24 were presented before the Prosecutor’s office.
 
During her interrogation, Ms. Sallam was
questioned about the nature of her work and about EIPR's management.
 
On June 23, 2014, the Heliopolis
Prosecution Office ordered the detention until June 25, 2014 of Ms. Yara
Sallam, Ms. Sanaa Seif as well as 21 other individuals on charges of “breaching
the protest law” under the “Anti-Protest Law”, “sabotaging public properties”,
“possession of inflammable materials” and “taking part in showing off force
with the objective of terrorising the public” for their alleged participation
in a peaceful march. Another individual was released on medical grounds[3].
 
On June 24, 2014, the two women human
rights defenders as well as five women protesters were transferred to Qanatir
Prison, 15 male detainees to Tora Prison, and one juvenile to Al-Marg juvenile
prison. This followed the extension by the prosecution of the detention of
these 23 individuals on June 23, 2014 for four days, as well as the release on
bail of another one on the same day.
 
On June 25, 2014, the Heliopolis Public
Prosecution transferred the case to the Heliopolis Misdemeanor Court. It
mentioned 12 provisions in the indictment order: articles 162, 361, 375 (bis),
375 (bisA) of the Penal Code, articles 1 to 4 of Law 10 of 1914 on Gatherings;
and articles 7, 8, 19, 21 of Law No. 107 of 2013 on demonstrations and public
rallies. These provisions include: “participating in an unauthorised
demonstration whose aim was to stop the implementation of the law and influence
the effectiveness of the public authorities during the carrying out of their
work”; “organising a demonstration without prior notice as stipulated by the
law and participating in a demonstration that breached and threatened public
security and the interests of citizens and disrupted transportation and
transgressed public and private property”; “using force and violence to
terrorise and intimidate citizens”; and “deliberately destructing property
owned by the aggrieved party as proven through investigations”. 
 
The 23 defendants in detention were
supposed to appear before the court on June 25 after the expiry of their
four-day detention. However, the defendants were not brought to court, and the
Prosecution instead issued an indictment order, before the defendants had a
chance to challenge their pre-trial detention before an independent judicial
body. 
 
On June 29, 2014, the trial against Ms.
Yara Sallam and Ms. Sana Seif, together with 21 other individuals who had
peacefully protested for the repeal of Law No.107 for 2013 on demonstrations
and public rallies, started. 
 
Though the session was due to take place at the Heliopolis
Courthouse, at the time set for the start of the session lawyers and family
members were informally told that the hearing of the case would transferred to
the Police Academy inside the high security Tora Prison. They had to rush across the city to attend the trial. Access
to the courtroom was heavily restricted: families of the detainees were denied
access and defence lawyers and journalists faced difficulties to access the
room. One journalist who tried to take a photograph had his equipment
confiscated and was removed from the courtroom. 
 
During the hearing, the defence lawyers
requested to examine and verify the validity of the evidence presented against
the defendants by the prosecution including audio-visual material on the
demonstration. The court granted this request, however the request for
provisional release of the defendants on bail was rejected by the court. 
 
The judge closed the hearing session and
left the courtroom without informing the lawyers about the date of the next
hearing. The Court's security guards then told the lawyers that the next
hearing was scheduled on September 13, 2014. 
 
On September 13, 2014, the trial against
Ms. Yara Sallam and Ms. Sana Seif, together with 21 other individuals who had
allegedly peacefully protested for the repeal of Law No.107 for 2013 on
demonstrations and public rallies, was postponed to October 11, by a Heliopolis
Misdemeanour court[4]. The hearing was held in
the deliberation chambers. Two videos were shown, based on the request of the
defendants' lawyers. The judge tried to identify  defendants in the videos shown, however none
of the defendants appeared in the videos. In addition, no weapon appeared on
the video. The prosecution also submitted a report on a video that was not
shown during the hearing. The defendants' lawyers requested that this video be
shown accompanied by an expert report. According to EIPR, a police report
claims that a police vehicle was damaged at 9:30pm on June 21, 2014
while most defendants had been arrested earlier. Furthermore, no weapons
or other items were seized from the defendants or presented as evidence. All
the defendants remained in custody pending trial despite the defence's request
to release them. The session was once again held in private as only the
defendants' lawyers were allowed to attend. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Egypt
asking them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Ms. Yara Sallam and Ms. Sana Seif, as well as the 22 protesters
above-mentioned and prosecuted for their alleged participation in said march
and all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
ii.             
Release Ms. Yara Sallam and Ms. Sana Seif,
as well as the 21
protesters prosecuted for their alleged participation in said march immediately and unconditionally, as well as all human rights
defenders currently in detention, since their detention is arbitrary as it seems to only aim at curtailing
their human rights activities; 
 
iii.           
Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Ms. Yara Sallam and Ms. Sana Seif, as well as the 22 protesters indicted for
their alleged participation in said march and all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
iv.   
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-     
its Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-     
its Article 5(a): “For
the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the
national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully”
-     
its Article 6(a), which
foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-     
its Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Egypt.
 
Addresses
·      
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi,
Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998
·      
Prime Minister, Mr. Ibrahim Mehleb, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini
Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·      
Minister of the Interior, General Mohamed Ibrahim Moustafa, Ministry of
the Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
·      
Minister of Justice, Mr. Mahmoud Saber, Ministry of Justice, Magles El
Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·      
Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Hisham Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses
Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577 4716
·      
Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National Council For Human Rights,
Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·       H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United
Nations in Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·       Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.
 


[1]                 Mohamed Ahmed Youssef Saad, Bassam Mohamed Aly El
Saed, Ahmed Samir Mahmoud Mohamed, Islam Tawfik Mohamed Hassan, Yasser Samir
Fadel Sayed, Ibrahim Ahmed ElSaed AbdelRahaman, Salwa Aboud Aly Mehrez, Karim
Moustafa Yassin, Islam Mohamed AbdelHamid Mohamed, Nahed Sherif Abdelhamid
ElSaed, Fekrya Mohamed Mohamed, Mohamed Anwar Massoud, Hanan Moustafa Ahmed
Soliman, Moataz Mahmoud Mansour Ragheb, Mohamed ElSaed AlSayed, Ahmed Mohamed
Abdelhamid Mohamed, Mahmoud Hesham Hassanien AbdelAziz, Mo'men Mohamed Radwan,
Mohamed ElSayed Mohamed, Moustafa Mohamed Ibrahim, Samar Ibrahim Mahmoud
Ibrahim and Amr Ahmed Muhammad Mahmoud. Mr. Amr Ahmed Muhammad Mahmoud was
provisionally released on medical grounds.


[2]           
Mr. Alaa Abdel Fattah who also faces judicial harassment is currently detained.



[3]       Mr. Amr Ahmed Muhammad Mahmoud.


[4]                
One of the protesters is a minor and will be prosecuted separately. 