Viet Nam:  Immediately release labour and land rights defender Tran Thi Nga
July 21, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2017 / JulyViet Nam: Immediately release labour and land rights defender Tran Thi NgaDownload full article1 page / 375 KB

                                       JOINT PRESS RELEASE
 
VIET NAM: Immediately release labour
and land rights defender Tran Thi Nga
 
Geneva-Paris, July 21, 2017 -
Vietnamese authorities must drop all charges against labour and land rights
defender Tran Thi Nga and immediately release her, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership) and the Vietnam
Committee on Human Rights (VCHR) urged today.
 
Tran Thi
Nga’s trial is scheduled for
July 25-26, 2017 at the People’s Court in Ha Nam Province. She has been charged
under Article 88 of the Criminal Code (“spreading propaganda against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam”). If convicted, she could face up to 20 years
in jail.
 
“The harassment, arbitrary arrest, and trial of
Tran Thi Nga follow a familiar pattern of repression that will inevitably
continue unless Hanoi enacts significant institutional and legislative reforms,
including the amendment of the country’s numerous repressive laws,” said FIDH President
Dimitris Christopoulos.
 
Tran Thi
Nga was
arrested on January 21, 2017 at her home in Phu Ly, Ha Nam Province, after the
police searched her house and confiscated several of her personal belongings.
On the same day, Tran Thi Nga’s partner Luong Dan Ly, a pro-democracy
activist and blogger, was also arrested. He was released the following day. 
 
Police accused Tran Thi Nga of using
the Internet “to spread some propaganda videos and writings that are against
the Government of the Social Republic of Viet Nam”.
 
“We strongly condemn the prosecution of
Tran Thi Nga, which illustrates once more the Vietnamese Government’s
relentless efforts to intimidate and silence human rights defenders for their legitimate human rights activities. Viet Nam must
immediately and unconditionally free Tran Thi Nga and all other jailed human
rights defenders,” said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
Tran Thi Nga has suffered repeated
intimidation, harassment, detention, interrogation, and physical assaults by
security agents because of her human rights activities. In May 2014, a group of
five men assaulted her with iron rods, breaking her arm and leg. In the days
prior to her arrest in January 2017, Tran Thi Nga was subjected to increased
police intimidation and harassment, including surveillance of her home and the
use of physical force to keep her from leaving her house. Police also refused
to allow a neighbour to take her two young sons to the city to buy them food.
 
“The result of Tran Thi Nga’s
trial is a foregone conclusion and it certainly won’t be the last conviction of
a human rights defender by Viet Nam’s kangaroo courts. Without renewed
international pressure, Hanoi’s crackdown on human rights defenders will
continue unabated,” said VCHR President Vo Van Ai.
 
For more information, please
contact:VCHR: Penelope Faulkner
(Vietnamese/English) - Tel: +33 1 45 98 30 85
FIDH: Andrea Giorgetta
(English) - Tel: +66 88 6117722 (Bangkok) / Audrey Couprie & Samuel Hanryon
(French/English) - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris)OMCT: Delphine Reculeau (French/English) - Tel: +41 22 809
49 39 (Geneva)
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this program is to
prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH
and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human
Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society. 