United Arab Emirates:  Lawyers attempt to reach human rights defender Ahmed Mansoor, who is held incommunicado in United Arab Emirates
February 27, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / United Arab Emirates / 2018 / FebruaryUnited Arab Emirates: Lawyers attempt to reach human rights defender Ahmed Mansoor, who is held incommunicado in United Arab Emirates





Geneva - On 26 February 2018, lawyers from Ireland approached
the Ministry of the Interior in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) to try to gain
access to distinguished human rights defender Ahmed
Mansoor, who has been detained since 20
March 2017 for his human rights activities. Mansoor, who received the Martin Ennals Award for
Human Rights Defenders in 2015, is a member of the advisory boards of the Gulf
Centre for Human Rights (GCHR). 
 
Given the widely documented
use of torture and solitary confinement by UAE authorities, and the lack of any
independent information regarding Mansoor, there are grave fears for his
safety. Numerous organisations have
expressed concern that he may be tortured and subject to ill treatment in
detention. 
 
Several hours after his arrest, the official
state-run news website, the Emirates News Agency, announced that Mansoor was
arrested on the orders of the Public Prosecutor for Cybercrimes linked to his
social media posts. Eleven months later, it is unclear what, if any, charges he
is facing, whether court proceedings are underway, and if he has legal
representation. Furthermore, his place of detention is unknown, and there is no
information on how he is being treated, or whether he is in solitary
confinement. With the exception of two family visits on 3 April and 17 September
2017, it appears that Mansoor has had no other visitors.
 
In Abu Dhabi, the Irish lawyers approached the
Ministry of the Interior headquarters, which is the authority controlling and
running prisons. The Ministry referred the lawyers to the police, who are not
responsible for prisons. The police then advised them to approach the Al-Wathba
prison, which they did, only to be told Mansoor is not being held there. The
inability of the authority responsible to provide any information on Mansoor is
remarkable given that he has been detained for almost a year. 
 
The mission was mandated by GCHR, the Martin Ennals
Foundation, Front Line Defenders, the International Service for Human Rights
(ISHR) and the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
 
The mission
partners continue to call on the UAE authorities to:
 
·              
Release Ahmed Mansoor immediately and unconditionally, as he is a
prisoner of conscience detained solely for peacefully defending human rights on
social media;
·              
Pending his release, disclose his whereabouts and ensure he is held in an
official place of detention and protected from torture and other ill-treatment;
·              
Ensure he is granted immediate and regular access to a lawyer of his
choosing, his family, and adequate medical care. 
 
For further information, please contact: Michael
Khambatta +41 79 474 8208
khambatta@martinennalsaward.org or visit www.martinennalsaward.org
 
Background
 
Ahmed Mansoor was arrested by a dozen security
officers at his home in Ajman in the pre-dawn hours of 20 March 2017 and taken
to an undisclosed location. The security officials conducted an extensive
search of his home and took away all of the family’s mobile phones and laptops,
including those belonging to his young children. The family had no information
about Mansoor until a statement was issued on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
website on 29 March 2017 saying that he was in detention in the Central Prison
in Abu Dhabi. Since his arrest, his family were
allowed to visit him only twice - on 3 April and 17 September 2017, and he has
had no access to a lawyer. 
 
In their public statements, the
UAE authorities have said that Mansoor is accused of using social media
websites to “publish false information that harms national unity.” On the day
of his arrest, the UAE’s official news agency, WAM, announced that he was
arrested on the orders of the Public Prosecution for Cybercrimes and detained
pending further investigation on charges of “using social media [including
Twitter and Facebook] sites to publish false and misleading information that
harms national unity and social harmony and damages the country’s reputation”
and “promoting sectarian and hate-incited agenda”. The statement classified
these as “cybercrimes,” indicating that the charges against him may be based on
alleged violations of the UAE’s repressive 2012 cybercrime law, which
authorities have used to imprison numerous activists and which provides for
long prison sentences and severe financial penalties
 
In the
weeks leading up to his arrest, Mansoor had used Twitter to call for the
release of activist Osama Al-Najjar, who remains in prison, despite
having completed a three-year prison sentence in 2017 on charges related to his
peaceful activities on Twitter; as well as prominent academic and economist Dr Nasser
bin Ghaith, arrested in August 2015 and sentenced to 10 years in 2017. Both
men have been convicted of charges related to peaceful messages they posted on
the social media platform Twitter. Mansoor had also used his Twitter account to
draw attention to human rights violations across the region, including in Egypt
and Yemen. He had also signed a joint letter with other activists in the region
calling on leaders at the Arab Summit who met in Jordan in March 2017 to
release political prisoners in their countries.
 
As a
result of his selfless and tireless efforts to defend the rights of migrants
and Emirati nationals in the UAE, he had become a thorn in the side of the UAE
authorities and consequently the object of years of government harassment and
persecution.
 
Since
his arrest, a group of United Nations human
rights experts have called on the UAE to release Mansoor, describing his arrest as “a
direct attack on the legitimate work of human rights defenders in the UAE.”
They said they feared that his arrest “may constitute an act of reprisal for
his engagement with UN human rights mechanisms, for the views he expressed on
social media, including Twitter, as well as for being an active member of human
rights organizations.” The experts include special rapporteurs on human rights
defenders, on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
expression and opinion, along with the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention and the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
 
UAE hacks the Apple IOS system
to try to spy on Mansoor.
 
The lengths the UAE authorities will go to
silence Mansoor are shown by their efforts to hack his iPhone. In a widely
documented case, the UAE were exposed after Mansoor’s suspicions were raised
and he contact the Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto in Canada. Citizen
lab released the following report: https://citizenlab.ca/2016/08/million-dollar-dissident-iphone-zero-day-nso-group-uae/
 
Previous
case against Ahmed Mansoor:
 
Mansoor, along with Dr Nasser bin Ghaith,
and online activists Fahad Salim Dalk, Ahmed Abdul-Khaleq, and Hassan Ali
al-Khamis were arrested in April 2011 and charged with “publicly insulting” UAE
rulers. On 27 November
2011, a panel of four judges of the Federal Court found all five men guilty and
sentenced Mansoor to three years in prison, and the others to two years. The
four men were released the next day, after the UAE president, Sheikh Khalifa
bin Zayed Al-Nahyan, issued a pardon. 