Nepal:  Nepal: Arbitrary arrest/forced disappearance of Mr. Ramashwor Pudasaini
May 30, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2005 / MayNepal: Nepal: Arbitrary arrest/forced disappearance of Mr. Ramashwor PudasainiCase NPL 300505 Arbitrary Arrest/Forced disappearance  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Nepal.    Brief Description of the Situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Informal Sector Service Center  (INSEC), a member of the OMCT network, that Mr. Ramashwor Pudasaini, 46, was arrested by Security Forces wearing civilian clothes on 29 April 2005 in Balaju, near Machapokhari in Nepal.  According to the information received, Mr. Pudasaini, a farmer, was arrested along with Arjun Pudasaini, a teacher, and Shambhu Thapaulia, an Insurance Company Heatauda Officer in Balaju. They were arrested by a group of security officers who were driving an unmarked van. Shortly after the arrests, Mr. Arjun Pudasaini and Mr. Thapaulia were released whereas Mr. Ramashwor Pudasaini was taken into custody and to date his whereabouts remain unknown.  OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ramashwor Pudasaini whose whereabouts are still unknown.   Action Requested: Please write a letter to the authorities in Nepal urging them to: i. Immediately locate the whereabouts of Mr. Ramashwor Pudasaini and guarantee his physical and psychological integrity;  ii. Order the immediate release of Mr. Ramashwor Pudasaini in the absence of valid legal charges, and if such charges exist, to ensure that he is given a prompt and fair trial, in which his procedural rights are guaranteed at all times;  iii. Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses: His Majesty King Gyanendra, Narayanhity Royal Palace, Durbar Marg, Kathmandu, Nepal  c/o Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Nepal to the United Nations, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 733 27 22; E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int Mr. Nain Bahadur Khatri, Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@ntc.net.np  Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.  Geneva, May 30th, 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 