Bangladesh:  Information and Communication Technology (Amendment) Act likely to silence further human rights defenders!
August 26, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / AugustBangladesh: Information and Communication Technology (Amendment) Act likely to silence further human rights defenders!

Geneva-Paris, August 26, 2013. The World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, urge the President of Bangladesh not
to promulgate the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) (Amendment)
Act, 2013 Ordinance as it might lead to further arrests and harassment of human
rights defenders.
 
On August 19, 2013, the
Cabinet of Bangladesh, chaired by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, passed in a
hurry and approved the
proposed draft of the Information and Communication Technology - ICT
(Amendment) Act, 2013, although the Parliament is scheduled to be in session in
September 2013[1].
 
Should this
new text enter into force, the highest punishment for offences covered by the
law would reportedly be increased from 10 years under the existing Act to 14
years under the amended Act. In addition, the offences would be considered as
non-eligible
for bail. Moreover, while under the existing ICT Act, 2006, provisions were
non-cognisable and law enforcers were not allowed to arrest anyone without
prior approval from an authority or court, the ICT (Amendment)
Act, 2013 would consider some of the offences as cognisable. As a consequence, law
enforcers would have the power to arrest anyone accused
of violating the law without a warrant, by invoking Section 54 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. 
 
The
Observatory is all the more concerned that those amendments take place in the
context of the arrest on August 10, 2013 of Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan, Secretary of the human rights non-governmental organisation
Odhikar and a member of OMCT General Assembly, under Section 57 of the ICT Act
2006, for “publishing false images and information” and “disrupting the law and
order situation of the country”. Mr. Khan was arrested in relation to a
fact-finding report issued by Odhikar about
the killing of 61 people during an operation carried out on May
5-6, 2013 by law enforcement agencies against
Hefazat-e Islam activists at the Dhaka’s
downtown
Motijheel area. As of August 26, 2013, Mr. Khan remained
detained in Kashimpur Jail number 1, on
the outskirts of Dhaka, where he was transferred on August 13, 2013.
 
“The new law seems to specifically target human rights defender Adil
Rahman Khan and other members of Odhikar”, said Gerald Staberock, Secretary
General of OMCT. “There is no
justification of changing an already doubtful law, adding ex post facto new
provisions that prevent bail and all this in a de facto emergency procedure”,
he added. 
 
“We urge the President of Bangladesh not to promulgate the ICT (Amendment) Act, 2013 as it might lead to further arrests and harassment of human
rights defenders and therefore shrinking even more the space of civil society
in the country”, said Karim Lahidji, President of FIDH.
 
The Observatory reiterates
its deepest concern about Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan's arbitrary detention, which seems to merely aim at
sanctioning his peaceful human rights activities, and calls upon the authorities in Bangladesh to guarantee in all
circumstances his physical and psychological integrity as well as to release
him immediately and unconditionally.
 
The Observatory also considers that rather
than prosecuting human rights defenders criticising the State security
services, it should assume its responsibility as a matter of urgency and
appoint an independent judicial inquiry into the alleged killings following
the operation carried out on May 5-6, 2013 during the Hefazat-e Islam rally in Motijheel.
 
More generally, the Observatory urges the
authorities in Bangladesh to put an end to any kind of harassment against all
human rights defenders in Bangladesh as well as to conform with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders and to ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Bangladesh.



[1] Article 93 of the
Constitution provides that a text can be promulgated as an Ordinance by the
President of Bangladesh when the “Parliament (...) is not in session”, and
“when immediate action is necessary”. Article 93 also adds that an Ordinance
shall nonetheless “be laid before Parliament at its first meeting following the
promulgation”. 