Turkey:  Sentencing of Ms. Eren Keskin, prominent human rights lawyer from Turkey and co-president of the Human Rights Association in Turkey
June 20, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2018 / JuneTurkey: Sentencing of Ms. Eren Keskin, prominent human rights lawyer from Turkey and co-president of the Human Rights Association in Turkey​
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
TUR 003 / 0618 / OBS 087
Judicial harassment /
Sentence /
Restriction to freedom of
movement
Turkey
June 20,
2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Turkey.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the sentencing of Ms. Eren Keskin, prominent human rights
lawyer from Turkey and co-president of the Human Rights Association in Turkey
(İHD), one of FIDH member organisations in Turkey. For almost thirty years, Eren
Keskin has contributed to the protection of minority rights, countered violence
against women, and campaigned to challenge militarism and end torture. She is
the founder of a legal office providing pro bono services for transgender persons
and women who were raped or sexually abused by the national security forces. From
2013 to 2016, Eren Keskin held the title of ‘co-editor-in-chief’ for Özgür Gündem (‘Free Agenda’)[1],
as a form of support of the imprisoned editorial staff. An honorary member of
the Paris Bar Association, Eren Keskin is the winner of multiple international
awards for her peace and human rights work, including the 2018 Helsinki Civil
Society Award[2].
 
According
to the information received, on March 30, 2018, Istanbul’s 2nd Criminal Court
of First Instance sentenced Eren Keskin to seven and a half years in jail in
relation to some articles published in Özgür
Gündem during the time when she was co-editor-in chief. According to the court’s
decision, the articles have “degraded” the Turkish nation and “insulted” the
Turkish president.
 
The
Observatory recalls that a total of more than 120 cases have been lodged
against Eren Keskin because of her role as co-editor-in chief for Özgür Gündem[3]
and that, as of June 2018, 47 of them are still pending. In addition to these
47 cases, Eren Keskin is also one of the nine defendants[4]
in another ongoing prosecution, which includes terrorism-related offences. This
prosecution carries the risk of a sentence of up to 24 years in prison. On June
4, 2018, the ninth hearing in this case was held and the trial was further
postponed to October 10, 2018. On the same day, Eren Keskin’s lawyers requested
to lift the travel ban in force against her, which the court refused.
 
Six of the
more than 120 cases filed against her have resulted in court rulings with all
appeal options already exhausted. The convictions are for ‘insulting the
President’ and for ‘failure to publish article corrections in the newspaper’.
Fines of 72,000 TL (approximately 14,500 Euros) have been imposed upon Eren Keskin.
Failure to pay the outstanding monetary fines would result in approximately 8,5
years of imprisonment. 
 
In a
further 69 cases, Eren Keskin has been found guilty and condemned to a
cumulative sentence of 12,5 years and a fine of 460,000 TL (approximately
93,000 Euros, in particular due to following offenses: ‘spreading propaganda
for an armed terrorist organisation’ (Law on Fight against Terrorism, Article
7(2)), ‘denigrating the Turkish nation, the Republic of Turkey, institutions
and organs of the State’ (Turkish Criminal Code, Article 301), ‘insulting the
President’ (Turkish Criminal Code, Article 299)[5],
‘failure to publish article corrections in the newspaper’ (Press Law, Article
18), ‘revealing the identity of the accused’ (Press Law, Article 21(c)), and
‘insult’ (Turkish Criminal Code, Article 125). At the time of the publication
of this Urgent Appeal, appeal procedures against these decisions are still
ongoing.
 
In addition
to indictments related to her editor-in-chief title with Özgür Gündem, Eren Keskin has also been charged for statements she
made after the shooting of a father and child by the police in South-Eastern
Mardin’s Kızıltepe district in 2004[6],
and for an article she wrote in 2016 on alleged abuses by the armed forces,
entitled ‘The Radical Evil’.
 
In addition
to the mounting indictments, Eren Keskin’s ongoing work as a human rights
lawyer is challenged as well: the legal team of the Office of the President of
Turkey has recently filed an application to the Istanbul Bar Association to
impose disciplinary measures on Eren Keskin, which may result in disbarment.
 
Of all the
cases brought against Eren Keskin until today, only four have been concluded in
her favour, either due to decisions of acquittal or due to the statute of
limitations.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the endless judicial harassment of Ms. Eren
Keskin as it is a clear retaliation of her human rights activities and urges
the authorities to put an end to all forms of harassment against her, including
at the judicial level and in particular to lift the travel ban in force.
 
The
Observatory expresses its utmost concerns over Ms. Eren Keskin’s ongoing judicial
harassment, which occurs in the context of an ongoing crackdown against human
rights defenders in Turkey[7].
 
Until all
charges are dropped, the Observatory urges the authorities to ensure all
proceedings against Ms. Eren Keskin are carried out in compliance with her
right to a fair trial, as protected under international law.
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write to the authorities in
Turkey, urging them to:
 
i.               
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
and psychological integrity of Ms. Eren Keskin; 
 
ii.              
Put an end to all forms of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against Ms. Eren Keskin and against all human
rights defenders in Turkey;
 
iii.            
Until all charges are dropped, ensure that
all proceedings against Ms. Eren Keskin are carried out in compliance with her
right to a fair trial, as protected under international law;
 
iv.            
Immediately lift the travel ban in force against Ms. Eren Keskin
and refrain from further hindering her freedom of movement;
 
v.             
Comply with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular its Articles 1, 6(a), 9, 11 and
12.2;
 
vi.            
Ensure in all circumstances respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Turkey.
 
Addresses:
 
·       President
of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31
·       Prime
Minister of Turkey Binali Yıldırım. Email: ozelkalem@basbakanlik.gov.tr
·       Minister of
Justice, Mr. Bekir Bozdağ. E-mail: ozelkalem@adalet.gov.tr
·       Minister of
Interior, Mr. Süleyman Soylu. Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30
·       Ambassador
Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the European Union in
Brussels, Belgium. Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50
·       Ambassador
Mr. Ali Naci Koru, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland. Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of
Turkey in your respective country.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva,
June 20, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code
of this appeal in your reply. 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·       Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 




[1] Özgür Gündem is one of the few independent newspapers in Turkey
critical of the government and is known for its extensive reporting on the
Kurdish-Turkish conflict. The newspaper was shut down in August 2016 by a court order
following the coup d’état attempt in Turkey, while several criminal charges
were brought against its journalists and editors. More than 100 persons
voluntarily named themselves as editor-in-chiefs on a rotating basis. Eren
Keskin was targeted by criminal convictions for news and articles by other
authors exercising their right to freedom of expression. According to the
Turkish Press Law, editors-in-chief can be indicted for publications in cases
when the responsible authors cannot be held to account.


[2] See
https://www.nhc.nl/helsinki-civil-society-award-2018-goes-to-eren-keskin/



[4] The other co-defendants
are other advisory board members, journalists and co-editorial directors of Özgür Gündem,


[5] Eren Keskin was found guilty for a headline ‘Tens of Thousands Speak Out from the Square
where the Peace was Murdered: Murderer Erdogan’ by a contributor to Özgür Gündem that was published after the
bombing of a peace demonstration on October 10, 2015 in Ankara, in which over
100 people were killed.


[6] Keskin words were as follows: ‘The State has
a brutal perspective, which could even slaughter a 12 year-old child. Turkey
should provide an account of its actions. It has a dark history’. This case has
been object of the ECHR decision: Makbule Kaymaz and others v. Turkey,
judgement as of 25.02.2014, the European Court of Human Rights, Information
Note on the Court’s case-law (171), February 2014, available at: https://www
.echr.coe.int/Documents/CLIN_2014_02_171_ENG.pdf.


[7] See, for instance, the Observatory’s Urgent Appeal TUR 002 / 0218 / OBS
016 published on February 1, 2018; TUR 001 / 0118 / OBS 014 published on
January 31, 2018. 