Guatemala:  Guatemala: aggression against El Periódico's director
July  7, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Guatemala / 2003 / JulyGuatemala: Guatemala: aggression against El Periódico's directorCase GTM 070703 Attacks / Threats / Freedom of expression  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Guatemala.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by La Federación Latinoamericana de Asociaciones de Familiares de Detenidos Desaparecidos (FEDEFAM) of the threats and assaults suffered by José Rubén Zamora, the director of the newspaper El Periódico in Guatemala.  According to the information received, on June 24th, 2003, at approximately 8:45 am, 12 heavily armed men in civilian dress, believed to be agents of the of the State security forces, broke into Mr. Rubén Zamora's home. The men threatened Mr. Rubén Zamora and his family, who felt themselves to be in grave danger during the attack.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by this new attack against José Rubén Zamora, which also constitutes an attack on the press and the freedom of expression, which plays a leading role in delivering objective information to the general population. Additionally, OMCT calls for the creation of a Commission to investigate the illegal sections and secret security apparatus of the CICIACS, in order to avoid these types of acts.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Guatemala urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Rubén Zamora and his family; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the attack, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Lic. Alfonso Portillo, Presidente de la República - E-mail: mensajes@presidenteportillo.gob.gt; Fax: 502 239 0090 ·	Dr. Sergio F. Morales Alvarado, Procurador de los Derechos Humanos – Fax: 502 238 1734; E-mail: opdhg@internet.net.gt ·	Lic. Carlos D. De León Argueta, Fiscal General y Jefe del Ministerio Público – Fax: 502 221 2718; E-mail: minpub@mp.lex.gob.gt  Please also write to the embassies of Guatemala in your respective country.  Geneva, July 8, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 