Philippines:  Philippines: Killing of civilians by members of the Philippine Army
February 22, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2005 / FebruaryPhilippines: Philippines: Killing of civilians by members of the Philippine ArmyCase PHL 220205 / Case PHL 220205.CC Urgent appeal/Child Concern Extra-judicial killings of indigenous peoples  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Philippines.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a member of the OMCT network, of the killing of three civilians, Mr Francisco Bulane (32), Mr Padilla Bulane (29) and Mr Prumencio Bulane (28), and wounding of four others, Mr Rogelio Bulane (42), Ricky Bulane (16), Mr Richard Bulane (31), and Mrs Judith Bulane, members of the indigenous group B’laans, in Mindanao, Philippines on 8th February 2005, by members of 25th Infantry Battalion of the Philippine Army.  According to the information received, at about 6.30 in the morning, in sitio Latil, Barangay Colonsabak, Matan-ao, Davao del Sur, Island of Mindanao, members of the 25th Infantry Battalion of the Philippine Army based in Sta. Cruz, Davao Del Sur, opened fire on Rogelio Bulane and his son Ricky who had gone to the river about 3km from their home to catch food.  They had about 4kg of fish which they were preparing to eat when they were surprised by the sound of gun fire. According to Rogelio, the soldiers fired at them from a distance without provocation. The first gun burst according to Rogelio Bulane hit the back portion of his head but did not penetrate. Rogelio Bulane said he was thrown about 4m away when he was hit with an M-79 in the back portion of his body.     Rogelio Bulane said he saw his son Ricky was also hit with bullets. Rogelio Bulane instructed Ricky to run and get help from his brothers. After several minutes the gun burst stopped and he pretended that he was already dead. The military came closer to him, but he did not move and the soldiers thought that he was already dead.  According to Rogelio, the soldiers then cooked their fish and frogs, and he overhead somebody say, “we will charge this person as member of New People’s Army (NPA)”. Another soldier said, “we will finish him off”, and another replied that he was already dead.  When Rogelio Bulane sensed that the soldiers were busy eating, he slowly crawled to the riverbank where he covered himself with grass. After several minutes, the military noticed that he had disappeared and searched the area without success. The soldiers left the area after several minutes and Rogelio Bulane crawled back to the place where he and his son had originally been shot.   According to the information received, Ricky ran to alert his uncle, Richard Bulane. Richard went to help Rogelio Bulane but was hit by bullets from the soldiers. His wife, Judith also sustained gunshot wounds. Three brothers of Richard followed him and were killed by gunshots from the soldiers.  According to Judith the wife of Richard, her husband responded immediately when he was told by Ricky that Rogelio Bulane was being shot by soldiers. Judith said that her husband did not reach the location of Rogelio, as he was met with bullets. He is still in a critical condition.   Action requested Please write to the authorities in the Philippines urging them to:  i.	ensure the physical and psychological integrity of Rogelio Bulane, Ricky Bulane, Richard Bulane and Judith Bulane;  ii.	intervene with the proper authorities to ensure that adequate medical assistance is provided as a matter of urgency to all persons who require it;  iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  iv.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victims;  v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses: H.E. Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Republic of the Philippines; Malacañang Palace, J.P. Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, Philippines Fax: (+632) 2929 3968; Email: corres@op.gov.ph / opnet@ops.gov.ph  Hon. Purificacion Quisumbing, Commissioner, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC Bldg., Commonwealth Avenue, U.P. Complex, Diliman, Quezon City  Fax: +63 2929 0101/928 0848; Email: drpvq@chr.gov.ph  Atty. Alberto Sipaco, Commission on Human Rights, Region XI, Trinity Bldg., Quimpo Boulevard, Davao City; Telefax: +63 2983749/2982233  Hon. Eduardo R. Ermita, Secretary, Department of National Defense Room 301 DND Bldg., Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, E. de los Santos Avenue, Quezon City   Fax: +632 911 6213; Email: osnd@philonline.com   Please also write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country.  Geneva, 22nd February 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 