28th Session of the Human Rights Council: Joint Statement on the Global Study for Children Deprived of Liberty
March 13, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Statements / 2015 / March28th Session of the Human Rights Council: Joint Statement on the Global Study for Children Deprived of Liberty




HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL - 28th Session                                                 12 March 2015                                            Annual
full-day meeting on the Rights of the Child
 
Oral statement delivered by
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), co-sponsored by Defence for Children
International (DCI)
 
Thank you Mr
President,
The World
Organization against Torture (OMCT) and Defence for Children International
(DCI), as part of the NGO Panel for the Global Study on Children Deprived of
Liberty, would like to thank the Human Rights Council and the UN experts for
their considerable work and consideration for the human rights of the child. 
We welcome the
continued support received from member states, UN representatives and civil
society organizations to the Global Study on Children Deprived of Liberty,
which was requested in Resolution 69/157 of the UN General Assembly last
December. The reports of the Special Rapporteur on Torture, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
(A/HRC/28/54) and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Violence against Children (A/HRC/28/55) to the Council, all express support to
this important and much needed Study. 
Children deprived
of liberty is not merely a legal issue (of international obligations not being
fulfilled by states), but also a social issue: there is strong evidence that
detention worsens recidivism rates and while detained children are deprived
education and exposed to increased violence. Even the shortest periods of confinement create a situation of extreme vulnerability for the
child and an opportunity for practices of torture and ill treatment, causing
the need for accountability, rehabilitation and reparation. Detention of
children also increases public expenditure. All in all generating negative short-
and long-term impact, not only on the child deprived of liberty but also on society
at large. 
To undertake a Global
Study on Children Deprived of Liberty - which would comprehensively and
scientifically analyze the status of the situation of children in detention
worldwide - will take time, close coordination with States, UN agencies, civil
society organizations, academia and children, and of course financial and human
resources. It is crucial that an independent expert be appointed to carry out
this Study, as it will best ensure a comprehensive approach and broker clear
cooperation and contributions by all relevant stakeholders. 
The Study does
not intend to be an end in itself, but rather a starting point, by getting all
actors involved in this grave issue and placing it on the political and social
agenda of countries worldwide. Through the Study, governments will be able to
realize and improve their national policies and practices, while serving the
best interests of both the child and society at large.
OMCT and DCI
thank the Council and UN experts for their continuous support in launching this
major endeavor, and look forward to realizing the Global Study on Children
Deprived of Liberty together.        Thank
you. 