Thailand:  'Thailand: Rape of two Karenni women by Thai soldiers
March 22, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2002 / MarchThailand: 'Thailand: Rape of two Karenni women by Thai soldiersCase THA 220302 VAW/CC Violence against Women/ Child Concern  Torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Thailand.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Commission of the rape of a 20 year old woman and a 15 year old girl by Thai soldiers on 17 March 2002. The two women are members of the Karenni ethnic group and were living in a refugee camp on the border between Myanmar and Thailand at the time of the rape.  According to the information received, on the morning of Sunday 17 March 2002, three women from Karenni refugee Camp 2 went searching for food in the fields near the camp.  At around noon, after they had collected some food, the women turned back toward the camp. It was at this point that they encountered five Thai soldiers who spoke to them in Thai and they could not understand what was being said.  Two of the soldiers left but the other three tried to restrain the women who attempted to run away. One of the soldiers held Woman A (aged 20) while a second soldier grabbed Girl B (aged 15).   The first soldier took Woman A’s food, pulled a knife from her basket and threatened to cut her throat. He then mimed putting the knife across her mouth and she understood that this was a threat to prevent her from calling for help. The soldier pushed Woman A onto the ground and raped her, tearing her clothes and biting her. When she resisted his demand to put his penis in her mouth, he seized her by the hair and threatened to hit her. He then raped her a second time. She managed to escape and, pursued by the soldier, fled into the trees where she found two older friends one of whom had witnessed the attack. Woman A and her two friends then ran together to the nearby Thai village of Huay Ka to call for help and ended up returning to Camp 2 without finding Girl B.  In the meantime, the second soldier seized Girl B and while the third soldier stood guard, he tore at her clothes and raped her. When she struggled and called out, he pinned her arms to the ground in order to stop her from escaping. The third soldier then grabbed her and also raped her. The two soldiers then left and Girl B returned to Camp 2 alone.   Following the rapes, the two victims were too scared, ashamed and traumatised by what had happened to tell anyone about their ordeal. One of their friends eventually decided to speak out and to bring the incidents to the attention of the camp leader.   To date, the civilian and military authorities in Thailand have not launched any investigations into the allegations of rape and OMCT is seriously concerned by the fact that, in the past,  perpetrators of this form of violence have not been held accountable for their actions. OMCT would remind the government that as a State Party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, it has obligations under international law to prevent and punish all forms of violence against women and girls.  The International Secretariat of OMCT urges the government to immediately commence thorough investigations aimed at identifying those responsible, prosecuting them and, following their conviction by a court, applying the sanctions provided by law.  The government should also ensure that the victims are provided with adequate reparations, including physical and psychological health care.  Action requested   Please write to the Thai authorities urging them to:   i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the two women and their families, and ensure that they receive adequate and appropriate reparation;  ii.	guarantee an impartial and exhaustive inquiry into the rapes, bring those responsible before a competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and administrative sanctions provided by law;  iii.	adopt immediate measures to put an end to all acts of violence by members of the armed forces including rape and other forms of sexual violence;   iv.	ensure respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms at all times and in all circumstances in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  -  Mr. Thaksin Shinwatra, Prime Minister , Government house, Pitsanulok Road, Dusit District, Bangkok 10300, Thailand. Fax: +66 2 282 8631. Email: govspkman@mozart.inet.co.th  -  HE Purachai Piumsombun, Minister of the Interior , Ministry of Interior, Thanon Atsadang, Bangkok 10200, Thailand. Fax: +662 226-4371. Email: webteam@moi.go.th  -  Professor Saneh Chamrik, Chair, c/o Mr. Vasan Phanich, National Human Rights Commission, 422 Phyathai Road Patumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. Fax: +662 219-2966. Email: c/o pairit_s@yahoo.com   Please also write to the Thai consulate or embassy in your country.  Geneva, 22 March 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply 