Egypt:  About the crackdown on civil society
February 12, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2012 / FebruaryEgypt: About the crackdown on civil societyARABIC_About the crackdown on civil society3 pages / 79 KBEgypt: About the crackdown on civil 
society
 
February 12, 2012
The Egyptian revolution was hailed internationally as an admirable 
and justifiable act by the Egyptian people to demand social justice and freedoms 
that they have been denied for decades. It was therefore anticipated that, 
following this revolution, the interim Egyptian political authorities would 
prioritize urgently needed legal and procedural reforms to enhance and protect 
the Egyptian people’s newly won rights. However, the Egyptian government has 
taken no steps to lift undue restrictions on the operations of civil society 
organizations, despite the fact that a vibrant civil society is an essential 
component of a democratic state that respects human rights and the rule of law. 

Recent actions by Egyptian authorities toward CSOs have violated 
their right to freedom of association and have imperiled their operations 
through increased restrictions and pressures including the ongoing 
investigations of NGOs operating without registration under the Associations Law 
of 2002. Many of these reputable NGOs have repeatedly been denied registration 
by the authorities without being given proper justification. In addition to the 
29 December raids, NGOs and INGOs had their staff interrogated as well as 
financial restrictions imposed on them, which have served to hamper these 
organizations’ ability to continue carrying out vital programs. 

We 
take this opportunity to highlight the vital role of development and human 
rights organizations in Egypt. Independent Egyptian NGOs and INGOs play a key role in the democratic 
transition and development process in Egypt. These are not-for-profit organizations with humanitarian, development 
and human rights, rather than commercial, objectives. Many aim to relieve 
suffering through promoting the interests of the very poor by providing basic 
social services and implementing community development, water, sanitation, food, 
health, education, and job creation programs. To do this, development 
organizations work both individually and alongside international aid agencies. 
They also work within existing frameworks with local governmental and 
non-governmental partners in order to outline priority areas of work and address 
existing gaps in meeting the basic needs of the Egyptian people. Many of these 
organizations also work on spreading democratic values and the rule of law and 
safeguarding fundamental human rights. The role of such organizations in the 
protection of human rights and civil liberties for every member of society is 
integral in ensuring that democracies are functioning and viable. It is clear 
that a dynamic and diverse civil society plays a critical role in a developing 
country and burgeoning democracy such as Egypt and the infringement on its 
freedom jeopardizes this essential role. 
Civil society organizations, NGOs, networks, and trade unions are all 
entitled to the freedom of association which includes the rights to exist, to 
take initiatives, and to organize freely without harassment. States have a 
positive obligation under international law to uphold and protect these 
rights.
We would also like to express our concern at the way in which 
state-owned media has been used by the government to defame local and 
international CSOs in the eyes of the public and encourage the misconception 
that they serve foreign agendas against the interests of Egypt. Official 
statements have questioned both the role of CSOs and the legitimate and legal 
foreign funding that they receive and have failed to showcase the multitude of 
indispensable development and human rights programs implemented by CSOs in 
Egypt. 
As 
INGOs, we uphold the highest standards of financial transparency, both 
internally and with our local partners, to document the ways in which funds are 
spent on different projects for Egypt. We recognize and respect the sovereignty 
of the State of Egypt and have worked as partners within this context for 
decades. We remain committed to providing the Government of Egypt (GOE) with any 
required information and are willing to respond to any relevant questions posed, 
in full accordance with the law. Any issues that the GOE wishes to bring up with 
CSOs in Egypt should therefore be raised in a transparent and cooperative manner 
and should be dealt with as part of a clear, consultative and non-intimidating 
process. As INGOs focused on the sharing of information with government 
counterparts, we urge the GOE to do the same by developing and sharing clear 
criteria for INGO and NGO registration in Egypt. It is neither just nor 
reasonable to deny registration for undisclosed reasons and to subsequently 
investigate these organizations abruptly and without explanation. 

Within this context, the recent draft of the Associations Law put 
forth by the GOE falls short of Egypt’s obligations under international law in 
light of the increased restrictions placed on civil society organizations. The 
law threatens to jeopardize the ability of a large number of local NGOs to 
operate and carry out essential programs in Egypt. The convening of the new 
parliament on 23 January 2012 provides an opportunity for the drafting of a new 
Associations Law that complies with Egypt’s obligations under international 
human rights law and which will liberate civil society and remove unnecessary 
barriers so that NGOs can effectively perform their vital work. The new draft 
must encompass NGOs working on all areas of development and human rights, a fact 
overlooked by both the current Associations Law and the draft put forth by 
government. 
Therefore, we are concerned that the current campaign against CSOs in 
Egypt, which includes the manner in which ongoing investigations are being 
carried out, negative official statements in the media, and the restrictive 
draft Associations Law, will undoubtedly hamper the ability of local and 
international NGOs to work alongside the Egyptian government in the provision of 
vital assistance in various developmental and human rights fields. To this end 
the undersigned INGOs call upon the Government of Egypt to take the necessary 
actions to:
·         
Cease raids on any offices of local or international NGOs and ensure 
that their staff is protected from harassment and intimidation as a result of 
the ongoing investigations. 
·         
Facilitate and enable CSOs to operate freely on a regular basis and 
to contribute to economic and democratic change.
·         
Put an end to the negative government statements which have 
discredited CSOs in the eyes of the Egyptian public.  
·         
Redraft a new Associations Law consistent with international human 
rights standards ratified by Egypt. The law should establish clear criteria for 
the registration of all organizations, whether development, humanitarian, or 
human rights NGOs, and ultimately aim to liberate civil society in 
Egypt.
 
Signatories:
1. Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network 
(EMHRN)
2. Human Rights Watch (HRW)
3. Transparency International (TI)
4. No Peace without Justice (NPWJ)
5. Project on Middle East Democracy (POMED)
6. Human Rights First (HRF)
7. Arab Program for Human Rights Activists 
(APHRA)
8. Arab Coalition for Darfur (ACD)
9. Alkarama Foundation 
10. Article 19
11. International Alliance of Women (IAW)
12. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a 
joint program of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the 
World Organization Against Torture (OMCT)
13. Arab Network for Human Rights Information 
(ANHRI)
14. Afro-Asian Peoples’ Solidarity Organization 
(AAPSO)
15. Amnesty International (AI)
16. The International Center for Not-for-Profit Law 
(ICNL-LLC) 