UN asks Burundi to protect ethnic minorities from violence; stop reprisals on civil society
August 12, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / 2016 / AugustUN asks Burundi to protect ethnic minorities from violence; stop reprisals on civil society 




Geneva, 12 August
2016 – Burundi must stop fueling ethnic violence and using
force against protesters, and report back by October on what it is doing to fight
impunity, the United Nations Committee Against Torture (CAT) concluded after a
special review requested in light of reports of politically or ethnically
motivated torture in the country. 
 
In its Concluding Observations, the Committee
called on Burundi to ensure the protection of citizens belonging to the “ethnic
minority” by refraining from any public statement that could exacerbate ethnic
tensions or incite hate. It called on Burundi to ensure its security forces
used non-violent methods to control protests, and to drop any reprisals against
dissenting civil society members. 
 
It also urged the State to conduct impartial
investigations into any allegations of killings, enforced disappearances and
sexual violence at the hand of its security forces and the Imbonerakure militia. The Committee also demanded the investigation
of suspected mass grave sites and the exhumation, analysis and identification
of any bodies found there. 
 
“The CAT has sent the Government a very strong message
that the world is watching,” said Dieudonné Bashirahishize, Vice-President of
the East Africa Law Society and chairman of the coalition of lawyers of
victims of international crimes (CAVIB). “Burundian
authorities need to stop disregarding human rights and start collaborating with
its civil society and the international experts.”
 
Following the authorities’ no-show halfway through the
session, it also invited the Government to report back by October. In what is
only a hardly veiled hint at Burundi’s lack of cooperation, the Committee gave
the State two months to follow up by 12 October to respond and provide it with
enough information to assess whether or not it had honored its obligations
under the Convention Against Torture, invoking the “interrupted dialogue” and “exceptional
and urgent character” of this special review.
 
These recommendations come as Burundi has been
witnessing serious human rights violations since the controversial re-election
of President Pierre Nkurunziza’s to a third term in April last year. After a
failed coup attempt, a violent crackdown quashed mass protests, prompting the
CAT to request that the State submits a special report on how it is fighting
torture and ill treatment in the country. 
 
After Israel and Syria, Burundi was the third country
the UN torture watchdog has ever asked, pursuant to Article 19, paragraph 1 of
the Convention, to submit a special report ahead of the scheduled four years. The
Committee experts on July 28 started examining the situation in Burundi, based on
information from the State’s own Special Report as well as on other publicly
available documents, including a so-called “alternative” report submitted by
national and international non-governmental organizations. At the initial July
28 session, the Burundian government delegation, led by Justice Minister Aimée
Laurentine Kanyana, dismissed as exaggerated any torture allegations.
 
Historical no show
Then on 29 July, in an unprecedented move by any State
party to the Convention, the Burundian delegation did not show up to provide
its replies to the questions posed by the CAT after this preliminary
examination. It instead sent the CAT a letter, saying
it was “surprised” the session had focused on examining civil-society reports.
The CAT then provided the State of Burundi a standard additional 48 hours in
response to its request to have more time to investigate the allegations of the
report. But at the time of writing no further information has been received. 
 
A coalition of Burundian and international
organizations had submitted a report denouncing the
current Government’s use of arbitrary detention to repress the opposition,
stating that SOS-Torture Burundi had counted 736 arbitrary arrests between
December 2015 and 31 March 2016, while the OHCHR office in Burundi had counted
3,477 arbitrary arrests in the year to end of April 2016. It also said
that since the President’s third term, it had counted more and more cases of enforced
disappearances among members of civil society, former Burundi Armed Forces
personnel or young demonstrators from neighborhoods of mainly Tutsi
ethnicity. 
 
Reprisals instead of
answers
 
Among its 12 dense pages of recommendations, the
Committee urged Burundi to drop its request to disbar four lawyers and human
rights defenders who had contributed to the coalition’s report – which it also
confirmed as a form of reprisals in a letter to the Government
today  – and urgently provide information
on the measures taken to that effect. 
 
These lawyers were namely Vital Nshimirimana, Chair of
Forum pour la Conscience et le Renforcement de la Société Civile (FORSC) and
President of the campaign “Halte au troisième mandat”, Armel Niyongere, President
of ACAT-Burundi and Coordinator of SOS Torture campaign that provides regular
monitoring reports about human rights abuses and torture cases, Mr. Bashirahishize,
who belongs to the organization that requested the International Criminal Court
to conduct investigations on crimes committed in Burundi, and Lambert Nigarura,
Prsident of the Burundian Coalition for the International Criminal Court. This
comes after a 29 July letter from the Burundian
Government to the President of the Burundi Bar Association. 
 
On 30 July, the UN Security Council announced it would
deploy a UN police force of up to 228 officers to Burundi to help prevent
further violence in the country. The Government of Burundi had earlier said it
would not accept more than 50. The country witnessed in 1972 mass killings of
Hutus by the Tutsi-dominated army, and in 1993, mass killings of Tutsis by the
majority-Hutu population. President Pierre Nkurunziza is the former leader of a
Hutu rebel group.
The organizations of the NGO coalition who contributed
to the above-mentioned alternative report are: Action des Chrétiens pour
l’Abolition de la Torture au Burundi (ACAT Burundi), Association Burundaise
pour la Protection des Droits Humains et des Personnes Détenues (APRODH),
campagne SOS-Torture / Burundi, Collectif des Avocats des Victimes de Crimes de
Droit International (CAVIB), Coalition Burundaise pour la Cour Pénale
Internationale (CB-CPI), le Forum de la Société civile pour le Monitoring des
Elections (COSOME), Collectif pour la Promotion des Associations des Jeunes
(CPAJ), Forum pour la Conscience et le Développement (FOCODE), (FORSC), Ligue
Burundaise des Droits de l’Homme (Ligue ITEKA) and Réseau des Citoyens
Probes. 
They received support from OMCT, Centre pour les
droits civils et politiques (CCPR), Fédération internationale de l’Action des
chrétiens pour l’abolition de la torture (FIACAT), TRIAL International, and
DefendDefenders (East and Horn of Africa Human Rights Defenders Project).
The report by the Burundian Government can be found
here:  http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/SessionDetails1.aspx?SessionID=1084&Lang=fr . 