Colombia:  Colombia: paramilitary groups as well as active army soldiers continue committing aggressive acts against the Community of Paz (Antioquia)
February  7, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2002 / FebruaryColombia: Colombia: paramilitary groups as well as active army soldiers continue committing aggressive acts against the Community of Paz (Antioquia)Case COL 070202 Harassment/ Sexual violence/ Killing /Theft  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Colombia.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Fundación Comité de Solidaridad con los Presos Políticos (FCSPP), a member of the OMCT network, that paramilitary groups as well as active army soldiers continue committing aggressive acts against the Community of Paz, in the rural region (corregimiento) of San José de Apartadó, in the Department of Antioquia.  According to the information received, between December 29, 2001, and January 3, 2002, paramilitaries and soldiers intimidated several rural inhabitants while conducting identification checks and general patrolling around the urban settlement of San José de Apartadó.  Rural inhabitants were harassed during inspections of their belongings, or during their transit on horse or by foot between the rural settlement of San José and the small villages (caseríos) of “La Unión” and “La Sucia.”  Reports indicate that on December 30, 2001, between 9:00 and 12:00 in the morning, several individuals were interrogated about the presence of other armed men and their general activity, thus not recognizing the principles of neutrality exercised by the Community of Paz.  According to the information received, on January 1, 2002, between 8:30 and 9:00 in the morning, Mrs. María Grimanesa Flórez, who was carrying her 5 month old child, was forced off of the road while walking between San José de Apartadó to the small village (caseríos) of “El Mariano” by a state agent (member of the national army).  At the site known as “La Sucia,” the soldier, who tried to hide his face using his rifle, intimidated the woman and led her to a small secluded hill where, threatening her with death, he used force to have sexual relations with her.  The information alleged that following the violation, the soldier was recognized when heading back to the location where his troop has been based since December 31, 2001, a distance of 15 minutes from the urban settlement (casco) of San José.  The information alleges that in the past six months, two sexual violations have occurred that involve the military unit that exercises control over the surroundings of the rural area (corregimiento) of San José de Apartadó.  Regarding the first sexual violation that occurred during this period, no further details are known.  According to the information received, on Wednesday, January 2, 2002 at around 3:00 pm, two men on a motorcycle, who appeared to be paramilitaries wearing civilian clothes and carrying small arms, carried out an eyewitness inspection during ten minutes at a site known as “La Batea,” located between the municipality of Apartadó and the urban settlement (casco) of San José.  The information indicates that this same day, around 7:30 pm, seven hooded men dressed in civilian clothing and carrying arms, arrived at the same location in a van.  There, they stopped off in the house of Mr. Iván Velásquez, where they ordered everyone to lie face down on the ground, and proceeded to load into the van packages of cocoa, corn, beans and other personal items belonging to the family, along with cash and personal documents belonging to Mr. Velásquez.  After securing the goods in the van, they forced Mr. Velásquez to leave with them and then shot him several times, killing him.  The information states that “La Batea” is located 10 minutes in car from the neighbourhood of Policarpa de Apartadó, from where paramilitary forces are known to base their operations.  According to the information received, on Thursday, January 10, 2002, in a separate incident, a truck that had left from Apartadó at approximately 6:00 am, carrying 10,300 kilos of cacao and 40 kilos of coffee beans, was stopped by paramilitaries on the highway that goes from Córdob to Medellín at the sight known as “Coldesa”, in the rural area (corregimiento) of “El Tres”, Municipality of Turbo.  The armed paramilitaries, who were dressed in civilian clothing, asserted that the goods being transported belonged to a guerrilla group, and that in order for them to be returned, it would require the presence of a representative of the Community of Paz, from which the goods had come.   The Community of Paz refused to meet with the paramilitaries, and at 8:00 pm received information that the truck had been rediscovered without any of its cargo or money inside.  According to the information, it should be remembered that the Community of Paz of San José de Apartadó was formed in 1997, based on the principle of neutrality, respected by all armed actors involved in conflict, and with the objective of protecting displaced persons as a result of violence.  Nevertheless, repressive violence against the Community of Paz has been a constant phenomenon.    According to the information received, since 1997 extrajudicial executions (both individual and collective), forced disappearances and cases of torture have affected roughly 90 persons.  These acts have been committed under complete impunity (see Urgent Appeal OMCT, Case COL 120700).  It should be mentioned that on October 3, 2000, the Intern-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) requested that the Inter-American Court adopt provisional measures in favour of the inhabitants of the Community of Paz de San José de Apartadó.  On November 24, 2000, the Inter-American Court enacted a Resolution through which it decided to ratify the Resolution from the President of the Inter-American Human Rights Court, which urged the Colombian State to adopt the necessary measures to protect the lives and personal integrity of the 189 members of the above mentioned Community.  The International Secretariat of OMCT shares its concern, along with the Fundación Comité de Solidaridad con los Presos Políticos (FCSPP) and other human rights organisations, namely the Inter-Congregational Committee for Justice and Peace, for the security and physical and psychological integrity of all inhabitants in the Community of Paz de San José de Apartadó, in the Department of Antioquia.  Furthermore, OMCT is deeply concerned by the general persecution experienced by the civilian population, the apparent impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of these frequent human rights violations, as well as the absence of effective protective measures by municipal and national authorities to prevent such acts.  Action requested :  Please write to the authorities in Colombia urging them to:  ·	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all inhabitants in the region of Community of Paz de San José de Apartadó, in the Department of Antioquia; ·	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, including the alleged collaboration of members of the National Army,  in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ·	guarantee adequate reparation to the families and victims of the above mentioned attacks; ·	carry out immediately the given recommendations by international and regional human rights organisations , including the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Commission for Human Rights of the United Nations, and the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights; ·	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses : ·	S. E.  Andrés Pastrana Arango, Presidente de la República, Cra. 8 n°.7-26, Palacio de Nariño, Santafé de Bogotá.Fax: (+57 1) 2867434; (+57 1) 2866842; (+57 1) 28421 86  ·	Consejería Presidencial de Derechos Humanos,  Calle 7 n°. 6-54 Piso 3, Santafé de Bogotá, D. C.  Fax: (+57 1) 337 13 51. ·	Doctor Gustavo Bell Lemus, Ministro de la Defensa, Avenida El Dorado con Cra. 52 CAN, Santafé de Bogotá.  Fax:  (+57 1) 222 18 74 ;  e-mail :  (dirección electrónica): siden@mindefensa.gov.co ·	Doctor  Armando Estrada Villa, Ministro del Interior,  Cra. 8 n°. 8-09 Santa Fe de Bogotá, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax:  (+57 1) 286 80 25 ;  (+57 1) 286 84 05 ;  e-mail:  minisint@col1.telecom.com.co  ·	Doctor  Edgardo José Maya Villazón, Procurador General de la Nación, Carrera 5 n°. 15-80, Santa Fe de Bogotá.Fax:(+57 1) 284 0472;(+57 1) 342 97 23 ; (+57 1) 282 76 14 e mail : reygon@procuraduria.gov.co  ·	Doctor  Luis Camilo Osorio,  Fiscal General de la Nación, Diagonal 22 B n°. 52-01, Santafé de Bogotá.  Fax:  (+57 1) 570 20 08 ;(+57 1) 570 20 00;  e-mail :contacto@fiscalia.gov.co ;  denuncie@fiscalia.gov.co ; webmaster@fiscalia.gov.co ·	Doctor  Eduardo Cifuentes, Defensor del Pueblo, Defensoría del Pueblo, Calle 55 n°. 10-32 Santa Fe de Bogotá.  Fax:  (+ 57 1) 346 12 25 ·	General  Fernando Tapias Stahelin, Comandante de las Fuerzas Militares, Avenida el Dorado con Cra. 52, Santafé de Bogotá. Fax: (+57 1) 222 29 35 ;  e-mail : siden@mindefensa.gov.co;   pilaque@cgm.mil.co  Please also write to the embassies of Colombia in your respective country. Geneva, February 11th, 2002 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 