Press Release: Global activists adopt new initiative to counter torture in times of terrorism
February  7, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionReports and Publications / 2019 / FebruaryPress Release: Global activists adopt new initiative to counter torture in times of terrorism


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                     Tunis, Geneva, Brussels, February 7, 2019



Tunis, Geneva, Brussels: Following
a two-day meeting in Tunis convened by the World Organization Against 
Torture (OMCT), leading anti-torture
activists from 23 countries discussed a concerted approach to challenge
the growing acceptance of torture in volatile security contexts. 

”The question is not about addressing the threat
that terrorism poses to our societies, but about how we address it”, 
said Mokhtar Trifi, OMCT Vice President. “The members and partners of 
our SOS-Torture Network see on a daily basis
how the legitimate fight against violent extremism is subverted to 
justify torture, despite the universal ban against it. We need to 
remember that, while no one is above the law, no one is below the 
threshold of the law either, whatever the crimes they stand accused of. Poking holes in the 
international legal framework endangers us all. It is urgent to fight 
this toxic narrative, even more so with the current turn toward populist
governance in many places, including in democratic
countries.”

The participants to the new Working Group 
“Torture & Terrorism”, who met for the first time on 5-6 February, 
live and work, for the most part, on the front lines of the “war against
terrorism” in Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Europe
and Latin America. They are faced with growing public acceptance of 
torture in their respective contexts. “This is despite what we know from
experience, that torture doesn’t make us safer”, said Sevan Doraisamy 
from SUARAM, a Malaysian human rights organization.
“Quite the opposite, it brutalizes societies and only feeds a vicious 
cycle of violence.”

Shockingly, members of anti-torture groups find 
themselves increasingly targeted by both sides, added Khalid Ibrahim 
from the Gulf Centre for Human Rights. ¨The biggest travesty is that 
States abuse the fight against terrorism to target
human rights defenders, the very people we need to support the fight 
against violent extremists. Each of us knows a colleague who was either 
the victim of terrorism or of the security forces supposed to protect 
us. How can anyone pretend that our countries
are safer when State responses to terrorist violence sweep human rights
defenders in their wake?” 

Ms Fionnuala Ni Aolain, United Nations Special 
Rapporteur on the protection of human rights while countering terrorism 
and one of the patrons of the Working Group, addressed the participants 
via video link, highlighting the ¨crucial
contribution of civil society groups such as this one in helping 
document the entrenched and systematic misuse of counter-terrorism 
measures.”

In the next months, the Working Group will step up its actions along three main axes:

    •    collection of data from the field, building on the members’ collective experiences and expertise
    •    increased support for victims of torture and human rights defenders at risk
    •    innovative campaigns to challenge the growing public acceptance for torture in so-called “exceptional” cases. 



For more information, please contact:

Camille Henry, Working group coordinator     ch@omct.org      +216 27
842 197
Iolanda Jaquemet, Communications advisor   ij@omct.org       +41 79 539
41 06 