IACtHR could help quell gender-based violence by ruling Venezuela guilty of torture by a private individual
March  8, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Statements / 2018 / MarchIACtHR could help quell gender-based violence by ruling Venezuela guilty of torture by a private individual
Geneva-Madrid, 8 March – By considering Venezuela guilty of the torture inflicted by a private individual upon
Ms. Linda Loaiza López Soto, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights (IACtHR) has a unique
opportunity to help quell gender-based violence, OMCT and Women’s Link Worldwide (Women’s Link) have advised the court.
After Ms. Loaiza López last month testified in a public
hearing before the international tribunal, OMCT and Women’s Link added weight to the case for torture and ill-treatment put forth by
her lawyers by
filing an amicus curiae  –
unsolicited expert and legal advice – calling on the
IACtHR to recognize the Venezuelan State’s responsibility.
This is the first time the international tribunal
– recognized as a pioneer when it comes to setting legal precedents on
cases of violence against women – will examine a case of gender-based violence
perpetuated on a Venezuelan citizen. It is also the first case where a Member
State of the Organization of American States could be held responsible for the
torture carried out by a private individual for failing to exercise due
diligence to investigate and provide adequate redress to the victim. If the
IACtHR were to condemn Venezuela for torture, it would send a powerful message
that could help prevent violence against women and protect more victims both in
the country and around the world.
“We need justice on the Loaiza López case to set the bar, to say
enough is enough to the pervasive violence that women suffer around the world,” said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. “It would mean that
from now on it is the State’s business, everyone’s business, to finally do stop
it, rather than let it pass as insignificant incidents happening punctually
behind closed bedroom doors.”
Gender-based violence 
Impunity for cases of violence
against women continues to be particularly egregious in Venezuela, where
violence against women is rampant and feminicides are commonplace. Statistics from the Public Ministry indeed show that, of the 70,763
complaints it received of violence against women in 2014, just 0.7% have come
to trial. 
Gender-based violence in Venezuela follows global trends. According to
the World Health Organization, some 35 per cent of women worldwide have
experienced either physical and/or sexual intimate partner violence or sexual
violence by a non-partner at some point in their lives. Other national studies
raise the figure to up to 70 per cent, according to United Nations Women. Experts of gender-based violence stress that violence can only be addressed
by taking into consideration both the discrimination against women and the
inefficiency of legal systems that fail to respond to violent crimes.
"The Inter-American Court has
now the opportunity to finally protect women,” said Women’s Link
President and CEO Viviana Waisman. “By ruling the
acts committed by private individuals on countless women are torture and the
responsibility of the State, the Court can help end centuries of deeply
engrained discrimination and stereotyping that generate the violence.”
The torture
Luis Carrera Almoina abducted Ms. Loaiza López, then 18 years old, on 27
March 2001 as she was leaving her house and forced her into his van. He held
her in an apartment and hotel room and tortured her for almost four months,
until she was able to call for help and was rescued by local authorities. During
her captivity, Ms. Loaiza López was subjected to severe and constant physical,
sexual and psychological violence that caused irreparable injuries.
Ms. Loaiza López was disfigured by the beatings: she had a triple
fracture of the jaw, her teeth were broken, her bottom lip was almost
obliterated, her right eye developed a cataract, the many blows left her with
cauliflower ears. She suffered multiple burns, fractures, bites, and has
lesions all over her body. One of her nipples was ripped off. As a consequence
of her many injuries, she was hospitalized for a whole year, and underwent more
than 15 operations, including reconstructive surgery to her nose, vagina and
pancreas.
The proceedings
until now 
Ms. Loaiza López’s case was riddled with negligent acts of the police
and investigative officials, who from the very beginning remained passive
despite the insistence of her relatives to act and find her. A major factor
that contributed to such negligence and indifference in Loaiza López’s case was
culturally-induced stereotypes and prejudices about her sex and age, which
revictimized her throughout the trial. 
Fifty-nine judges declined to hear Ms. Loaiza
López’s case and the hearings were deferred 38 times. Ms.
Loaiza López, from a humble family of the mountainous region of Merida, had to
go on a 13-day hunger strike to obtain a trial, in which Mr. Carrera Almoina, the son of a well-connected university
professor, was absolved of any wrongdoing. In a second trial two
years later, Mr. Carrera Almoina was
sentenced to six years in jail for depriving Ms. Loaiza López of her liberty and inflicting grievous bodily injuries – but not for attempted murder, rape, sexual abuse and other acts of
torture on her. 
Unable to obtain a redress in her home country, Ms. Loaiza López brought
her case before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, who referred the case to the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights – individual citizens of Organization of American States Members
are not allowed to file cases directly to the Court. She is
defended by COFAVIC (a SOS-Torture Network member) and CEJIL. She has now become a women’s
rights advocate in her own right, using her story to call for their greater
protection from violence.
The amicus
Basing themselves on international standards
and jurisprudence of the United Nations human rights system and regional courts,
expertise in combatting torture and sexual violence and reliable data, the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and Women’s Link advised the court to
condemn the State of Venezuela for its negligence to stop, investigate, sanction
and provide remedies to Ms. Loaiza López for the brutal
physical, sexual and psychological abuse that Luis Carrera Almoina inflicted upon her. Under the United Nations Convention Against Torture, torture consists of acts carried out by state
agents, officials or other individuals at the instigation, or with the consent
or acquiescence, of the State. Acts carried out in the private sphere fall
under that category when they are condoned, or allowed to happen for lack of
due diligence, by the State. As a result, acts of gender-based and sexual
violence that happen as a result of the State’s ineffective prevention or
reprehension may be considered acts of torture. 
In what is likely the most emblematic
case of gender-based violence committed in the private sphere, the IACtHR delivered
a judgment in 2009 in the case Gonzalez
et al. v. Mexico known by the name of “Campo Algodonero”, or “Cotton
Field”, named after where the three victims found. Though much progress remains
to be done in practice, this decision, which questioned the roods of violence against
women and recognized it as a major social issue, strengthened the legal protection
of women against violence, rape and murder in the Americas. 
A decision as the one advocated by
OMCT and Women’s Link would constitute a step further insofar as it would make
the State responsible for taking actual steps to stop and prevent it.


The World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) is the catalyst of the SOS-Torture network, a coalition
of more than 200 international and national non-governmental organizations
fighting torture, summary execution, enforced disappearances and all other
cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment, and promoting better protection for
human rightds defenders. With offices in Geneva, Brussels and Tunis, OMCT runs
programmes to favour State compliance with anti-torture legislation, support
victims of torture, with particular attention to children in detention and
women, and protect human rights defenders worldwide.
For more information, please visit: www.omct.org. For media requests, contact lb@omct.org. 
Women’s Link Worldwide is
an international organization with regional offices in Latin America and
Europe, and expanding partnerships across East Africa.  Since it opened in
2001, Women's Link Worldwide has been successfully advocating and litigating
for new standards to advance the human rights of women and girls. It has become
known for opening new frontiers, developing legal theories and strategies,
particularly those that bring attention to women’s rights violations that are
undocumented or neglected. 
For more information,
please visit: http://www.womenslinkworldwide.org/en 