Turkey:  Turkey: Police raid against the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey
September 12, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2001 / SeptemberTurkey: Turkey: Police raid against the Human Rights Foundation of TurkeyURGENT APPEAL – THE OBSERVATORY  TUR 006/1109/OBS 074 Raid against NGO TURKEY September 11th, 2001   The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a program of FIDH and OMCT, requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Turkey.  Brief description of the situation:  The Observatory has been informed by the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey (HRFT) that the Police carried out a raid on its Diyarbakir office (situated in the South East of Turkey) on September 7th , 2001.   According to the information received, the Police officers acted without official permission to search the premises. The representatives of the HRFT opposed the search, arguing that it was undertaken unlawfully, due to the lack of authorization, but an officer phoned the Diyarbakir Public Prosecutor’ Office which gave the permission orally.   The Public Prosecutor reportedly granted the Police permission to “search for banned publications which were alleged to be therein”, allowing the policemen to seize all the dossiers, documents and computer files they considered relevant to their investigation. Included in the documents confiscated were some officially banned journals, the ownership of a single copy of which does not constitute an offense.  Furthermore, the Police seized medical files that are confidential, or transmitted only in accordance with the concerned individual’ wishes, a condition that is essential to the work of the HRFT.  The Observatory is gravely concerned about the continuing harassment and persecution to which the Human Rights Defenders are being subjected, and the accumulation of judicial proceedings which prevent them from being able to effectively engage in their respective activities, in total violation of their right to the freedom of expression and opinion.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Turkey urging them to:  i.	put an end to any kind of harassment against human rights NGOs and all human rights defenders in the country, and ensure that they be allowed to carry out their work without obstacles; ii.	return the confiscated material unless they are being used for an impartial and independent investigation, iii.	abide by the provisions of the Declaration on the Protection of Human Rights Defenders adopted on the 9th of December 1998, by the U.N. General Assembly (“Declaration on the right and responsibility of individuals, groups and organs of society to promote and protect universally recognized human rights and fundamental freedoms”), particularly, Article 1 which stipulates that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and through these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters” and article 6. a. according to which everyone has the right “to know, seek, obtain, receive and hold information about all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including having access to information as to how those rights and freedoms are given effect in domestic legislative, judicial or administrative systems”. iv.	more generally abide by the Universal declaration on Human Rights and Covenants and international Conventions ratified by Turkey.  Addresses  1.	Minister of Interior, Mr Saadettin Tantan, Içisleri Bakanligi, 06644 Ankara, Turkey.  Fax: + 90 312 418 17 95, email: info@icisleri.gov.tr  2.	Minister of Justice, Prof Hikmet Sami Türk, Ministry of Justice, Adalet Bakanligi, 06659 Ankara, Turkey. Fax: + 90 312 417 3954 / 418 5667, email: info@adalet.gov.tr 3.	State Minister with responsibility for Human Rights, Mr Rüstü Kazim Yücelen, Office of the Prime Minister, Basbakanlik, 06573 Ankara, Turkey. Fax: + 90 312 417 0476  Geneva – Paris, September 11th, 2001  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken, quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, a joint FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.  To contact the Observatory, call the Emergency Line:  E-mail: observatoire@iprolink.ch Tel and fax FIDH +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 01 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT + 4122 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29 