South Africa:  Killing of anti-mining activist Sikhosiphi “Bazooka” Rhadebe
April 14, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / South Africa / 2016 / AprilSouth Africa: Killing of anti-mining activist Sikhosiphi “Bazooka” Rhadebe

ZAF 001 / 0416 / OBS 034
Killing
South Africa
April 14, 2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in South Africa. 
 
Brief
description of the situation:


Photograph: Law Resource Centre of South Africa


The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the killing of Mr. Sikhosiphi “Bazooka” Rhadebe, Chairperson
of the Amadiba Crisis Committee (ACC).
ACC is an advocacy group launched in 2007 to campaign for the rights of the
residents of the Xolobeni community in Eastern Cape, and especially opposing
open-cast mining of titanium in this area by Mineral Commodities Ltd (MRC), an
Australian-owned mining company, and its local subsidiary TEM, which would result in disruption of the
community’s way of life.
 
According to
the information received, on March 22, 2016, at around 7.30 pm, Mr. Sikhosiphi
Rhadebe was shot outside his house in Mbizana by two unidentified men. The two
assailants, who came in a white Polo car with a rotating blue lamp on the roof,
knocked at his door saying they were police officers. The human rights defender
went out to speak with them and was shot eight times including in the head. His
son witnessed the murder and was hospitalised along with Mr. Rhadebe's wife, as
both were in shock. An investigation into the murder of Mr. Rhadebe has
reportedly been handed over to the Directorate for Priority Crime
Investigation.
 
An hour and
a half before his murder, at about 6 pm, Mr. Sikhosiphi Rhadebe had called Ms. Nonhle Mbuthuma, ACC Secretary, to check
on her safety, and had told her that he understood that both of them were on a
“hit list” of strong opponents of mining operations, together with
another ACC member, Mr. Mzamo Dlamini. The Observatory expresses its
utmost concern for the safety of other ACC members.
 
For several
years, members of the ACC, with the help of local residents, have resisted
attempts by MRC, and its local subsidiary, TEM, to access the titanium-rich
Xolobeni coastal dunes, arguing that the mining venture would lead to their
forced removal from their land and threaten their livelihoods.
 
This murder
is not the first episode of violence associated mining plans on the Xolobeni
dunes. Opponents to the mine have been the victims of repeated acts of
violence, including armed attacks against community members in May and December
2015 as well as intimidations and raids by police against opponents to the
mine. 
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the murder of Mr.
Sikhosiphi Rhadebe and
urges the authorities to adopt effective measures to ensure the protection of
human rights defenders, including land and environmental rights defenders, in
South Africa, and to conduct an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent
investigation into the above-mentioned events.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in South Africa, urging them to:
 i.  Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Ms. Nonhle Mbuthuma, Mr. Mzamo Dlamini, all ACC members as well
as all human rights defenders in South Africa, including land and environmental
rights activists;
 ii.  Carry out an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent
investigation into the above-mentioned events in order to identify all those
responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as
provided by the law;
 
iii. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
- its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national
and international levels”;
- its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by South Africa.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
President of South
Africa, Mr. Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma, Email:
president@po.gov.za, Twitter: @SAPresident
·      
Minister of International Relations and
Cooperation,
Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, Fax: + 27 12 329 1000, Email: info@foreign.gov.za
·      
Minister of Justice, Mr. Tshililo
Masutha, Fax: 012 406 4680, E-mail: Ministry@justice.gov.za  
·      
Minister
of Home Affairs, Mr. Malusi Gigaba, Email: csc@dha.gov.za
·      
Minister of Mineral Resources, Mr.
Mosebenzi Zwane, Fax: +27 (12) 444 3145, Email: Queen.Poolo@dmr.gov.za 
·      
Ambassador Mxolisi
Nkosi, Diplomatic Mission of South Africa to the
European Union in Brussels, Fax: +32 (0)2 514 78 03, Email: embassy@southafrica.be  
·      
Ambassador Abdul Samad Minty,
Permanent Mission of South Africa to the United Nations in Geneva, Fax:
+41 (0) 22 735 73 64, Email: mission@safricaun.ch
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of South Africa
in your respective country. 