Cambodia:  27th Session of the Human Rights Council
September 25, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Cambodia / 2014 / SeptemberCambodia: 27th Session of the Human Rights CouncilOral Statement of CCHR & OMCT1 page / 65 KB
HUMAN
RIGHTS COUNCIL
27th Session (8 - 26 septembre 2014)
ITEM 10:
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Cambodia
Oral
Statement by the Cambodian Center for Human Rights and the World Organisation
against Torture  
Thank
you Mr. President.
The
Cambodian Center for Human Rights and the World Organization against Torture
express their concerns over the situation of human rights defenders in the
Kingdom of Cambodia. Threats against Human Rights Defenders are widespread and
systematic and frequently take the form of violence as well as judicial
harassment.
Particularly
at risk are Human Rights Defenders and activists who work on issues related to
land and housing rights, which are some of the most frequently violated rights
in Cambodia. Despite international and domestic legal obligations, vulnerable
communities continue to see their land illegally taken away from them, land
which is then usually transferred to powerful individuals or companies with
links to the ruling party and to the Royal Government of Cambodia. Human Rights
Defenders who engage in peaceful demonstrations are frequently attacked,
harassed and arrested. The executive maintains a strong influence on the
judiciary and renders the separation of power illusory. The government responds
to criticism and demonstrations by charging community leaders and activists
with criminal offences. In most cases, little or no genuine evidence is
produced against them.
On
9 September 2014, for instance, two researchers employed by a Cambodian human
rights organisation were detained by local police while investigating evictions
due to sugarcane plantations in the Oddar Meanchey province. They were
questioned for almost 24 hours and only released after signing an agreement
promising to not file complaints over their arrest. This is only one example of
many where Human Rights Defenders are forced to sign these types of agreements
in order to be released from custody. 
The
government’s practice of requiring Human Rights Defenders and activists to sign
agreements to secure their release from illegal detention is a clear and
unlawful restriction of the rights of Human Rights Defenders and dangerously
restricts the environment in which they operate. These are tactics of
intimidation which the government uses to silence its critics and form part of
a larger pattern of restrictions for civil society. 
Thank
you very much Mr. President. 