HRC 33 - Joint NGO Oral Statement on gender parity in international human rights bodies
September 26, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / 2016 / SeptemberHRC 33 - Joint NGO Oral Statement on gender parity in international human rights bodies

Annual discussion on the
integration of a gender perspective throughout the 
work of the Human Rights Council and that of its mechanisms
Monday, 26 September, 2016

Last year this panel
discussed gender parity in
international human rights bodies, including the Human Rights Council and its
mechanisms.  
States resolutely called
for the redoubling of efforts to improve gender balance on UN human rights bodies
and mechanisms, courts and tribunals and specialised agencies. Unfortunately, since
then, the gender balance on these bodies has not improved and, in some cases,
it has worsened.
For instance, for the
Special Procedures mandate holders, the most recent figures are for 31 December
2015, when a total of 37 per cent of mandate holders were female
and 63 per cent were male.[1]
The situation in the
treaty bodies is particularly disturbing. 
At 1 January 2016, out
of a total of 172 treaty body members - if we take out CEDAW members - the
representation of women in the membership of the treaty bodies is 31 per cent.[2]
Illustrative of the
negative trend is the recent elections in the Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities which had the result that there will be only
1 female member amongst 17 male members, from 1 January 2017.  
It is also important to
recall that the current Bureau of the Human Rights Council is comprised
entirely of men. It is disappointing to observe that since the commencement of
the Council there has been only 1 female President compared with 9 male
Presidents.
We
should be alarmed by these outcomes. Despite commitments and fine words in resolutions
and treaties, actions have not followed. 
We call on States to take
active measures to significantly increase the number of women on UN bodies -
the human rights treaty bodies, Special Procedures and the HRC Bureau itself -
by, for instance:
·     
establishing safeguards to increase participation of women candidates
in the process for proposal of candidates, including with more inclusive
national processes; 
·     
supporting women candidates within the Regional Groups; 
·     
establishing and using a gender-sensitive guide in the interviewing
of candidates for the Special Procedures.
We believe that the
situation calls for special measures – that is, the institution of objective
and concrete targets, quotas, guidelines for nomination and voting, and other measures
that require State delegations to the UN to pay attention to gender balance at
the point of soliciting candidates, nomination of candidates and voting.  
Thank you



[1] A/HRC/31/39
para 4


[2] Annexes to
the Secretary-General’s report on the Status of the human rights treaty body
system (A/71/118), p 35 