Nepal:  HRC 31 - Statement - Universal Periodic Review
March 16, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Nepal / 2016 / MarchNepal: HRC 31 - Statement - Universal Periodic Review
Human Rights Council: 31th
Session
Item 6: UPR Outcomes, Nepal
16th March 2016
Oral Statement delivered by the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), a non-governmental organisation with general consultative status,
joined by Advocacy Forum-Nepal (AF) and REDRESS
Thank you
Mr. President. 
OMCT, Advocacy Forum-Nepal and REDRESS value
Nepal’s commitment to implement a “zero-tolerance policy against torture and
ill-treatment in any form.” However, torture in Nepal is still widespread, and
still not made a specific crime under its criminal law. 
While a bill to criminalise torture was tabled
last year in Parliament, it does not fully comply with Nepal’s international
obligations including article 1 of the Convention against Torture. We therefore
call on the Government to carry out a transparent process of revision of the
Bill, and to provide a clear timeline for its adoption. We also urge Nepal to
reconsider its decision to reject the recommendations to ratify OP-CAT and
ICPPED, both important instruments in the fight against torture and enforced
disappearance.
Mr President,
Our organisations are also deeply concerned by
state authorities’ repeated defiance of court orders in cases concerning human
rights violations, especially when the perpetrators are members of security
forces or powerful individuals, which reflects a pattern of lack of political
will to ensure accountability. A blatant example is the case of Balkrishna
Dhungel, a political leader convicted of murder in 2004, who still remains
free. Another is the case of Maina Sunuwar, a 15-year-old girl who was tortured
and killed in Army custody ten years ago. 
Despite court orders for the arrest and trial of soldiers, the accused
remain at large. Against this backdrop, we regret the decision of Nepal not to
support the recommendation to establish a much-needed independent commission
for complaints against the security forces. 
Despite the Government’s assurance within the
UPR process that the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the Commission on
Enforced Disappearances will comply with international standards, the
transitional justice process remains deeply flawed and has lost the confidence
of many victims, human rights activists, and international actors. We therefore
urge Nepal to dissolve the existing commissions, and to start a consultative
process with the aim to establish mechanisms in line with the ruling of the
Supreme Court and international best practices. 
Finally, we call on Nepal to cooperate fully
with UN mechanisms at this point in its transition, and to issue standing
invitations to the relevant special procedures to work constructively with the
Government to strengthen respect for and protection of human rights.  
Thank you Mr President. 