Bahrain:  Sentencing in appeal of Mr. Naji Fateel
June  5, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2014 / JuneBahrain: Sentencing in appeal of Mr. Naji Fateel​












New information
BHR 001 / 0614 / OBS 049
Sentencing /
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial
harassment / Impunity of acts of torture
Bahrain
June
5, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Bahrain.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Gulf Centre
for Human Rights about the sentencing in appeal of Mr. Naji Fateel,
co-founder of the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights (BYSHR) and blogger,
who monitored human rights violations committed during Bahrain's uprising.
 
According to the information received, on May 29,
2014, the Court of Appeal headed by Judge Isa Al-Kaabi upheld a 15-year
imprisonment sentence against Mr. Naji Fateel on charges of “establishing […] a
group for the purpose of […] disabling the Constitution” under Article 6 of Law
No. 58 of 2006 on Terrorism[1].
The charges relate to the alleged terrorist group known as the “February 14
Youth Coalition”, which organised demonstrations and protests during Bahrain's
uprising. 
 
No evidence against Mr. Fateel was provided during the
trial. The sentence was solely based on coerced confessions made under torture
and without thoroughly and impartially investigating the allegations of torture
which the defender was subjected to during his detention (see background information).
During a hearing, Mr. Naji Fateel removed his shirt and showed the torture
marks on his back; however, it was totally ignored by the court. 
 
Mr. Naji Fateel will appeal the decision to the Court
of Cassation. His lawyer also filed a complaint before the
Supreme Judicial Council arguing that the trial proceedings fell short of the
minimum standards of fair trial. Mr. Naji Fateel is
currently detained the Central Prison “Jaw” where reports continue to emerge of
overcrowded cells and dire conditions. 
 
The Observatory recalls that other BYSHR members are
also subjected to ongoing judicial harassment, including Mr. Mohammed
Al-Maskati, BYSHR President[2]. 
The Observatory condems the sentencing and
arbitrary detention of Mr. Naji Fateel, which merely aim at curtailing his
human rights activities, and calls upon the Bahraini authorities to release him
immediately and unconditionally. The Observatory also notes that several human
rights defenders remain in arbitrary detention or are subject to judicial
harassment in the country. 
 
Background information[3]:
 
On May 2, 2013, Mr. Naji Fateel was arrested at dawn
without warrant by security men in civilian clothes at his home in the village
of Bani-Jamra and held incommunicado for three days, during which time it is
reported that he was severely tortured. He was allegedly subjected to severe
torture at the Criminal Investigation Directorate. Reports allege that he was
subjected to electrical shocks to his genitals, left foot and back in addition
to simulated drowning, severe beatings, threats to publish his wife’s
photographs (taken from a camera confiscated by the security forces when his
house was raided), insults, hanging by his hands from the ceiling, sexual
harassment and threats of rape, standing for hours, and sleep deprivation. He
was taken to the Ministry of Interior hospital twice for treatment due to the
torture. Mr. Naji Fateel was detained in Dry Dock Detention Centre.
 
On May 22, 2013, Mr. Naji Fateel was sentenced by the
Manama Criminal Court to six months of imprisonment on charges of “attending
illegal gatherings” in relation to a gathering organised on January 24, 2012 in
Bani-Jamra in which he did not participate. He was charged in another case with
the establishment of a group for the purpose of disabling the Constitution
under Article 6 of the controversial Terrorism Act.
 
On September
29, 2013, Mr. Naji Fateel was sentenced by the Fourth Criminal Court to 15
years in prison for “the establishment of a group for the purpose of disabling
the constitution” under Article 6 of the Terrorism Act. Mr. Naji Fateel was
then moved to the Central Prison “Jaw”. 
 
On November 18, 2013, when the appeal trial against
Mr. Naji Fateel started, the authorities of Bahrain denied entry to a lawyer
who was mandated by a coalition of NGOs, including the Observatory, to observe
the appeal trial.
 
In February 2014, one of the lawyers in the case said
that 90% of their questions to the prosecution witnesses were rejected by the
judge, and a policeman forcefully silenced a lawyer during his pleadings.
Another lawyer was thrown out of the court room although he represented five of
the defendants in the case.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Bahrain urging them
to: 
 
i.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Naji Fateel, all BYSHR members as well as all human rights defenders in
Bahrain;
 
ii.     Release Mr. Naji Fateel immediately and unconditionally as his detention
is arbitrary since it only aims at sanctioning his human rights activities;
 
iii.   Order an immediate, thorough, transparent investigation into the
allegations of torture and ill-treatment against Mr. Naji Fateel, in order to
identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and
apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
iv.    Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against Messrs. Naji Fateel, 

all
BYSHR members 
as well as all human rights
defenders in Bahrain;
 
v.     Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, in particular its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”, Article 11, which states that “everyone has
the right, individually and in association with others, to the lawful exercise
of his or her occupation or profession”, Article 12(1) that provides “everyone
has the right, individually and in association with others, to participate in
peaceful activities against violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms”, as well as Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take
all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually or in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; 
 
vi.    Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Addresses:

 
·      
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL
KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·      
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad
AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; fax: +973 172 12
6032
·      
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL
KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; fax:
+973 175 31 284
·      
Permanent Mission of
Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218
Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50.
Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
June 5, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.

 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax FIDH: + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 (0)
22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] Article 6 provides that “life
imprisonment shall be the penalty for everyone who forms, establishes,
organizes or operates, contrary to the provisions of the law, a society,
association, organization, group, gang or a branch of any of the above or
undertakes the leadership or command thereof for the purpose of calling for
obstructing the enforcement of the provisions of the Construction or the laws
or preventing any of the government organizations or public authorities from
carrying out their activities or infringes upon the citizen’s personal freedom
or other freedoms or public rights secured by the Constitution, the law or
undermines national unity if terrorism is one of the methods used in the
realization or implementation of the purposes called for by the society,
association, organization, group or gang or any of their branches”. 


[2] See Observatory Urgent Appeal BHR
003 / 0613 / OBS 052.1, issued on October 31, 2013.


[3] See Joint Press Releases, June 21
and November 15, 2013. 