Egypt:  Egypt: death as a result of torture of Mohamed As-Sayed Nagem
January 19, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2004 / JanuaryEgypt: Egypt: death as a result of torture of Mohamed As-Sayed NagemCase EGY 150104 Arbitrary arrest / Incommunicado detention / Death as a result of torture   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Egyptian Organisation of Human Rights (EOHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the death of Mohamed As-Sayed Nagem (30 years old), reportedly as a result of torture, in Egypt.  According to the information received, Mohamed As-Sayed Nagem was arrested on December 31st, 2003 and taken to state security headquarters in Benha while confined to a wheelchair. There were reportedly no legal charges against him, but he was detained until January 6, 2004 at 7:00 pm. He was in a coma at the time of his release and died the following morning.  EOHR has reportedly presented a number of statements to the responsible authorities demanding an inquiry, and also calling for measures to be taken against those responsible for the detention of Mohamed as-Sayed Nagem at the state security headquarters in Benha for 8 days. This is in accordance with article 25 of the criminal procedures code. However, no response to these statements has yet been received.  It is important to note once again that in its latest report on torture inside police stations, EOHR called for investigations into 22 cases of torture in police stations in 2002, including 5 incidences of death in detention. There are also recent reports of deaths in detention as a result of torture of Mr. Mahmoud Gabr Mohammed (see OMCT Urgent Appeal Case EGY 201003) and of Mr.Sa’d Sayed Mohammed Kotb (see OMCT Urgent Appeal Case EGY 101103).   The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern for the death of Mohamed As-Sayed Nagem, notably given the serious allegations that he was subjected to torture during his detention. OMCT calls on the authorities to immediately order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of his arrest, torture and death, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial, apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law, and award adequate reparation to his family.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to:  i. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the arrest, and notably the allegations of torture in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii. guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victim’s family; iii. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  · President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, His Excellency Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg, Fax:+202 390 1998  · Minister of the Interior, His Excellency General Habib al-Adeli, Ministry of the Interior, Al-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 579 2031  · Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr Faruq Sayf al-Nasr, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 795 8103   · Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Maher 'Abd al-Wahid, Dar al-Qadha al-'Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 577 4716  · Ambassadeur Gabr, Naéla, Av. Blanc 49 (2ème), CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 738 44 15  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.  Geneva, January 15th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 