Russian Federation:  Serious concerns about the safety of Mr. Magomed Khazbiev
April 19, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2010 / AprilRussian Federation: Serious concerns about the safety of Mr. Magomed KhazbievMr. Dmitry Anatolyevich Medvedev
President of the Russian Federation
Fax: + 7 495 206 5173 / 230 2408
Email: president@gov.ru
 
Geneva, 19 April 2010
Re: Serious concerns about the safety of Mr. Magomed Khazbiev
Your Excellency,
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest network of NGOs fighting against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the world, is writing to you to express its serious concern about the situation of Mr. Magomed Khazbiev, a well-known Ingush opposition leader and journalist working for the opposition website www.ingushetiyaru.org. 
OMCT is seriously preoccupied about the safety of Mr. Magomed Khazbiev, in particular after a federal arrest warrant was issued, late March 2010, for his three brothers, namely Mr. Ali Khazbiev, Mr. Makhmoud Khazbiev and Mr. Berd Khazbiev, in relation to the beating of Mr. Kaloy Akhilgov, official spokesman of the Ingush president, Mr. Yunus-bek Yevkurov[1]. According to the information received, Mr. Magomed Khazbiev’s three brothers have been providing for Mr. Magomed Khazbiev’s security after an armed assault was carried out, allegedly by Ingush security forces, on his family’s house in August 2008 and two of his former colleagues and opposition leaders, namely Mr. Magomed Yevloyev and Mr. Maksharip Aushev[2], were killed in August 2008 and October 2009 respectively.
It is also reported that Mr. Magomed Khazbiev was ordered not to leave the territory of Ingushetia after a heavy police detachment carried out, on 11 March 2010, a search of Mr. Khazbiev's home, in Nazran, in relation to the beating of Mr. Kaloy Akhilgov. Mr. Magomed Khazbiev and his brothers deny any involvement into the alleged facts. 
In light of the ongoing climate of repression and impunity faced by the civil society and political activists in the region, the International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the safety of Mr. Magomed Khazbiev and urges the competent authorities to guarantee his physical and psychological integrity, as well as of his family, in all circumstances.
OMCT hopes that the concerns expressed in this letter will receive the attention they deserve.
Yours sincerely
Eric Sottas
Secretary General, OMCT 
CC:
Mr. Yunus-bek Yevkurov, President of the Republic of Ingushetia, Fax: +7(8734) 55-11-05
Mr. Vladimir Lukin, Russian Federal Ombudsman for Human Rights, Fax: +7 495 207-74-70
 

[1] Mr. Kaloy Akhilgov was reportedly attacked and beaten by five men in Nazran, on 22 February 2010. He allegedly suffered minor injuries.
 
[2] On 25 October 2009, Mr. Maksharip Aushev was driving his car when he was shot dead by unknown assailants who approached him driving another vehicle in the neighbouring Republic of Kabardino-Balkaria. See OMCT – FIDH press release diffused on 29 October 2009. 