Azerbaijan:  Press Release: Trial against Ms. Leyla and Mr. Arif Yunus to open after a year in custody
July 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JulyAzerbaijan: Press Release: Trial against Ms. Leyla and Mr. Arif Yunus to open after a year in custody 
Paris-Geneva, July 10, 2015 – On July 13, 2015,
the trial of Ms. Leyla and Mr. Arif Yunus will open before the Baku
Administrative-Economical Court. After almost a year in detention, where they
have been denied the medical treatment they desperately require, they will face
charges such as “large-scale fraud”, “forgery”, “tax evasion” and “illegal
business.” The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders urges the authorities in Azerbaijan to immediately and
unconditionally release them.
 
Ms. Leyla Yunus, Director of the
Institute for Peace and Democracy (IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly,
and Mr. Arif Yunusov, Chief of IPD's department of conflictology, were
arrested as part of a large crackdown targeting human rights defenders and
civil society which began in the summer of 2014. In addition to the charges
listed above, they are also facing charges of “state treason” that will be
examined in a separate process at a later stage. The Observatory recalls that
human rights defenders Mr. Intigam Aliyev and Mr. Rasul Jafarov are currently
serving a 7.5 and 6.5-year prison sentence respectively on very similar and
equally spurious charges of tax evasion, illegal entrepreneurship, and abuse of
power.
 
“The
abysmal record of the judiciary in Azerbaijan sadly shows that there is
absolutely no chance that the Yunus couple will benefit from a fair and
impartial trial”,
said FIDH President, Karim Lahidji.
 
“This is
why we call once again for the authorities in Azerbaijan to immediately and
unconditionally release our colleague Leyla and her husband Arif, as well as
all human rights defenders currently detained for their work”, added OMCT
Secretary General, Gerald Staberock.
 
Since they were first detained,
Ms. Leyla and Mr. Arif Yunus have suffered from serious health conditions and
been denied the appropriate medical care. Ms. Leyla Yunus has lost 16 kilograms
since her arrest and is struggling with the consequences of an enlarged liver.
She also has a severe case of diabetes, however her special dietary needs have
been denied. Finally, while she has been assaulted on several occasions by her
cell-mate, no measures have been taken by the penitentiary authorities to
ensure her physical integrity.
 
Mr. Arif Yunusov, who was
hospitalised for a pre-stroke condition shortly before his arrest, suffers from
high blood pressure. He is being held at the Investigative Prison of the
Ministry of National Security, the only remaining prison in Azerbaijan which is
not under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice. This situation puts him
at high risk of being tortured and ill-treated. The extreme levels of isolation
and the absence of a proper medical unit in this prison has been denounced by
various international human rights bodies, such as the UN Committee Against
Torture (CAT) and the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT).
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of
this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders.
 The Press Release is also available in Russian: Azerbaijan_2015.07.10_Press_Release_RUSSIAN
For more information, please contact :
FIDH
     : Lucie Kroening (French / English / German / Arabic) - Tel: +33 6 48 05
     91 57 (Paris) / Arthur Manet (French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72
     28 42 94 (Paris)OMCT
     : Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui (French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +41 22
     809 49 39 (Geneva) 