Lebanon:  Ongoing judicial harassment against members of the Lebanese Centre for Human Rights (CLDH), Ms. Marie Daunay and Mr. Wadih Al-Asmar
December 15, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Lebanon / 2015 / DecemberLebanon: Ongoing judicial harassment against members of the Lebanese Centre for Human Rights (CLDH), Ms. Marie Daunay and Mr. Wadih Al-Asmar​















URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
LBN 001 / 0311 / OBS 036.2
Ongoing judicial harassment
Lebanon
December
15, 2015
 
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Lebanon.
 
New
information:
 
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial harassment against
Ms. Marie Daunay
and Mr. Wadih Al-Asmar, respectively President and Secretary General of the Lebanese Centre for
Human Rights (Centre libanais des droits humains – CLDH).
 
According to the
information received, on December 17, 2015, Ms. Marie Daunay and Mr. Wadih
Al-Asmar will appear before the Publication Court for the second public session
of the criminal case for which they could face up to one year in jail or a
fine.
 
The case, which
started in March 2011 (see background information), is based on a complaint
filed by the
Amal Movement, a political party headed by Mr. Nabih Berri, President of the
Lebanese Parliament, against CLDH, following the publication on February 10, 2011 of a
report entitled “Arbitrary Detention and Torture: the bitter reality of
Lebanon”[1] that denounced alleged practices of torture in Lebanon. The report also mentions
testimonies of arrests by Amal Movement members. 
 
The Observatory
strongly condemns the judicial harassment against Ms. Marie Daunay and Mr.
Wadih Al-Asmar, which only aims at sanctioning their legitimate human rights
activities and calls on the authorities to drop all charges held against them,
and put an immediate end to this judicial harassment.
 
Background
information:
 
On March 14, 2011,
Ms. Marie Daunay and Mr. Wadih Al-Asmar were notified that they were requested
to present themselves to the criminal investigation service at the Ministry of
Justice in Beirut on March 17, 2011 at 10 a.m. The summons was then postponed
to March 22, 2011. During the interrogation, the two CLDH representatives were
not allowed to be assisted by a lawyer, and used their right to remain silent,
guaranteed notably by Article 47 of the Criminal Procedure Code. 
 
A hearing of CLDH representatives took place on July 6, 2011 before the
Baabda Court, and was postponed to give CLDH representatives sufficient time to
appoint a lawyer.
 
On October 11, 2011, hearings of the two CLDH representatives started
before the Investigating judge at the Baadba Court which concluded to the
referral of the matter to the Publication Court.
 
On February 24, 2014,
the Investigating judge at the Baadba Court indicted both Ms. Marie Daunay and
Mr. Wadih Al-Asmar with “defamation”.
 
On March 17, 2015, the two CLDH representatives appeared for a first
public session before the Publication Court, presided by Judge Elias Khoury.
 
The judgment was
supposed to be rendered on June 11, 2015.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the
Lebanese authorities urging them to: 
 
i. Put an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Ms. Marie Daunay and Mr. Wadih Al-Asmar, and more generally against all
human rights defenders in Lebanon; 
 
ii. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Marie Daunay
and Mr. Wadih Al-Asmar, other representatives of CLDH, as well as of all human
rights defenders in Lebanon;
 
iii. Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
 
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the
right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive
for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at
the national and international levels”,
 
- its Article 6 (b) and (c), which states that
“Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others […] as
provided for in human rights and other applicable international instruments,
freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information and
knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms and [...] to study,
discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice,
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other
appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters”;
 
- its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State
shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”;
 
iv. More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Lebanon. 
 
Addresses: 
 
· Mr. Tammam Salam, Prime
Minister, Grand Serail, Beirut, Lebanon. Fax: + 961 (0)1-983060
· Ashraf
Rifi, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, Adlieh, Beirut, Lebanon. Fax:
+961 (0)1-612564
· Mr.
Nouhad Machnouk, Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior, Sanayeh, Beirut,
Lebanon. Fax: +961 (0)1-751622
· Permanent
Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations in Geneva, rue de Moillebeau 58,
1209 Geneva, Switzerland. E-mail: mission.lebanon@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22
791 85 80
· Embassy
of Lebanon in Brussels, rue G. Stocq, 2 1050 Brussels, Belgium. E-mail:
ambassade.liban@brutele.be, Fax: +32 2.645.77.69
 
Please also write to
the diplomatic mission or embassy of Lebanon in your respective countries. 
 
*** 
Paris-Geneva,
December 15, 2015
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is
dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them
concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency
line:
·       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1
43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809
49 29



[1]                
See http://humanrights-lb.org/upload/Torture%20and%20Arbitrary%20Detention%20ENGL.pdf. The report
published by the CLDH, contains more than 60 pages outlining patterns of
arbitrary detention and torture in Lebanon, based on statistical data,
testimonies and interviews, and tackling the alleged practices of most of the
Lebanese security services dealing with arrests. The Amal Movement seems to
have initiated its lawsuit against CLDH on the basis of four lines of the
report, where CLDH states that it gathered testimonies of arrests by Amal
Movement in which, in some cases, serious allegations of torture during
investigation were revealed (page 25), while explaining in its conclusions that
it was not possible to evaluate the frequency of these torture allegations
specifically (page 29). 