Human rights abusers must not be elected to United Nations Human Rights Council
November  5, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2013 / NovemberHuman rights abusers must not be elected to United Nations Human Rights CouncilJoint Letter_Human rights abusers must not be elected to Human Rights Council4 pages / 107 KBThe international community should ensure that States 
responsible for gross human rights violations and that fail to protect human 
rights defenders or cooperate with the UN are not elected to the UN's top human 
rights body. A coalition of over 40 leading non-governmental 
organisations has today called for States that are candidates for membership to 
the UN Human Rights Council to do more to respect human rights at home and at 
the international level. On 12 November, the United Nations General 
Assembly will elect 14 new members to the Human Rights Council; it’s top human 
rights body. In a joint
letter signed by 40 signatories from all regions 
of the world, NGOs expressed concern about the clear failure of some candidates 
to fully comply with the criteria of upholding the highest human rights 
standards, and cooperating with the Human Rights Council.  “Failure by 
Council members to take effective measures to address violations of human rights 
for which they are responsible, particularly of a gross or systematic nature, or 
to fully cooperate with the Council and its mechanisms undermines the ability of 
the Council to promote and protect human rights and to demand full state 
cooperation with its mechanisms”, the letter says. In the joint letter, 
global civil society called on candidates to clearly commit to cooperate with 
the Human Rights Council’s human rights experts - the ‘special procedures’ - and 
with the newly established senior and UN wide focal point to improve the safety 
of those cooperating with the United Nations. The joint
NGO letter was 
sent to all candidates to the Human Rights Council and copied to members of the 
UN General Assembly.  List of signatory organisations: 1. Action 
Canada for Population and Development2. Amman Center for Human Rights 
Studies3. Amnesty International4. ARC International5. Asian Forum 
for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA)6. Cairo Institute for Human 
Rights Studies (CIHRS)7. Canadian HIV/AIDS Legal Network8. Center for 
Reproductive Rights9. CIVICUS: World Alliance for Citizen 
Participation10. Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative11. East and Horn 
of Africa Human Rights Defenders Project12. Egyptian Initiative for Personal 
Rights (EIPR)13. Fondazione Marista per la Solidarieta Internazionale 
ONLUS14. Franciscans International15. Front Line Defenders16. GAYa 
NUSANTARA17. Global Initiative for Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights18. Human Rights House Foundation (HRHF)19. Human Rights 
Watch20. International Association for Catholic Education21. 
International Catholic Child Bureau22. International Commission of 
Jurists23. International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)24. 
International Federation of University Women (IFUW)25. International Lesbian 
and Gay Association26. International Movement Against All Forms of 
Discrimination and Racism (IMADR)27. International Service for Human 
Rights28. KIFKIF LGBT GROUP29. Lutheran World Federation30. Matrix 
Support Group31. Network of Chinese Human Rights Defenders32. Pax 
Christi International33. Public Information and Need of Knowledge NGO34. 
Public Union of Democracy and Human Rights Resource Centre35. 
Rainbow-Ethiopia HIV and Media Initiative (REHMI)36. Red Nacional de 
Promoción de la Mujer, RNPM-Perú37. Russian Research Center for Human 
Rights38. Vietnam Committee on Human Rights39. World Federation of 
United Nations Associations40. World Organisation Against Torture 
(OMCT) 