Azerbaijan:  Joint Letter: Letter to the Members of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Board on the Working Conditions of Civil Society in Azerbaijan
October 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2016 / OctoberAzerbaijan: Joint Letter: Letter to the Members of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Board on the Working Conditions of Civil Society in Azerbaijan



20
October 2016Letter to the Members of the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative Board on the Working Conditions of Civil
Society in AzerbaijanDear Members of the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative Board,In light of the upcoming review of Azerbaijan's status in
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) in October, the
undersigned organisations call on the EITI Board to suspend Azerbaijan from
participation in EITI, due to continuous breach of the initiative’s requirements
for fostering an enabling environment for civil society.EITI downgraded Azerbaijan’s status from ‘compliant’ to
‘candidate’ in April 2015, setting out corrective actions the Azerbaijani
government must take to restore its status. During her visit to Azerbaijan last year, EITI
Chairwoman Clare Short met with President Ilham Aliyev on 8 October 2015. At
the meeting, President Aliyev acknowledged that restrictions were imposed on
civil society’s activities and promised to eliminate them[1].  Since then, the government has taken some limited positive actions to remedy the issues outlined in the EITI corrective action plan; however,
persistent problems remain and the government has launched a renewed crackdown
on civic space, including on cultural actors, during recent months. The
attached annex provides further information on the current context for civil
society in Azerbaijan; while this letter summarises problems that continue to
prevent civil society from meaningfully participating in the EITI.Persecution
and harassment of members of the EITI NGO CoalitionThe Azerbaijani government continues to harass
representatives of the EITI NGO Coalition in Azerbaijan[2],
preventing them from effectively contributing to EITI processes.Two
members of the EITI NGO Coalition, Asif Yusifli and Fuad Gahramanli, remain in
prison on spurious charges. Mr Yusifli, a high-ranking member of Azerbaijan's
opposition Popular Front Party, was arrested on 25 November 2014 and later
convicted on charges of fraud and forgery. He is presently serving a six-year
prison sentence. Mr Gahramanli, deputy chairman of the opposition Popular Front
Party, was arrested on 8 December 2015 on charges of incitement to religious
hatred in connection to comments he posted on Facebook. The comments
constituted legitimate exercise of the right to freedom of expression and
Amnesty International have named Gahramanli a prisoner of conscience. He is
currently on pre-trial detention as the court proceedings in his criminal case
are underway. The proceedings against both men are widely believed to be
politically-motivated, aimed at preventing their activities as opposition
politicians. Furthermore,
the wife of Fuad Gahramanli, Zumrud Yagmur has also faced reprisals as her
novel Country Name: 22 was
effectively banned from sale by bookshops due to content critical of the
government.Another member of the Council of the EITI
Coalition and chairman of the Public Association for Democratic Reform, Ogtay
Gulaliyev, is currently under an international travel ban due to an ongoing
criminal case dating back to 2012. On 23 June 2016, after applying for a new
passport, he was taken to the police station where he was informed about the
ban. Gulaliyev was originally sentenced to 12-day administrative imprisonment
for minor hooliganism on 9 April 2012. However, a day before the expiration of
his administrative detention, on 20 April 2012, Gulaliyev was sentenced to
two-months of pre-trial detention and charged with “active disobedience to
authorities’ legal orders” and 
“incitement to mass riots and to violence against citizens”. On 13 June
2012, Sabirabad Regional Court replaced Gulaliyev’s pre-trial detention with
police supervision and he was consequently released. However, the criminal case
against him remains open.  Other
members of the Coalition, Zohrab Ismayil, chairman of Public Association for
Assistance to Free Economy, Elchin Abdullayev, chairman of Democratic
Institution and Human Rights Public Union, and Sabuhi Gafarov, chairman of "Free Person" Human Rights
Protection Society, remain outside the country, having been forced to
leave Azerbaijan in 2014, to avoid imminent arrest in relation to the criminal
case launched against NGOs in 2014. Several other NGO leaders, including Rasul
Jafarov and Intigam Aliyev, had been jailed as part of this case.  Meanwhile,
those that remain in Azerbaijan face major obstacles to their activities,
related to restrictive NGO legislation, explored below. The inability of these
independent members to operate in Baku has led to an increase in the number of
pro-government NGOs in the Coalition, which has enabled the government to
control the activities of the NGOs in the framework of EITI. Broader
civil society environment The harassment of
members of the EITI coalition continues to occur against a broader back drop of
persecution of civil society. Restrictive amendments introduced to NGO legislation
in 2014 render it almost impossible for independent NGOs to operate within
Azerbaijan. The European Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice
Commission)has raised concerns about the legislation, which they believe
illegitimately restrict the activities of NGOs, making recommendations for reform,
which the Azerbaijani government has ignored.[3]The
amendments made to the NGO legislation have hampered NGOs' ability to access
foreign funding.  If a foreign donor
issues a grant to an NGO operating in Azerbaijan, the grant has to be approved
by the Ministry of Justice. Given the current political climate, the Ministry
refuses to approve foreign grants, particularly the grants allocated for human
rights NGOs. In fact, the purpose of these amendments was to effectively ban
access to foreign funding.   A criminal case
launched against a number of NGOs by the Serious Crimes Investigation
Department of the Prosecutor General’s Office in April 2014 is still ongoing. Moreover, despite
the unfreezing of bank accounts of EITI coalition members, the accounts of many
other NGOs and their directors are still frozen. Foreign travel bans imposed on
NGO leaders have not been lifted, while other members of civil society are subject
to arbitrary checks by customs officers when leaving the country. Lack
of political will for reformTo
successfully implement the corrective actions outlined by the EITI, the
government must demonstrate political will to introduce genuine reforms and
create the conditions for developing civil society in the country. Although the government faces serious economic problems, it
remains unwilling to cooperate with civil society, and continues to violate the
rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly, preventing civil
society from meaningfully operating within the country.The government
has signalled that, despite external pressure, it does not intend to reform its
policies towards civil society. In May 2015, after Azerbaijan’s status in EITI
was downgraded, the head of the State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan Shahmar Movsumov
stated that EITI had lost its appeal to Azerbaijan. Movsumov, who is also the
EITI programme coordinator in Azerbaijan, said that Azerbaijan was considering
leaving the EITI, following a change in the initiative’s strategy: “if earlier
the EITI’s strategy was aimed at ensuring transparency, now it fulfils the
function of protecting the interests of NGOs[4],”
he said. We, the
undersigned organisations, deeply appreciate the principled position
demonstrated by the EITI last year, including during the visit of EITI
Chairwoman Clare Short
to Azerbaijan. The initiative’s repeated emphasis on the need for Azerbaijan to
reform offers some hope to independent activists in Azerbaijan.We ask
members of the EITI board to suspend Azerbaijan from membership in the
initiative, until the government addresses the following issues: ·      
Abolish the NGO legislation restricting the activities
of NGOs, in line with the 2014 opinion of the Venice Commission and introduce
legislation enabling normal working environment for civil society; ·      
Abolish legislation and regulations imposing excessive
requirements and approvals for access and using foreign funding. ·      
Immediately and unconditionally release all political
prisoners held in Azerbaijan, including members of the EITI coalition: Asif
Yusifli and Fuad Gahramanli;·      
Discontinue the fabricated criminal proceedings
launched as a means of pressuring independent NGOs and government critics,
unblock the bank accounts of NGOs and their leaders, end arbitrary bans on the
sale of books by authors critical of the government, and lift the foreign
travel bans imposed on heads of NGOs and others;·      
Simplify the registration procedures impeding the work
of civil society organisations. We thank
the EITI Board for its commitment to addressing deteriorating civic space in
Azerbaijan, and urge you to maintain this principled stance, in order to defend
transparency in Azerbaijan and uphold the high standards required by the EITI. Sincerely,Article 19CEE Bankwatch NetworkCivil Rights DefendersCrude AccountabilityFreedom HouseFreedom NowHuman Rights House FoundationIndex on CensorshipInstitute for Reporters’ Freedom and SafetyInternational Media SupportInternational Partnership for Human RightsNetherlands Helsinki CommitteeNorwegian Helsinki CommitteePEN AmericaPEN InternationalPeople in NeedUrgewaldWorld Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)AnnexBriefing Note
on Conditions of Civil Society in AzerbaijanIntroductionOver a year since Azerbaijan’s status at the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) was downgraded, the environment for
independent civil society organisations (CSOs) remains highly problematic.
According to Michael Forst, the UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights defenders, who visited Azerbaijan on 14 - 22 September 2016, civil
society in Azerbaijan is "facing the worst situation" since
independence.[5]  In his statement on 22 September, the Special Rapporteur
condemned the crippling pressure on journalists and human rights activists
critical of the government, which has made it virtually impossible for
non-governmental organizations to operate.[6]The conditions created by the government of Azerbaijan make
the work of the independent civil society organisations extremely difficult.
Repressive legislation severely limits the operation of non-governmental
organisations (NGOs), and criminal proceedings have been launched against
numerous CSOs. A range of intimidation tactics place further substantial
restrictions on NGO activities in Azerbaijan. Although in the past year the
government of Azerbaijan has taken some limited steps in relation to NGOs
participating in EITI activities, the overall situation in this sector remains
deplorable. Civil Society
Actors Participating in EITIIn the
past months, the government has taken some limited positive actions to remedy the issues outlined in the EITI
corrective action plan. The bank accounts of EITI members were unfrozen.
However, notwithstanding the aforementioned incremental improvements, there remain a vast
number of unresolved issues.Asif
Yusifli and Fuad Gahramanli, two members of the EITI Coalition of Azerbaijan
NGOs, are currently in prison. Asif Yusifli, a
high-ranking member of the opposition party Azerbaijan Popular Front Party
(APFP), was arrested in November 2014 on charges of fraud and forgery. Although
the victim in the case had no complaints and was compensated for pecuniary
damage, Asif Yusifli was convicted and sentenced to seven years and six months
in prison by Baku Grave Crimes Court on 30 July 2015. On 4 May 2016, Supreme
Court reduced Yusifli’s sentence to six years. Gahramanli, deputy
chairman of the opposition Popular Front Party, was arrested on 8 December 2015
on charges of incitement to religious hatred, in connection to comments he
posted on Facebook. The comments constituted legitimate exercise of his right
to freedom of expression, and Amnesty International have named Gahramanli a
prisoner of conscience. He is currently in pre-trial detention, as the court
proceedings in his criminal case are underway. The proceedings against both men
are widely believed to be politically-motivated, aimed at preventing their
activities as opposition politicians.Furthermore,
the wife of Fuad Gahramanli, Zumrud Yagmur has also faced reprisals as her
novel Country Name: 22 was
effectively banned from sale by bookshops due to content critical of the
government.Ogtay
Gulaliyev, EITI Council member and chairman of the Public Association for
Democratic Reform, is currently under an international travel ban in regard to
an ongoing criminal case dating back to 2012. On 23 June 2016, after applying
for a new passport, he was taken to the police station and informed of the ban.
Ogtay Gulaliyevis a member of Kura Civil Society, a social body established to
ensure transparency and combat corruption over the equitable distribution of
public funds allocated for people affected by floods of Kura River. On 8 April
2012, Gulaliyev was arrested during a meeting with flood-affected residents
based on allegation that he was swearing in public. Gulaliyev was originally
sentenced to 12days of administrative imprisonment for minor hooliganism on 9
April 2012. However, the day before the expiration of his administrative
detention, on 20 April 2012, Gulaliyev was sentenced to two-months of pre-trial
detention and charged with “active disobedience to authorities’ legal orders”
and  “incitement to mass riots and to
violence against citizens”. On 13 June 2012, Sabirabad Regional Court replaced
Gulaliyev’s pre-trial detention with police supervision and he was consequently
released. However the criminal case against him remains open.Another EITI NGO Coalition member, chairman of
"Free Person" Human Rights Protection Society Sabuhi Gafarov, has been charged with tax evasion, illegal business
and abuse of office in 2015 as part of the criminal case launched against NGOs
by the Serious Crimes Investigation Department (SCID) of Prosecutor General's
Office in 2014. After being interrogated and fearing his imminent arrest, he
left Azerbaijan in 2015. The criminal case against him is ongoing and, as a
result, he is unable to return to Azerbaijan. Coalition members
Zohrab Ismayil, chairman of the Public
Association for Assistance to Free Economy (PAAFE) and Elchin Abdullayev, chairman of Democratic
Institution and Human Rights Public Union were forced to leave Azerbaijan in
2014 to avoid their imminent arrest on spurious charges. They have been unable
to resume their activities in Azerbaijan. Several leaders of the NGOs represented in the EITI NGO Coalition Council
have also left the country as a result of governmental pressure and their
inability to continue their work. Moreover, numerous members of the EITI
Coalition have been denied registration by the Ministry of Justice.The government has failed to create an enabling environment for these individuals,
and they remain unable to return to Azerbaijan to continue their work. In
addition, the Baku Tax Department, acting without a court order, withdrew a sum
of moneyfrom the bank account of PAAFE, allegedly
tax owed by a member of the PAAFE.The
inability of these independent members to operate in Baku has led to an
increase in the number of pro-government NGOs in the Coalition, thus enabling
the government to control the activities of the NGOs in the framework of EITI. Overall Conditions for CSO in AzerbaijanIn 2014, the Government of Azerbaijan began a systematic
crackdown on civil society. The amendments to the Law on Non-Profit
Organisations and Law on State Registration and Registry of Legal Entities that
introduced burdensome registration requirements increased administrative
responsibility, and de facto
prohibited access to foreign funding. These laws place severe limitations on
NGOs' ability to work. The changes to legislation also made it impossible for
foreign NGOs to operate in Azerbaijan.The criminal case
initiated by the Serious Crimes Investigation Department of the Prosecutor
General’s Office against several NGOs that had received foreign funding has
been ongoing for over two years. Natig Jafarli, REAL Movement Executive Secretary
and economist critical of government policy, was recently arrested and later
conditionally released in connection to the case.Criticism of the authorities is met
with varying degree of repressions including criminal proceedings on trumped-up
charges. For instance, Akram Aylisli, a prominent 78-year-old Azerbaijani
author and outspoken critic of the government, was stopped at Baku's
international airport and accused of assaulting and seriously injuring a
significantly younger border guard. The criminal case against him on charges of
"using violence against government representatives" remains ongoing.Furthermore, the bank accounts of
numerous NGOs remain frozen while travel bans imposed on their directors are
still in place. The bank
accounts of 10 NGOs and human rights defenders are frozen and several NGOs
leaders are banned from leaving the country. In general, the
government does not consult with independent NGOs and disregards their
proposals for the reform of NGO laws and other recommendations. Civil society
representatives have prepared and disseminated a package of proposals on
legislative amendments that are required for the effective functioning of civil
society. Unfortunately, the government is not interested in opening a dialogue
with civil society, nor in addressing the existing issues.Moreover, the NGOs ability to organise public events has
been curtailed by lack of resources and the fact that hotels refuse to provide
venues for independent CSOs. Civil society has
been unable to participate in monitoring of governmental activities,
particularly with respect to transparency, since the beginning of the crackdown
and critical voices, including in the cultural sector, face persecution. There
is no national plan on transparency and CSO contributions in this area are
impossible unless the existing legal and political barriers are lifted.Legislation Restricting NGO OperationSince the EITI Board decided to downgrade Azerbaijan’s
status on 14 April 2015, the Azerbaijani government has adopted several restrictive
amendments to legislation regulating NGO operation: (i)             
On 5 June 2015, the Cabinet of
Ministers adopted new rules for the registration of grant agreements
introducing numerous obligations for NGOs, including new registration
requirements;(ii)            
On 21 October 2015, the Cabinet of
Ministers published rules for the registration of contracts on the provision of
works and services that are covered by funds from foreign donors, introducing
additional requirements for such contracts;(iii)           
On 22 October 2015, the Cabinet of
Ministers approved a new procedure according to which foreign donors may only
issue grants in Azerbaijan with prior approval from the government;(iv) On 12 February 2016, the Ministry of Justice published
Rules for Studying the Activities of Non-Governmental Organizations and
Branches or Representative Offices of Foreign Non-Governmental Organizations.
The rules granted broad powers to the Ministry to inspect and penalise NGOs in
Azerbaijan. ConclusionThe positive steps taken by Azerbaijan with respects to
several members of the EITI Coalition are merely ad hoc improvements that fade in comparison to the overall
situation for civil society.  Several
members of the EITI Coalition are imprisoned while others have been forced to
flee the country. There have been no systemic changes to address the issues
hindering the work of civil society since the 2014 crackdown.  This has made it possible for the government
to dominate the EITI processes through pro-governmental NGOs. It is evident
that the government of Azerbaijan has fallen far short of its obligation to
implement the remedial actions outlined by the EITI. 20 October, 2016



[1]The extracts of the interview Ms Clare Short had with BBC Azeri on
13 October 2016. Original version: http://www.bbc.com/azeri/azerbaijan/2015/10/151013_clare_short_int
English translation: http://www.azhr.org/single-post/2015/10/12/Conversation-with-Ilham-Aliyev-about-pressure-on-civil-society


[2]According to the website of the EITI
Azerbaijan Coalition, the Coalition has some 138 members. The work of the
coalition is goverened by the Coalition Council, comprised of 10 members and
one coordinator. http://eiti-ngo-azerbaijan.org/?page_id=155


[3] The Venice Commission opinion 787/2014. On the law on
non-governmental organisations (public associations and funds) as amended of
the Republic of Azerbaijan. Strasbourg, 15 December 2014.


[4] As commented during May 2015 press conference in Baku. http://contact.az/search/document.php?id=65054&vr=en#.V_3fyY-LTIU


[5]  End of mission statement by
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders. 22 September
2016 http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20544&LangID=E



[6]Ibid 