Cameroon:  Ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Musa Usman Ndamba
March 15, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2018 / MarchCameroon: Ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Musa Usman Ndamba

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY                                                                                
 
New information
CMR 002 /
0613 / OBS 049.1
Judicial
harassment
Cameroon
March 15, 2018
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Cameroon. 
 
New information:
 The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Musa Usman Ndamba, National Vice President of the Mbororo Social and Cultural Development Association (MBOSCUDA)[1].According to the information received, on February 23, 2018, the trial against Mr. Musa Usman Ndamba was resumed for the 57th time since its opening in May 2013. The plaintiff Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo,
 a billionaire businessman, cattle rancher, tea plantation owner and a 
member of the Central Committee of the ruling Cameroon People’s 
Democratic Movement (CPDM) party, was not present at the hearing and was
 represented by Mr. Sama
 Francis Asanga, a senior official of the opposition Social Democratic 
Party (SDF), close family member of the party leader Mr John Fru Ndi and
 former President of the Cameroon Bar Association. On March 2, 2018, the Bamenda Court of First Instance presided by Magistrate Babila Tibet adjourned the next hearing to March 16, 2018.Mr. Ndamba has been accused of, “being a party in a judicial proceeding on oath and making false declarations”, “making a false report against Baba Ahmadou Danpullo liable to lead to his prosecution” and “injuring the reputation of Baba Ahmadou Danpullo by imputation of unprovable facts” under Section 305(1) of the Penal Code. These offenses are punishable by up to three years of prison and a fine.
 
Mr. Ndamba’s
lawyers have reported several irregularities in the proceedings. In particular,
the defender was never officially served with a summons. Moreover, the alleged
defamatory statements contained in the affidavit are not signed by the defender
but by another individual named Mr. Musa Adamu. According to the plaintiff, Mr.
Ndamba is the author of these statements, and he intentionally changed his name
in order to escape prosecution. However, Mr. Ndamba was able to provide
evidence that he had never changed his name, in the form of an expired identity
card dated July 20, 2000. In addition, the lawyer who wrote the affidavit for
Mr. Musa Adamu told the prosecutors that he had never met Mr. Musa Usman Ndamba
and he was not the one who signed the affidavit.
 
The
Observatory fears that the ongoing judicial harassment against Mr. Ndamba comes
in as a retaliation to his human rights activities, in particular as MBOSCUDA’s
National Vice President. Moreover, these acts of harassment are not isolated, as
the Observatory reported several cases of judicial harassment against leaders
of civil society organisations denouncing the government’s corruption and
opposing land grabbing in Cameroon. Many of these acts are linked to cases of
land acquisition by Mr. Baba Ahmadou
Danpullo.[2] 
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concerns about
those acts of harassment, and fears that they have increased after MBOSCUDA and
its members submitted in early May 2013 a report in the framework of the United
Nations Human Rights Council Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of Cameroon in
Geneva, outlining the various obstacles faced by the Mbororo community[3].
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns these acts, and urges Cameroonian authorities to stop
all forms of judicial harassment against Mr. Ndamba and other human rights
defenders in Cameroon.
 
The
Observatory further urges the Cameroon authorities to ensure that, until all charges
are dropped, all judicial proceedings are carried out in full compliance with his
right to a fair trial, as protected under international law.
 Background information:
 
On May 10, 2013, Mr. Musa Usman Ndamba was summoned to appear before the Court of First
Instance in Bamenda, North Western Cameroon, following a complaint brought by
Mr. Baba Ahmadou Danpullo for “propagating false information liable to injure
public authorities”, “being a party in a judicial proceeding on oath and making
false declarations”, “making a false report against Baba Ahmadou Danpullo
liable to lead to his prosecution” and “injuring the reputation of Baba Ahmadou
Danpullo by imputation of unprovable facts”. 
 
At the hearing, Mr. Ndamba refuted all the allegations
and pleaded not guilty. Mr. Ndamba was bailed, pending another hearing
scheduled for May 27, 2013. On that day, as the landowner failed to appear in
court, the matter was adjourned to June 28, 2013, and the judge warned that he
would award costs against the landowner should he fail again to attend court.
Subsequently, in May 2014 the court dismissed the charges against Mr. Ndamba
for lack of a diligent prosecution. 
 
On July 29, 2016, Mr. Baba Ahmadou
Danpullo accused M. Ndamba of
“propagation of false information, false oath, false report and defamation of
character” based on the same affidavit and evidence as the case in 2013. Subsequently,
the trial was adjourned several times in absence of the plaintiff. 
 
On December 18, 2017, the trial of Mr. Ndamba was
adjourned for the fifty-fifth time.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities of Cameroon asking them to:
              
i.        
Guarantee in
all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Musa Usman Ndamba, as well as of all MBOSCUDA members
and all human rights defenders in
Cameroon;
             
ii.        
Put an end
to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against of Mr.
Musa Usman Ndamba, as well as of all MBOSCUDA members
and all human rights defenders in
Cameroon;
           
iii.        
Until all charges are dropped,
ensure that all judicial proceedings against Mr. Musa Usman Ndamba are carried
out in full compliance with his right to a fair trial, as protected under
international law;
            
iv.        
Fully
implement the recommendation of the Inter-Ministerial Commission of
Investigation (The Jani Commission) on the abuses by the landowner mentioned
above, ordered by the President of Cameroon and submitted to the Office of the
Prime Minister since 2004, for action[4];
             
v.        
Conform in
any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular its Articles 1 and 12.2. ;
            
vi.        
 Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
instruments ratified by Cameroon and article 45 of the Constitution of the
Republic of Cameroon, whereby “duly approved or ratified treaties and international
agreements shall, following their publication, override national laws, provided
the other party implements the said treaty or agreement”.

Addresses:
 
His
     Excellency Mr. Paul Biya, President of the Republic, Presidency of the
     Republic, Palais de l’Unité, 1000 Yaoundé, Cameroon, Fax +237 22 22 08 70H.E.
     Mr. Philémon Yang, Prime Minister and Chief Head of Government, Primature
     du Cameroun, 1000 Yaoundé‚ Cameroon. Fax: +237 22 23 57 65. Email: spm@spm.gov.cmMr.
     Laurent Esso, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 1000 Yaoundé‚
     Cameroon, Fax: + 237 22 23 00 05Mr.
     René Emmanuel Sadi, Minister of Territorial Administration, Fax: + 237
     22 22 37 35Dr. Chemuta Divine Banda, Chairman of the
     National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms, Fax: +237 22 22 60 82,
     E-mail: cndhl@iccnet.cm / cdbanda26@yahoo.fr H.E.
     Mr. Anatole Fabien Marie Nkou, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cameroon to the
     United Nations Office in Geneva, Avenue de France 23, 1202 Geneva,
     Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 736 21 65, Email: mission.cameroun@bluewin.chH.E. Mr.
     Daniel Evina Abe’e, Ambassador of Cameroon to Belgium & the European
     Union, Embassy of the Republic of Cameroon in Brussels, 131 av. Brugmann, 1190 (Forest), Belgium, Fax: +
     32 2 344 57 35; Email: ambassade.cameroun@skynet.be; embassy@cameroon.be



Please also write to diplomatic representations of
Cameroon in your respective countries.
 
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
March 1, 2018
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the FIDH.
The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations
of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line:
 
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1] The Mbororo Social and Cultural
Development Association (MBOSCUDA) defends
the rights of indigenous Mbororo pastoralists in North-Western Cameroon since
1992. It has been active in monitoring the sale of public land to private
landowners, denouncing corruption and defending indigenous people’s land
rights. 


[2] See
the Observatory’s Urgent Appeals CMR
001 / 0716 / OBS 056.3 published on May 11, 2017 and CMR
001 / 0317 / OBS 033.1 published on June 19, 2017.


[3]
See the report on http://www.upr-info.org/IMG/pdf/js1_upr_cmr_s16_2013_jointsubmission1_e.pdf


[4] The
commission was created by the Minister of Justice through Ministerial Decision
No. 164 on July 2, 2003, modified by Decision No. 230 on August 13, 2003, to
investigate human rights abuses by Mr. Danpulo against the Mbororo community
including arbitrary arrests, trumped charges, imprisonment, torture,
expropriation of lands, interference with Mbororo community leadership, etc.
Recommendations of the Commission include that the authorities retrace and
where necessary re-demarcate the legal boundaries of ELBA Ranch in accordance
with Land Certificate No. 140/Menchum of December 1, 1989, with a surface area
of 4,726 hectares; that the authorities retrace and where necessary
re-demarcate the legal boundaries of the Land Grant measuring 1,335 hectares
allocated to Baba Ahmadou Danpullo for transhumance; that Baba Ahmadou Danpullo
liberates illegally occupied lands; that Baba Ahmadou Danpulo pays compensation
to those who were displaced by ELBA Ranch; that the authorities identify the
various Mbororo communities in the North-West capable of being led by
traditional rulers designated in conformity with the law; that the authorities
take measures with regards to the illegal and irregular functioning of Ndawara
Alkali Court. For more information, please see: http://justice-dignity.net/wp-content/themes/green-stimulus/Jani_Commission_Report.pdf 