Israel:  Anti-boycott law violates human rights and further undermines Israeli democracy - EU must unequivocally condemn the law
July 15, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2011 / JulyIsrael: Anti-boycott law violates human rights and further undermines Israeli democracy - EU must unequivocally condemn the law 
Anti-boycott law violates human rights and further undermines Israeli 
democracy 
EU must unequivocally condemn the law
 
 
Brussels, 15 July 2011: APRODEV, 
the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN), Front 
Line, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 
- a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the 
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) - and the Quaker 
Council for European Affairs are extremely concerned about the 
'Law for Prevention of Damage to the 
State of Israel through Boycott – 2011' (anti-boycott law). This new law, which 
was adopted by the Israeli Knesset (Parliament) by a majority of 47 to 38 votes on 11 July 2011 
constitutes another attack against freedom of expression and 
association in Israel.
 
The anti-boycott law prohibits calls for a “boycott of the state of Israel” by Israeli 
citizens and organisations, and, in some cases, agreement to participate in a 
boycott. The definition of “boycott of the state of Israel” does not only 
comprise the state of Israel and its institutions but also any area under its control, 
thus including the Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory (OPT) erected contrary to international 
law.
 
The law defines calling for a boycott of the state of Israel as a 
‘civil wrong’ and applies the law of tort to it. Anyone who publicly calls for a 
boycott can be sued for damages by their intended target, and fined even if no 
actual damage has been caused to the boycotted party. 
 
The law also allows the government to revoke tax exemptions and other 
rights and benefits from Israeli individuals and groups, as well as academic, 
cultural and scientific institutions that receive state support, if they support 
a boycott. In many cases, this means that those affected may no longer be 
eligible for external public funding, including from the European Union, on 
which many depend. 
 
Besides this, Israeli businesses and industries (including Israeli 
subsidiaries of foreign companies) are to be penalised by the law if they refuse 
to trade with settlement businesses (e.g. by signing on to such a condition in a 
contract with Palestinian associates). 
 
Irrespective of the actual merits of the tactic of boycott, the 
attempt to prohibit it severely restricts freedom of expression as it targets 
non-violent public expressions of opposition to Israeli occupation policies. It 
will also affect freedom of association, since it will expose organisations 
engaging in public campaigning against the settlements and other human rights 
violations to legal and financial sanctions and costly compensation claims by 
settler organisations. 
 
This new law constitutes an unacceptable attempt to silence and 
severely restrict the activities of civil society organisations in Israel. It is 
part of an ongoing campaign that seeks to delegitimise the activities of 
Israel’s civil society organisations, in particular those defending the basic 
human rights of Palestinians in the OPT and denouncing the occupation and its 
consequences. This law violates international human rights treaties ratified by 
the State of Israel, in particular the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights and therefore stands in stark contrast to the fundamental 
principles of democracy. 
 
We express our solidarity and full support with the 53 civil society 
organisations in Israel that jointly signed a letter addressed to the Speaker of 
the Knesset, MK Reuven Rivlin, in February 2011 in protest against the then 
proposed law.[1] It is the second law adopted by the Knesset in less than six months 
that aims at restricting the activities of Israel’s independent civil society. 

 
We welcome the initial concerns raised by the EU High Representative, 
Baroness Ashton. However, in accordance with the EU Guidelines on Human Rights 
Defenders, we
call on the EU and EU member States to: 
 
-   Unequivocally and publicly condemn the law and urge Israel to revoke 
it and refrain from any further legislation and practices which would 
effectively curtail the freedoms of association and expression in Israel. 

-  Use all means at their disposal to defend and protect 
the freedom of association and expression of human rights defenders 
and organisations in Israel. 
-    Strongly reiterate their concerns about the current restrictions imposed on 
human rights defenders and organisations at the upcoming EU-Israel Human Rights Working Group 
meeting due to take place on 13 September 2011. 

-     Continue to support financially civil society organisations in Israel 
which defend these fundamental rights and freedoms. 




[1] For the letter, please see: 
 http://www.coalitionofwomen.org/?p=1760&lang=en 