Bangladesh:  Help us put an end to the harassment against Adilur Rahman Khan and Nasiruddin Elan, Secretary and Director of Odhikar!
November 16, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / NovemberBangladesh: Help us put an end to the harassment against Adilur Rahman Khan and Nasiruddin Elan, Secretary and Director of Odhikar!


TAKE ACTION! 
 
Please take action to call for the end of the
judicial harassment against human rights defender ADILUR RAHMAN KHAN! To do so, kindly
copy the enclosed letter and send it to the addresses provided. Kindly inform
us of any action undertaken at omct@omct.org. Thank you for taking action! 
 
· Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime
Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax:
+880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
· Mr. Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, Minister for Home Affairs,
Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka, Bangladesh,
Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com;
minister@mha.gov.bd;
· Barrister Shafique Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice
and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs,
Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
· Mr. Hasanul Haq Inu, Honourable Minister, Ministry of
Information, Building # 4 (8th floor), Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka-1000,
Bangladesh. E-mail: minister@moi.gov.bd
· Mr. Hasan Mahmud Khandaker, Inspector General of
Police, Police Headquarters, Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Email: ig@police.gov.bd

· H.E. Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador, Permanent Mission
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 65 rue
de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
· Embassy of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in
Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 646 59 98;
Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be

 
Please also
write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Bangladesh in your respective
country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in Bangladesh.
 
 
Your
Excellency,
 


I have been informed by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) about the ongoing judicial harassment of
Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of
the human rights non-governmental organisation Odhikar, OMCT network member in
Bangladesh, and a member of OMCT General Assembly, as well as against Odhikar's
Director Mr. Nasiruddin
Elan.
 
On November 10, 2013, Adilur Rahman
Khan appeared again before the Dhaka Cyber Crimes Tribunal in relation to a
case filed by the Government after Odhikar published a report on the repression
of a demonstration of fundamentalists by the police last May. Odhikar’s
Director, Nasiruddin Elan, who was sent to prison on November 6 in
relation to the same case, was not brought to the tribunal from Kashimpur Jail
- 2.
 
During the hearing,
Odhikar’s lawyers submitted a bail application on behalf of Mr. Elan. The Judge
of the Cyber Crimes Tribunal set November
17, 2013 for the next hearing on which to hear the bail application. He
also ordered that charges would be formally framed against Adilur Rahman Khan
and Nasiruddin Elan on that day. 
 
The lawyers also
submitted an application to obtain copies of the orders passed by the Tribunal;
but the judge gave no order in this regard. Furthermore, a Public Prosecutor has not yet been appointed to represent the Government for
this case, which amounts to further harassment and delay in framing
charges against Adilur Rahman Khan and Nasiruddin Elan.
 
Mr.
Khan was arrested on August 10, 2013 in Dhaka. On September 4, 2013, the Detective Branch of Police announced they had filed a charge sheet
against Mr. Khan as well as against Mr. Elan for allegedly
“distorting images by using photo shop and publishing a fabricated
report, which enraged public sentiment”, under Section 57 of the ICT Act and
Sections 505 (c) and 505A of the Penal Code, in relation to Odhikar’s report. If found guilty, the two human rights defenders might face up to 14 years
in jail or Tk 10,000,000 (about 93,660 €) fine under the ICT Act and seven years’ jail term under
the Penal Code. In addition, on September 11, 2013, the Cyber Crimes
Tribunal issued an arrest warrant against Mr. Nasiruddin Elan. 
 
On October 8, 2013, the High
Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh granted a six-month interim
bail to Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan. The bail petition filed by Mr. Khan’s lawyer was
earlier rejected three times in the same case, once by the Cyber Crimes
Tribunal in Dhaka on September 25, 2013 and twice by the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Court on August 11 and September 9. Mr. Khan subsequently challenged the Cyber Crimes Tribunal’s
order of September 25, and filed an appeal with the High Court, requesting it
to grant him bail.
 
On October 11, 2013, at 10.30 am,
Mr. Khan was finally released on bail from Kashimpur Jail number 1. I am concerned that it took two days for
the bail order to be implemented,
and consider this as further harassment against Mr. Khan.
 
On October 10, 2013, Mr.
Nasiruddin Elan was granted an order of “no
arrest or harassment” for four weeks from the High Court Division of the
Supreme Court.
 
On October 21, 2013, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan appeared before the
Dhaka Cyber Crimes Tribunal. The Tribunal Judge then fixed
the next date of hearing in his case on November 10, 2013. 
 
On November 6, 2013, Mr. Nasiruddin Elan and his
lawyers appeared before the Cyber Crimes Tribunal and appealed for bail in the
above-mentioned case. Yet, Judge Shamsul Alam rejected the plea for bail and
ordered that Mr. Elan be arrested and taken to Dhaka Central Jail.
 
I am also greatly concerned that on October 6, 2013, the National
Parliament of Bangladesh passed the Information and Communication Technology
(Amendment) Act, 2013, setting a minimum of
seven years’ imprisonment and increasing the highest
punishment for cyber-crimes from 10 years under the existing Act to 14 years or
a fine of Tk 10 million or both. In addition, offenses
under Sections 54, 56, 57 and 61 of the ICT Act, 2006 are now considered as cognisable and non-bailable. As a consequence, law enforcers are empowered to
arrest anyone accused of violating the law
without a warrant, by invoking Section 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
 
It is feared that those amendments will lead to further arrests and harassment of human rights
defenders, therefore shrinking the space of civil society in the country, and
that there is risk that they could be applied retrospectively to the
pending case against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and Mr. Nasiruddin
Elan. 
 
I express my
deepest concern about the judicial harassment against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and
Mr. Nasiruddin Elan, which seems to merely aim at
sanctioning their peaceful human rights activities. Accordingly, I call upon
the authorities in Bangladesh to put an
end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Mr.
Nasiruddin Elan, all Odhikar members and all human rights defenders
in Bangladesh; as well as to conform with the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly
of the United Nations on December 9, 1998.
 
I thank you for your attention to this urgent matter.
 
Sincerely yours,
 







On November 10, 2013, prominent human rights
defenders Adilur Rahman Khan and Nasiruddin
Elan, respectively Secretary and
Director of OMCT member organisation Odhikar, faced trial before the Dhaka Cyber Crime Tribunal in a case
filed by the Government after Odhikar published a report on the repression of a
demonstration of fundamentalists by the police last May. Mr. Khan is also a member of
OMCT General Assembly. On November 6, Mr. Elan was sent to prison in relation to this case.
Help us put an end to the judicial harassment
against Adilur Rahman Khan, Nasiruddin Elan and Odhikar!




  
On November
10, 2013, prominent human rights defender Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of the human rights
non-governmental organisation Odhikar, OMCT network member in Bangladesh, and a member of OMCT General
Assembly, appeared again before the Dhaka Cyber Crimes Tribunal in relation to
a case filed by the Government after Odhikar published a report on the
repression of a demonstration of fundamentalists by the police last May. Odhikar’s
Director, Nasiruddin Elan, who was sent to prison on November 6 in relation
to the same case, was not brought to the tribunal from Kashimpur Jail - 2.
 
During the hearing, Odhikar’s lawyers submitted
a bail application on behalf of Mr. Elan. The Judge of the Cyber Crimes
Tribunal set November 17, 2013
for the next hearing on which to hear the bail application. He also ordered
that charges would be formally framed against Adilur Rahman Khan and Nasiruddin
Elan on that day. 
 
The lawyers also submitted an application to
obtain copies of the orders passed by the Tribunal; but the judge gave no order
in this regard. Furthermore, a Public
Prosecutor has not yet been appointed to represent
the Government for this case, which amounts to further harassment and
delay in framing charges against Adilur Rahman Khan and Nasiruddin Elan.
 
The OMCT recalls that Mr. Khan was arrested on August
10, 2013. On August 11, 2013, he was brought before the
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Court (CMM), and placed on a five-day remand for interrogation. On August 12, the High
Court of Bangladesh stayed the five-day remand order to interrogate Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan and asked police to send him to jail. The next day, Mr. Khan was transferred to Kashimpur Jail number 1. 
 
On September 4, 2013, the
Detective Branch of
Police announced they had filed a charge sheet against Mr. Khan as well as against Mr.
Nasiruddin Elan for allegedly
“distorting images by
using photo shop and publishing a fabricated report, which enraged public
sentiment”, under Section 57 of the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Act and Sections 505 (c) and
505A of the Penal Code, in relation to a fact-finding report
issued by Odhikar on the killing of 61 people during
an operation carried out on May 5-6, 2013 by security forces against Hefazat-e
Islam activists in Dhaka. If found guilty, the two human
rights defenders might face up to 14 years in jail or Tk 10,000,000 (about 93,660 €) fine under the ICT Act and seven years’ jail term under
the Penal Code.
 
On September 11, 2013, the Cyber Crimes Tribunal issued an
arrest warrant against Mr. Nasiruddin Elan.
 
On October 8, 2013, the High Court Division of
the Supreme Court of Bangladesh granted a six-month interim bail to Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan. On
October 9, 2013, the Office of the Attorney General filed an application before
the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court, requesting to stay the High
Court’s order granting bail to Mr. Khan. However, the Chamber Judge decided on
the same day to uphold the High Court Division’s decision. 
 
The OMCT recalls that the bail petition filed by
Mr. Khan’s lawyer was earlier rejected three times in the same case,
once by the Cyber Crimes Tribunal in Dhaka on September 25, 2013 and twice by
the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate Court on August 11 and September 9. Mr. Khan
subsequently challenged the Cyber Crimes Tribunal’s order of September 25, and
filed an appeal with the High Court, requesting it to grant him bail.
 
On October 11, 2013, at 10.30 am, Mr. Khan was
finally released on bail from Kashimpur Jail number 1. The OMCT is concerned that it took two days for the bail
order to be implemented,
and considers this as further harassment against Mr. Khan.
 
On October 10, 2013, Mr. Nasiruddin Elan was granted an order of “no arrest or harassment” for four
weeks from the High Court Division of the Supreme Court.
 
On
October 21, 2013, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan appeared before the Dhaka Cyber Crimes Tribunal. The
Tribunal Judge then fixed the next date of hearing in his case on November 10,
2013. 
 
On November 6, 2013, Mr. Nasiruddin Elan and his
lawyers appeared before the Cyber Crimes Tribunal and appealed for bail in the
above-mentioned case. Yet, Judge Shamsul Alam rejected the plea for bail and
ordered that Mr. Elan be arrested and taken to Dhaka Central Jail.
 
The OMCT is also greatly concerned that on
October 6, 2013, the National Parliament of Bangladesh passed the Information and Communication Technology
(Amendment) Act, 2013, setting a
minimum of seven years’ imprisonment and increasing
the highest punishment for cyber-crimes from 10 years under the existing Act to
14 years or a fine of Tk 10 million or both. In
addition, offenses under Sections 54, 56, 57 and 61 of the ICT Act, 2006
are now considered as cognisable and
non-bailable. As a consequence, law enforcers
are empowered to arrest anyone accused of violating
the law without a warrant, by invoking Section 54 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure.
 
It is feared that those amendments will lead to further arrests and harassment of human rights
defenders, therefore shrinking the space of civil society in the country, and
that there is risk that they could be applied retrospectively to the
pending case against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and Mr. Nasiruddin
Elan. 
 
The OMCT considers the
prosecution against Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan and Mr. Nasiruddin Elan as arbitrary since it only aims at sanctioning and preventing their activities as human rights defenders,
therefore contradicting international human
rights standards and Bangladesh’s obligations.
 
Rather than prosecuting human rights defenders criticising the State
security services, the State should assume its responsibility as a matter of
urgency and appoint an independent judicial inquiry into the alleged killings
following the operation carried out on May 5-6, 2013 during the Hefazat-e Islam
rally in Motijheel.
 
TAKE ACTION! Help us
put an end to the harassment against Adilur Rahman Khan, Nasiruddin Elan and Odhikar!
 
To do so, please send a letter to the authorities of Bangladesh calling
upon them to end the
harassment against human rights defenders ADILUR RAHMAN KHAN and NASIRUDDIN ELAN.
You just need to click on the “Take action” button above, copy the enclosed
letter and send it to the addresses provided.
 
Thank you!
 
For more information, check out our latest international mission report on the situation of human
rights defenders in Bangladesh.
 
See also:
- Statement issued at the end of the mission led by OMCT President Yves
Berthelot and member of OMCT General Assembly Max de Mesa and on the occasion
of the release on bail of Adilur Rahman Khan: http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/bangladesh/2013/10/d22406/
- Press
Release issued on November 6, 2013 following the arrest of Odhikar’s
Director Nasiruddin Elan: http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/bangladesh/2013/11/d22427/ 