China:  Prominent rights defence lawyer Mr. Shu Xiangxin sentenced to six months in prison
January 12, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2016 / JanuaryChina: Prominent rights defence lawyer Mr. Shu Xiangxin sentenced to six months in prison

New information
CHN 001 / 0116 / OBS 006
Arbitrary
detention / Ill-treatment /
Judicial
harassment
People’s Republic of China
January
12, 2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention on the following situation in the People’s Republic of China (PRC).
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the ongoing arbitrary detention, judicial harassment, and ill-treatment
of prominent rights defence lawyer Mr. Shu Xiangxin, Director of
the Shandong Xuzhou Law Firm. Mr. Shu has been actively involved in defending
petitioners whose property rights had been violated in several rural provinces.
 
According
to the information received, on January 8, 2016, Mr. Shu appeared before the Licheng District First Instance Criminal Court, Licheng District Court
House, in Ji’nan. Accused of defamation, he was sentenced to six months in
prison and his lawyer's licence was revoked. 
 
During
the trial that lasted for only thirty minutes, neither of Mr. Shu's defence
lawyers were permitted access to the court room, and only Mr. Shu's wife was
allowed to be present as an observer. Although Mr. Shu was denied his right to
have legal counsel present during the trial, he stated his intent to appeal the
court's sentencing. His lawyers have applied for parole on bail, but this
request has illegally been ignored by the authorities.
 
Mr.
Shu's physical condition also seems to be deteriorating, as he is reportedly
being denied access to proper medical care while in detention. A medical
examination conducted on January 6 and 7 showed that Mr. Shu was suffering from
thrombosis, muscle atrophy, and an effusion on his brain. On January 8, he was
also suffering from tinnitus in his left ear, and had great difficulty hearing.
Witnesses reported that during the trial on January 8, Mr. Shu's physical
condition was so weak that he was not able to walk into the court room without
assistance. Until now, Mr. Shu has not received adequate medical treatment and
is still subjected to ill-treatment in detention.
 
In
addition, the Observatory has also received reliable information that Mr. Shu's
eighteen year-old daughter was attacked and beaten outside the court house just
before the start of Mr. Shu's trial. Reportedly, the attacker was the son of
Mr. Zhou Yujie and Ms. Wang Junzhi, the plaintiffs in the case against Mr. Shu.
Mr. Shu's daughter was transferred to the hospital by ambulance. At the time of
writing this Urgent Appeal, she remains in hospital and is being treated for a
concussion. There have been no reports of any investigation being conducted by
the authorities into the beating. 
 
The
Observatory condemns the judicial harassment of Mr. Shu, including his
arbitrary arrest, the denial of his right to access legal counsel, and the
charges and sentencing against him, which seem aimed at punishing him for his
legitimate human rights work. The Observatory calls on the Chinese authorities
to immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Shu and drop all charges against
him. 
 
The
Observatory is also deeply concerned regarding the allegations of ill-treatment
and torture against Mr. Shu, and calls on the authorities to provide him with
appropriate medical treatment, and to fully investigate the allegations of
torture and ill-treatment by the police. 
 
Background
information[1]:
 
On January 2, 2016, the Jinan police in Shandong province
issued a notice of arrest for Mr. Shu
Xiangxin. Mr. Shu was taken to
the Hongjialou police liaison office at Lixia Police Department before being
transferred to Jinan No. 2 Detention Centre.
 
When Mr. Shu's defence lawyers were finally allowed access
to him on January 4, after he had spent two days in police custody, they
observed that he had several injuries. Mr. Shu informed them that while in
detention, police officers demanded he engage forced labour. When he refused,
he was subjected to torture and ill-treatment by the police, including being
punched and dragged, left out in the cold, and humiliated. Mr. Shu also
described being hanged from an iron bar of a second floor staircase with only
one leg reaching the floor, and being left in that position for about eight
hours without access to food, water or a bathroom. Despite crying out in pain,
he stated that no police officer came to his aid and he finally lost
consciousness.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China, urging them to:
 
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Shu Xiangxin, as well as his family and of all human rights defenders in China;
 
ii.
Release Mr. Shu Xiangxin immediately and unconditionally since his detention is
arbitrary, and drop all charges against him;
 
iii. Carry
out an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the
allegations of torture and ill-treatment against Mr. Shu as well as into the
attack against his daughter, in order to identify all those responsible, bring
them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law;
 
iv.
Put an end to the harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr.
Shu Xiangxin, as well as against all human rights defenders in the People’s
Republic of China;
 
v.
Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially

-
its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, and 
-
Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration”;
 
vi.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by the People’s Republic of China.


Addresses: 
 
Mr. Li Keqiang, Prime Minister
     of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council
     General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s
     Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs)Ms. WU Aiying, Minister of
     Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen
     Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax:
     +86 10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cnMr. Wang Yi,
     Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang
     Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of
     China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cnMr. Guo Shengkun, Minister of
     Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14
     Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s Republic of
     China, Fax: +86 10 63099216 H.E. Mr. Wu
     Hailong, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the
     People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213
     Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cnEmbassy of the
     People’s Republic of China in Brussels, Avenue de Tervuren, 1150 Woluwe
     Saint-Pierre, Belgium,Tel: +32-2-7711497, 7711495; Fax: +32-2-7792895;
     Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the People’s Republic of
China in your respective country.



[1] See Observatory Joint Press Release
published on January 6, 2016. 