Bahrain:  Joint open letter to Ambassadors on the situation of Nabeel Rajab
July  7, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / JulyBahrain: Joint open letter to Ambassadors on the situation of Nabeel RajabLetter to EU Amb. Letter to UK Amb. Letter to Swiss Amb. Letter to 
Netherlands Amb. Letter to German Amb. Letter to French Amb. Letter to 
Canadian Amb. Letter to Australian Amb.

 



Re: Situation of Nabeel Rajab



7 June 2017

 

Your Excellency,

 

We write to alert you to the precarious situation facing Mr. Nabeel Rajab, 
President of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR), Founding Director 
of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and Deputy Secretary General of 
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH). According to Mr. 
Rajab’s lawyers, the Bahraini judiciary will issue a sentence on 
Monday 10 July in one of the two cases for which he is being prosecuted. He 
is on trial in two cases relating to his right to freedom of expression, 
which could result in up to 18 years of prison, with other cases 
pending.

 

Mr. Rajab is likely to be sentenced in absentia to three years in prison 
on charges of “publishing and broadcasting false news that undermines 
the prestige of the state.” This relates to press interviews he gave 
in 2015 and 2016. These charges relate solely to the exercise of Mr. 
Rajab’s freedom of expression and are reprisals against his work 
exposing human rights violations in Bahrain.

 

Mr. Rajab has been hospitalized since April and been unable to attend the 
trial. Despite this, the Lower Criminal Court has insisted on holding court 
sessions. His lawyers have boycotted the trial since 14 June, in protest of 
the court’s decision to hold the hearings in Mr. Rajab’s 
absence, as he is still recovering at the Ministry of Interior Hospital from 
a post-surgery infection and not able to attend his hearings. Monday’s 
hearing with be the fourteenth hearing since the trial began. To date, the 
court has held eight hearings during Rajab’s hospitalization which he 
has been unable to attend.

 

We respectfully request your Excellency’s presence at the 
upcoming court hearing to ensure adequate protection of Mr. 
Rajab’s internationally protected rights, including rights protected 
by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), acceded 
to by Bahrain in 2006, and the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders. His 
fair trial rights and freedom of expression are being systematically denied 
by the Bahraini Government
[1] as follows.

 

Since 19 June, Mr. Rajab has been prevented from contacting his lawyers 
and has had little contact with his family, apart from a visit in early 
July. The denial of regular communication raises fears for his health and 
safety. We believe it is a new form of harassment with the aim of 
transferring him back to prison. His health has steadily worsened during his 
lengthy detention and on 5 April he underwent surgery for bleeding ulcers, 
but was returned to the prison shortly afterwards. Due to the unhygienic 
detention conditions, Mr. Rajab developed a post-surgery infection and was 
rushed back to the Ministry of Interior hospital three days later. He has 
been slowly recovering ever since.

 

Mr. Rajab has been arbitrarily detained on spurious charges for over a 
year, over nine months of which has been in solitary confinement. This 
long-term isolation has been coupled with sleep deprivation, unsanitary cell 
conditions, and chronic physical pain, resulting in deteriorated mental 
health, including severe depression. In May, the Committee Against Torture 
expressed particular concern over Mr. Rajab’s solitary confinement and 
called for his release 
[2].

 

We support your dialogue with Bahrain; however, we are equally convinced 
that this relationship is only sustainable if it is founded on the mutual 
respect of democratic freedoms and human rights. Mr. Rajab is currently 
being punished for holding these same ideals. We urge you to stand by him 
now, and to call on the Bahraini government to grant his release 
immediately on humanitarian grounds, in light of the critical state 
of his mental and physical health and to immediately drop the 
expression-related charges.

 

We also urgently seek your assistance in verifying Mr. 
Rajab’s status and safeguarding his health by requesting 
permission from the authorities to visit him at the Ministry of Interior 
Hospital. The government has so far denied requests by human rights groups 
to visit him and examine his condition.

 

We also urge you totake action to ensure that the fair trial and 
due process rights of Mr. Rajab are adequately protected and to 
press for the Bahraini authorities to implement their own commitment to 
invite the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein 
to visit the country 
[3].  This visit which was postponed indefinitely, 
would be a critical step in encouraging the Bahraini government to engage 
with the recommendations and decisions of UN Human Rights bodies concerning 
Bahrain, including those calling specifically for the immediate release of 
Mr. Rajab.

 

Should you require any further information please don’t hesitate to 
get in touch.

 

We look forward to your response.

 

Yours sincerely,

 



Americans for Democracy & Human Rights in Bahrain

Bahrain Center for Human Rights

Front Line Defenders

Gulf Center for Human Rights

IFEX

International Federation for Human Rights

Pen International

World Organization against Torture

 





[1] 
For more info, please see: 
http://bahrainrights.org/en/node/8758



[2] 
Committee Against Torture, CAT/C/BHR/CO/2-3, Concluding Observations on the 
Second and Third Periodic Reports of Bahrain, 29 May 2017, paras. 20, 21(e), 
32, 33(b).



[3]

https://www.usnews.com/news/world/articles/2017-03-15/bahrain-parliament-invites-un-rights-chief-for-unrestricted-visit 