Egypt:  Joint Press Release: The United Nations Working Group declares the detention of Yara Sallam as arbitrary and requests compensation
January 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / JanuaryEgypt: Joint Press Release: The United Nations Working Group declares the detention of Yara Sallam as arbitrary and requests compensation​













JOINT
PRESS RELEASE
 
THE
OBSERVATORY FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
(FIDH-OMCT)
CAIRO
INSTITUTE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS STUDIES (CIHRS)
EGYPTIAN
INITIATIVE FOR PERSONAL RIGHTS (EIPR)
 
 
Cairo-Geneva-Paris, January 20, 2016 – A UN expert body, the Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention (WGAD), declares the detention of human rights defender
Yara Sallam, as arbitrary, and requests immediate compensation. Several human
rights groups urge the Egyptian authorities to apply this Opinion in relation
to the numerous similar cases of human rights defenders arbitrarily detained in
application of the draconian Protest Law.
 
In August 2014, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders and the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS), referred
the case of Ms. Yara Sallam to the
United Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD). Ms. Yara
Sallam was the Transitional Justice Officer at the Egyptian Initiative for
Personal Rights (EIPR). In December 2014, she was sentenced in appeal along
with 22 other protesters including Ms. Sanaa Seif, a member of the “No
to Military Trials for Civilians” movement, to two years of imprisonment and
two years of police surveillance on charges of “breaching the protest law” under the “Anti-Protest
Law”, “sabotaging public properties”, “possession of inflammable materials” and
“taking part in showing off force with the objective of terrorising the
public”. She was released on September 23, 2015, by presidential pardon. 
 
In an opinion adopted in December 2015, the UN WGAD concluded that “Ms.
Sallam has been deprived of liberty for having peacefully exercised her right
to freedom of expression and freedom of association as guaranteed by Articles
19 and 20 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and Articles 19
and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)”,
the deprivation of liberty of Ms. Sallam thus falling within category II of the
categories applicable to the consideration of cases submitted to the UN WGAD.
Moreover, the UN WGAD also considered that “the non-observance of the
international norms relating to the right to a fair trial and to liberty and
security, established in article 9 of the UDHR and article 9 of the ICCPR in
this case is of such gravity as to give the deprivation of liberty of Ms.
Sallam an arbitrary character” the deprivation of liberty of Ms. Sallam also
falling within category III of the categories applicable to the consideration
of cases submitted to the UN WGAD. Accordingly, the UN WGAD requested “the
Government to take the necessary steps to remedy the situation of Ms. Sallam
and bring it into conformity with the standards and principles set forth in the
UDHR and ICCPR””
 
“While our organisations welcome the opinion rendered by the UN WGAD, we
would like to recall that many human rights defenders are still unjustly behind
bars in Egypt. We reiterate our call to the Egyptian authorities for the
immediate and unconditional release of all human rights defenders currently
detained in violation of their right to freedom of expression and freedom of
association and assembly”, said Karim Lahidji, FIDH President. 
 
The case of Yara Sallam is an illustration of a wider trend of
repression against human rights defenders in Egypt. The restrictive Protest Law
(Law No. 107 of 2013), which bans gatherings of ten or more people without a
permit issued by the authorities, has been repeatedly used by the authorities
as a tool to harass and imprison human rights defenders that dare to speak out
against governmental policies that violate human rights. 
 
“As long as the 2013 Protest law will be in force, human rights in Egypt
including the rights to freedom of expression and freedom of association and
assembly will systematically and continuously be violated. The Egyptian
authorities must absolutely amend this law and make it compliant with the
country's international law obligations”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. 
 
“Yara Sallam’s case is
not unique, throughout the past two years, several hundreds of individuals have
been arrested and deprived from their liberties under similar circumstances to
what the WGAD has ruled as arbitrary. It is important for the Egyptian
government to understand that stability would be realized once authorities
uphold the rule of law and the rights of their citizens. The WGAD decision on
Yara is a reminder of this”, said Mohamed
Zaree, Egypt Program Manager at CIHRS.
 
CIHRS, EIPR and the
Observatory call upon the Egyptian authorities to implement the UN WGAD
decision and remedy to the situation of Ms. Yara Sallam, and immediately and
unconditionally release all human rights defenders in Egypt arrested under the
repressive 2013 protest law, among others Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, Mr. Youssef Shaban, Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman[1] and Mr.
Alaa Abdel-Fattah[2].
 
For more information, please
contact:
· CIHRS: Mohamed
Zaree: (+202) 27931104 - 27931105
· EIPR: Yara Sallam:
(+202) 27960158 - 27960197 
· FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Arthur
Manet: (+33) 1 43 55 25 18
· OMCT: Delphine
Reculeau / Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: (+41) 22 809 49 39
 



[1]    
See Observatory Urgent Appeal EGY 001 / 0514 / OBS 045.8


[2]    
See Observatory Urgent Appeal EGY 002 / 1113 / OBS 095.7 