World summit brings surge of new commitments to protect human rights defenders
October 31, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2018 / OctoberWorld summit brings surge of new commitments to protect human rights defenders​




Human rights defenders from across all
corners of the world gathered this week in Paris for the Human Rights Defenders
World Summit, to develop a plan of action for how to protect and promote the
work of activists fighting for rights, 20 years on from the first UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders.After three days of discussions and strategy
development spanning regional and global issues, environmental rights and
women’s human rights defenders and the increasing attacks on human rights
defenders everywhere, the momentum culminated in the presentation of a landmark
action plan which will be presented to the UN in December. 
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
Michelle Bachelet, who spoke at the opening ceremony said: "What human
rights defenders teach us is that all of us can stand up for our rights and for
the rights of others, in our neighborhoods, in our countries and all over the
world. We can change the world.”
The Summit discussed  calls on Governments, corporations,
international financial institutions, donors and others, including the adoption
of national governmental action plans, implementation of legislation to legally
uphold the UN declaration, protecting defenders as a priority in foreign policy
and prioritizing the protection and work of women human rights defenders,
LGBT+, indigenous rights defenders and other marginalized defenders. 
Kumi Naidoo, Amnesty International’s
Secretary General, said: “The level of danger facing activists worldwide has
reached crisis point. Every day ordinary people are threatened, tortured,
imprisoned and killed for what they fight for, believe in or simply for who
they are. Now is the time to act and tackle the global surge in repression of
human rights defenders.”
The closing ceremony took place at the Palais
de Chaillot, Universal Declaration of Human Rights was signed 70 years ago. The
150 defenders gathered together to set out the Action Plan and pay tribute to
the men and women who work tirelessly to defend human rights around the world.
Among those in attendance over the last three
days were Alice
Mogwe, Secretary General of International Federation for Human Rights and the
Director of Botswana Ditshwanelo; Pulitzer Prize-winning
journalist Matthew Caruana Galizia,
who is calling for justice after his mother, Daphne Caruana Galizia, was assassinated one year
ago in Malta; Anielle Franco, who is bravely campaigning on behalf
of her sister, Marielle Franco, a Brazilian activist and elected councillor who
was shot dead in her car seven months ago.
Hina Jilani, President of OMCT, founder of the Human Rights Commission
of Pakistan, and the first UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights defenders said: “States have never given us space, it is because of
human rights defenders that there is space for civil society.  Seeing you all here engaged in defending
human rights., I am not too pessimistic. We have never been as global as a
movement. But we have to be clear to states: you need to live up to the
challenge and speak out for defenders. Human rights don’t come for free.”
The 1998 UN Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders
In 1998, governments adopted the Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders to acknowledge the key role of
human rights defenders. Despite progress in some areas, many governments are
continuing to fall short of their commitments
20 years on from the first Summit and the global context in which human rights
defenders operate in has become increasingly challenging. Democratic values are
under threat and systemic corruption, extreme inequality and discrimination,
religious fundamentalism and extremist policies are all on the rise. Alongside
this, we have seen a concerted effort to undermine, discredit and kill human
rights defenders. In
2017, at least 312 human rights defenders were assassinated, twice as many as
in 2015,
almost all with impunity for the perpetrators. The Action Plan hopes
to tackle these injustices and support Human Rights Defenders to continue their
critical work in a safe environment. 
ENDS
Notes to editors
The Human Rights Defenders World Summit 2018
The
Human Rights Defenders World Summit 2018 will bring together a diverse group of
150 human rights defenders from around the world for three days of meetings,
panel discussions, networking and workshopping. These activists, who are at the
forefront of struggles for social, political and environmental changes in their
countries, will have the opportunity to connect and engage with regional and
international human rights organizations, global government leaders, the United
Nations, donors and the private sector. The first Human Rights Defenders World
Summit took place 20 years ago in 1998 at the Palais de Chaillot, Paris,
the same location where this year’s closing ceremony will be held. 
About the organizations involved:
Amnesty
International
Amnesty International is a global movement of more than seven million people
who take injustice personally. We are campaigning for a world where human
rights are enjoyed by all. We are funded by members and people like you. We are
independent of any political ideology, economic interest or religion.                 
Association for Women’s Rights in Development (AWID)
AWID is
a global feminist organisation with over 5,000 individual and institutional
members from 164 countries. We support feminist, women’s rights and gender
justice movements to thrive, to be a driving force in challenging systems of
oppression, and to co-create feminist realities.
FIDH
FIDH (International
Federation for Human Rights) is an international human rights NGO federating
184 organisations from 112 countries. Since 1922, FIDH has been defending all
civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights as set out in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Front Line Defenders
Front
Line Defenders works for the protection, security and well-being of human
rights defenders at risk around the world, providing grants, training and
capacity building in physical and digital protection, advocacy and
campaigning/visibility for HRDs.
International Service for Human Rights
The International
Service for Human Rights is an independent, non-governmental organisation
dedicated to promoting and protecting human rights. We achieve this by
supporting human rights defenders, strengthening human rights systems, and
leading and participating in coalitions for human rights change.
OMCT
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is the world’s largest coalition of
non-governmental organisations fighting against arbitrary detention, torture,
summary and extrajudicial executions, forced disappearances and other forms of
violence and provides a comprehensive system of support and protection for human rights
defenders. 
ProtectDefenders.EU
ProtectDefenders.eu
is the European Union Human Rights Defenders mechanism, established to protect
defenders at high risk and facing the most difficult situations worldwide. Led
by a consortium of 12 NGOs active in the field of human rights.
Reporters Without Borders 
Reporters
Without Borders, or Reporters Sans Frontières, is an international non-profit,
non-governmental organization based in Paris, France, that conducts political
advocacy on issues relating to freedom of information and freedom of the press.https://hrdworldsummit.org/ 