Sudan:  Continuing judicial harassment against 5 defenders from TRACKs and the Director of ZORD
January 18, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2017 / JanuarySudan: Continuing judicial harassment against 5 defenders from TRACKs and the Director of ZORD

URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

New information
SDN 001 / 1016 / OBS
084.5
Judicial
harassment / Arbitrary detention /
Health
deterioration while in detention /
Arbitrary
arrest
Sudan
January 18, 2017
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Sudan.
New information:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continuing judicial
harassment against five human right defenders working at the Centre for
Training and Human Development in Sudan (TRACKs)[1],
namely Mr. Al Hassan Kheiry, a computer technician, Ms.
Arwa Elrabie, the Administration
Manager, Ms. Imany-Leyla Raye, a student volunteer, Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, the
Director, and Mr. Midhat A. Hamdan,
a trainer, as well as against the Director of Zarqa Organisation for Rural
Development (ZORD) who had delivered training for TRACKs, Mr. Mustafa Adam, as
well as the arbitrary detention of the last three (see background information).
According to the information received, on
January 10 and 12, 2017, new court sessions were held before the Khartoum
Central Criminal Court. This was the nineteenth hearing since the opening of
the trial on August 24, 2016.
On January 10, the Court heard the testimonies
of two witnesses. First, the Ambassador of Sudan before the United Nations in
Geneva was brought to the bar to report on the negative impact on Sudan
diplomatic relations with foreign actors of the alleged activities of the
defendants. He claimed that, even though civil society organisations are
allowed to work and report on human rights violations, these reports must not
have any political content and must be submitted to the government for approval
before being disseminated to foreign bodies. He was also asked to give his
opinion on films found during the search, such as the documentary Beats of the Antonov and the movie Attack on Darfur.
Secondly, a specialist in film montage was
brought as witness to discuss the credibility of the scenes in Beats of the Atonov and Attack on Darfur. He stated that the
films aimed at tarnishing the image of Sudan in the eyes of the viewer. 
On January 12, 2017,
the judge interrogated the six defendants on their relations to TRACKs, their
involvement with the centre and the various activities conducted. Mustafa Adam
was also questioned regarding his relation to the International Criminal Court
(ICC).
The next hearing will take place on January 19,
2017 at 12 pm. During this session, the judge will decide whether the charges
should be dropped or confirmed.
The
Observatory recalls that the six human rights defenders are facing crimes
against the State, which carry the death penalty (see below).
Three
of them remain arbitrarily detained in Al-Huda prison in Omdurman, namely
Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam and Midhat Afifi Hamdan,
despite a United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) decision
requesting their immediate release. 
The
Observatory also expresses concerns regarding the deteriorating health of Mr.
Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, who suffers from a heart condition and does not
have access to appropriate medical care in prison.
The
Observatory urges the Sudanese authorities to release immediately Messrs.
Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam and Midhat A. Hamdan and drop all the
charges against them and against Mr. Al Hassan Kheiry, Ms. Arwa Elrabie and Ms.
Imany-Leyla Raye, since they only aim at sanctioning their legitimate human
rights activities.
Until
all charges are dropped against them, the Observatory urges the Sudanese
authorities to ensure that the conditions of detention of the three
above-mentioned human rights defenders are humane, and that all judicial
proceedings against the six are carried out in full compliance with their right
to a fair trial, as protected under international law.
Background
information:
On March 26, 2015, approximately ten plain-clothed National Intelligence
and Security Services (NISS) agents raided TRACKs’ premises, during the last
day of a training on “social responsibility and active citizenship”. No search
warrant was presented and computers and documents belonging to TRACKs were
confiscated. Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif
Mukhtar was detained
for one day following the raid and later released on bail. 
Following the raid, on April 16, 2015, Mr. Adil Bakheit, member
of the Board of Trustees of the Sudan Human Rights Monitor (SHRM)[2]
was arrested and charged with “joint acts in the execution of criminal
conspiracy, undermining the constitutional system, waging war against the
State, calling for opposition to public authority by use of violent or criminal
force, publication of false news, and impersonating a public servant”.
In May 2015, Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar was charged with a number of
crimes, including “criminal conspiracy”, “undermining the constitutional
system” and “waging war against the State” and later released on bail.
On June 3, 2015, Mr. Adil Bakheit was released on bail.
On February 10, 2016, Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar received a phone
cal from the NISS Prosecution Office of Crimes against the State, he was
informed by the prosecutor that after 11 months of looking into the five
laptops and the server of the centre, they did not find any evidence to support
the charges made against them and therefore they decided to drop the 
case. The prosecutor also informed him that NISS had two weeks to appeal
their decision. If NISS did not appeal
within the timeframe, then Mr. Mukhtar should come to the NISS Prosecution
Office in order to collect his laptops and the server that had been
confiscated. 
On February 29, 2016, NISS officers raided for the second time TRACKs
offices without any warrant and brought the staff present in the premises to
the police station in order to interrogate them for 12 hours on TRACKs’
activities, including on their relation to the Al-khatim Aldan Center for
Enlightenment (KACE)[3].
Moreover, the NISS officers severely threatened, verbally abused and
ill-treated them for hours.
On May 22, 2016, Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam,
Midhat A Hamdan, Al Hassan Kheiry, Ms. Arwa Elrabie and Ms. Imany-Leyla Raye as
well as three other TRACKs staff, Ms. Nudaina Kamal, accountant, Mr. Khuzaini
El Hadi and Mr. Al Shazali Ibrahim Al Sheikh were summoned to the
NISS Department in Khartoum. Only two of them were questioned and further
threatened in relation to their personal activities, including their activism
and sources of income, while others were kept waiting before all the
individuals summoned were placed in custody pending further investigations.
Ms. Nudaina Kamal was released shortly after her arrest on the same day.
Ms. Arwa Elrabie and Ms. Imany-Leyla Raye were released on bail on May 30;
Messrs. Hassan Kheiry, Khuzaini El Hadi and Al Shazali Ibrahim Al Sheikh on
June 7, 2016.
On August 15, 2016, Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam and
Midhat Afifi Hamdan were transferred to Al Huda prison after spending almost
three months in a narrow cell with poor ventilation and access to food, no
access to medication and limited access to toilet at the State Prosecution
office and were charged for the same offences.
On August 24, 2016,
the trial against Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam, Midhat Afifi Hamdan, Al Hassan Kheiry,
Ms. Arwa Elrabie and Ms. Imany-Leyla Raye on charges under the 1991 Criminal
Act of “criminal conspiracy” (Article 21), “undermining the constitutional
system” (Article 50), “waging war against the State” (Article 51) and
“espionage” (Article 53)[4]
opened before the Khartoum Central Criminal Court. Such offences are
classified as crimes against the State and carry the death penalty. Messrs.
Midhat Afifi Hamdan and Mustafa Adam are also facing charges under Article 14
of the Information Crime Law. These
charges relate to accusations of producing, setting, sending, storing or
promoting indecent content through internet, computer or alike that affect
public order or morals. They carry additional sentences of imprisonment up to
ten years and a fine.
On
August 25, 2016 the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) adopted a
decision[5],
which found the deprivation of liberty of Mr. Al Hassan Kheiry,
Ms. Arwa Elrabie, Ms. Imany-Leyla Raye,
Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mr. Midhat Afifi Hamdan, Mr. Mustafa Adam, Mr. Al Shazali Ibrahim Al
Sheikh, Mr. Adil Bakheit, and Mr. Khuzaini El Hadi to be arbitrary and thus in
violation of their rights as enshrined in Articles 9.2 and 19 of the ICCPR and
19 of the UDHR.
On September 22 and 29, 2016, the Prosecutor showed a number of personal
pictures and materials found on the laptops of the defendants[6],
although completely irrelevant to the charges and in blatant breach of their right
to privacy and property. Furthermore, the Prosecutor claimed TRACKs’ activities
were used to carry on the work of KACE despite being shut down by the
authorities in 2012.
The Prosecutor also claimed that TRACKs was operating without being
registered as a training centre, since their licence ended on March 27, 2015.
However, TRACKs’ application to renew their licence in due time, which included
the payment of registration fees to the National Centre for Training, has been
delayed by the authorities due to “internal issues”. The status of their
application is therefore still pending, which nonetheless enables TRACKs to
legally operate under Sudanese legislation.
The hearing of September 29, which started with two hours delay due to
the late arrival of both Prosecutor and Investigator, was eventually suspended
due to a power cut.
On October 6, 2016, the Prosecutor continued showing evidence allegedly
found on Mr. Mustafa Adam’s laptop and without any relevance to the proceedings.
Amongst the documents brought forward, some of them were allegedly including
“information about the Sudanese regime”[7].
The
Prosecutor also presented the registration form filled out by TRACKs to the
National Center for Training. In this document, TRACKs requested to be registered
as a centre that works on trainings covering a wide scope of issues such as
NGO, time and project management as well as proposal-writing, negotiations,
conflict analysis and youth capacity-building. The Prosecutor argued that
TRACKs was not registered to carry out trainings on human rights and human
rights monitoring. 
Lawyers
of the defendants requested evidence to be stamped by the forensic laboratory
and cross-examined.
On
October 13, 2016 a power cut led the hearing to be held in a very small courtroom
on the ground floor, thus preventing many journalists, activists, family
members of the defendants as well as a diplomatic staff member from entering
the room despite their protests, in breach of the principle of publicity of
debates.
During
the hearing, the Prosecutor continued showing evidence allegedly found on the
laptops of the defendants. These included evidence completely irrelevant to the
proceedings, such as a list of names of invitees to the Human Rights Council
and a letter addressing the German Democratic Republic[8]. Amongst the
documents brought forward were also a report on human trafficking in Sudan
addressing the role of state forces as well as Mr. Mustafa Adam’s membership to
the International Criminal Court Coalition.
On
October 22, once more, the Prosecutor showed evidence allegedly found on the
defendants’ laptops. Amongst these were reports about workshops and training
sessions on the human rights situation in Sudan, as well as on the rights and
protection of human rights defenders under international law.
In
his final attempt to portray TRACKs and its members as working against the
Sudanese State, the Prosecutor blamed the organisation and its work for the
“negative opinion” the International Criminal Court (ICC), the United Nations
(UN) and the European Union (EU) have of the Sudanese President, Omar
al-Bashir, and for the economic sanctions adopted against Sudan. According to
him, “TRACKs’ activities are responsible for the demise of the State”.
In addition, the Prosecutor focused part of his
intervention on a former member of KACE, who is neither physically in Sudan,
nor a member of TRACKs or part of this case. In spite of these elements, and
without any evidence provided, the Prosecutor nonetheless argued that TRACKs
was “working alongside him to support the military opposition in Darfur”.
During
the same October 22 hearing, two journalists were prevented from entering the
courtroom. In particular, Mr. Adil Color, Al-Ayam journalist, had
his press card confiscated and was forced to leave the courthouse following
acts of harassment against him while trying to cover the trial. As for
journalist Mr. Ibrahim al-Safi,
he was stopped at the door, and taken to an office downstairs before activists
intervened to take him out.
On November 10, the trial resumed with an hour
delay. On that day, the defence team proceeded to the cross-examination of the
investigator representing the States Crimes Prosecution Office on the evidence
and arguments provided by the Prosecutor. The latter denied any knowledge of
the international human rights framework, and of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) investigation in Darfur despite the Prosecutor’s previous attempts
to blame TRACKs and its members for the “negative opinion” the ICC, the United
Nations (UN) and the European Union (EU) have of the Sudanese President, Omar
al-Bashir, and for the economic sanctions adopted against Sudan (see background
information). 
The defence team also claimed that the
investigator had committed some procedural irregularities with respect to the
search warrants and seizures that took place within TRACKs premises.
In addition, on November 10, two
journalists were violently arrested and briefly detained by NISS officers.
Namely, Mr. Ibrahim al-Safi and Ms. Amel Habbani’s phone were searched for
allegedly taking pictures inside the courthouse. The security officers slapped
Ms. Habbani as she refused to hand in her cell phone.
Further
hearings dedicated to the cross-examination of evidences presented by the
investigator by the defence and the State prosecutor team took place on
November 17, 22 and 29, 2016.
On
December 6 and 13, 2016, the court heard several witnesses, including NISS
officers.
On
December 27, 2016, the court heard two witnesses presented by the State Crime
Prosecutor.
Furthermore,
Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Ms. Arwa Elrabie, Ms. Nudaina Kamal and Mr.
Adil Bakheit are also facing the similar charges in another court case related
to another raid conducted at TRACKs’ offices on March 26, 2015. The case was
dropped on February 2016 by the State Crimes Prosecution Office, and re-opened
by the same on August 15, 2016. Their first hearing should have taken place on
August 24, 2016 but has already been postponed three times and no date for the
next hearing has been set yet.
Actions requested:
The
Observatory urges the authorities of Sudan to: 
i.           
Release immediately
and unconditionally Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam and Midhat A Hamdan and guarantee in
all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity;
ii.         
Drop all charges against Messrs. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, Mustafa Adam, Midhat A Hamdan, Al Hassan Kheiry, Mrs. Arwa Elrabie and
Ms. Imany-Leyla Raye, as they only aim at sanctioning their human rights
activities;
iii.        
Put an end to any kind of harassment, including
at the judicial level, against them, as well as against
all human rights defenders in Sudan, and ensure in all circumstances that they
are able to carry out their activities without hindrances;
iv.        
Conform to the decision of the UNWGAD of August
2016;
v.          
Conform in any circumstances with the provisions
of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular its articles 1,
6 and 12.2; 
vi.        
Ensure in all circumstances respect for the
right to a fair trial as enshrined in Article 10 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR);
vii.       
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Sudan.
Addresses: 
· Mr. Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, President of Sudan; Fax: + 249 183 783223
· Mr. Awad Al Hassan Al Nour, Minister of Justicer; Fax: 249 183 764 168 / +249 183 770 883; Email: moj@moj.gov.sd 
· Mr. Ibrahim Ahmed Ghandour, Minister of Foreign Affairs; Fax: 249183772941
· Mr. Ismat Abdelrahman Zeinalabdin, Minister of Interior; ;; Fax: +249 183 779383 / +249 183 776 554; Email: ministry@mfa.gov.sd
· Advisory Council for Human Rights, Rapporteur, ;Fax: +249 183 77 08 83
· H.E. Mr.
Mustafa Osman Ismail Elamin, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, ;Fax: +41 22 731 26 56 / +41 22 716 19 70; Email: mission.sudan@bluewin.ch 
· Embassy of Sudan in Brussels, Avenue F.D. Roosevelt 124, 1050 Brussels, Belgium. Fax: 0032 (2) 648 34 99, Email: sudanbx@yahoo.com
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Sudan in your respective countries. 

*** The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.


[1]                
TRACKs is a Sudanese NGO providing training on various topics relating
to human rights and information technology.


[2]                 See the Observatory’s Urgent
Appeals SDN 001 / 0415 / OBS 033 and SDN 001 / 0415 / OBS 033.1, published on
April 21 and May 18, 2015. 


[3]                 KACE aimed to develop
democratic modes of behaviour, to encourage freedom of thought and freedom of
scientific research, and to reinforce peaceful and civilized debate amongst
different groups and sectors of the society.  Sudanese authorities shut
down KACE in late 2012 on allegations of working to topple the regime.


[4]           
Previously
the charges included Article 65 “criminal and terrorist
organisation”, but on October 20, the Prosecutor did not require its
application and instead added Article 21 to the charges. Article 21 reads “when
an offence by two or more persons in execution of criminal conspiracy between
them, each of such persons shall be responsible for that offence in the same
manner as if it is committed by him alone, and shall be punished with the
penalty prescribed therefore”. Since the other charges carry the death
penalty, it is believed that this article could also be used by the Court to
hand down such a sentence.


[5]           
See Opinions adopted by the UNWGAD at its 76th session, 22-26 August
2016 available at:
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Detention/Opinions/Session76/34-2016.pdf. 


[6]                 The materials shown in Court
were film documentaries, 41 pictures of one taken during workshops or meetings
and several personal pictures taken during private time with friends.


[7]                 In reality, these were forms
for an International Criminal Court (ICC) witness-protection programme run by
the US Embassy.


[8]                 The defence had to point out
that this country does not even exist anymore. 