17th Human Rights Council: OMCT oral statement_SR on Extrajudicial killing
June 15, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Bahrain / 2011 / June17th Human Rights Council: OMCT oral statement_SR on Extrajudicial killingHuman Rights
Council
17th
Session, 30th May – 17th June 2011
Item 3: Interactive
Dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary
Executions and the Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers
Check against delivery
Oral statement delivered by the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), a non-governmental organisation with general consultative status
Thank you, Mr. President. 
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) welcomes
the report of the Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary
Executions on “Protecting the right to life in the context of policing
assemblies” which is very timely, in particular in light of the unfolding
events in the Middle East and North Africa. The report provides
guidance for States to avoid arbitrary deprivation of life during protests,
which OMCT urges States to implement. 
The Special Rapporteur, along with other mandate
holders, has previously expressed its concern about the situation in Syria, Bahrain and Yemen, among others,
with regard to the use of live ammunition against peaceful protesters in clear
violation of international law. Security forces in those countries have
continued to blatantly use unlawful and excessive force, including widespread
use of beatings, rubber and live ammunitions, against generally peaceful
protests. The violent repression, aimed at silencing any dissident voices, has
resulted in over hundreds dead and thousands injured. The OMCT is concerned
that the situations can further escalate to unprecedented levels in the coming
days, and urges these States to immediately put an end to the deadly crackdown,
and to this Human Rights Council to address promptly these violations. 
Mr. President, 
As highlighted by the Special Rapporteur in his
report, ensuring accountability for human rights violations, including of the
right to life, during protests, is needed to prevent further violations. This
particularly holds true for countries undergoing transition. In this regards,
OMCT supports the Special Rapporteur’s call for independent, impartial and
exhaustive investigations and justice to all of the victims of the violent
protests that took place at the beginning of the year in Tunisia and Egypt. OMCT further
calls on the countries undergoing transition to engage in decisive legal and
policy reforms to fully guarantee the right of people to engage in peaceful
protests, including by repealing long-term emergency laws, ensure that they can
do so without fear or threat, and to ensure that the State security forces
comply fully with international standards on the use of force and firearms. 
Mr. Special Rapporteur, in light of the recent events
in Pakistan, notably with the
Abbottabad operation, do you intend to follow-up on your predecessor’s study on
targeted killing? 
Turning to the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
Independence of Judges and Lawyers, OMCT wishes to highlight the case of Venezuelan
Judge Maria Lourdes Afiuni, who was arrested on 10 December 2009, following her decision to release on bail a
defendant, taking into account the recommendations of the United Nations
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention. Judge Afiuni is presently under house
arrest and faces ongoing prosecution. The OMCT urges the Venezuelan authorities
to ensure her safety at all times, end her persecution and guarantee that the
trial initiated against her meet all international standards of fair trial and
is open to international observers. 
Finally, Ms. Special Rapporteur, while we
welcome the topic of the report, we would appreciate if you could identify
pertinent violations and cases that you think should be given particular
attention in connection with the thematic addressed in your report. 
Thank you. 