Russian Federation:  Judicial harassment against Mr. Igor Kalyapin
January 19, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2012 / JanuaryRussian Federation: Judicial harassment against Mr. Igor KalyapinURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
RUS
002 / 0112 / OBS 009
Judicial
harassment
Russian
Federation
January 19, 2012
The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in the Russian
Federation.Brief description
of the situation:
The Observatory
has been informed by the Committee Against Torture about the judicial harassment
against its Chairman, Mr. Igor Kalyapin, also Head of the Joint Mobile
Group of human rights organisations in Chechnya (JMG)[1].
According to the
information received, on January 18, 2012, Mr. Igor Kalyapin was informed by
the Head of the Territorial Department for Investigating Particular Important
Cases of the Investigative Department of the Investigative Committee of the
Russian Federation, Mr. Igor Sobol, about the filing by the head of the Chechen
special militia agents (OMON) of a request for the opening of a criminal case
by the investigative authorities of the Chechen Republic for “disclosure of
State secrets” against Mr. Kalyapin under Article 283 of the Criminal Code of
the Russian Federation, which is punishable with a prison sentence of three to
seven years. The request is currently being reviewed by the investigative
authorities.
It is feared that
this request merely aims at sanctioning the human rights activities carried out
by the JMG, in particular the investigation into the abduction and subsequent
ill-treatment of Mr. Islam Umarpashayev by members of the Chechen OMON. The
Umarpashayev case is currently examined by a team placed under the leadership
of Mr. Igor Sobol, while Mr. Kalyapin is representative for the victim. The
diary written by Mr. Kalyapin, in which he narrates the story of the
investigation, has gained broad popularity on the Internet. Moreover, the JMG
received two new cases in which members and commanders of the Chechen OMON are also
suspected[2].
The Observatory
condemns the judicial harassment of Mr. Igor Kalyapin since it seems to merely
aim at sanctioning his human rights activities and expresses its deep concern
about the ongoing attempts to hinder the peaceful activities of human rights
defenders in the Russian Federation.
Actions
requested:
Please write to
the authorities of Russian Federation, urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Igor Kalyapin as
well as of all members of the Committee Against Torture and of the JMG and all
human rights defenders in the Russian Federation;ii.                  
Put an end to any
act of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr. Igor Kalyapin
as well as against all human rights defenders in the Russian Federation, and ensure
in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate
activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
iii.                 
Comply with the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted
by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially:
-         
its Article 1,
which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”,
-         
its Article 6 (b)
and (c), which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others [...] as provided for in human rights and other applicable international
instruments, freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information
and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms and [...] to study,
discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice,
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate
means, to draw public attention to those matters”,
-         
and Article 12.2,
which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association
with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”;
iv.                 
Comply with the
provisions of the Declaration of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe on the protection of human rights defenders and the promotion of their
activities, and in particular With Article 2.i), in which the Committee calls
on member States to “create an environment conducive to the work of human
rights defenders, enabling individuals, groups and associations to freely carry
out activities, on a legal basis, consistent with international standards, to
promote and strive for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
without any restrictions other than those authorised by the European Convention
on Human Rights;v.           More generally,
ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international
and regional human rights instruments ratified by the Russian Federation.
Addresses:
Mr. Dmitri Medvedev, President of the
     Russian Federation, Ilinka Str, 23, Moscow, 103132, Moscow, Russian
     Federation, Faxes:+ 7 495 606 5173 / 630 2408Minister of Internal Affairs, Mr. Rashid
     Nurgaliev, ul. Zhitnaya, 16, 117049 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram:
     Rossiia, 117049, Moskva, Fax: + 7 495 637 49 25Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey
     Lavrov, Smolenskaya-Sennaya pl, 32/34, 121200 Moscow, Russian Federation,
     Telegram: Fax:+ 7 495 644 2203Mr. Alexander Ivanovich Bastrykin, Chairman
     of the Investigations Committee of the Russian Federation, Building 28,
     house 15, Naberezhnaya Akademika Tupoleva, Moscow, 105005, Russian
     FederationAmbassador Mr. Valery Loshchinin, Permanent
     Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations in Geneva, Avenue
     de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland, E-mail : mission.russian@vtxnet.ch, Fax: +4122 734 40 44Ambassador Mr. Alexandra
     Romanov, Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 66 avenue de Fré,
     1180 Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26 13. E-mail: amrusbel@skynet.be
Please also write
to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Russian Federation in your respective
country.
***
Geneva-Paris,
January 19, 2012
Kindly inform us
of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +
     41 22 809 49 29Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43
     55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1] The JMG was formed after the murder of Ms.
Natalia Estemirova, a member of the Human Rights Centre “Memorial” in Grozny,
in July 2009, and has been active in Grozny since the fall of 2009.


[2] One of these cases concerns the illegal
detention and brutal torture by policemen of employees of the Criminal Investigation
Department of the Interior Ministry of the Chechen Republic. The investigation
into these events was recently suspended by the investigative authorities in
Chechnya. In late December 2011, the lawyers of the JMG sent a complaint
against the suspension to the Prosecutor’s Office of the North Caucasus Federal
District. In the case, which is now under review by the Federal Prosecutor,
convincing evidence of criminal activity by the Chechen OMON agents was
gathered. 