Kenya:  New acts of intimidation against civil society and restrictions on their access to foreign funding
December 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2016 / DecemberKenya: New acts of intimidation against civil society and restrictions on their access to foreign funding


THE OBSERVATORY - URGENT APPEAL

KEN 004 / 1216 / OBS 110
Intimidation / Smearing campaign /
Restrictions to freedom of association
 Kenya
December 20, 2016

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, received
new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Kenya. 

Description of the situation:

The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the recent new acts
of intimidation and attacks against civil society and restrictions on their access
to foreign funding. 
According
to the information received, on December 19, 2016, the NGO Coordination
Board declared illegal and froze the bank accounts of the International
Foundation for Electoral Systems (IFES), an American non-governmental
organisation (NGO) carrying out an electoral assistance programme ahead of the
upcoming general elections of August 2017 through its Kenya office. In a letter
addressed to IFES, Principal Secretary Interior Karanja Kibicho, the Central
Bank of Kenya governor and USAid[1],
the NGO Coordination Board affirmed that IFES is not a registered NGO in Kenya
and therefore lacks the legal status to operate in the country. The NGO Coordination
Board therefore ordered an asset freeze until proper registration occurs, and asked
the director of Immigration to review the status of all foreigners working with
IFES.
This
happened only one week after the public speech of President Kenyatta on December
12, 2016, on Jamhuri Day (Celebration of Kenyan Independence), in which he condemned
the work of NGOs, targeting especially the ones working in the field of civic
education in Kenya ahead of next year’s general elections. 
During
his intervention he accused NGOs providing civic education to be agents of
foreign powers trying to influence the electoral process and threatened to
forbid them from receiving foreign funding. It has to be recalled that in
Kenya, the role of civil society in educating the population on the political
system and the electoral process is crucial to ensure free, fair and
transparent elections.  
The
Observatory expresses its concern over such facts, since they are emblematic of
the climate of hostility against civil society that has been characterizing the
Kenyatta administration for almost 4 years. It is not the first time that the
NGO Coordination Board arbitrarily put hindrances to the freedom of association
of NGOs in Kenya[2] and
that foreign NGOs and personnel working in Kenya are targeted[3].
Moreover President Kenyatta, who is running for his second mandate in the
upcoming presidential elections, has been carrying out smearing campaigns
against independent civil society in Kenya since he started his presidential
mandate, blaming NGOs for instigating crimes against humanity charges against him
and for cooperating with the International Criminal Court.
In
addition, the questioning of foreign funding for NGOs is not new to the current
administration, since it recalls other attempts to restrict freedom of
association of Kenyan civil society through draconian amendments proposed
to place restrictions on foreign funding to 15% for independent civil society
groups. This could be the beginning of a new wave of
harassment against the Kenyan independent civil society in view of the upcoming
general elections. 
The
Observatory would like to recall that this happens under the same
administration that has been undermining, for more than 1000 days since its
signing into law, the commencement of the Public Benefit Organisation (PBO) Act
2013, a law seeking to provide an enabling environment for NGOs. Despite the
High Court ruling for its immediate overdue commencement on October 31, 2016,
no further step has been undertaken so far[4].
Instead, as of today the NGO Coordination Act 1990 is still regulating the
space for civil society with broad and vague provisions leaving room for
arbitrariness and abuses against NGOs[5].
The
Observatory considers extremely worrisome this lack of political will to create
a favourable environment for civil society to work without hindrances in the
defence of human rights and strongly condemns this new attack against the
Kenyan civil society. 
Finally,
the Observatory would like to reiterate the importance of guaranteeing the
constitutional rights to freedom of association, assembly and expression,
particularly in view of the upcoming general elections, in order to prevent the
brutal experiences of excessive use of violence by the police that Kenya has
faced around the past two general elections.
 
Actions requested:

Please write to the authorities of Kenya asking them to:
Put an end to all forms of harassment and smearing campaigns against
civil society in Kenya, as well as against all human rights defenders in Kenya
as they only aim at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities.
Guarantee under all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of all human rights defenders in the country;
Immediately issue a public statement legitimizing the work of civil
society and human rights defenders;
Follow the order of the High Court of Kenya by effectively
implement the PBO Act without further delay. 
Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on
December 9, 1998, especially Articles 1 and 12.2; and
More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human
rights instruments ratified by Kenya.

Addresses:
·  Hon.
Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the Republic of Kenya, Fax: +254-020-2436,
Email: president@statehousekenya.go.ke
·  Hon.
William Ruto, Deputy-President of the Republic of Kenya, Email: dp@deputypresident.go.ke
·  Hon.
Joseph Nkaissery, Interior & Coordination of National Government,
Email: ps.interior@kenya.go.ke
·  Inspector
General of Police, Email: nps@nationalpolice.go.ke
·  Macharia
Njeru, Chairperson, Email: macharia.njeru@ipoa.go.ke
·  Otiende
Amollo, Chairperson, Commission on Administrative Justice (CAJ), Email:otiendeamollo@yahoo.com; otiendeamollo@ombudsman.go.ke
·  Commissioner Kagwiria
Mbogori, Chairperson, Kenya National Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR),
Fax: +254-020- 2716160 E-mail haki@knchr.org
·  H.E.
Mr. Stephen Ndungu Karau, Permanent Mission of Kenya to the United Nations
in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 731 29 05, E-mail: mission.kenya@ties.itu.int
·  H.E.
Johnson Weru, Embassy of Kenya in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 340 10 50 / +
32 2 340 10 68. Email: kenbrussels@hotmail.com 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Kenya in your respective
countries.
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.



[1] The US Development Agency funds IFES with 2
billion KSH for its Kenyan electoral assistance programme.


[2] See the Observatory Urgent Appeal KEN 001 / 0415 / OBS 034.1 issued on June 5,
2015.


[3] International
and foreign registered NGOs that have an office in Kenya are facing increasing
restrictions particularly regarding the arbitrary withdrawal of work permits
for their foreign staff working in Kenya and the denial of new ones. This was
the case for the Kenyan office of Human Rights Watch in August 2016, where all
international staff has been forced to leave the country and work from abroad.


[4] See Observatory Press Release issued on November
4, 2016.


[5] For example, the NGO Coordination
Board can refuse registration of an NGO applicant if its proposed activities or
procedures are not “in the national interest”, and is not legally required to
furnish the applicant with an explanation for the refusal of registration.
Moreover, wide discretion is given to the NGO Board and the Minister, including
regarding the certificate of registration, and the timeframe within which the
NGO Coordination Board must act on NGO registration applications. 