Greece:  Continuous acts of harassment against minority rights defenders
November 18, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2016 / NovemberGreece: Continuous acts of harassment against minority rights defenders

CASE GRE 181116
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

Restrictions to
freedom of movement /
Entry ban / Arbitrary detention
 
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Greece.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT has
been informed by the Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM) about continuous acts of
harassment against defenders and journalists working on the rights of
minorities in Greece, including the arbitrary restriction to freedom of
movement of Mr. Slavko Mangovski, International
Coordinator of the Macedonian Human Rights Movement International (MHRMI). 
 
According to the information received, on
October 24, 2016, Mr. Mangovski was travelling from Macedonia to Greece in
order to meet with Macedonian minority activists in the framework of his work
for MHRMI, inter alia. At the Niki/Medzitlija Macedonian-Greek border crossing,
he was denied entrance to Greece and informed that he was, since June 4, 2013,
listed on the national registry of persons not allowed entering the Greek
territory. The authorities provided him with a copy of the official document
pronouncing his ban; it was the first time Mr. Mangovski learned about the
existence of such ban against him, which prevented him from being able to use
in a timely manner the available legal remedy to contest such measure soon
after it was imposed. Moreover, he was given no explanation either about the
grounds of the ban or the length of the measure. 
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is
concerned that such ban could be linked to Mr. Mangovski’s participation as a
speaker to the joint MHRMI and Association of Refugee Children from Aegean Macedonia
(ARCAM) Gala Banquet on June 1, 2013, in Toronto, commemorating the 65th
anniversary of the plight of the Detsa Begaltsi (Macedonian minority Children
Refugees from the Greek Civil War).
 
It is important to note that this is not
the first time that Mr. Mangovski is prevented from entering Greece, since
another ban had been issued against him on August 11, 2000. Such decision was
lifted on August 11, 2010, two days after GHM intervened before the Greek
authorities on his behalf. 
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT would
like to highlight that this measure echoes many other violations, particularly entry
bans, arbitrary detentions and expulsions, suffered by minorities’ rights
defenders in Greece in the past years. 
 
The most recent case is the one of the
Turkish defender Mr. Mustafa Kaymakçı,
President of the organisation “Rhodes, Kos and the Dodecanese Turks Culture and
Solidarity Association”, who was arbitrarily detained, expelled and banned from
the Greek territory while he was conducting a fact finding mission about
Turkish minorities in Greece[1].
 
Moreover, on November 8, 2014, the human
rights lawyer Ms. Trandaflika Sandeva
was also declared persona non grata
and banned from entering the Greek soil. She was heading towards Thessaloniki
to legally represent Macedonian families in cases involving their properties in
Greece, which they had lost during the Greek Civil War, but at the Evzoni
border crossing she was handed a notice banning her from entering the country.
 
Furthermore, on June 3, 2013, two
Macedonian journalists Mr. Goran
Momirovski and Ms. Ivana Kostovska were
also banned from entering Greece, after filming a documentary about the daily
life and struggles of the Macedonian minority in Greece. They were declared personae non grata, and were handed
official documents describing them as "dangerous" and "enemies
of the state", for posing threats to the public and internal security of
the country.
 
On August 19, 2012, Mr. Marin Mema, an
Albanian reporter was declared a “threat to national security” and therefore denied
entry to the country by the Greek authorities after he realised a documentary
about the Çam community, an Albanian minority expelled from northern Greece
during the Second World War and never allowed to return. 
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is
concerned about the pattern of restriction of movement, particularly entry in
the country, on the ground of posing threats to national security, against defenders
and journalists working on the rights of minorities, which appears only to be aimed
at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities. 
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT calls
upon the Greek authorities to immediately and unconditionally lift such bans
and more generally to put an end to all acts of harassment against all minority
rights defenders in Greece. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in
Greece, urging them to:
 
Guarantee
     the freedom of movement of Mr. Slavko Mangovski, Ms. Trandaflika Sandeva,
     Mr. Goran Momirovski, Ms. Ivana Kostovska and Mr. Martin Mema by
     immediately and unconditionally lifting the prohibition to enter the
     country which was issued against them, as it only aims at sanctioning their
     legitimate human rights activities;
 
Put
     an end to all acts of harassment against all minority rights defenders in
     Greece;
 
Conform
     with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
     adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998,
     especially Articles 1 and 12.2; and
 
More
     generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
     fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
     Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments
     ratified by Greece.
 
Addresses:
 
·   Prime Minister of
Greece, Mr. Alexis Tsipras, Email: mail@primeminister.gr
·    Alternate
Minister of Immigration Policy of Greece, Mr. Giannis Mouzalas, Fax: +30 213
136 4418, Email: gram.anaplypourgou@ypes.gr

·    Alternate
Minister for Citizens Protection of Greece, Mr. Nikolaos Toskas, Fax: +30 210
692 9764, Email: minister@mopocp.gov.gr

·    Deputy Permanent
Representative of Greece, Mr. Ioannis Tsaousis, First Counsellor, Permanent
Mission of Greece to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 732
21 50; Email: grdel.gva@mfa.gr
·    Ambassador of
Greece, H.E. Eleftheria Galathianaki, Embassy of Greece in Brussels, Belgium,
Fax: (+32) 2 545 5585, Email: gremb.bru@mfa.gr
·    Permanent
Representative of Greece, H.E. Papastavrou Andreas, Permanent Representation to
the European Union (EU), Fax: +32 2 5515651, 5127912, Email: mea.bruxelles@rp-greece.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of Greece in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva, November 18, 2016
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 



[1]
For more details, see OMCT Urgent Appeal GRE 261016 of October 26, 2016:
 http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/greece/2016/10/d24016/ 