Egypt:  Ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Azza Soliman
May 21, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2015 / MayEgypt: Ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Azza SolimanNew informationEGY 001 / 0315 / OBS 006.2
Judicial harassment
Egypt
May 21, 2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of theInternational Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in 
Egypt.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing 
judicial harassment of Ms. Azza Soliman, human rights lawyer 
and founder of the Centre for Egyptian Women Legal Aid (CEWLA).
 
According to information received, on May 23, 2015, the Abdeen Misdemanour 
Court will hold a hearing in the case against Ms. Soliman on charges of 
“unauthorised protesting” and “breach of security and public order”. Charges 
were pressed after Ms. Soliman went to the police to provide a testimony on the 
violent repression by the police of a protest commemorating the January 25 
Revolution, which led to the death of Ms. Shaimaa El Sabbagh, political activist 
and women's rights defender (see background information).
 
The Observatory recalls that Ms. Soliman has recently established the 
“Coalition on the Protection of Witnesses and Informants”sand held a conferene 
entitled “Protection of witnesses and informants: Improving the justice system” 
about the lack of protection of witnesses within the Egyptian legal system on 
May 7 in Cairo, which included the participation of a large network of civil 
society organizations and representatives from the Egyptian authorities 
including the President of the National Human Rights Council, and 
representatives from the Ministry of Justice and the “Legislative Reform” 
Committee.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the judicial harassment against Ms. 
Soliman, which only aims at sanctioning her recent reports on human rights 
violations, as part of her legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory 
calls on the authorities to drop all charges held against her, and put an 
immediate end to her judicial harassment.
 
This case is an illustration of a wider trend of repression against human 
rights defenders in Egypt. The Observatory recalls in particular that the 
restrictive Protest Law, which bans gatherings of ten or more people without a 
permit issued by the authorities, has been repeatedly used by the authorities as 
a tool to harass and imprison human rights defenders.
 
Background information:
 
On January 24, 2015, Ms. Soliman voluntary went to the Public Prosecution's 
office to give her testimony regarding the violent dispersal of a protest 
organised by the political party Popular Alliance on the same day by security 
forces, which lead to the death of political activist, Ms. Shaimaa El Sabbagh. 
Ms. Soliman did not take part in the protest, but was coincidentally in the same 
area and witnessed the dispersal and the shooting of the activist.
 
After waiting several hours at the Public Prosecution's office, Ms. Soliman 
was finally able to give her testimony, pointing to the responsibility of the 
police for the death of the activist. Ms. Soliman also filed a complaint 
accusing the Minister of Interior and security forces of having violently 
dispersed the peaceful protest.
 
Upon completion of her testimony, the prosecutor then interrogated her, and 
informed her that he was going to press charges against her and four other 
witnesses for “illegal gathering” and “participating in a protest that harmed 
public security”. Ms. Soliman was released along with the other four, pending 
investigation.
 
On March 23, 2015, Ms. Soliman was formally charged with “unauthorised 
protesting”, and “breach of security and public order”. Along with Ms. Soliman, 
sixteen others were charged, including Ms. Nagwa Abbass, member of the Socialist 
Popular Alliance Party.
 
On March 28, 2015, the lawyers of Ms. Soliman requested from the General 
Prosecutor to include her as a witness and not as a defendant in the case, 
however on March 31, this request was denied.
 
On April 4, 2015, the first hearing took place before the Abdeen 
Misdemeanor Court. Ms. Soliman's lawyers requested adjournment, as they had not 
been able to access the criminal files[1]. The request was granted and the Court adjourned the 
hearing to May 9, 2015. On May 9, the judge heard requests made by lawyers of 
other accused and adjourned the hearing to May 23, 2015.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:
 
·       Drop all charges against Ms. Azza Soliman and put an end to all 
acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against her and all human 
rights defenders in Egypt;
 
·       Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Ms. Azza Soliman and all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
·        Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-      its Article 1, which provides that 
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote 
and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental 
freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-      its Article 5(a): “For the purpose of 
promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the 
right, individually and in association with others, at the national and 
international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully”
-      its Article 6(a), which foresees that 
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to 
participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and 
fundamental freedoms”;
-      its Article 12.2, which provides that “the 
State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the 
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, 
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure 
adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a 
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the 
present Declaration”;
 
·       Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and 
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Egypt.
 
Addresses
·       President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, 
H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 
23901998
·       Prime Minister, Mr. Ibrahim Mehleb, 
Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 
/ 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·       Minister of the Interior, General Mohamed 
Ibrahim Moustafa, Ministry of the Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, 
Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794 5529
·       Minister of Justice, Mr. Ezzat Khamis, 
Ministry of Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, 
E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·       Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Hisham 
Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577 
4716
·       Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the 
National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·       H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, 
Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 
1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·       Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue 
de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email:embassy.egypt@skynet.be 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in your 
respective country. 