Ethiopia:  Ethiopia: New information  - Arbitrary arrest and detention / Peaceful Demonstration
May 23, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Ethiopia / 2001 / MayEthiopia: Ethiopia: New information  - Arbitrary arrest and detention / Peaceful DemonstrationURGENT APPEAL – THE OBSERVATORY New information ETH/001/0105/OBS 040.1 Ethiopia Arbitrary arrest and detention / Peaceful Demonstration May  22nd, 2001  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of FIDH and OMCT, requests your urgent international intervention in the following situation in Ethiopia.  New information  The Observatory has been informed by the Ethiopian Human Rights Council of the arbitrary arrested and detention of two senior human rights defenders in Addis Ababa Ethiopia.  According to the information received, Professor Mesfin Wolde Mariam and Dr. Berhanu Nega's detention at the Maekelawi prison has been extended until May 25th, 2001. During their detention they have not been allowed access to legal representation. These human rights defenders once again appeared before the 5th criminal division of the Ethiopian Federal High Court on May 18th, at which time the team charged with investigating their alleged crimes again requested that the court give it more time to finish studying the documents and other material it had collected. The team also requested extra time be given for them to follow new leads, including a "programme of a political party that is not legally registered” that had reportedly been found at the house of one of the detainees. It is worth noting that the Federal police originally justified the arrest of the two human rights defenders by claiming to already have sufficient evidence to prove that they had allegedly incited Addiss Abeba University students to riot during a meeting held to discuss academic freedom on April 8th, 2001.  According to the information received, on May 18th Professor Mariam and Dr. Nega's lawyers requested that the two men be released on bail, but the court refused this and ruled that their detention should be extended until the next court hearing, which is to be held on May 25th. Both men have now begun a hunger strike to protest their detention. The Ethiopian Human Rights Council's (EHRCO) offices have reportedly been searched by the police on May 11th, 12th and 16th, following their closure on May 9th, even though neither of the two detainees actually have offices there. The Observatory is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Professor Mariam and Dr. Nega, especially since they began a hunger strike, and wishes to condemn the closure of the EHRCO's offices.  Brief reminder of the situation  On May 8th 2001, Ethiopian government forces arrested Professor Mesfin Wolde Mariam and Dr. Berhanu Nega, two prominent academics and human rights defenders, allegedly for inciting violence and rioting in connection with student demonstrations which occured at Addis Ababa University on April 17th and 18th, 2001.   71 year-old Professor Mariam is a founding member of EHRCO, and has previously served as the NGO's Chairman. He is currently a member of the EHRCO's Executive Committee. Dr. Nega is the President of the non-governmental Ethiopian Economic Association and is a supporter of the EHRCO. They held a meeting at the Auditorium of the National Lottery Administration on April 8th, reportedly concerning human rights issues, which was attended by a large number of students. The authorities have accused Professor Mariam and Dr. Nega of inciting students to violence and to riot during this meeting, and they have been held since they appeared in court to be charged on May 9th. They are being held incommunicado by the police until May 18th, at which point they are scheduled to re-appear in court. They have reportedly not been allowed access to legal representation or their families.   According to the information received, during their first appearance in court, the detainees claim not to have engaged in anti-constitutional activities. According to the information received, the EHRCO's offices were shut down by the authorities on May 9th. No official explanation was provided for the closure. The peaceful demonstrations held by students in mid-April, which were held to demand their rights to expression and assembly inside the campus grounds, was met with violent repression by the authorities, which reportedly resulted in over 40 dead and more than 250 injured demonstrators.  Action requested 1.	Please write to the authorities in Ethiopia urging them to: take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of  Professor Mariam and Dr. Nega; 2.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; 3.	allow the detainees to meet with their relatives and lawyers; 4.	Ensure the protection of defenders of human rights in Ethiopia according to Article 12-2 of the Declaration on defenders of human rights which states that : "The State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration." 5.	Comply with the Declaration on Defenders of Human Rights adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 9 December 1998, in particular, to Article 1 mentioned above, Article 6(a) which states that "each person has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental liberties at national and international levels", Article 6(b) which states that "each person has the right, individually or in association with others, to publish, communicate to others or freely disseminate ideas, information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms".  Addresses -	Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, PO Box 1031, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Telegrams: Prime Minister Meles, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Fax: + 251 1 552020 -	Commissioner of Police, Office of the Commissioner of Police, Ministry of Justice, PO Box 21321, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Telegrams: Commissioner of Police, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Fax: + 251 1 550278 -	Mr Werede-Wold Wolde, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, PO Box 1370, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Telegrams: Minister of Justice, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Fax: + 251 1 550278 -	Mr Knife Gebre-Medhin, General manager, Public Security, Office of the Prime Minister, P.O. Box 1031 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Fax: + 251 1 55202  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  Paris - Geneva, 22nd May 2001  Thank you for informing the Observatory of any action taken, quoting the code of this appeal. The Observatory, a joint programme of FIDH and OMCT is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and strives to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic. To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:  Tel and fax FIDH : 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 01 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : + 4122 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29 E-mail: observatoire@iprolink.ch 