Situation of human rights defenders in Africa - Contribution to the 55th ordinary session of ACHPR
May 20, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2014 / MaySituation of human rights defenders in Africa - Contribution to the 55th ordinary session of ACHPRSituation of human rights defenders in Africa - Contribution to the 55th ordinary session of ACHPR7 pages / 211 KB

AFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN AND PEOPLES'
RIGHTS 
 
55th ordinary session
 
Luanda, Angola
 
April 28 - May 12, 2014
 
Contribution of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) 
and the 
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 
 
In the framework of their joint programme,

The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders 
 
Under agenda item 9: “Situation of human
rights defenders”
 
Madam President, 
Madam the Special Rapporteur for Human
Rights Defenders,
Madam and Sir Commissioners,
Madam and Sir Delegates,
 
FIDH and OMCT, in the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, once again express
their grave concern about the situation of human rights defenders in Africa.
 
Since the last session of the Commission
in November 2013, the Observatory has reported, with great concern, multiple
violations of human rights defenders’ rights and freedoms all across the
continent, especially in Angola, where the Observatory carried out
a fact-finding mission in 2013, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Djibouti, Egypt,
Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Swaziland
and Uganda.

 
Judicial harassment based on false
accusations, accompanied by arbitrary arrests and detentions, remains the most
common harassment technique, especially in Angola, Cameroon,
Djibouti, Egypt, The Gambia and Sudan.

 
In several countries, including the DRC
and Djibouti,
human rights defenders have also been subjected to threats and defamation
campaigns. 
 
Acts of intimidation have been
particularly directed against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) rights defenders in Cameroon.
 
Major obstacles to freedom of association
were also reported, as for instance in Algeria, Angola,
Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda.

 
Violations were suffered, among others, by
members of non-governmental organisations (NGOs), lawyers, journalists,
bloggers, land and environmental rights activists, civil society organisations
who defend the rights to freedoms of expression, association and peaceful
protest, denounce human rights abuses by the State or powerful companies, and
fight for the respect of the rights of LGBTI people and for fundamental
freedoms in general. 


I. Continuation
and intensification of the judicial harassment of human rights defenders
 
Judicial harassment, arbitrary arrests and
detention of human rights defenders remain widespread practices in many
countries, and the situation in this respect is particularly worrying in Angola,
Egypt, the DRC, Cameroon, Sudan
and Swaziland.
 
In Angola,
charges remain pending against Mr. Rafael Marques de Morais, well-known
for his publications denouncing corruption and human rights abuses in the
Angolan diamond industry, after he was charged in March 2013 with 11 criminal
counts for allegedly libelling Generals together with business entrepreneurs.
The case was referred to the National Directorate of Investigation and Penal
Action (DNIAP). The charges pending against Mr. Marques, the lack of access, by
him and his lawyer, to all the documents related to the case, the transfer of
the case to DNIAP upon request of the Attorney General, constitute serious
infringements to Mr. Marques' right to due process and illustrate the
authorities' willingness to hamper his freedom of expression and undermine his
documenting and reporting activities. Moreover, on February
7, 2014, Mr. Queirós Anastácio Chilúvia, Director of the Despertar
radio, was sentenced to six months' suspended imprisonment for expressing
his concerns about conditions of detention in a Luanda prison.
 
In Egypt, members of the “No
to Military Trials for Civilians” group have been regularly targeted by
Egyptian authorities for denouncing Article 198 of the draft constitution that
allows for civilian trials before military courts, and more generally for
criticising human rights abuses committed by security forces and the army under
rule of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) and afterwards. On
November 26, 2013, at least nine members of the “No to Military Trials for
Civilians” group were arrested as they were demonstrating near Tahrir Square in
Cairo. Police forces beat them up and sexually harassed both men and women. Two
days after the protest, Mr. Alaa Abdel Fatah, member of the “No to
Military Trials for Civilians” and a famous civil and political rights
activist, was arrested at his home by security forces. On January 5, 2014, along
with Ms. Mona Seif, co-founder of the movement, and Mr. Ahmed
Abdallah, member of the 6 April Youth Movement and co-founder of the
Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms, Mr. Fatah was sentenced to
one-year imprisonment, suspended for three years, on charges of “arson”,
“theft”, “damage to property”, “violence” and “danger to public safety”. The
convictions are based solely on the evidence of so-called eyewitnesses who were
either agents of the government or persons with criminal records or with criminal
investigations pending against them. On March 23, 2014, the 16th
terrorism circuit of South Cairo Criminal Court ordered the provisional release
of Mr. Alaa Abdel Fatah on a bail of LE 10,000 (approximately EUR 1,042). The
second hearing of Mr. Abdel Fattah’s trial was held on April 6, 2014, when his
lawyers obtained an adjournment of the trial pending a review of Judge
El-Fikki’s involvement in the case. 
 
Egyptian authorities have also been
harassing members of the Egyptian Centre for Economic and Social Rights
(ECESR). On December 18, 2013, more than 60 heavily armed operatives of
Azbakeya and Abdin police stations and the Homeland Security Agency stormed the
headquarters of the ECESR in Cairo. Without any search or arrest warrants, they
brutally manhandled and arrested Mr. Moustafa Eissa, Head of ECESR
Documentaries Unit, Mr. Mahmoud Belal, ECESR lawyer, and Mr. Hosam
Mohamed Nasr, Mr. El Sayed Mahmoud El Sayed, Mr. Sherif Ashour
and Mr. Mohamed Adel, all four ECESR volunteers. All were working on a
documentary about an ongoing strike of the Iron and Steel Workers' Union, in
preparation for its screening at a press conference the following day. Apart
from Mr. Mohamed Adel, all were released the following morning but were
reportedly beaten several times during their detention. Moreover, on April 7,
2014, Mr. Mohamed Adel was sentenced in appeal to three years' imprisonment for
“organising a protest on November 26 without notifying the Ministry of
Interior”, and “assaulting security forces in charge of securing the Abdeen
court on November 30”. The November 26 demonstration had been held to protest
against the military courts. 
 
Arbitrary detentions and judicial
harassment of human rights defenders also occur regularly in the DRC.
Mr. Abedi Ngoy and Mr. Gervais Saidi, members of the Maniema
Farmers Alliance (Alliance paysanne du Maniema - ALLIPAM), were arrested
respectively on December 2 and 16, 2013 for defending farmers whose houses in
Kasongo were burnt in 2008. Both defenders have been held with 20 prisoners in
a cell conceived for 10 persons, without aeration, bed, access to sanitary
facilities and medical services. They have also been deprived of food and have
to pay 10 $USD to their jailers to be able to receive food sent by their
families. While Mr. Ngoy was released on bail, Mr. Saidi remains detained to
date.
 
In the territory of Tshikapa in Western
Kasaï, Mr. Albert Fwamba Kabasele, Territorial President of the National
Farmers’ League of Human Rights (Ligue nationale paysanne des droits de l’Homme
- LINAPEDHO), has been arbitrarily detained since his arrest on February 14,
2014, after a meeting held between the Vice-Governor of Kasaï Province and
civil society actors to discuss the exploitation of Mpokolo diamonds quarry.
Mr. Kabasele has been defending Kamonia population's rights and encouraging
them to resist to the exploitation of the mineral quarry, which is their sole
source of income.
 
In October
2013, the Supreme Court of Justice of Kinshasa finally decided to grant bail to
the nine members of the Association for
the Advocacy of the Interests of the City of Bandundu
(Association pour la défense des intérêts de la ville de Bandundu -
ADIVB), who were detained
since March 2013 for calling upon the population to take part in a peaceful
demonstration to protest against the raise of the prices of electricity and
water. Yet their release was subject to the payment of an exorbitant bail (500,000 Congolese francs each - over 400 euros) as well as to the
condition not to leave Bandundu without the permission of the Attorney General
to the Appeal Court.
 
In Cameroon, Mr. Célestin
Yandal, President of the Collective for Young People of Touboro (Collectif
des jeunes de Touboro), a local NGO defending youth's rights in the
Adamaoua region, was arrested on November 23, 2013 and placed in provisional
detention. Mr. Yandal was coming back from a meeting with members of the
Network of Human Rights Defenders of Central Africa (Réseau de défenseurs
des droits humains de l'Afrique centrale), which took place on November 19,
2013 in Douala. Mr. Célestin Yandal had denounced in particular the arbitrary
arrest of 14 young people in Rey Bouba, ordered by Vice-President of the
Cameroonian Senate. After being released by the Prosecutor of Tcholliré, he was
immediately re-arrested as he was leaving the tribunal. He appeared for the
first time before the North Appeal Court on January 16, 2014, which rejected
the request for provisional release lodged by his lawyer. As of April 19, 2014,
Mr. Yandal remained in detention in the central prison of Garoua.
 
In Sudan, a number of
defenders of peaceful student activists have been arrested by the National
Intelligence and Security Services (NISS), and detained incommunicado. For
instance, Messrs. Gazi Alrayah Al-Sanhouri and Abdulmonim Adam
were respectively arrested on March 12, 2014 and March 13, 2014 in Khartoum, in
connection with a demonstration organised at the University of Khartoum on
March 11 to denounce the human rights situation in Darfur. The protest was
harshly repressed by the authorities, resulting in the killing of one student
and in seven others being seriously injured. As of March 18, 2014, the
whereabouts of Mr. Al-Sanhouri remained unknown, and Mr. Adam was detained
within the NISS offices in Khartoum Bahri with no access to his lawyer and
family members.
 
In Swaziland, Mr. Thulani
Rudolf Maseko, a prominent Swazi human rights lawyer, senior member of
Lawyers for Human Rights Swaziland and the Southern Africa Human Rights
Defenders Network, and Mr. Bheki Makhubu, a columnist and
Editor-in-Chief of The Nation, considered as the sole independent
newspaper of the country, have been repeatedly harassed for denouncing abuses
committed by the Swazi judiciary. The two human rights defenders were initially
arrested on March 17 and 18, 2014 and kept in provisional detention for three
weeks, on charges of “scandalising the judiciary” and “contempt of court”. They
were temporarily released on April 6, 2014 before being rearrested on April 9,
2014. Both are currently kept in the provisional detention centre of
Sidwashini, Mbabane, pending trial. 
 
In Zimbabwe, while police
and security agents are often responsible for the arbitrary arrest, abduction,
harassment or intimidation of human rights defenders, some positive developments
have been noted with the acquittal of Mr. Abel Chikomo and Ms. Beatrice
Mtetwa, on November 22, 2013 and November 26, 2013 respectively. Mr. Abel
Chikomo is the Executive Director of the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum, a
coalition of 20 Zimbabwean human rights organisations advocating against
organised violence, torture and impunity in Zimbabwe. Ms. Beatrice Mtetwa is a
human rights lawyer and board member of Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights
(ZLHR).
 
II. Threats and slandering campaigns
against human rights defenders
 
On several occasions, human rights
defenders have suffered threats or acts of intimidation in an attempt to
silence them. Such acts were committed either directly by State agents or by
non-State actors with the silent complicity of the authorities, therefore
encouraging further acts of violence against human rights defenders.
 
In the DRC, Mr. Mémé
Awazi Nengo, ALLIPAM Executive Secretary, Mr. Angali Salumu Yemoko,
President of the Network of Associations for Human Rights in South Maniema (Réseau
des associations de défense des droits humains dans le sud Maniema -
RADHOSMA), and Ms. Salufa Aziza, President of ALLIPAM Women, have been
threatened after having initiated proceedings against the Maniema Provincial
Government. They were also publicly insulted and received death threats for
defending farmers whose houses in Kasongo were burnt in 2008 (see above). On
November 28, 2013 a group of non-identified armed men attacked of the house of
Mr. Awazi Nengo. Since this incident, the three defenders have been into
hiding.
 
In Djibouti, repression and
harassment of human rights defenders remain a general and widespread practice,
which was condemned on January 22, 2014 by Ms. Reine Alapini Gansou, ACHPR
Special Rapporteur for Human Rights Defenders. Mr. Zakaria Abdillahi,
President of the Djiboutian League of Human Rights (Ligue djiboutienne des
droits humains – LDDH), was arrested on January 24, 2014 before being
eventually released on January 26, 2014. As the lawyer of many human rights
defenders harassed by Djiboutian authorities, he was subject to intense
pressure and received threats prior to his arrest. On the day of his release,
the journalist Maydaneh Abdallah Okieh, working for La Voix de
Djibouti newspaper, was arrested for covering it, before being released
shortly after.
 
III. Intimidations and violence against
LBGTI rights defenders
 
In Cameroon, the defenders
of LGBTI people still face threats and judicial harassment. The Observatory
conducted a mission from January 7 to 16, 2014, and could witness an
environment marked by overall insecurity and intimidation against health rights
and LGBTI rights defenders, in a country where homosexuality is also
criminalised. To date, Cameroon is the country with the highest number of
persons being prosecuted, sentenced and imprisoned for “consensual sexual
relations with a person of the same sex” (Article 347bis of the Penal Code).
The Cameroonian authorities are showing no perceptible signs of willingness to
stop these persecutions, none of the persons responsible for blackmail or
extortion has ever been arrested or troubled, and the complaints filed by the
defenders have all been ignored. The investigation into the death of Eric
Ohena Lembembe, Executive Director of the Cameroonian Foundation for AIDS
(CAMFAIDS) and journalist who actively defended LGBTI rights, remains in a
deadlock, as the only procedural act carried out by the investigating judge up
to now was to summon six of the victim's friends to testify and to be
questioned about charges of aggravated theft.
 
In Uganda, the
anti-homosexuality bill promulgated on February 27, 2014 provides imprisonment
in case of “promotion” of homosexuality and against anyone who would fail to
denounce a homosexual act within 24 hours while having authority to do so.
These provisions place human rights defenders, and in particular those whose
organisations provide healthcare, social and legal services to LGBTI persons,
in a vulnerable situation and expose them to criminal prosecution. Such
provisions constitute a grave violation of the principles and fundamental
freedoms guaranteed by the African Charter, and notably the principle of
non-discrimination, freedom of expression, freedom of association and freedom
of assembly.
 
IV. Obstacles
to the rights of freedoms of association, expression, movement and peaceful
assembly in African countries
 
Since the last session of the ACHPR, the
Observatory has continued to witness several obstacles to freedom of
association, expression movement and peaceful assembly, as for instance in Algeria,
Angola, Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda
and Uganda.

 
In Angola, human rights
organisations remain in a situation of vulnerability, due to the voluntarily
maintained ambiguity of their legal status or the use of subtle acts of
intimidation against their members, aimed at undermining their actions. The
Association Justice, Peace and Democracy (Associação
Justiça Paz e Democracia), Mãos Livres, Omunga or SOS-Habitat are among
these organisations. It is also prohibited to report on the human rights violations
committed in the Cabinda province, as exemplified by the ban of the NGO
Mpalabanda in 2006 and the continued harassment of its members.
 
Despite its accession to the United
Nations Human Rights Council in January 2014, Algeria remains the only
country among its neighbours that generally restricts access to human rights
organisations. The Algerian authorities have not agreed to visits requested by
the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture and the UN Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances, and have restricted access for other human rights
observers. Algerian authorities have also refused to grant visas to
international human rights NGOs for several years. At the domestic level, the
right of Algerian NGOs to operate freely has been violated in many ways. In
2012, Algerian authorities have even adopted a new law on associations more
repressive than the previous one. Law No. 12-06 forbids associations from
receiving any foreign funding or cooperating with or seeking membership in
foreign organisations without the government’s agreement. The law also required
all associations already registered under the previous law to submit
organisational bylaws that comply with the new legislation, by January 15,
2014. All existing associations not successfully registered under the new law
can be considered illegal, exposing their members to penalties of up to 6
months in prison and a 300,000 Algerian dinar (€2,800) fine.
 
Similarly, in Kenya, a new
proposed bill submitted on October 30, 2013 was aiming to provide the
government with the ability to control all funds coming into the country. The
bill was aiming to limit to a maximum of 15% the proportion of foreign funding
that an NGO would be allowed to receive from external donors, and to impose any
funding to be channelled through a new “Public Benefits Organizations (PBO)
Federation”, rather than directly from donors. The text was further providing
for the creation of a “PBO Authority”, with a chairperson appointed directly by
the President of the Republic, to “impose terms and conditions for the grant of
certificates of registration, permits of operation, and public organisations
status”. While the bill was rejected by Parliament at the second reading –
following strong national and international pressure – it gave an illustration
of the political environment within which civil society organisations are
operating in Kenya.
 
In terms of obstacles to freedom of
expression, in December 2013, the Parliament of Kenya adopted two bills aimed
at regulating the media sector, which provide for discretionary powers of the
authorities over media houses and journalists. Both have been signed into law
by President Kenyatta. The first text, titled “Information and Communication
Act, 2013”, creates a government-appointed Communications and Multimedia
Appeals Tribunal with unfettered powers to impose penalties on media
practitioners, including revocation of accreditation, seizure of property, and
heavy fines of up to 1 million Kenyan shillings (US$12,000) on journalists, and
up to 20 million Kenyan shillings (US$235,000) on media companies. The Act
provides that such fines could be imposed on the basis of anonymous complaints.
The Act also restricts advertising revenues, a provision which could force some
media houses to close down. The second text, entitled “Media Council Act,
2013”, establishes a Media Council of Kenya and a Media Council's Complaints
Commission with powers to ban any media content that is “prejudicial to public
or national interest” and impose penalties against the publishers of such
content, while failing to clearly define “national or public interest”.
Following the passage of these two laws, two different petitions were filed
before the High Court in Nairobi to challenge their constitutionality. On
January 31, 2014, the High Court, which decided to consolidate the two cases,
ordered to halt the implementation of both laws pending its ruling on the
merits of the case. To date, the Court has not yet rendered its decision on the
merits.
 
In Uganda,
the Public Order Management Act (POM Act), which was signed into law on October
2, 2013 by President Yoweri Museveni, restricts freedoms of expression and
peaceful assembly and further deteriorates an already shrinking space for civil
society and human rights defenders in the country. Although protecting public
order is a legitimate concern recognised by international instruments, the
scope and nature of the restrictions provided by the POM Act, which was passed
by Parliament in August 2013, go well beyond the restrictions permitted under
international and regional human rights law and therefore contradict Uganda's
international and regional commitments. In particular, the POM Act fails to
establish a presumption in favour of the exercise of the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly as it fails to recall the duty on the State to facilitate
peaceful assemblies. In circumstances where a public meeting is held contrary
to the Act, participants
in the meeting may be criminalised and are liable of an imprisonment not
exceeding 12 months or a fine not exceeding 480,000 Uganda shillings (about 140
€) or both. The POM Act also grants the Interior Minister the power, subject to
Parliamentary approval, to declare any area as “gazetted” where public meetings
are absolutely prohibited, and prohibits public meetings at and around public
institutions by designing them as “restricted areas”, where entry is prohibited
with punishment of two years’ imprisonment and/or a fine of 960,000 Uganda
shillings or both. These areas notably include Parliament and Courts. 
 
In Rwanda, the authorities
continue to interfere in the internal affairs of independent associations, and
impede in particular the legitimate board of the Rwandan League for the
Promotion and Defence of Human Rights (Ligue rwandaise pour la promotion et
la défense des droits humains - LIPRODHOR) to be reinstated. The LIPRODHOR
was one of the few independent human rights organisations in Rwanda, until its
board was ousted during a meeting convened on July 21, 2013 by the former
LIPRODHOR President, unbeknownst to the members of legitimate board. At that
meeting, the legitimate board that was in office at the time was replaced by
people believed to be favourable to the Government. The meeting was later
renamed as “ extraordinary assembly”, in violation of the association's bylaws.
A few days later, the Rwanda Governance Board (the public body in charge of the
registration of associations) expeditiously recognised the new board. On July
24, bank accounts of the LIPRODHOR were frozen and the police cancelled a
training workshop that was to be organised by LIPRODHOR about the UN Universal
Periodic Review mechanism. The outset legitimate board initiated proceedings to
void the decision taken during the “extraordinary assembly” of July 21, 2013 so
as to destitute the new, illegitimate, LIPRODHOR board. The first hearing took
place on March 6, 2014, followed by a second hearing on April 10, where the
judge again announced a postponement to May 15. The case of the LIPRODHOR is
illustrative of the governmental interference in the functioning of independent
civil society organisations, in violation of the right to freedom of
association protected under the Rwandan Constitution. 
 
In Burundi, some human
rights NGOs still face pressure from the authorities that impede their proper
functioning. On April 4, 2014 the Mayor of Bujumbura unilaterally rejected the
notification submitted by the Observatory for the Fight against Corruption and
Economic Embezzlement (Observatoire de lutte contre la corruption et les
malversations économiques - OLUCOME) to organise a commemoration of the
assassination of its Vice-President Ernest Manirumva, which has remained
unsolved to date. The Burundian Prosecutor General has even made wrongful and
fallacious public accusations against the current OLUCOME President, Mr. Gabriel
Rufyiri, accusing the latter - without any grounds - of being possibly
involved in the assassination of Ernest Manirumva.
 
Recommendations: 
 
1) In view of the above-mentioned
elements, the Observatory reminds States Parties of their obligation to comply
with all the provisions of the African Charter, in particular those relating to
the protection of human rights defenders. In that regard, States should
immediately and unconditionally:
 
- Implement all the provisions of the 1998
United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, especially by
guaranteeing in all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity
and their capacity to operate in a safe and enabling environment;
 
- Release all defenders who are
arbitrarily detained for merely exercising their rights to fundamental
freedoms, in particular freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly and
association;
 
- Put an end to all acts of harassment -
including at the judicial level - against human rights defenders;
 
- Order immediate, thorough, transparent
investigations into allegations of violations of human rights defenders’
rights, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
- Refrain from adopting any provisions
that do not comply with international and African standards with respect to the
exercise of the right to freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly and
association, and abrogate or revise any such provisions that may be in force;
 
- Send a standing invitation to the United
Nations and ACHPR’s Special Rapporteurs on Human Rights Defenders and
facilitate their country visits.
 
2) The
Observatory also calls upon the ACHPR to:
 
- Systematically raise the question of the situation of human rights
defenders during the examination of the periodic reports of the States parties
to the ACHPR, and on the occasion of all visits conducted in a State party;
 
- Adopt the Report of the ACHPR Study Group on Freedom of Association,
entitled “Freedom of Association and Freedom of Assembly in Law and Practice in
Africa”;
 
- Ensure the effective implementation of its concluding observations in
order that everyone, including human rights defenders, be able to effectively
enjoy all the rights and freedoms recognised by the ACHPR and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights;
 
- Continue and strengthen the collaboration with the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders, as well as with the other
regional mechanisms for the protection of human rights defenders.
 
 
***
Luanda,
April-May 2014 