Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Brutal crackdown continues
October 15, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2007 / OctoberMyanmar (ex-Burma): Brutal crackdown continuesThe World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its deep concern about the recent arrests as part of a continuing crackdown by the military authorities.  OMCT has been informed about the arrests of the remaining leaders of the 88 Generation Students Group, namely Hla Myo Naung, Htay Kywe, Aung Thu and Thin Thin Aye (aka Mie Mie).  According to the information received, Hla Myo Naung was arrested on 10 October 2007 when he was trying to meet with an eye specialist to get treatment for his poor eyes condition. Two students, who helped him to visit the clinic, were also arrested. Hla Myo Naung, a former student leader of 1988 and a former political prisoner, had already spent about six years in prison from 1990 to 1996.  Furthermore, on 13 October 2007, security forces raided a hiding place of the group and arrested three remaining leaders namely, Htay Kywe, Aung Thu and Thin Thin Aye (aka Mie Mie). Another student, name Zaw Htat Ko Ko was also arrested along with them. Htay Kywe, Aung Thu and Thin Thin Aye are also former political prisoners having already spent some years in prison.  Hla Myo Naung, Htay Kywe, Aung Thu and Thin Thin Aye all are core members of the 88 Generation Students Group since its inception in 2005. Since 21 August 2007, more then 35 core members of the group were reportedly arrested[1]. They are allegedly detained in Insein Prison.  OMCT is very much concerned for the safety of the above mentioned individuals as they are at high risk of torture and ill-treatment.  OMCT has also been informed of the arrests of several other pro-democracy activists as well as the death in detention of some of them. OMCT expresses its deepest concern regarding these latest events and the continued detention, especially after the UN Security Council had strongly deplored on 11 October 2007 the use of violence against peaceful demonstrators and had called for the early release of all political prisoners.  OMCT is particularly concerned for the safety of all those detained. OMCT urges the Burmese authorities to fully implement the Human Rights Council Resolution S-5/1 adopted at its 5th special session and calls upon them to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all detained political prisoners as well as of the individuals arrested as a result of the recent repression of peaceful protests and to release them immediately and unconditionally since their detention is arbitrary.   For further information, please contact: Eric Sottas + 00 41 22 809 49 39   [1] See OMCT press release issued on 220807. 