International Day in Support of Victims of Torture: No torture survivor should be sent back to torture
June 26, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2018 / JuneInternational Day in Support of Victims of Torture: No torture survivor should be sent back to tortureGeneva,
26 June 2018 (OMCT) – Torture survivors deserve better
protection all over the world, including in Switzerland.
Reports concur to say that about 40 per cent of asylum
seekers arriving in Switzerland have been tortured either in their home country
or along their migration route.
Torture leaves indelible traces forever that are often
invisible to the uninformed eye, but that can be easily confirmed by forensic
experts. 
For one, torture survivors often have unconsciously
blocked out of their brain the violence they have endured in order to survive
with it. When they remember it, they can be ashamed or find it hard to disclose
the enormity and absurdity of the pain they were inflicted. That is especially
true when asylum proceedings staff and other state officials who deal with
torture survivors are not made aware of the forms and consequences of widespread
violence nor of how to address torture survivors.
Switzerland is a country with highly trained medical
staff capable of identifying and documenting signs of torture among asylum
seekers and then offering them proper treatment. 
All that is missing is the political will to ensure
that those in need of protection are systematically treated fairly,
considerately and humanely throughout asylum and extradition proceedings. 
OMCT and its partners Action des chrétiens pour l’abolition de la torture (ACAT),
Organisation suisse d’aide aux réfugiés (OSAR),
the United Nations
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and International
Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims (IRCT) and many others
including NGO Platform Human Rights,
believe that Switzerland must make sure torture survivors are protected both from
being retraumatized while interrogated in an inconsiderate fashion and from
being pushed back home to more violence. That is part of States’
non-refoulement legal obligation.
For that, it is important that asylum and migration
officials, doctors, lawyers and judges all better understand what torture is,
how it affects victims psychologically and physically, become familiar with and
use the full range of that tools can be used to identify and document it.  In particular they must be trained on state obligations
under the UN Convention Against Torture and, when relevant, resort to and give
due weight to medical examinations that follow the guidelines of the Istanbul Protocol. Then
survivors of torture and ill treatment must get access to rehabilitation and
redress to recover and rebuild their lives and fruitfully contribute to society.
We
protect #torture victims – we don’t send them back to more violence. 
What
do you stand for?
Our campaign, dubbed #protecttorturevictims, is
supported by a documentary film coming out soon. Please feel free to share this
first taste of it. 