Equatorial Guinea:  Government Critic Blocked from Leaving Country Unreasonable Delay in Renewing Cartoonist’s Passpo
May  2, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Equatorial Guinea / 2018 / MayEquatorial Guinea: Government Critic Blocked from Leaving Country Unreasonable Delay in Renewing Cartoonist’s PasspoEquatorial Guinea:
Government Critic Blocked from Leaving Country Unreasonable Delay in Renewing
Cartoonist’s Passport
Nairobi, May 1, 2018An internationally acclaimed cartoonist acquitted on
trumped-up charges and released from prison on March 7, 2018, cannot leave
Equatorial Guinea because authorities have stalled on renewing his passport, 9
human rights group said today. The charges against Ramón Esono Ebalé
appear to have been in retaliation for cartoons that were critical of the
government.  
An arbitrary or unreasonable delay in
renewing Esono Ebalé’s passport violates his right to leave one’s own country,
as enshrined in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and multiple treaties
to which Equatorial Guinea
is a party. The government
of Equatorial Guinea should expedite his passport so that he can be reunited
with his wife and daughter. 
"The authorities in Equatorial Guinea should stop
procrastinating and immediately renew Ramón Esono Ebalé’s passport,” said
Angela Quintal, Africa program coordinator for the Committee to Protect
Journalists. “It’s the least they can do, given he was framed in the first
place. He has suffered enough and should be allowed to join his family.”
Esono Ebalé, who lives in El Salvador, was arrested on
September 16, 2017, while visiting Equatorial Guinea to
renew his passport. The police interrogated
him at length about his drawings, but a news broadcast on a state-owned television channel a few
days after the arrest claimed that police had
found one million Central African francs
(US$1,800) in a car Esono
Ebalé was driving.  He was formally charged with counterfeiting.
The charge sheet alleged that a police officer,
acting on a tip, had asked Esono Ebalé to
exchange large bills and had received
counterfeit notes in return.  However, Esono Ebalé’s lawyer and another person who was at
the February 27 trial, told the organizations that the state’s sole witness
recanted this story, telling the court that his superiors had ordered him to
charge Esono Ebalé with the crime.  The
court eventually acquitted Esono Ebalé.
“Ramón should never have been arrested
or spent a single night in prison,” said Tutu Alicante, executive director of
EG Justice.  “But for his unjust and
prolonged imprisonment, he would have obtained a passport by now, and would
already be with his family in El Salvador.”
The human rights groups are Cartoonists Rights
Network International, Committee to Protect Journalists, EG Justice, FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, Human Rights Watch, OMCT - World
Organisation Against Torture, within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, PEN America, PEN International and Reporters Without Borders.
For
more information, please contact:
In Chapel Hill, for EG Justice, Tutu Alicante (Spanish, English, French): +1-615-479-0207 (mobile); or tutu@egjustice.org. Twitter: @TutuAlicante
In New York,
for Human Rights Watch, Sarah Saadoun (English): +1-917-502-6694 (mobile); or saadous@hrw.org. Twitter: @sarah_saadoun
In New York,
for Committee to Protect Journalists, Angela Quintal (English): +212-300-9004
(office); or aquintal@cpj.org. Twitter: @angelaquintal 