Cameroon:  Arbitrary arrest of and judicial harassment against Mr. Nasako Besingi and four SEFE collaborators
November 29, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2012 / NovemberCameroon: Arbitrary arrest of and judicial harassment against Mr. Nasako Besingi and four SEFE collaborators


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
CMR 001 / 1112 / OBS 111
Arbitrary arrest / Release on bail /
Judicial harassment
Cameroon
November 29, 2012
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Cameroon.
 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the arbitrary arrest of and judicial harassment against Mr. Nasako Besingi, Director of the NGO Struggle to Economize Future Environment (SEFE), a
local environmental organisation based in Mundemba, Ndian division, Southwest
Cameroon, and four of his collaborators, Ms. Ekpoh Theresia Malingo, Mr.
Isele Gabriel Ngoe, Mr. Mosongo Lawrence Namaso and Mr. Nwete
Jongele.
 
According
to the information received, in the morning of November 14, 2012, over 15
heavily armed Gendarme officers led by Brigade Commandant Luc Evoundou raided
the premises of SEFE in Mundemba, where over 50 members of the local population
had come to get T-shirts that were prepared for a peaceful campaign against the
company Sithe Global Sustainable Oils Cameroon (SGSOC), a local subsidiary of
the New York based company HERAKLES Farms, and its establishment of a
controversial large-scale palm oil plantation on 73,000 hectares in the area[1].
On this same day, the Governor of the southwest region from Buea was
visiting Mundemba to install the local government official and the local
population wanted to use this occasion to wear the T-shirts as a means to
peacefully  voice their rejection of the
oil palm plantation project to the authorities. 
 
Mr.
Nasako Besingi was then arrested without warrant along with four of his
collaborators, Ms. Ekpoh Theresia Malingo, Mr. Isele Gabriel Ngoe, Mr. Mosongo
Lawrence Namaso and Mr. Nwete Jongele. They were forced into a pick up vehicle
belonging to the department of forestry and wildlife protection and whisked off
for detention at the Gendarmerie brigade in Mundemba. The officers also seized
a large consignment of the campaign T-shirts, a camera and the mobile telephone
of Mr. Besingi. It was further reported that some local women were forcefully
undressed by the gendarmes who removed their campaign T-shirts in public,
leaving them partially naked with only their breast wears.
 
Mr. Nasako Besingi, Ms. Ekpoh Theresia Malingo, Mr. Isele Gabriel Ngoe,
Mr. Mosongo Lawrence Namaso and Mr. Nwete Jongele were detained incommunicado
for 24 hours. While in detention, no charges were brought against them.
Visitors who came to visit them with food were turned away by the Gendarmes and
were only allowed the next day. The commandant of the gendarmerie would have
added that Mr. Besingi was not allowed to communicate. They were detained in
dirty and stinking cells that were over crowded with over 12 detainees who had
no beds to sleep on or chairs to sit on, with no lights, poor ventilation and
no toilets.
 
On November 17, 2012, the State counsel for Mundemba visited Mr. Nasako
Besingi, Ms. Ekpoh Theresia Malingo, Mr. Isele Gabriel Ngoe, Mr. Mosongo
Lawrence Namaso and Mr. Nwete Jongele and asked the gendarmes to bring them to
the legal department, where they arrived at 1 pm. The defenders were then
released on bail at 5.30 pm on a recognizance of 750,000 FCFCA (about 1,140
EUR). Although no charges have been brought against them yet, they were
requested to appear before the legal department on December 4, 2012.
 
The Observatory
strongly condemns these arrests and the judicial harassment of Mr. Nasako Besingi, Ms. Ekpoh Theresia Malingo, Mr. Isele Gabriel Ngoe,
Mr. Mosongo Lawrence Namaso and Mr. Nwete Jongele, as it seems to
merely aim at sanctioning SEFE peaceful human rights activities. In particular, SEFE is representing the indigenous population in the
public litigation that has been brought to court since August 2011 against the
SGSOC -Cameroon - HERAKLES Farms USA project that would lead to massive
deforestation and threaten the livelihoods of residents in an area home to
vital biodiversity.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Cameroon and ask them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nasako Besingi, Ms.
Ekpoh Theresia Malingo, Mr. Isele Gabriel Ngoe, Mr. Mosongo Lawrence Namaso and
Mr. Nwete Jongele as well as all human rights
defenders in Cameroon;
 
ii.             
Put an end to all acts
of harassment - including at the judicial level - against them as well as
against all human rights defenders in Cameroon;
 
iii.           
Conform in any
circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in
particular:
-               
article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to
promote the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms
at the national and international levels”, 
-               
and article 12.2 which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection
by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”;
 
iv.            
Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights instruments ratified by Cameroon.
 
Addresses:
 
Mr. Paul Biya,
     President of the Republic, Presidency of the Republic, Palais de l’Unité,
     1000 Yaoundé, Cameroon, Fax +237 22 22 08 70Mr. Philémon
     Yang, Prime Minister and Chief of Government, Primature du Cameroun, 1000
     Yaoundé‚ Cameroon. Fax: +237 22 23 57 35. Email: spm@spm.gov.cmMr. Laurent Esso,
     Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 1000 Yaoundé‚ Cameroon, Fax: +
     237 22 23 00 05Mr. René Emmanuel
     SADI, Minister of Territorial Administration, Fax: + 237 22 22 37 35Dr. Chemuta
     Divine Banda, President of the National Commission on Human Rights and
     Freedoms, Fax: +237 22 22 60 82, E-mail: cndhl@iccnet.cm / cdbanda26@yahoo.frMs. Enonchong
     Annet, Protection Officer of the National Commission on Human Rights
     and Freedoms, Email: annet_mbeng@yahoo.comH.E. Jean
     Simplice Ndjemba Endezoumou, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Republic
     of Cameroon to the United Nations Office in Geneva, rue du Nant 6, 1207
     Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 736 21 65, Email: mission.cameroun@bluewin.chEmbassy of the Republic of Cameroon in Brussels, 131 av. Brugmann,
     1190 Forest, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 344 57 35; Email: ambassade.cameroun@skynet.be
 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Cameroon in your respective countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
November 29, 2012
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·      
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41
22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29
·       Tel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80



[1] HERAKLES’s
presence in the region is considered a security risk by those opposed to the
project, and as a threat to local communities’ rights. Its reputation is
tarnished by an abundance of illegal activities: for example, the treaty of
establishment linking SGSOC to the Cameroonian State gives the company the
right to “arrest and detain” any person crossing the concession, a clause that
violates both national law and international conventions ratified by Cameroon.
Moreover, the company does not have a lease agreement with the State and
therefore does not have the legal right to conduct its operations in the areas
where it is located. 