Russian Federation:  Judicial harassment and media smear campaign against the NGO “Planet of Hopes” (Planeta Nadejd) and its director Ms. Nadejda Kutepova
July 17, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2015 / JulyRussian Federation: Judicial harassment and media smear campaign against the NGO “Planet of Hopes” (Planeta Nadejd) and its director Ms. Nadejda Kutepova

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
RUS 001 / 0615 / OBS 058
Judicial harassment / Sentencing
Russian
Federation
July 17,
2015
 
 
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in the Russian Federation.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about
the judicial harassment and media smear campaign against the NGO “Planet of
Hopes” (Planeta Nadejd) and its director Ms. Nadejda Kutepova,
Nuclear-Free Future award winner in 2011[1]. Since 2000,
"Planet of Hopes" has been defending the rights of victims of
exposure to increased radiation and has been advocating for the review of the
legal regime put in place under the Law "On Closed
Administrative-Territorial Units" (CATU)[2].
Over the past 15 years, "Planet of Hopes" has provided legal aid to a
number of high-profile cases, including the ones related to victims of the
nuclear accident "Mayak" in 1957, victims of nuclear contamination of
the Techa river and the one of a six-year old girl who passed away from cancer
caused by extreme levels of radiation. The radiation was passed on to her
genetically by her grandmother who took part in the clean-up works after the
"Mayak" accident.
 
According to the
information received, on May 26, 2015, the Ozersk
City District Court (Chelyabinsk region) sentenced “Planet of Hopes” to
pay a 300,000 roubles fine (4,760 Euros) for refusing voluntary registration as
a "foreign agent". 
 
Starting from the next day following the court ruling, a
series of defamatory reports on national television groundlessly accused Ms.
Kutepova of espionage and violated her right to privacy.
 
On May 27, 2015, the national TV channel Russia-1
broadcasted a defamatory report about the trial. The 5:26 minutes report on
prime time TV news programme disclosed the NGO’s funding sources and accused
Ms. Kutepova of industrial espionage in the city of Ozersk, where the nuclear
waste reprocessing plant is located. The plant rendered Ozersk a "closed
city" according to the law on CATU. 
 
On June 24
and on July 1, 2015, another two defamatory reports were broadcast on the same
TV channel. Their content resembled the May 27 report, yet the last one
disclosed the address of Ms. Kutepova hereby infringing her right to private
life. Following the defamatory reports, Ms. Kutepova filed a lawsuit. 
 
The Observatory
recalls that on April 15, 2015, the Ministry of Justice included the NGO
"Planet of Hopes" into the "foreign agents" list. The NGO
appealed the decision claiming the non-political nature of its activity and the
violation of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. Funding
from the US non-profit organization "National Endowment for
Democracy" (NED - United States) and Women in Europe for a Common Future
(Netherlands) as well as Ms. Kutepova's interviews about violations of rights
of victims of nuclear contamination in the Chelyabinsk region were cited by the
Ministry as an official reason for recognizing "Planet of Hopes" as a
"foreign agent". Ms. Kutepova has sufficient reasons to believe that
she is being harassed and intimidated for her human rights work[3].

 
The Observatory furthermore emphasises that this is not the first time
that "Planet of Hopes" is subject to harassment. 
 
On May 20, 2014, Ms. Kutepova was summoned by a local
police division, following instructions received from the Ozersk Prosecutor's
Office. The prosecutor asked the local police division’s Economic Crimes Unit
to verify Ms. Kutepova's criminal record. Moreover, he also asked to pay
special attention to the NGO’s office lease. According to the information
received, the office leaseholder was also summoned to appear at the police
station. Creating obstacles to civil society organisations for officially
leasing an office is a common form of harassment in Russia. 
 
The Observatory strongly denounces the judicial and media harassment
targeting "Planet of Hopes" and its Head Ms. Nadejda Kutepova. It
expresses its deepest concern regarding the restrictive legislative arsenal
that Russia continues to complement aiming to silence all forms of criticism
against the regime as well as all forms of human rights activities in the
country, in contradiction with international human rights standards[4].
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities of Russian Federation, urging them to:
 
i.     Put an end to any act of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against the Ozersk city
socio-environmental NGO “Planet
of Hopes”, its head Ms. Nadejda Kutepova, as well as all environmental NGOs
and human rights defenders in the Russian Federation, and ensure in all
circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate activities
without any hindrance;
 
ii.    Publicly acknowledge and
recognise the legitimacy of the human rights work carried out by Ms. Nadejda
Kutepova, the NGO “Planet of Hopes“ and all human rights defenders and human
rights defenders in the country ;
 
iii. Repeal the law on
“undesirable foreign organisations”, the law on “foregin agents“, the Law on Non-commercial
Organizations, the “Bloggers law” and other legislation contravening
international human rights standards and put an end to the clampdown on freedom of association
in the Russian Federation ;
 
iv. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998,
especially:
- its Article 1,
which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”,
- its Article 5,
endowing everyone with the right to meet or assemble peacefully; to form, join
and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations and groups; and
to communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental organizations for the
purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms. 
- and Article 12.2,
which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”;
 
v.    Comply with the provisions of
the Declaration of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on the
protection of human rights defenders and the promotion of their activities, and
in particular With Article 2.i), in which the Committee calls on member States
to “create an environment conducive to the work of human rights defenders,
enabling individuals, groups and associations to freely carry out activities,
on a legal basis, consistent with international standards, to promote and
strive for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms without any
restrictions other than those authorized by the European Convention on Human
Rights;
 
vi.   More generally, ensure in all circumstances
the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human
rights instruments ratified by the Russian Federation.
 
Addresses: 
 
·     Mr. Vladimir Putin, President
of the Russian Federation, Ilinka Str, 23, Moscow, 103132, Moscow, Russian
Federation. Faxes: + 7 495 606 5173 / 630 2408


·     Mr. Yurii Ya. Chaika,
Prosecutor General, 15 A, Bolshaia Dmitrovka 125993 Moscow, Russian Federation.
Fax: +7 495 692 17 25, Email: prgenproc@gov.ru


·     Mr. Vladimir Kolokoltsev,
Minister of the Interior, Ulitsa Zhitnaya, 16, 117049 Moscow, Russian
Federation. Fax: + 7 495 637 49 25


·     Mr. Alexander Konovalov,
Minister of Justice, 14, ul. Zhitnaya, 119991 Moscow, Russian Federation. Fax:
+7 495 955 59 99. Electronic appeals via website: http://minjust.ru/electronic-appeal/email


·     Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Smolenskaya-Sennaya pl, 32/34, 121200 Moscow, Russian
Federation. Fax: + 7 495 644 2203


·     Ms. Ella Pamfilova, Ombudsman of the
Russian Federation. E-mail: press-sl@ropnet.ru


·     Mr. Mikhail Fedotov, Head of
the Council under the President for development of civil society and human
rights. Fax: +7 495 606-48-55. E-mail: president-sovet@mail.ru,
fedotov_MA@gov.ru


·     H.E. Mr. Alexey Borodavkin,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
in Geneva, Avenue de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22
734 40 44, E-mail: mission.russian@vtxnet.ch


·     Ambassador Mr. Alexander
Romanov, Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 66, avenue de Fre,
Brussels, 1180 Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26 13. E-mail:
amrusbel@skynet.be


·     Ambassador Mr. Alexander
Alekseev, Permanent Representation of the Russian Federation to the Council of
Europe, 75, allee de la Robertsau, 67000 Strasbourg, France. Fax: (+33) (0) 3
88 24 19 74. Email: representationpermderussie@wanadoo.fr
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Russian Federation in
your respective country.
 
***


Paris-Geneva, July 17, 2015
 
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line:
·               
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·               
Tel
and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·               
Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 



[1]            Since 1998 the Nuclear-Free Future Award honours
individuals and organisations worldwide who contribute to creating a world free
of nuclear power and nuclear weapons. The Award is a project of the Franz Moll
Foundation for the Coming Generations and gives out awards in three categories:
Resistance, Education and Solutions. For more information, see
http://www.nuclear-free-future.com/en/. 


[2]                 Article 1 of the aforementioned
law puts in place a special legal regime in areas of production of mass
destruction weapons, radioactive materials, military and other equipment.
Residents of these so-called "closed cities" not only face
restrictions on their freedom of movement, entrepreneurship, ownership, use and
disposal of land, natural resources and real estate, but are also often exposed
to dangerous levels of radioactivity. 


[3]      The
main demand of the organisation "Planeta Nadejd" is to ensure justice
and adequate compensation to the victims of nuclear contamination; to declare
the river Techa and its surroundings as a zone dangerously contaminated by
nuclear waste; to evacuate residents living close to the Techa river and its
surroundings; to officially acknowledge the causal relationship between
diseases caused by increased levels of radiation and patients' places of
residence.


[4]      
See the Observatory's Press Release, May 20, 2015. 