Turkey:  Judicial harassment of Pinar Selek continues as Istanbul Heavy Penal Court decides to amend her acquittal and request her conviction
November 27, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2012 / NovemberTurkey: Judicial harassment of Pinar Selek continues as Istanbul Heavy Penal Court decides to amend her acquittal and request her conviction


PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
TURKEY: Judicial harassment of
Pinar Selek continues as Istanbul Heavy Penal Court decides to amend her acquittal and request her conviction
 
Paris-Geneva,
November 27, 2012. The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), is deeply appalled by the last decision of Istanbul
Heavy Penal Court No. 12 to amend Pinar Selek's acquittal. The 14-year old
judicial ordeal faced by the activist may therefore continue several more
years. 
 
On November 22, 2012,
Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 12 decided to amend its previous decision to
acquit Ms. Pinar Selek, a writer and sociologist who has been actively
defending the rights of vulnerable communities in Turkey, in a criminal case
that has been ongoing since 1998. In addition, the Presiding Judge, who was
replacing the ordinary presiding judge on sick leave, requested the
condemnation of Pinar Selek to life imprisonment before setting a new date for
a hearing on December 13, 2012 to hear the observations of the accused.
According to defence lawyers, this decision is unprecedented in Turkish legal
history.
 
The Observatory recalls that,
in 1998, Pinar Selek was in turn accused without proof of supporting the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and then of causing a bomb to explode in
Istanbul’s Egyptian bazaar on July 9 of the same year. On the basis of these
accusations, she was detained and subjected to torture and ill-treatment during
two years, until her provisional release in 2000.
 
The court’s investigations
largely confirmed the absence of any bomb and attributed the explosion to a gas
leak; in addition the other defendant in the case who had accused her during
interrogation withdrew his statement during the trial. Accordingly, Istanbul
Heavy Penal Court No. 12 acquitted her on three occasions: in 2006, 2008, and
for the last time on February 9, 2011. Nonetheless, following appeals by the
Prosecutor, the Court of Cassation quashed the first two acquittal decisions.
As of today, Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 12's last decision of acquittal
made in 2011 has not been examined by the Court of Cassation and has therefore
the effect of res judicata. Therefore, by amending one of its own
rulings, Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 12 has unlawfully has misused its
powers its competence in violation of Articles 223, 287 and 307/3 of the Penal
Procedure Code. 
 
In consequence of the above,
the judicial harassment may potentially continue several more years though
there is no evidence incriminating Pinar Selek. The Observatory recalls that as
a consequence of this judicial harassment and under the threat of a new
arbitrary arrest, her life and work in Turkey has been severely disrupted.
 
“Not
only does the court decision violate Turkish law, in that it blatantly
disregards the authority of its own decisions as res judicata, but it also
violates the right to a fair trial as well as the right to freedom of
expression, laid down in the European Convention on Human Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) ratified by
Turkey. The endless delays in rendering justice clearly amount to a denial of
justice!”, denounced Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President.
 
“This
judicial harassment is unprecedented. If the Court confirms this decision, we
can conclude that there is no more legal certainty in Turkey”,
added Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. “We firmly condemn this decision, and call upon the judiciary
authorities of Turkey to review it immediately”, he concluded.
 
More generally, the
Observatory further reiterates its call on the Turkish authorities to
immediately and unconditionally put an end to the uninterrupted harassment that
has been targeting Pinar Selek for more than 14 years, as it seems to merely
aim at sanctioning her for her legitimate exercise of the freedom of opinion
and expression.
 
For further information, please
contact:
• FIDH:
Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
• OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22
809 49 39 