Yougoslavia, Federal Rep.of:  Yugoslavia: arbitrary arrest and torture of 28-year old Vladimir Radojcic
March  8, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Yougoslavia, Federal Rep.of / 2002 / MarchYougoslavia, Federal Rep.of: Yugoslavia: arbitrary arrest and torture of 28-year old Vladimir RadojcicCase YUG 080302 Arbitrary arrest/Torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Yugoslavia.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Humanitarian Law Center, of the arbitrary arrest and torture of 28-year old Vladimir Radojcic in the city of Smederevo, in Belgrade, Yugoslavia.  According to the information received, on February 26th, 2002 Vladimir Radojcic was arbitrarily arrested by three plainclothes officers of the Smederevo Police Department known only as Edi, Ivan and Peca, at a shopping center in Belgrade.  Radojcic was reportedly beaten and forced at gunpoint into an unmarked vehicle, and driven to the Smederevo Police Station.  While in the car he was slapped and intimidated, as the police officers informed him that no one knew of his arrest and that therefore they could do anything to him, even kill him, without anyone finding out.      According to the report, during his detention at the police station Vladimir Radojcic was tied up and electrocuted repeatedly for several hours, with the officers pouring water on him when he lost consciousness, as they attempted to extract a confession that he was a car thief.  He was later handcuffed and beaten on the soles of his feet with nightsticks by officers in civilian clothes.  Vladimir Radojcic was then allegedly driven to his home in Belgrade where an officer, who refused to provide his name, threatened his relatives about the safety of Vladimir Radojcic, and confiscated his mobile phone.  Vladimir Radojcic was then reportedly driven back to the police station where his ankle was bandaged and he was forced to spend the night handcuffed to a desk.    According to the information received, on February 28, 2002 Vladimir Radojcic was released.  Although he was unable to walk he was left about 300 meters from his home and was warned to tell that he had been held for ransom by criminals in a basement.  He was reportedly not given documents detailing his arrest and detention at the Smederevo Police Station, or concerning the confiscation of his mobile phone.  At the Emergency Medical Center, Vladimir Radojcic was diagnosed as having a broken ankle and several bruises and burns.    The International Secretariat of OMCT condemns Vladimir Radojcic arbitrary arrest and torture by Smederevo police officials, in violation of both Yugoslav police regulations and international human rights standards.  OMCT is also gravely concerned that the perpetrators of this attack will not be brought to justice, and that they will continue to be active within the police force, as well as the fact that Vladimir Radojcic may not receive adequate reparation for the injuries sustained during these events.    Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Yugoslavia urging them to:  i.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.	guarantee adequate reparation to Vladimir Radojcic; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Vojislav Kostunica, President of The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Predsednik SRJ, Bulevar Mihaila Pupina 2, 11070 Belgrade, Yugoslavia Fax: (+ 381) 11 636 775 /(+ 381) 11 636 682) / (+381) 11 636 167 E-mail: VojislavKostunica@gov.yu  ·	His Excellency, Prime Minister of The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Dragiša Pešiæ, Bulevar Mihaila Pupina 2, 11070 Belgrade, Yugoslavia. Fax: (+381) 11 636 775 or (+381) 11 659 682 E-mail:  Dragisa.Pesic@gov.yu  ·	His Excellency, Minister of Justice of The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Markoviæ Savo, Republicko Ministarstvo za pravosudje i optu upravu, Namanjina 26, 11000 Belgrade, Yugoslavia. Fax: (+381) 11 361 6590 E-mail: Savo.Markovic@gov.yu  ·	His Excellency, Minister of Foreign Affairs of The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Svilanoviæ Goran. Fax : (+ 381) 11 681 572 E-mail:  Goran.Svilanovic@gov.yu  ·	His Excellency, Minister of Internal Affairs of The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Živkoviæ Zoran. E-mail: Zoran.Zivkovic@gov.yu  ·	His Excellency, Prime Minister of the Serbian Government, Zoran Djindjic Belgrade, 11 Nemanjina St. Fax: (+381)11 3617-609  Please also write to the embassies of Yugoslavia in your respective country.  Geneva, March 8th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 