Bahrain:  Joint Statement: EU must act upon European Parliament Resolution on human rights in Bahrain
July 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Bahrain / 2015 / JulyBahrain: Joint Statement: EU must act upon European Parliament Resolution on human rights in BahrainBahrain_2015.07.09_Joint_Statement_EP_Resolution2 pages / 167 KBECDHR-OBS-FLD
Joint StatementEU must
act upon European Parliament Resolution on human rights in Bahrain 
Thursday 9 July
2015 - The
European Centre for Democracy and Human Rights, Front Line Defenders, and the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), welcome the European Parliament’s urgency
resolution on Bahrain, particularly on the case of Nabeel Rajab, adopted today[1].
The Human Rights situation in Bahrain has continued to deteriorate and our
organisations are pleased to see the European Parliament has chosen to take a
united stance against such violations. 
“This sends a strong and clear
message to the Bahraini authorities that the European Parliament is very much
concerned about the perpetration of Human Rights violations in Bahrain, and
that it will not remain silent” said Husain Abdulla, Executive Director of
Americans for Democracy and Human Rights in Bahrain, member of the ECDHR
coalition.
The
European Parliament highlights the lack of progress in the implementation of
meaningful reforms for the protection of Human Rights in Bahrain and it
urgently calls upon its government to immediately and unconditionally release
all Human Rights Defenders and political prisoners and to abide by its Human
Rights commitments under international law. 
Nabeel
Rajab, like many other Human Rights Defenders in Bahrain, has suffered
oppression and ill-treatment from the Bahraini authorities due to his
activities. A climate of repression against peaceful dissent reigns in Bahrain
since the 2011 protests, in a country where freedom of expression and thought
and of gathering are criminalised. In particular, Human
Rights Defenders face continous judicial harassment and arbitrary detention.
Some of them have been exposed to severe torture.
As
the resolution points out “the Bahrain
authorities has been intensifying the use of repressive measures against civil
society activists and peaceful opposition”. In the past seven months, the
government has revoked the citizenship of 128 people, including 9 minors,
rendering most of them stateless, due to their peaceful opposition against the
regime which is in blatant violation of international law. Also, the use of
death penalty has dramatically increased in Bahrain, with four individuals
being sentenced to death only in 2015, pointing towards a very worrying trend on
the use of death sentences. 
“It is encouraging to see that the European
Parliament is denouncing Human Rights abuses in Bahrain. This resolution should
be the first step for the European Union as a whole to put human rights at the
centre of its diplomatic relations with Bahrain”, declared  Karim Lahidji, FIDH President. “We urge
the EU High Representative, and EU Member States to collectively and publicly
insist that Bahrain release those currently detained and imprisoned for
peacefully exercising their rights, such as Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja and Ghada
Jamsheer”, said Mary Lawlor, Executive Director of Front Line Defenders.

ECDHR,
Front Line Defenders and the Observatory join the call made by the European
Parliament  for “a rapid collective EU
effort to develop a comprehensive strategy on how the EU and the Commission can
actively push for the release of the imprisoned activists and prisoners of
conscience”.  
The Resolution also urges the
European Union to properly implement its guidelines on human rights defenders
and torture and to ban exports of tear gas and crowd control equipment until
investigations are conducted regarding their improper use and until the
perpetrators of such improper use are held accountable. ECDHR, Frontline
Defenders and the Observatory demand that the EU acts diligently upon these key
recommendations and in addition that it undertake an evaluation of support
offered to the Bahrain police and justice sectors. 
“We
urge the government of Bahrain to immediately and unconditionally release all
Human Rights Defenders and political activists imprisoned and to abide by its
obligations under the United Nations Human Rights Charter and the United
Nations Convention Against Torture, along with its other commitments under
international and humanitarian law”, concluded OMCT
Secretary General, Gerald Staberock.
 
For
further information please contact: 
ECDHR: 
Isabel
Cerda Marcos, icerdamarcos@ecdhr.org, +32.2.609.44.15
Front
Line Defenders:
Emma
Achilli, emma@frontlinedefenders.org, +32 230.93.83 or
+32.476.79.69.86
FIDH:
Arthur
Manet, press@fidh.org, +33.6.72.28.42.94
Lucie Kroening, press@fidh.org, +33.6.48.05.91.57
OMCT: 
Miguel
Martin Zumalacárregui, mmz@omct.org, +32.2.218.37.19



[1]     European Parliament resolution of 9 July
2015 on Bahrain, in particular the case of
 Nabeel
Rajab (2015/2758(RSP)), 