Human Rights Day: A call to action  - No implementation of human rights in the Universal Human Rights Declaration without human rights defenders
December 10, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2018 / DecemberHuman Rights Day: A call to action  - No implementation of human rights in the Universal Human Rights Declaration without human rights defenders
Geneva, December 10, 2018 - This 10th
December marks a double important Anniversary, as we celebrate the 20 years
since the adoption of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the 70th
Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
On this Day,
the OMCT, the largest alliance of human rights defenders fighting against
torture, and a leading human rights defenders protection organisation, invites
all of us to not lower our guard and renews its commitment to human dignity and
human rights. 
The OMCT
with a coalition of human rights organization calls for states to turn
statements into action and to endorse and implement the Action Plan that was adopted by participants of
the Human Rights Defenders World Summit
2018,
held in Paris on 29, 30, 31 October 2018. At the heart of the action plan is the recognition of human rights
defenders across the world for their communities, for social justice and many
other causes including the fundamental fight against torture. The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, landmark and inspirational document adopted 70
years, is as valid as ever, but without human rights defenders it would risk
being deprived of meaning and means. 
Over these 20 years, we have seen a
significant growth of international mechanisms as well as the adoption of
national human rights defenders’ policies in some countries. However, these
past years   also witnessed a very dramatic backsliding in
the actual protection of defenders. There are an ever-growing number of
threats, attacks, killings, detentions and defamation campaigns across all
regions of the world. States, increasingly also in Europe and North America,
are passive when it comes to concrete protection for defenders, and continue to
engage in acts or omissions which encroach on the dignity and personal
integrity of human rights defenders. This Human Rights Day reminds us that the
struggle for human rights matters, maybe more than ever, and it needs more and more
support to succeed. The adoption of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders 20 years ago was a promise of recognition and protection. It still
remains an unfulfilled promise.
“In this Anniversary, to pay a tribute to all these achievements and to
the work of Human Rights Defenders (HRD) we urge states to recommit to human
rights and to the protection of human rights defenders”, stressed Hina Jilani, OMCT President and first
UN Special Representative of the UN Secretary General on the Situation of Human
Rights Defenders. 
This day is a call
to all of us to continue our work to protect and support defenders, to reaffirm that States must fulfil their
obligations under international human rights law and guarantee the right to
freedom of action for human rights defenders to accomplish their work
everywhere. 
We often neglect that the human rights
movement is more global, more diverse and more vibrant than it has ever been. We
need to pay tribute to human rights defenders worldwide and what they are
achieving every day: a better world with less discrimination, marginalization,
torture, disappearances, less arbitrariness and more social justice, and
ultimately less conflict and more peace, security and development. 
This is what some members of OMCT Executive Council and
fellow human rights defenders say on this special Anniversary: 
“We started to
forget what our grandfathers were fighting for and the idea of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders. I
think it is still time to remember and to act […] ” - Olga Sadosvkaya, Russia.
"20 years
after the adoption of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, this Anniversary
reminds today the crucial role they play worldwide, at a time when the space
for civil society organizations and defenders continues to shrink through
various legislative manoeuvres and various forms of repression, especially in
the Arab world. Those men and women, in Yemen, in Saudi Arabia, or in Egypt,
are threatened, sentenced, sometimes even forced into exile, for defending
tirelessly rights and freedoms, particularly in the context of the fight
against terrorism or under the pretext of it " - Mokhtar Trifi, Vice-President of the OMCT,
Tunisia.
“Thousands of women and men, at the risk of
their lives, mobilize in a network for a common ideal: respect for human
rights. Today, it is even more important than ever to
celebrate this tireless work of dedicated advocates so that the oppressed do
not feel lonely” - Aminata Dieye,
Senegal.
"Human rights defenders sustain peace and democracy all over the
world regardless of reprisals and stigmatisation they face. The work of our forefathers and foremothers
sustain our dream for a world where human rights are a reality, not an
aspiration. As we celebrate achievements of the past 20 years, we can only hope
that Generations to come will be able to continue the struggle for freedom,
democracy, difference, diversity, development, respect for the Mother Nature
and above all peace in a safer environment” - Claudia Samayoa, Guatemala.
“We are in a world today where some States, democracies or not,
favouring cronyism, have absorbed democracies and civic spaces with their abuse
of power and authority. On this 20th anniversary of the UN Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, unfortunately we have moved several steps backwards when it
comes to freedoms of expression, assembly and association. Dissent is the
backbone of any democracy. Yet today dissent, which is a symbol of free speech
and expression, is criminalised and the dissenter jailed, killed and
persecuted. Today, it is a moment to remind the work of thousands of defenders
across the world and to pay tribute to thousands who have left their legacies,
thoughts and inspirations behind them" - Henri Tiphagne, India.
For more information, please contact Delphine
Reculeau, Director; dr@omct.org or Laura Parisotto, project officer and communication; lpa@omct.org
Background information 
Created in 1985, the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) is the main coalition of non-governmental organisations
(NGO) fighting against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and
all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. With more than 200 affiliated
organisations in its SOS-Torture Network, OMCT aims at accompanying,
reinforcing and protecting anti-torture organisations in particular in erosive
environments and provides a comprehensive system of support and protection for
human rights defenders around the world. 