Belarus:  Landmark UN decision: Ales Bialiatski's detention arbitrary, release and compensation requested
December 21, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2012 / DecemberBelarus: Landmark UN decision: Ales Bialiatski's detention arbitrary, release and compensation requestedRussian_Landmark UN decision: Ales Bialiatski's detention arbitrary, release and compensation requested2 pages / 270 KB


PRESS RELEASE -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
BELARUS: Landmark UN decision: Ales
Bialiatski's detention arbitrary, release and compensation requested
 
Paris-Geneva, December 21, 2012. At its 64th session, the
United Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) adopted
decision A/HRC/WGAD/2012/39, published on November 23, in which it found that
the detention of Mr. Ales Bialiatski, President
of the Human Rights Centre (HRC) “Viasna” and FIDH Vice-President, was
arbitrary, “being in contravention
of article 20, paragraph 1, of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights [UDHR]
and article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights”  (ICCPR). The WGAD emphasized that “the
adequate remedy is to release Mr. Bialatski and accord him an enforceable right
to compensation pursuant to article 9, paragraph 5, of the [ICCPR]”. This
decision follows a communication which had been addressed by the Observatory to
the WGAD on April 2, 2012 to contest the legality of Mr. Bialiatski's
detention.
 
In its decision, the WGAD highlighted that “central to the case, as
stated by the source, [were] Mr. Bialatski’s claims that the funds received in
a bank account abroad were part of the fundraising for the non-governmental
organization, Viasna, that the Government had deregistered and taken steps to
dissolve”. “The Working Group also emphasize[d] that criminal liability
cannot be based on prior government action to deregister and dissolve the
non-governmental organization Viasna, in violation of article 20, paragraph 1,
of the [UDHR] and Article 22 of the [ICCPR]”.
 
The WGAD further underlined that “the criminal law provisions in
Belarus applied to Mr. Bialatski’s case [did] not list human rights-related
activities among the purposes that allow tax exemption” and that States
parties to the ICCPR were “not only under a negative obligation not to
interfere with the founding of associations or their activities, but also under
a positive obligation to ensure and provide […] measures such as facilitating
associations' tasks by public funding or allowing tax exemptions for funding
received from outside the country”.
 
The WGAD also stated that the “fund raising undertaken by Mr.
Bialatski for the purposes of allowing the very existence of Viasna and
continuation of its activities [was] in conformity with […] articles 20,
paragraph 1 of the UDHR and 22 of the ICCPR”, and concluded that “the
criminal provisions as applied to Mr. Bialatski [did] not take account of the
aforementioned standards” and that Belarus was therefore in breach of its
international obligations. 
 
Eventually, the WGAD found Mr. Bialiatski's detention was arbitrary as
it resulted from the exercise of his universally recognised human rights, and
that it fell within category II of the arbitrary detention categories referred
to by the Working Group when considering the cases submitted to it (i.e. when
the deprivation of liberty results from the exercise of the rights or freedoms
guaranteed by articles 7, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20 and 21 of the UDHR and by articles
12, 18, 19, 21, 22, 25, 26 and 27 of the ICCPR).
 
The WGAD added that “when there are claims of human rights violations
[...], including a pattern of harassment […], domestic authorities
have a duty to investigate, and the inquiry must be independent, both institutionally
and in practice, and prompt”. The Group stressed
that “there [was] no support for such a review being undertaken by the
domestic authorities in the present case”.
 
“The decision of the WGAD is a landmark victory as it recognises
that the detention of Ales Bialiatski is arbitrary under international law, and
implements the right to funding for independent human rights NGOs” FIDH
President Souhayr Belhassen said today. “Ales Bialiatski must be released
immediately, Viasna must not be subject to further harassment” she
added.
 
For OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock “this decision must
lead to an improvement of the situation of human rights defenders and NGOs, in
Belarus and beyond”.
 
In August 2011, Mr. Bialiatski was arrested and charged with “concealment
of profits on an especially large scale” under Article 243, part 2, of the
Criminal Code of Belarus. On November 24, after almost four months of pre-trial
detention, the Minsk Pervomaiski District Court sentenced him to four and a
half years of imprisonment under strict regime conditions, confiscation of
property - including the premises used for Viasna's offices - and to a fine of
757,526,717 Belarusian Rubles (approximately 70,000 Euros). On January 24,
2012, the Minsk City Court confirmed the sentence on appeal, after all the
motions filed by Mr. Bialiatski's lawyers were rejected. On March 29, 2012, the
same court issued a new decision, ordering him to pay an extra amount of
140,366,151 rubles (nearly 12,700 Euros) in penalty in addition to the previous
fine which had already been paid in January 2012, due to alleged late payment
of arrears.
 
In making its decision, the WGAD took into account the communication it
received from the Observatory, but also the reply of the Republic of Belarus,
which alleged that the detention and sentencing of Mr. Bialiatski was legal
according to the national legislation and did not violate its international
obligations. The WGAD further took into consideration Communication No.
1296/2004 of the UN Committee on Human Rights, which concluded that the
dissolution of Viasna violated its freedom of association as guaranteed by
Article 22 of the ICCPR, and quoted the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of
Human Rights Defenders, Ms. Margaret Sekaggya, which addressed the case in her
report of February 24, 2010, as well as the report of the UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Belarus (dated April 10,
2012), which found that the pressures on the HRC Viasna and its President were
violating Article 22 of the ICCPR.
 
The decision of the WGAD is based on international law and was issued by
an international monitoring body composed of independent experts, according to
a contradictory procedure with the Republic of Belarus. Such decision will be
relied upon to call for the release of Mr. Ales Bialiatski.
 
For more information on the
situation of Mr. Ales Bialiatski, please see: http://freeales.fidh.net/ and the previous Urgent Interventions
issued by the Observatory.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·  
FIDH: Audrey Couprie /
Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·  
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
+ 41 22 809 49 39 