Philippines:  Ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Temogen Sahipa “Cocoy” Tulawie
March 25, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2013 / MarchPhilippines: Ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Temogen Sahipa “Cocoy” Tulawie


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
PHL 001 / 0112 / OBS 007.1
Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment
Philippines
March
25, 2013
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention on the following situation in The
Philippines.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Philippine Alliance of Human
Rights Advocates (PAHRA) about the ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary
detention of Mr. Temogen Sahipa “Cocoy”
Tulawie, former Provincial Chairperson of the Consortium of
Bangsamoro Civil Society (CBCS) in Mindanao, province of Sulu. His work
involves the monitoring and documentation of human rights violation cases
affecting Muslim communities in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao,
especially in the province of Sulu.
 
According to the
information, on March 4 and 6, 2013, the hearing of
the motion for bail filed by Mr. Temogen “Cocoy” Tulawie took place at the
Regional Trial Court (RTC), Branch 19 of Manila. Mr. Tulawie is detained
in suspicion of participating in the March 13, 2009
terrorist bombing, which led to the wounding of twelve persons,
including Governor Abdusakur Tan of the province of Sulu. Mr. Tulawie
has consistently denied any involvement in the bombing (See
background information). During the hearing,
the Prosecutor presented a total of seven witnesses, five from the military and
the police and two self-confessed conspirators of the March 13, 2009 bombing,
Messrs. Sali Said and Mujibar “Bong” Alih Amon. Both witnesses, though
they confessed conspiring to the bombing, were not included as accused nor were
they mentioned as witnesses on the charge sheet against Mr. Tulawie.
 
The
police and military testimonies made no mention of Mr. Tulawie’s involvement in
the incident but just described the incident and the destructions as a result
of the bombing. The witness Sali Said admitted that he was one of those who
conspired in the planning and execution of the March 13, 2009 bombing as well
as in other criminal activities such as the kidnapping of a well-known network
personality in 2008. He also admitted that he was an active member of the Abu
Sayyaf Group (ASG). Yet, he was released from prison last February 15, 2013,
two weeks before the bail hearing of the Tulawie case. Mr. Mujibar “Bong” Alih
Amon, who is currently in detention on suspicion of being a member of the ASG
involved in the beheading of Almeda/Jehovah witnesses members, testified that
Mr. Tulawie would have hired him for another plot to assassinate Governor Tan. Yet,
though he said he had lived for years with the Tulawie family, he failed to
respond to many questions on his job and Tulawie's family.
 
After the testimonies of the witnesses, the Defence counsel motioned that
the Public Prosecutor should include Sali Said as accused in the Tulawie case
because of his admission of involvement in the bombing. The Prosecutor said
that there should be a complaint in which the Judge said that it should be motu
proprio on their part. But the former is still adamant, thus Judge asked the
Counsel to formalize the motion.
 
The
bail hearing for Mr. Tulawie was concluded on March 6. The Judge will issue her
decision on or before June 19, 2013, the scheduled next hearing in the case.
For the meantime, Mr. Tulawie will remain in Davao city jail.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the continued arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment of Mr. Tulawie, and calls on the Philippines authorities to
immediately and unconditionally drop the charges brought against him, as their
intended goal seems to be the sanctioning of and obstructing to his human
rights activities. The Observatory also urges the authorities to guarantee in
all circumstances his physical and psychological integrity, as threats were
reportedly made against his security and life.

Furthermore, the Observatory is concerned that on February 28, 2013, a news
report in the national tabloid People's
Tonight[1] stated that the
Palace (Office of the President) might interfere into the Tulawie trial. The
article mentioned in particular that the Commission on Human Rights (CHR)
Chairperson Etta Rosales “openly aired her support for Tulawie’s innocence”. It
also stated that “it is well known that influential civil society groups and
NGOs, adept with tactics of information and agitation but without the benefit
of formal trials and fair deliberations, often campaign for their members
through various government channels, including the Office of the President”.
CBCS and the Free Cocoy Tulawie Movement were specifically mentioned.
 
On
March 4, a picket of Muslim youths, who regularly gathered during court
hearings in the Tulawie case, referred to the news clipping. 
 
Background
information:
 
Mr. Tulawie is facing charges of “multiple frustrated
murder” and “attempted murder” at the Regional Court of Jolo, Sulu, filed on
July 22, 2009 (criminal case no. (07-09)
1648-3 and criminal case no. (07-09) 1649-3) against him and four others[2].
The charges relate to a bombing incident that happened in the municipality of
Patikul, Sulu, on May 13, 2009. The evidence and warrant of arrest against him
was based on forced confessions of two of the accused, which they later
recanted.
 
Mr. Tulawie was
initially forced to hide due to fears that he would not be accorded a fair
trial.
 
On June 13, 2011, the Supreme
Court granted the motion he filed for transfer of venue to the RTC of Davao
City. He argued that there were reasons to believe that he would not be
afforded with impartiality if his case was to be tried in the RTC of Jolo. In
its decision, the Supreme Court considered that “there is an indication of
actual and imminent threat to the life of the petitioner and his family, as
well as his witnesses” and that “there is reason to believe that continuing
with the trial of the subject criminal cases in the RTC, Jolo, Sulu can lead to
a miscarriage of justice”.
 
On January 13, 2012, at
about 11:45 pm, Mr. Tulawie was arrested at his rented house in Davao City by
combined elements of Military Intelligence Group (MIG) from Region 9, members
of Special Action Force (SAF) and members of Police Regional Intelligence Group
from Region 11 based in Davao City. He was then taken to Talomo police station
for police blotter and to Davao Regional Hospital for medical check-up, before
being taken to Camp Catitipan, Davao City, at the office of the Intelligence
division for proper documentation. He was subsequently brought to Davao City
Police Office in Camp Domingo Leonor, Davao City.
 
On January 16, 2012, Mr. Tulawie was presented to the RTC of Davao City,
where a letter from the Executive and Presiding Judge of Jolo, Sulu RTC Branch
3, to the Executive Judge of Davao City was read, ordering the transfer of Mr.
Tulawie back to Jolo within 48 hours, in contravention to the Supreme Court
Order dated June 13, 2011 and granting the motion he filed for transfer of
venue to the RTC of Davao City.
 
On January 17, 2012 in the afternoon, Mr. Tulawie was flown to Zamboanga
City and detained at the Criminal Investigation and Detection Group
(CIDG)-Region 9. On the same day, the Office of the Court Administrator
(Supreme Court) sent an order for immediate action stating that “said order of
Judge Barraquias is contrary to the Resolution dated June 13, 2011 issued by
the Third Division of the Supreme Court wherein the transfer of venue of
Criminal Case Nos. (07-09) 1648-3 and (07-09) 1649-3, both involving Mr.
Tulawie, was decreed to be held at the Regional Trial Court of Davao City.
Likewise, be advised that the Motion for Reconsideration of the above
Resolution had already been acted upon and this has apparently been denied.
Thus, with more reason that Judge Barraquias has no authority to issue his
supposed order. As such, you are hereby directed to inform the police or jail
custodians of Mr. Tulawie that any order contrary to the Resolution dated 13
June 2011 of the Third Division of the Supreme Court cannot be implemented”.
 
In August 2012, the case was ordered
for transfer from Davao to Manila, Branch 19, upon the motion of Governor Tan. Mr. Tulawie appealed against the transfer of case and
incarceration in Manila because of alleged plot of assassination if he is
transferred to Manila. Yet the appeal was denied by the Supreme Court.
 
Actions
requested:

Please write to the authorities in The Philippines, urging them to:

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Temogen Sahipa "Cocoy" Tulawie as well
as of all human rights defenders in The Philippines;
 
ii. Release Mr. Temogen Sahipa
"Cocoy" Tulawie immediately and unconditionally since his detention
is arbitrary as it seems to only aim at sanctioning his human rights
activities;
 
iii.
Put an
end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr.
Temogen Sahipa "Cocoy" Tulawie as well as against all human rights
defenders in the Philippines, and ensure in all circumstances that they are
able to carry out their work without any hindrance and fear of
reprisals;
 
iv. Comply with all the
provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9,
1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular:
-    Article 1, which states that “everyone has the
right, individually or in association with others, to promote the protection
and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, 
-    Article 6.a, which states that "everyone has
the right individually and in association with others to know, seek, obtain,
receive and hold information about all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including having access to information as to how those rights and freedoms are
given effect in domestic legislative, judicial or administrative systems",
-    Article 12.1, which foresees that “everyone has the
right, individually and in association with others, to participate in peaceful
activities against violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”,
-    Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall
take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.

v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by The Philippines.
 
Addresses:
 
• H.E.
Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Republic of the Philippines, New
Executive Building, Malacañang Palace, JP Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila 1005,
Philippines. Fax: +63 2 736 1010  / +63 2 742-1641 / 929-3968 Email: corres@op.gov.ph / opnet@ops.gov.ph / op@president.gov.ph
• Hon. Leila M. De Lima, Secretary, Department of Justice (DOJ), Padre Faura
Street Ermita, Manila, 1000 Philippines Fax: +63 2 523 9548 
/ +63 2 521-1614 Email: lmdelima@doj.gov.ph / doj.delima@gmail.com / soj@doj.gov.ph
• Chairperson
Loretta Ann P. Rosales, Commission on Human Rights (CHR), SAAC Bldg.,
Commonwealth Avenue, U.P. Complex, Diliman, Quezon City. Philippines Fax: +63
2929 0102 Email: chair.rosales.chr@gmail.com
• Police
Director Alan Purisima, Chief, Philippine National Police, Camp General Rafael
Crame, Quezon City, Philippines. Fax: +63 2 724 8763 / +63 2 723 0401. Email: feedback@pnp.gov.ph
• Lt. General Emmanuel Bautista, Chief of
Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), AFP-GHQ office, Camp General
Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City, Philippines. Fax: +63 2 9116436
• Hon. Emilio Gonzalez, Deputy Ombusdman, Office of the Deputy Ombudsman for
the Military and other Law Enforcement Offices, 3rd Flr., Ombudsman Bldg.,
Agham Road, Diliman, 1004 Quezon City Philippines. Fax: +63 2 926 8747
• Hon.
Manuel Roxas, II, Secretary, Department of Interior & Local Government
(DILG) A. Francisco Gold Condominium II, Edsa corner, Mapagmahal St.,
Diliman, Quezon City. Email: mar@marroxas.com;
marroxas@dilg.gov.ph. Fax: + 63 2 925 0332
• J/C
SUPT Diony Dacanay Mamaril, Cese, Officer-in-Charge, Bureau of Jail management
and Penology, 144 Mindanao Avenue, Project 8, Quezon City, Philippines 1106,
Email: mailto:itu@bjmp.gov.ph
• H.E.
Mr. Evan P. Garcia, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the
United Nations in Geneva, 47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41
22 716 19 32, Email: geneva.pm@dfa.gov.ph
• Embassy
of the Philippines in Brussels, 297 Avenue Moliere, 1050 Brussels, Belgium,
Fax: +32 2 345 64 25.
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of The
Philippines in your respective country.

***
Geneva-Paris, March 25, 2013

Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in
your reply.

The Observatory, a OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of
Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of
need.

To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·        
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·        
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]
http://www.journal.com.ph/index.php/news/national/45695-palace-intervention-feared-as-tulawie-trial-begins


[2] As of today, one (Muammar Askali)
is still at large, one (Sulayman Mohammad
Muin) was killed in detention for
allegedly trying to escape, and the remaining two (Juhan Albani Alihuddin
and Abner Salahi Tahil) are
detained in Metro Manila, in separate jails. 