India:  Joint Press Release:  Authorities prolong unlawful detention of Kashmiri human rights defender Khurram Parvez
October 26, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / OctoberIndia: Joint Press Release:  Authorities prolong unlawful detention of Kashmiri human rights defender Khurram ParvezPress Release_Khurram Parvez2 pages / 266 KB                                            The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (The Observatory)
The Asian Federation Against Involuntary
Disappearances (AFAD)
The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC)
Human Rights Defenders Alert - India (HRDA)
FORUM-ASIA
The International Coalition Against Enforced
Disappearances (ICAED)
OdhikarBangkok-Dhaka-Geneva-Madurai-Paris-Quezon City, 26 October
2016 – The High Court in Jammu and Kashmir has again prolonged the arbitrary
detention of Kashmiri human rights defender Mr. Khurram Parvez, who has already
spent 40 days in jail. Our organisations call on the Indian authorities to
release him immediately. 
 
On 25 October 2016, the Jammu and Kashmir High Court
heard the case against Mr. Parvez filed under the Public Safety Act. Mr.
Parvez’s family had filed a petition on 13 October 2016 challenging his
detention, to which the State failed to respond. However, instead of releasing
Mr. Parvez, the High Court granted the State another three weeks to respond,
sending Mr. Parvez back to Jammu’s Kot Balwal Jail, 300 kilometres away from
his home, family, and legal counsel in Srinagar. The Court has set the next
hearing date for 14 November, meaning that Mr. Parvez risks spending at least
20 more days in arbitrary detention.
 
On 14 September 2016 Mr. Parvez was stopped from
travelling to Geneva to participate in the United Nations Human Rights Council
on orders from the Intelligence Bureau, and was arrested 2 days later at his
home in Kashmir under Sections 107 and 151 of the Criminal Procedure Code[1]
and denied access to legal counsel.[2]
 
A judge from The High Court in Srinagar District issued an order for Mr. Parvez’s release on 20
September, but police promptly re-arrested him under the preventive detention
provisions of the Public Safety Act (PSA). He has remained arbitrarily detained
since, along with hundreds of others individuals detained under the ambiguous
and oft-manipulated PSA.
 
Our organisations denounce this abuse of the PSA by
the Indian authorities to silence human rights defenders and dissidents under
the guise of national security. Almost 800 people have been arrested in central
Kashmir since protests broke out in July 2016, with at least 80 of them booked
under the PSA. 
 
On
19 October 2016, several United Nations experts called on the Government of
India to release Mr. Parvez, and expressed their concerns regarding the
arbitrary application of the PSA against human rights defenders.[3]
Nevertheless, the Indian authorities have ignored this call and their
obligations under international law by continuing to hold Mr. Parvez in
arbitrary detention. 
 
Our
organisations condemn the arbitrary use of the Public Safety Act to unlawfully
detain Mr. Parvez and call for his immediate and unconditional release.
Additionally, we demand an end to the harassment of human rights defenders and
that the Indian government remove all legal and administrative barriers that
impede their legitimate work. We also call on the international community,
notably the other members of the United Nations Human Rights Council of which
India is currently a member, to insist that India comply with its human rights
obligations, including by allowing Indian human rights defenders to freely
engage in their work and to enjoy their rights to free expression, peaceful
assembly, and association.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (The
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT.
The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations
of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of
ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
The Asian Federation Against Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD) is a
federation of human rights organizations working directly on the issue of
involuntary disappearances in Asia. Envisioning a world without desaparecidos,
AFAD was founded on June 4, 1998 in Manila, Philippines.
 
The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) works towards
the radical rethinking and fundamental redesigning of justice institutions in
order to protect and promote human rights in Asia. Established in 1984, the
Hong Kong based organisation is a Laureate of the Right Livelihood Award 2014.
 
Human Rights Defenders Alert - India (HRDA) is a national
network of human rights defenders for human rights defenders.  HRDA intervenes in the cases of
threats/harassment/attack on HRDs and curbing of freedom of expression,
assembly and association.
 
FORUM-ASIA is a regional
human rights group with 58 member organisations in 19 countries across Asia.
FORUM-ASIA addresses key areas of human rights violations in the region,
including freedoms of expression, assembly and association, human rights
defenders, and democratisation. FORUM-ASIA operates through its offices in
Bangkok, Jakarta, Geneva and Kathmandu. 
 
The International Coalition Against Enforced Disappearances
(ICAED) is a network of 42 member organisations concerned with the issue
of human rights and the struggle against enforced disappearances. The principal
objective of ICAED is maximising impact of the activities carried out by its
members in favour of an early ratification and effective implementation of the
Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearances. 
 
Odhikar, a human rights organisation based in Dhaka,
Bangladesh, was founded in 1994 with the aim to create a wider monitoring and
awareness raising system on the abuse of civil and political rights. 
 
For
more information, please contact:
·        
AFAD: Mary Aileen D. Bacalso: +63 2 456 6434
·        
AHRC: Md. Ashrafuzzaman: +41 766 382 659 / +852 607 32
807
·        
FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33 14 355 2518
·        
FORUM-ASIA: Anjuman Ara Begum: +977 982
381 5517
·        
HRDA: Mathew Jacob: +91 886 011 0520
·        
ICAED: Mary Aileen D. Bacalso: +63 917 792 4058
·        
Odhikar: Adilur Rahman Khan: + 880 29 88 85 87
·        
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39




[1]      Section
107 and 151 of the Criminal Procedure Code 
allow the police to exercise preventive custody of individuals  only when there is an imminent danger to the
peace or likelihood of breach of peace in a given area. Such arrests can be
made only when it appears to the concerned police officer that the commission
of such crimes cannot be prevented otherwise.


[2]      For more information on
Mr. Parvez’s arrest see  https://www.fidh.org/en/issues/human-rights-defenders/kashmiri-human-rights-defender-khurram-parvez-arbitrarily-arrested



[3]                    OHCHR, http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20697&LangID=E 