India:  Severe human rights violations in Nandigram
June  6, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2008 / JuneIndia: Severe human rights violations in NandigramGeneva, 6 June 2008. The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its deep concern about the latest events which occurred in Nandigram, East Midnapur District, West Bengal, beginning of May 2008, in the context of panchayat elections (village council). The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that, from mid-April to beginning of May 2008, members of and private militias owing allegiance to the ruling Communist Party of India Marxist (CPIM) violently assaulted residents of several villages in Nandigram aiming at intimidating them in view of the elections planned to take place on 10 May 2008. Many voters’ identity cards were subsequently reportedly seized. Furthermore, reports indicate that, while in some cases police forced did not intervene to stop the violations, in other cases police forces were directly involved in the abuses. These assaults have reportedly caused an unidentified number of injured people, including women and children. Human rights NGO Masum has so far collected names of 28 injured and one killed. At least two children have sustained severe injuries, including bullet injuries, and at least two women were raped. However, the actual victims’ toll of those who were killed is expected to be higher. OMCT has already documented serious human rights violations in Nandigram. On 14 March 2007, security forces had entered the remote areas in Nandigram, allegedly to restore severed communication links with the region, using lathi (baton) charge and indiscriminate gun fire against the civilians to disperse the crowd (see OMCT Press Release 21 March 2007). OMCT is very concerned about these reports and urges the authorities to put an immediate end to human rights violations in the region. OMCT calls upon the authorities to launch a thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these allegations, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law. OMCT also calls upon the authorities to provide appropriate medical treatment to the victims in need. Finally, OMCT urges the authorities to guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws, international humanitarian law and human rights standards.   For further information, please contact: + 00 41 22 809 49 39 