Repression in Turkey: European Parliament Must Take Strong Stand
June  7, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / European Union (EU) / 2013 / JuneRepression in Turkey: European Parliament Must Take Strong Stand

Repression in Turkey:
European
Parliament Must Take Strong Stand
 
In the last week, Turkish citizens, human rights defenders, trade unions
and civil society organisations have come under attack by the Turkish
government. What started as a peaceful demonstration has turned into a violent
clash with the Turkish police and security services.
 
In the protests, at least 3 people died and more than 2800 people were
injured in Istanbul, Ankara and Izmir. Reports indicate that about 3000 people
were taken into custody and many allegedly subjected to ill-treatment; several
sources reported the disproportional use of gas and chemical substances to
crackdown on the protests; and media sources
reported over 25 twitter activists have been detained and placed in custody.
 
SOLIDAR, İnsan Hakları Derneği (İHD),
Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights
Network, World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), the International Federation of
Human Rights League (FIDH),
ISCOS CISL and other human
rights organisations and trade unions have developed a draft
resolution for the European Parliament in the run up to the plenary debate in
Strasbourg on the situation in Turkey next Wednesday.
 
This draft resolution
outlines the following recommendations urging the Turkish government to:
·     Put an end to police violence and acts of ill-treatment against
protestors to prevent further deaths and injuries.
·     Stop the detention of protesters, human rights activists and social
media activists under the pretence of fighting terrorism.
·     Release all peaceful protestors from prison who were taken into custody
during protests in Turkey and guarantee neither administrative nor judicial
investigations will be initiated against them.
·     Guarantee and respect the full right to freedom of expression, of peaceful
assembly and of peaceful protest for all citizens.
·     Guarantee the right to freedom of expression and press freedom for all
journalists, bloggers, social media activists and human rights defenders.
·     Guarantee the implementation of all signed and ratified international
standards, conventions and agreements.
·     In particular, abide by the Convention against Torture and other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, as well as by the International
Covenant on Political and Civil Rights that protects freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly.
·     Reform the legal framework, the penal code and the anti-terror law to
stop criminalising peaceful protests and civil activities based on their
content.
·     Issue an immediate, independent and impartial investigation into
allegations of excessive use of force and ill-treatment against protestors,
prosecute those who are found guilty and ensure that those who are politically
accountable take their responsibility.
·     Seek a peaceful solution through dialogue and debate, taking into
account the demands and well-being of all Turkish citizens.
 
The European Union, in the year it received the Nobel Peace Prize, has
to take a strong stand against violence against peaceful protestors, against
human rights violations and encroachment on the freedom of association and
peaceful assembly in Turkey and the rest of the world. The human rights
defenders, trade unions and civil society organisations that contributed to
this draft resolution will continue to closely monitor the developments in
Turkey. 