China:  New acts of ill-treatment against Mrs. Liu Jie
August 22, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2008 / AugustChina: New acts of ill-treatment against Mrs. Liu JieNew information CHN 007 / 1007 / OBS 129.5 Arbitrary detention / Torture and ill-treatments People’s Republic of China August 22, 2008 The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention on the following situation in the People’s Republic of China. New information: The Observatory has been informed by “Chinese Human Rights Defenders” (CRD) about new acts of ill-treatment against Mrs. Liu Jie, an activist for the rights to complain and to seek justice, while in detention in a camp of Re-Education Through Labour (RTL)[1]. According to the information received, on August 15, 2008, Mrs. Liu Jie was beaten by a guard at the RTL camp when she confronted the guard about the mistreatment of a fellow detainee. During the beating, Mrs. Liu pushed the guard in an act of self-defence. The RTL camp then accused Mrs. Liu of attacking its staff and, as punishment, Mrs. Liu has been forced to sit on a “Tiger Bench”: the torture victim is made to sit upright on a long bench, her hands tied behind her back. Her thighs are fastened with a rope to the bench while her feet are raised off the floor by bricks placed under her feet. This puts extreme strain on the knees and is a very painful form of torture, especially for an extended period of time. This is not the first time Liu was tortured at Harbin Drug Rehabilitation Centre, where she is currently held. On May 22, 2008, Mrs. Liu had already been forced to sit on a “Tiger Bench” for seven consecutive days (See background information), for protesting against the harsh working conditions in Qiqihar RTL camp. Furthermore, Mrs. Liu is in very poor health, as she suffers from heart disease, Cholecystitis and a severe eye illness. According to a doctor who examined her on December 20, 2007, Mrs. Liu will go blind if she does not receive proper treatment immediately. As the treatment is unavailable in Heilongjiang Province, she must be sent to Beijing. However, the authorities have not yet responded to her and her family’s repeated requests for release for medical treatment eight months after the diagnosis was made. And although she is close to being blind, Ms. Liu is forced to work fourteen hours a day, six days a week at the camp. The Observatory expresses its deep concern about the acts of torture against Mrs. Liu Jie while arbitrarily detained, and recalls that her detention is also a flagrant violation of the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular of its Article 6.c, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to study, discuss, form and hold opinions in the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters”. Background information: On October 11, 2007, Mrs. Liu was arrested by Beijing police as she was leaving some friends at Beijing Zhong Ding Village, near the South Train Station. She was taken to the nearby You-an Men police station where her cell phone was confiscated. Police officers then put her in a car and drove away. She and other activists spent the two previous months surveying petitioners and collecting signatures for the open letter addressed to the leaders of the Communist Party. They collected a rather large number of signatures by petitioners from many provinces, who had been to Beijing to file complaints about their mistreatments by local officials, many of whom having suffered official harassment and police brutality. Since 2003, Ms. Liu has organised petitioners every year to submit open letters to Chinese leaders at important meetings, such as the annual National People’s Congress, advocating for legal and political reforms. Other organisers of the open letter campaign are now in hiding. On October 13, 2007, Mrs. Liu Jie was officially detained for suspicion of “instigating trouble” and “gathering crowds to disturb social order”, on the basis of Article 61 of the Criminal Procedure Law, which pertains to the initial detention of “major suspects” or “active offenders”. Her family obtained her formal detention order from the PSB of the Beian City Military Farm Bureau (Nongken). Mrs. Liu was the lead organiser of a public letter signed by 12,150 petitioners calling on the Chinese Communist Party leaders to implement political and legal reforms on the eve of the 17th Party Congress. On November 12, 2007, Mrs. Liu Jie’s husband was informed by the Beian Nongken Detention Centre that his wife was sentenced to 18 months of Re-Education Through Labour (RTL) by the Public Security Bureau (PSB) of the Beian City Military Farm Bureau (Nongken) in Heilongjiang Province. On December 20, 2007, she applied for an administrative review of the decision to send her to RTL. She has been beaten a number of times by police from Heilongjiang Provincial Nongken (Military Farm Bureau) PSB because of her activities protecting the human rights of petitioners. In March 2002, she suffered permanent eye injuries and drastically reduced vision as a consequence of such beatings. Between October and November 2007, while in detention, she was again beaten which caused further injuries to her eyes. On February 19, 2008, Heilongjiang RTL Management Committee rejected Ms. Liu Jie’s application demanding an administrative review of the decision to send her to the RTL camp. Ms. Liu has decided to appeal this decision. On May 22, 2008, Mrs. Liu Jie was transferred, along with 29 other female detainees, from the Qiqihar RTL camp to the Harbin Drug Rehabilitation Centre after protesting against the harsh working conditions in the RTL camp. Indeed, between March and May, the detainees were forced to work over 14 hours a day to make crafts for an upcoming traditional festival. The detainees alleged that the chemical dye provided by the RTL camp, which stained their hands red, was poisonous. Soon after her arrival at the Rehabilitation Centre, Mrs. Liu Jie was reportedly forced to sit on a “Tiger Bench”: she was made to sit upright on a long bench, her hands tied behind her back. Her thighs were fastened with a rope to the bench while her feet were raised off the floor by bricks placed under her feet. This puts extreme strain on the knees and is a very painful form of torture, especially as Mrs. Liu was subjected to this torture for five consecutive days. Reportedly, Mrs. Liu was tortured as part of the Rehabilitation Centre’s “effort” to instil “discipline” among the newcomers. However, the Rehabilitation Centre allows families of the detainees four visits a month, which is an improvement from the RTL camp. Actions requested: Please write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China, urging them to:   Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mrs. Liu Jie, and in particular ensure that she be granted all necessary medical treatment she requires;  Ensure her immediate release since her detention is arbitrary as it merely aims at sanctioning her human rights activities;  Conduct a fair and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned allegations of torture against Mrs. Liu Jie in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by the law;  Guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to Mrs. Liu Jie;  Put an end to the harassment against all human rights defenders in the People’s Republic of China;  Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, Article 6.c mentioned above and Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;  Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by the People’s Republic of China.  Addresses:  Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Mr. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn Mr. Yang Jiechi, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn; Mr. Meng Jianzhu, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216 Mr. Ma Zhenchuan, Director of the Beijing Public Security Bureau, Juzhang, Beijingshi Gong’anju, 9 Qianmen Dongdajie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100740, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 85222320, Email: wbjc2sohu.com Ambassador Sha Zukang, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int; Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Brussels, Avenue de Tervuren, 463 1160 Auderghem, Belgium, Tel: + 32 2 663 30 10 / + 32 2 663 30 17 / +32 2 771 14 97 / +32 2 779 43 33; Fax: +32 2 762 99 66 / +32 2 779 28 95; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn.  Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.  Geneva - Paris, August 22, 2008 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic. To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / +33 1 43 55 18 80  Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29    [1] RTL is an administrative detention measure according to which, without any proper legal procedures or court proceedings, the PSB can send individuals to detention facilities for a maximum of four years. Detainees sent to RTL are deprived of their rights to legal counsel and appeal. 