Bangladesh:  Senior journalist Shafik Rehman detained as Government repression of journalists grows
April 19, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Bangladesh / 2016 / AprilBangladesh: Senior journalist Shafik Rehman detained as Government repression of journalists grows 

The Bangladesh Government’s
attempts to silence free speech continue. Several senior journalists and
writers are facing trumped up charges and arbitrary detention for having
published stories that are critical of the authorities. Mr. Shafik Rehman, an 81-year-old author,
anti-death penalty campaigner, TV presenter, and journalist, has become the
latest victim of this systematic abuse of the judicial system to repress
freedom of expression in Bangladesh.


  
In the early morning of 16
April 2016, plainclothed police, who did not have any warrant of arrest against Rehman, gained
access to his house in Dhaka by falsely claiming to be “journalists” from a
private TV channel, and arrested the veteran journalist, a British national of
Bangladeshi origin. 
 
After taking Rehman to the Detective Branch Police
headquarters, the police showed him to be arrested in relation to a pending criminal
case registered in August 2015 for “conspiring to abduct and assassinate” Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina’s son Sajeeb Wazed Joy, who is an immigrant in the United
States and an Information and Technology Adviser to the Prime Minister. A
Metropolitan Magistrate of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate’s Court of Dhaka
placed Rehman in police remand for five days, where local human rights groups
fear he will be tortured.
 
Rehman’s
arrest is the latest in a wave of detentions and trumped up charges against
journalists and critics of the Government. Several other individuals, including
renowned journalists, are currently in detention and face dozens of trumped up
and falsified criminal cases. 
 
On
11 April 2013, the Government detained Mr. Mahmudur
Rahman, Acting Editor of Daily Amar
Desh, a national daily newspaper, and shut down his newspaper for
publishing stories about a corruption scam involving the Prime Minister’s son
Sajeeb Wazed Joy and her Adviser on Energy and Mineral Resources Affairs.
Rahman has now spent over three years in arbitrary detention, and currently
faces 72 criminal cases. Over the past years, Rahman has been granted bail by
the Courts, but each time the police present a new criminal case against him in
order to prevent him from being released.
 
Mr.
Abdus Salam, Chairman of Ekushey TV, was arrested on 6 January
2015 on alleged pornography charges, after his
private TV channel broadcast a speech of an exiled Senior Vice Chairperson of
the BNP [Bangladesh Nationalist Party, the main opposition political party], Mr. Tareque Rahman. Later, the Government allegedly took active
part in helping a pro-government controversial businessman purchase the majority
shares in Ekushey TV from Abdus
Salam, who is still in detention.
 
Mr.
Shawkat Mahmud, Editor of Weekly
Economics Time, has been arbitrarily detained since 18 August 2015 and now faces 24 fabricated criminal cases. He is associated
with the opposition party and is known to be critical of the Government. As with Mahmudur Rahman, whenever the Courts grant
Shawkat Mahmud bail, the police present a new case against him to keep him in
detention.
 
Mr.
Mahfuz Anam, Editor of The Daily Star, is facing 79 cases of
sedition and defamation for having published reports in 2007 that accused
now-Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina of corruption. These reports were based on
uncorroborated information and Mahfuz Anam has since stated that it was a
mistake to have published them, but nevertheless faces 17 sedition and 62
defamation cases. On 11 April 2016, the High Court stayed the proceedings of 72
of the cases filed against him, but he still could be sentenced to up to 175
years in prison if he is convicted of the charges he faces. 
 
This
abuse of the judicial system to silence and harass journalists is creating a
climate of fear and self-censorship in Bangladesh. The trumped up charges and
arbitrary detentions of Government critics is a violation of international
human rights law, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, which Bangladesh has ratified. The international community, in
particular the Special Procedures of the United Nations Human Rights Council,
must engage actively to stop the repression of free expression in Bangladesh.
All journalists and individuals detained for exercising their basic right to
free expression, including Shafik Rehman, Mahmudur Rahman, Abdus Salam and
Shawkat Mahmud, must be immediately and unconditionally released. 
 
# # #
 
The Asian Human Rights Commission is a
regional non-governmental organisation that monitors human rights in Asia,
documents violations and advocates for justice and institutional reform to
ensure the protection and promotion of these rights. The Hong Kong-based group
was founded in 1984.
 
FIDH (The International
Federation for Human Rights) is a non-governmental federation of national human
rights organizations from around the world. Founded in 1922, FIDH is the oldest
international human rights organisation in the world, and today brings together
178 member organisations in over 100 countries. Its core mandate is to promote
respect for all the rights set out in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
 
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) is an international non-governmental organisation (NGO) that was
created in 1985. It leads
a global coalition of 297 human rights NGOs around the world, members of its SOS-Torture Network, helping them to more effectively fight against
torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances and other cruel, inhuman
and degrading treatment. 