Philippines:  Philippines: torture of Amador Matos, 27 year old farmer, by a group of soldiers
April 18, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2000 / AprilPhilippines: Philippines: torture of Amador Matos, 27 year old farmer, by a group of soldiersPhilippines: torture of 27 year old farmer by soldiers  Case PHL 180400  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Philippines.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines, a member of the OMCT network, of the torture of Amador Matos, 27 year old farmer by a group of soldiers.  According to the information received, on March 28, 2000, Amador Matos, a farmer from Brgy. Santican, Danao City was arrested by a group of soldiers and accused as a member of the outlawed New People’s Army (NPA).   Amador Matos, who is presently detained at the Danao City Police Station, said that on his way to Sityo Tubigon he passed a checkpoint manned by a group of soldiers.  All of a sudden, at about 10:00 a.m., an unidentified man, who claims to be a member of Alcover’s group (Pastor “Jun” Alcover is the chair of the anti-communist group Nationalist Alliance for Democracy), shouted while pointing his finger to the victim, “That man (Amador Matos) is on the list.”  It is reported that at gunpoint, the soldiers then surrounded the victim and asked him about the whereabouts of the NPA members in their barrio. The soldiers then searched Matos finding a .22 caliber pistol inside his bag which he reasoned that he only carries for protection against lawless elements.  His bag was then confiscated.  According to further information, the soldiers then brought him to the bushes, about one hundred meters away from the barangay road, where they proceed to interrogate him. The perpetrators accused the victim of collecting revolutionary tax from the farmers. When Matos denied their allegations he was tied with a nylon rope and a  plastic bag was put on his head, thus depriving him of air (this form of torture is known as dry submarine), by the soldiers. He was also hit on the shoulders with the butt of an M16 rifle. A certain Lt. Molina, the commanding officer of the soldiers, also reportedly punched him on the stomach. The victim also said that the soldiers would chamber their rifles everytime he denied their allegations.  Matos admitted that he was visited by the members of the New People’s Army and were given reading materials by the said men. But the victim vehemently denied that he is a member of the foresaid group.  The soldiers then took Matos to their camp and tied him to a tree till dawn. Matos claimed that the soldiers refused to untie him even though it was raining and he was forced to urinate in his pants.  Matos added that his arms were very sore during the incident.  On March 29, 2000 at around 4:00 p.m., the soldiers then decided to turn him over to the Philippine National Police in Danao City.  A case of illegal possession of firearms were filed against the victim at the Municipal Trial Court in Danao City.  According to the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines, since June 1999, this is the fifth torture case, perpetrated by the Armed Forces of the Philippines Visayas Command, that has been documented. Unfortunately, three of the said cases were not filed in court because the victims have refused to file charges against the perpetrators. Majority of the victims are farmers who were suspected as members of the New People’s Army.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Philippines urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Amador Matos; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these allegations of torture and ill-treatment in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	garantee adequate redress to Amador Matos; iv.	garantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses  His Excellency, Joseph Ejercito Estrada, President, Republic of the Philippines, Malacanang Palace, Manila, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 832 3793, E-mail: erap@ops.gov.ph Secretary Artemio Toquero, Department of Justice, Padre Faura, Manila, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 521 1614 Commissioner Aurora RecinaCommission on Human Rights, SAAC Bldg., UP Complex, Commonwealth Ave., Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 631 6499 Secretary Orlando Mercado, Department of National Defense, 3rd floor DND Bldg., Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City, Philippines Gen. Angelo Reyes, Chief-of-Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines, Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City, Philippines Hon. Mamintal Adiong, House Committee on Justice and Human Rights, House of Representatives, Batasan Hills, Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 818 7391  Diplomatic representatives in your country.  Geneva, April 18, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 