Bahrain:  Sentencing and continuing judicial harassment of Ms. Ghada Jamsheer
November 30, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2015 / NovemberBahrain: Sentencing and continuing judicial harassment of Ms. Ghada Jamsheer

New
information
BHR 002 / 0415 /
OBS 030.3
Sentencing
/ Judicial harassment
Bahrain
November
30, 2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Bahrain.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the sentencing and continuing judicial harassment of Ms. Ghada
Jamsheer, Head of the Women's Petition Committee, an organisation which
campaigns for the rights and dignity of women in the Shari'ah family courts.
 
According to information received, on November 26, 2015, the High
Criminal Appeal Court upheld the one year sentence, suspended for three years,
issued against Ms. Ghada Jamsheer on charges of
“assaulting a police officer” (see background information). The Court
refused all the requests of the defense lawyers, which included the testimony
of Ministry of Interior officials and a forensic examination of whether Ms.
Jamsheer could have kicked the police officer as alleged. 
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the sentencing and the continuous judicial harassment
of Ms. Ghada Jamsheer, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning her human
rights activities. The Observatory calls upon the Bahraini authorities to
immediately and unconditionally drop all charges against her.
 
Background
information:
 
Over the
past years, Ms. Jamsheer has come under permanent surveillance with a 24-hour
presence of plainclothes Public Security officials of the Ministry of the
Interior in front of her home.
 
On September
14, 2014, Ms. Jamsheer was arrested and arbitrarily detained for more than
three months on allegations of defamation, in connection with messages posted
via her Twitter account criticising corruption in the management of King Hamad
Hospital in Bahrain, which is run by members of the ruling family. Various
charges were brought against Ms. Jamsheer based on the above-mentioned Twitter
posts resulting in twelve criminal cases.
 
Hearings in
a total of 12 criminal cases against Ms. Jamsheer have been regularly adjourned
without any reason, in violation of Ms. Jamsheer’s right to be tried within a
reasonable time.
 
On October
29, 2014, the Third Criminal Court acquitted Ms. Jamsheer in one case, fined
her 100 BHD (approx. €210) in another case, and granted bail upon the payment
of 50 BHD pending the decision on the other Twitter cases. However, Ms.
Jamsheer had to wait until November 27 to be released, and was again rearrested
only 12 hours later on new charges of “assaulting two police women”. She was
again released on December 15, 2014, and further put under house arrest until
January 15, 2015.
 
On May 5,
2015, the Bahrain High Criminal Court sentenced Ms. Jamsheer to a one year
prison term, suspended for three years on charges of “assaulting a police
officer”.
 
On June 9,
2015, the Third Lower Criminal Court sentenced Ms. Jamsheer to one year and
eight months imprisonment on charges of defamation in connection with messages
posted via her Twitter account criticising alleged corruption in the management
of King Hamad Hospital in Bahrain. Ms. Jamsheer paid a bail of 400 BHD (approx
1,200 USD) and filed an appeal. 
 
Besides, on
October 1, 2015, the Second Lower Criminal Court held its first hearing against
Ms. Ghada Jamsheer on charges of “verbal and physical confrontation with a
police woman”. The Court then adjourned the hearing to November 11, 2015. On
that day, Ms. Jamsheer's lawyers requested the Court to present evidence and
witnesses, and the court adjourned the hearing to December 28, 2015. The
Prosecution alleges that Ms. Jamsheer assaulted a police officer while she was
detained in September 2014.
 
In the present,
separate case, for allegedly “assaulting a police officer”, for which she has
been sentenced in first instance to one year in prison suspended for three
years, the High Criminal Court of Appeal had refused on October 29 the requests
filed by Ms. Jamsheer and adjourned the hearing to November 23 for the verdict.
The ruling was eventually issued on November 26.
 
The
Observatory recalls that on December 29, 2014, UN
experts urged the government of Bahrain to drop charges
against Ms. Jamsheer, as she was sentenced “purely for [her] criticism of
government authorities. [...] Such criticism is not only fully legitimate
according to Bahrain’s obligations under human rights law; it is also essential
to the free and public debate necessary for a healthy civil society” they
added.
 
Furthermore,
Ms. Jamsheer has faced other acts of harassment. For instance, on March 14,
2015, Ms. Jamsheer was denied the right to board on a plane at Bahrain
International Airport by the airport's security office as she attempted to
travel to France to receive medical treatment. Ms. Jamsheer, who did not
receive any prior notification, was not given any reason for the travel ban. On
March 23, 2015, Ms. Jamsheer complained to the Public Prosecutor's office
regarding the travel ban and was informed that she should submit a travel
request to the High Criminal Court. The Court reviewed her request on April 12,
2015 and decided to waive the travel ban, stating that there was no solid
reason for such a restriction. Nonetheless, on April 15, 2015, the office of
the Public Prosecutor was still unable to provide Ms. Jamsheer with a formal
authorisation to travel, stating that the file was now in the hands of the
immigration office.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Bahrain urging them
to: 
 
i.   
Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Ghada Jamsheer;
 
ii.  
Put an end to any kind of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Ghada Jamsheer as well as against all human rights
defenders in Bahrain;
 
iii. Guarantee
Ms. Ghada Jamsheer's freedom of movement;
 
iv.  Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, in particular its :
- Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually
and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”, 
- Article 12(1) that provides “everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, to participate in peaceful activities against
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”, 
- as well as Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually or in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; 
 
v.  
Ensure in all
circumstances, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Bahrain.
 
Addresses:

 
• Cheikh
Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
• Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Fax: 00973 17 21 05 75; ofd@mofa.gov.bh
• Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of
Justice and Islamic Affairs, Fax: +973 175 31 284
• Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister
of Interior, Email: info@interior.gov.bh
• H.E. Mr. Yusuf Abdulkarim Bucheeri, Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in
Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy,
Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
• H.E. Ahmed Mohammed Yousif Aldoseri, Embassy of the
Kingdom of Bahrain to the Kingdom of Belgium, Avenue Louise 250, 1050 Brussels,
Belgium; Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail: Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh 