Kazakhstan:  Judicial harassment and ongoing arbitrary detention of Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayan
October 11, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2016 / OctoberKazakhstan: Judicial harassment and ongoing arbitrary detention of Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayan​















URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
KAZ 001 /
1016/ OBS 085
Judicial harassment/
Arbitrary
detention 
Kazakhstan
October 11, 2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Kazakhstan.

 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the judicial harassment
and ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Max
Bokayev[1], head of the NGO “Arlan”[2]
and a human rights defender working for the protection of the environment,
freedom of expression and the fight against torture, and Mr. Talgat Ayan, a lawyer and activist from Atyrau, Western
Kazakhstan. Both human rights defenders played a crucial role in
the social protests that took place last April and early May against the
amendments to the Land Code of Kazakhstan (see background information below)[3].                           
According
to the information received, the first hearing in the trial against Messrs.
Bokayev and Ayan will be taking place in Atyrau’s City Court No. 2 at 10.30 am
on October 12, 2016. They are facing charges for “institution of social
discord” (Article 174), “dissemination
of knowingly false information” (Article 274) and “violation of the procedure of organisation
and holding of meetings, rallies, pickets, street processions and
demonstrations” (Article 400) and face imprisonment for a term of up to
ten years.
 

The judicial harassment and
arbitrary detention of Messrs. Bokayev and Ayan has been ongoing since May 17,
2016, when they were arrested in Atyrau in retaliation for their critical
statements posted on Facebook and for making public their intention to
participate and encouraging others to take part in the 21 May protests. On the
same day, an administrative court sentenced them to 15 days of administrative
detention for “organising and holding peaceful assemblies” (Article 488 of the
Administrative Offences Code) in violation of the laws of the Republic of
Kazakhstan. This happened though the two had sent requests for authorisation to
hold demonstrations on May 21 to the relevant local authorities in Atyrau, in
accordance with domestic laws.
 

On May 20,
2016, the officers of the Division 9 of the National Security Committee in
Atyrau, following a court order, raided the house of nine human rights
defenders including that of Mr. Bokayev’s mother and confiscated documents, computers,
telephones, USB sticks and other data storage elements. During the search, Mr.
Bokayev’s mother was injured and her front door was slammed in.
 

On
May 31, 2016, one day before the end date of their administrative detention, the National Security Committee issued an order charging Messrs.
Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayan with the
offenses of “preparation of a crime”, and “propaganda
or public calls for seizure of power or retention of power or violent change of
the constitutional order” under Articles
24.1 and 179.3 of the criminal code. On July 21
these charges were replaced with the three charges mentioned above. 

 
On
June 3, 2016, the investigation
judge of Atyrau Court No. 2 remanded Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayan for
two months in pre-trial detention. Mr. Bokayev’s request for house arrest due
to his critical health condition given that Mr. Bokayev suffers from a chronic hepatitis C and needs constant medical care was
rejected. On August 27, 2016, the judge decided to extend the pre-trial
detention. The prosecutor argued that “Max has a lot of friends inside and
outside of Kazakhstan and so there’s a fear that he will leave the country”.
 
The
Observatory expresses its concern regarding the ongoing repression,
intimidation, and judicial harassment of human rights defenders in Kazakhstan,
which seems to be aimed at hindering their legitimate human rights activities
and condemns the ongoing attempts by the Kazakh authorities to curtail the
rights to freedom of association, assembly, and expression,
 
Furthermore,
the Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing judicial harassment against
Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayan, and
calls on the Kazakhstani authorities to immediately and unconditionally release
and drop all charges against them.
 
Background Information: 
 
Between
April and May 2016, several protests were held in Kazakhstan, gathering
hundreds of citizens calling for the abolition of amendments to the Land Code
that were introduced in November 2015[4].

 
Ahead of a
country-wide protest scheduled on May 21, the authorities started to repress
the protest movement: they rejected all authorisations
to hold demonstrations on May 21 and arrested and, between, May 16 and 20,
2016, detained and sentenced more than 30 protesters to administrative
detention of up to 15 days for “preparation of illegal rallies” or
“hooliganism” or “inciting social discord”. Protesters included Messrs. Gatau-Gali Bohan, Sagingali Kapizov,
Kubaidolla Sholak, and Makhambet
Abzhan. 
 
Later, as
the movement gained momentum through social media, the police arrested, ahead
of protests, activists believed to be planning or involved in the movement. The
arrests targeted well-known several civic activists and civil society leaders
in Almaty, Uralsk, Atyrau, and Astana. Several criminal cases against human
rights defenders were opened in addition to Messrs. Bokayev and Ayan. On May
17, singer and human rights defender, Mr. Zhanat
Esentaev was arrested in Uralsk and subsequently sentenced on July 15 to
two and a half years of probation for “incitement of inter-ethnic discord” for
his posts on Facebook. 
 
On May 21,
2016, demonstrations were held across the country though the authorities had
failed to authorise them. The police systematically blocked access to public
places and arrested hundreds of protesters as they were on their way to the
protest meeting places. More than 500 people were arrested in Almaty and almost
100 in Uralsk. 
 
Moreover, on
the same day, law enforcement officers arrested over 50 journalists who were
covering the protests or were in the vicinity. Their photos and videos were
deleted. The distribution of the newspaper Uralskaya Nedelya was also
blocked in addition to the website of Radio Free Europe/ Radio Liberty
(RFE/RL)’s Kazakh Service, Radio Azattyq. In Almaty, where the
protest counted the largest number of participants, access to social media such
as Periscope, Facebook, Google and Youtube were
blocked. In other regions, individual accounts on social media tools were
monitored and used to prove participation in the protests. 
 

On May 27, a press release posted on the official website of
the Office of the Prosecutor General described protests as a “chain of events”
by means of which “certain individuals” intended to “destabilis[e] the
social-political situation, inciting inter-ethnic discord and seizing power”.
It stated that criminal proceedings had been launched against several
individuals in connection with the events, without specifying their identity. 

 
In this
context, the Government launched a smear campaign via mass media platforms
accusing the protesters of planning violent attacks and blaming a Kazakhstani businessman,
for leading the protest movement in order to plot a coup to destabilise the
country. 
 
This isn’t
the first time Kazakhstan has criminalised human rights defenders for using
their right to freedom of expression and to peaceful assembly. On October 12,
2015, Messrs. Ermek Narymbaev and Serikzhan
Mambetalin were arrested in Almaty and sentenced to a suspended three-year
and one-year prison term respectively for “inciting inter-ethnic discord”.
During a five-year period, they will not be able to take part in any so-called
“social activities”.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Kazakhstan asking them to:
 

i.   
Immediately and unconditionally drop
all charges against Messrs. Bokayev and Ayan and put an end to all acts of
judicial harassment against them as well as against all human rights defenders
in Kazakhstan;

 

ii.  
Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Bokayev and Ayan, as well as of all human rights
defenders in Kazakhstan;

 

iii. Repeal legal provisions limiting freedom of peaceful
assembly beyond the narrow restrictions permitted under international human
rights law, particularly with the aim of ensuring that this right is no longer
subjected to the permission of government authorities and merely to prior
notification;

 

iv.  Repeal legal provisions limiting freedom of
expression beyond the narrow restrictions permitted under Article 19 of the
ICCPR, including the
vague and broad definition of the offence of incitement to “social, national,
clan, class or religious discord” in Article 174 of the Criminal Code;

 

v.  
Comply with all the provisions of
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders;

 

vi.  Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Kazakhstan.

 Addresses:

·       Mr.
Nursultan NAZARBAEV, President of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Fax: + 7 3172 32
61 82, 007 / 3172 / 32 40 89 
·       Mr.
Kalmukhanbet Kassymov, Minister of Internal Affairs. Email: Kense@mvd.kz
·       Mr.
Zhakip Assanov, Prosecutor General. Fax: +7 7172 506 402
·       Mr.
Askar Shakirov, Human Rights Commissioner. Fax: +7 7172 74 05 48
·      
Ambassador Ms. Zhanar Aitzhanova,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Kazakhstan to the UN Office and
other International organizations in Geneva. Fax: +41 (0) 22 788 66 02. Email: mission@kazakhstan-geneva.ch
·       Ambassador Mr. Almaz KHAMZAYEV, Embassy of Kazakhstan
in Brussels. Email: brussels@mfa.kz.
·      
Permanent Delegation of the Republic
of Kazakstan to the OSCE in Vienna. Fax: +43 1 890 80 08 20. Email: kzosce@kazakhstan.at

Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of Kazakhstan in your respective country.



***
 
Geneva-Paris,
October 11, 2016

 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line:

•  
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
•  
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49
39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
•  
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 

 



[1]     Max Bokayev is a civil society activis. He is a member of the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) since 2011, a member of the
“Zhanaozen-2011” International Committee under the “Journalists in Trouble”
Public Foundation, the initiator of the “Azat” Coalition (freedoms and
liberties on the Internet), and an active participant in the National
Preventive Mechanism (NPM) on the prevention of torture in prisons. In 2016, he
was appointed as head of the NPM regional group in Atyrau oblast.


[2]     Arlan focuses on public scrutiny over governmental actions and the right
of citizens to participate in public life, environmental protection especially
in the context of oil companies, and various social issues both at the local
and national levels.


[3]     On May 12, 2016, Mr. Max Bokayev was invited by the Government
to join a Land Code Reform Commission that had been established to review the
law following several peaceful rallies across the country. However, he refused
arguing that members of the Commission should nott be nominated by the
government but by Kazakhstani citizens and that the government should put an
end to all acts of harassment against those protestings the Land Code reform.


[4]     In November 2015, draft amendments to the
Land Code, aiming at facilitating the lease of agricultural land by foreigners
were presented to the Parliament in Kazakhstan. The amendments were adopted and
should have entered into force in July 2016. Protesters contended that the
changes infringed upon the rights of Kazakh citizens and landowners. 