Venezuela:  Joint Press Release: Cases of arbitrary detention of Gregory Hinds and Geraldine Chacón presented to the UN
May 31, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Venezuela / 2018 / MayVenezuela: Joint Press Release: Cases of arbitrary detention of Gregory Hinds and Geraldine Chacón presented to the UN   

JOINT PRESS RELEASE – THE OBSERVATORY / COFAVIC

 
VENEZUELA: Cases of arbitrary detention of Gregory
Hinds and Geraldine Chacón presented to the UN
 
Geneva-Paris-Caracas, 31 May 2018 – Given the lack of
compliance by the Venezuelan authorities with legal resolutions calling for the
release from prison of human rights defender Geraldine Chacón who has been held
for 120 days and human rights defender Gregory Hinds who has been held for 121
days, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and COFAVIC have
presented the case to the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention.
Gregory Hinds, Director General of the Foundation for Community Ambassadors
(Fundación
Embajadores Comunitarios - FEC)
and Geraldine Chacón, Director of the FEC Ambassadors Program, both
human rights defenders, have been arbitrarily
held in detention in the Helicoide prison since January  31, 2018 and February 1, 2018, respectively, in
a case which has produced numerous human rights violations. 
The continuation of their arbitrary detention is especially serious
because of the existence of two legal resolutions which have requested their
immediate release and up to six notifications sent to the Bolivian National
Intelligence Service (Servicio Bolivariano
de Inteligencia Nacional - SEBIN), which has to date denied receiving these
notifications (see background).
“It is scandalous that Gregory and Geraldine are still being held in
prison despite the fact that the Venezuelan justice system itself has requested
their release. This is such a flagrant case of arbitrary detention that we are
convinced that international scrutiny by the UN Working Group will lead to a
resolution in favour of Gregory and Geraldine”,
stated Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the OMCT.
The two defenders are being held in inadequate conditions for their
health, which appears to have deteriorated, and for their physical and psychological
integrity. They have restricted access to drinking water, are prohibited from
going outside in the sunlight and have been locked up with individuals accused
of common crimes, putting their security at risk.
“Aside from flagrant violations of due process, there are clear
indications in this case that the conditions of detention could constitute
torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, for which we are demanding an
effective investigation”, declared Gloria Cano,
Vice-President of FIDH.
Finally, it is worrying that to date neither their lawyers nor family
members of the two defenders, nor human rights organisations, have been permitted
to visit them in the Helicoide prison.
“Before the
International Community, we are making an urgent call to the Venezuelan
authorities to immediately authorise access to family members and human rights
organisations so that they can verify Geraldine and Gregory’s situation”, affirmed Liliana Ortega, Director of COFAVIC.
 
 
For further
information, please contact:
OMCT: Miguel Martín / Delphine Reculeau: +41
     22 809 49 39FIDH: José Carlos Thissen : +51 95 41 31 650
·      
COFAVIC: Liliana Ortega / Hercilia Garnica: lortega@cofavic.org; cofavic@cofavic.org;
coordinaciónprensa@cofavic.org
 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.

Since 1989 COFAVIC has been giving advice and support
to victims of violations of the right to life, personal integrity, personal
freedom and due process. During this time the organisation has recorded 600
cases of human rights violations in Venezuela and has brought six cases before
the Inter-American System of Human Rights. 