Sudan: arbitrary arrest and risk of torture of members of the Fur tribe
February  9, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2004 / FebruarySudan: Sudan: arbitrary arrest and risk of torture of members of the Fur tribeCase SDN 090204 Arbitrary arrest and detention / Risk of torture   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT  intervention in the following situation in the Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the  Sudanese Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT  network, of the arbitrary arrest of six fur tribe members in Khartoum  and Zalingy and the continuing risk of ill-treatment and/or torture  of four of them in Southern Darfur, Sudan.  According to the information received, on January 31st, 2004, members  of the National Security Agency (NSA) arrested: 1) Dafa'allah  Abdullah Suleiman, an employee at the Agricultural bank in Khartoum,  arrested in Khartoum; 2) Abubakr Sharaf Al Din, a high ranking police  officer, arrested in Khartoum; 3) Ahmed Hassan, an employee at the  Bank of Khartoum, arrested in Zalingy; 4) Ahmed Al Tahir Ahmed Shata,  arrested in Zalingy; 5) Tariq Abu Al Gasim Saif Aldin, a graduate  from the University of Sudan, arrested in Khartoum; and 6) Mohamed  Abu Al Gasim Saif Aldin, a final year student at the University of  Sudan, arrested in Khartoum.   The latter two, Tariq Abu Al Gasim Saif Aldin and Mohamed Abu Al  Gasim Saif Aldin, are brothers and were released on February 3rd,  2004. They were reportedly questioned about their sister, Eman, who  recently married the leader of the rebel Sudan Liberation Army (SLA),  Abd Al Wahid Mohamed Ahmed Al Nur. The other detainees were  reportedly arrested and are being detained by the National Security  Agency on suspicion of supporting the SLA.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the  physical and psychological integrity of the four fur tribe members  who have been arbitrarily arrested and are at risk of being subjected  to ill-treatment and/or torture. OMCT recalls that National Security  officers and the military intelligence in Darfur are reported to have  systematically used torture and ill-treatment against suspected  members and supporters of the SLA. Detainees have reported being held  in appalling, overcrowded conditions at security detention centres,  with very poor food and no access to their families or their lawyers.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and  psychological integrity of Dafa'allah Abdullah Suleiman, Abubakr  Sharaf Al Din, Ahmed Hassan, and Ahmed Al Tahir Ahmed Shata; ii.	intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure  that those detained be allowed to meet with their relatives and  lawyers; iii.	order their immediate release in the absence of legal charges  that are consistent with international law and standards or, if such  charges exist, bring them before  an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural  rights at all times; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental  freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and  international human rights  standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President  of the Republic of Sudan, People's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum,  Sudan, Telex: 22385  PEPLC SD or 22411 KAID SD- Fax: +249 11 771 7 24  ·	Mr. Ali Osman Yasin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General,  Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Telex:22459 KHRJA SD or 22461  KHRJA SD (via Ministry of  Foreign Affairs) - Fax: +249 11 7740 63  ·	Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of  Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Telex: 22459 KHRJA SD  or 22461 KHRJA SD -  Fax: 249 11 7740 63   ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent  Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO  Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail:  mission.sudan@ties.itu.int; mission.sudan@bluewin.ch.  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective  country.  Geneva, February 9th, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this  appeal in your reply. 