Egypt:  Joint Statement: New Law Will Cripple Egyptian NGOs
June  2, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2017 / JuneEgypt: Joint Statement: New Law Will Cripple Egyptian NGOsEgypt_020617_JS3 pages / 258 KB

We the undersigned civil society organizations strongly
condemn the ratification
of a new law regulating non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Egypt, issued
by President Abdel-Fattah El Sisi on Wednesday, May 24. The law ushers in
unprecedented levels of repression and will criminalize the work of many NGOs,
making it impossible for them to function independently.
Implications of the law include the absence of valuable
human development and charity initiatives, and a media opacity and lack of
accountability around government abuses. These functions of Egyptian NGOs are
particularly essential amid the current security and socioeconomic crises.
Vulnerable Egyptians and refugees on Egyptian territory are in ever-growing
need of the support and essential services provided by the NGOs targeted by
this law—such as social services, education and poverty alleviation, as well as
legal, medical or psychological support to survivors of torture, abuse and
gender-based violence.
The law is virtually the same as earlier legislation approved
by the Egyptian parliament on November 29, 2016, but shelved after widespread
international criticism.
Under Law 70 of 2017 for Regulating the Work of Associations
and Other Institutions Working in the Field of Civil Work, all NGOs are
prohibited from conducting activities that “harm national security, public
order, public morality, or public health,” vague terms that can be abused to
constrain legitimate activity. The bill creates a “National Authority for
the Regulation of Foreign Non-governmental Organizations” that includes
representatives of Egypt’s top national security bodies—the General
Intelligence Directorate and the Defense and Interior Ministries—as well as
representatives from the Foreign Affairs Ministry and the Central Bank of
Egypt. The authority will oversee the work of NGOs, including any funding or
cooperation between Egyptian associations and any foreign entity. The law
prohibits any Egyptian government body from making agreements with NGOs without
the authority’s approval.
The law strictly controls the funding of NGOs. It states
that associations must obtain permission from the authority 30 days in advance
to receive donations from Egyptian entities or individuals inside Egypt and
must inform the Social Solidarity Ministry upon the receipt of such funds. The
law further states that associations may receive funding or grants from foreign
entities inside Egypt or Egyptian or foreign entities outside Egypt as long as
the authority is notified within 30 days of receipt. The authority then has the
right to reject the funding within a 60-day period following its notification.
Associations may not use these funds within the 60-day review period.
Additionally, the law gives the government the authority to
monitor and challenge NGOs’ day-to-day activities, from choices in leadership
to the schedule of internal meetings. Even a move as administrative as
relocating headquarters to another building without informing the authorities
is punishable under the law. The law creates a blanket and ambiguous provision
authorizing the Egyptian government to cancel a foreign NGO’s license at any
time if the NGO’s work is deemed to be harming national security or public
safety or disturbing public order, or per the principle of reciprocity.
Thus, state bodies assembled in this new authority—including
security bodies—are given the power to interfere in every aspect of NGOs’
existence, administration and activities. Parliamentarians claimed the law will
make this sector more “secure” by ensuring robust oversight, but it is doubtful
that this authority will have the capacity to effectively oversee a thriving
and active NGO sector. Rather, full implementation of the law will induce
paralysis and eventual closure of much of the nonprofit sector, as many NGO
requests for licensing or approval of funding will likely go unanswered and be
considered denied by default. Yet Egyptians are in severe and growing need of
the services and support NGOs provide. The country needs the non-profit sector
to grow, not to wither away.
The law punishes a host of violations by one to five years
in prison and a fine of 50,000 to 1,000,000 Egyptian pounds. Among the
prohibited activities that could result in a prison sentence are:
·                      
establishing an NGO that is deemed
to have breached national unity, national security, public order or public
morals;
·                      
assisting or working with a foreign
NGO that is conducting work in Egypt without a license;
·                      
establishing or managing any entity
that does NGO work without following the provisions of this law; and
·                      
sending or receiving foreign funds
as a president or member of an NGO in violation of the law’s provisions.
Anyone who issues a license to an NGO whose work violates
the law, obstructs the government from inspecting an NGO’s paperwork, or
conducts public opinion surveys or fieldwork or moves an NGO office without
approval faces a prison sentence of up to one year or a possible fine of 20,000
to 500,000 Egyptian pounds.
This law contravenes Egypt’s commitment to international
human rights law, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, which states that no restrictions may be placed on the right to free
association other than those “which are necessary in a democratic society in
the interests of national security or public safety, public order, the
protection of public health or morals or the protection of the rights and
freedoms of others.” No restriction should undermine the essence of the right
to freedom of association itself.
We call upon the Egyptian government to drop all existing
criminal investigations into NGOs and to repeal this law in accordance with its
domestic and international obligations to protect freedom of association.
Restricting civil society to this degree eliminates a path
for Egyptian citizens to peacefully express dissent, hold the government
accountable for human rights violations, and access human development
initiatives at a time of economic hardship. By constraining civil society, the
government has made it more difficult for NGOs to respond to social needs that
at times can lead to unrest, such as recent increases in the price of
bread. Increased state control of Egyptian NGOs results in opacity
surrounding security threats and terror attacks and gives perpetrators the
opportunity to shape the
narrative of the struggle between the state and violent extremists.
Additionally, we call on Egypt’s international partners
providing foreign assistance and economic aid such as the United States and the
European Union to use their influence to urge the Egyptian government to allow
NGOs to fulfill their function within civil society. Moreover, international
bodies such as the United Nations and United Nations Human Rights Council, and
their member states, must endeavor to use their positions as mediators within
the international community to hold Egypt accountable for legislation that
muzzles civil society to such a severe degree.
It should not be a crime to advocate for human rights and
development in Egypt, but this law does just that, crippling civil society for
years to come.
Signatories:
·                      
The Tahrir Institute for Middle East
Policy (TIMEP)
·                      
Human Rights Watch (HRW)
·                      
Cairo Institute for Human Rights
Studies (CIHRS)
·                      
CIVICUS
·                      
World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders
·                      
FIDH, within the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
·                      
Associazione Ricreativa Culturale
Italiana (ARCI)
·                      
Un Ponte Per 