Equatorial Guinea:  Open letter to the President: Release Artist and Writer Ramón Esono Ebalé
November 15, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Equatorial Guinea / 2017 / NovemberEquatorial Guinea: Open letter to the President: Release Artist and Writer Ramón Esono EbaléDownload full article2 pages / 93 KB

November 15, 2017 
Open Letter to the
President of Equatorial Guinea: Release Artist and Writer Ramón Esono Ebalé 
Mr. Teodoro
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo 
President of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea 
Palacio
Presidencial 
Avenida de
la Libertad 
Malabo,
Guinea Ecuatorial
 
Your Excellency, 
We write to express our
deep concern in response to the unjust arrest and subsequent detention without
charge of Ramón Esono Ebalé in Malabo on 16th September 2017, and to
urge you to release him immediately. 
Mr. Ebalé and two
of his friends were stopped by police, handcuffed, and had their mobile phones
seized while getting into Mr. Ebalé's sister's car after leaving a restaurant
in Malabo. Police then interrogated Mr. Ebalé
about his drawings of, and blog posts about members of the Equatoguinean
leadership, and told him – in front of his two friends – that he needed to make
a statement explaining those drawings and blog posts. It was
confirmed by police that only Mr. Ebalé was the target of the arrest, and not his two friends.
Mr Ebalé has learned that
he faces potential charges of counterfeiting and money laundering; offences
that were apparently never mentioned to him or his friends when they were
arrested.   Mr. Ebalé’s prolonged detention without charge gives rise to
serious concerns that these allegations are no more than a pretext to justify
the ongoing arbitrary deprivation of liberty he is being subjected to.
Mr. Ebalé’s extended
detention at Black Beach prison without charge appears to be a clear violation
of Equatorial Guinean law, which requires charges to be filed within 72 hours
of an arrest. A judge has not mandated preventative detention in his case,
which under exceptional circumstances would allow the police to hold him
without charge for longer, nor does there appear to be a basis for such an
order. 
Mr. Ebalé, a renowned
cartoonist who has been living abroad since 2011, has now spent 60 days in
prison. His arrest in Equatorial Guinea—where he returned to renew his
passport—has received global attention with calls for his release from fellow
journalists, artists, activists, and human rights and press freedom
organizations. 
As Equatorial Guinea
prepares to join the UN Security Council in January 2018, the world is watching
the case of Mr. Ebalé closely. We hope that as your country takes this
prominent position on the world stage, your government respects all human
rights, including the right to freedom of expression, as enshrined in Article
19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
In this vein, we call on
your Excellency, and the judicial authorities in Equatorial Guinea to respect
the rights of all artists, human rights defenders, activists, and, more generally,
all individuals in Equatorial Guinea who wish to exercise their right to
freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association without fear of being
harassed or prosecuted. 
To this end, we urge you to
order Mr. Ebalé’s immediate and unconditional release from prison.
Thank you for your
consideration.
Yours Sincerely,
Amnesty International
API Madrid
Arterial Network
Association of American
Editorial Cartoonists
Baroness Helena Kennedy QC, Member of the House of Lords,
President of JUSTICE
Cartoonist Rights Network
International
Committee to Protect
Journalists
EG Justice
International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Freemuse
Human Rights Watch
Index on Censorship
PEN International
Reporters Without Borders
The
Doughty Street International Media Defense Panel
Transparency International
UNCAC Coalition
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory
for the
Protection
of Human Rights Defenders 