European Union (EU):  HRDN Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders Campaign: DO’S AND DON’TS for EEAS, EU delegations and member state embassy public statements or letters on human rights defenders
April 29, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / European Union (EU) / 2016 / AprilEuropean Union (EU): HRDN Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders Campaign: DO’S AND DON’TS for EEAS, EU delegations and member state embassy public statements or letters on human rights defendersHRDN_Dos and Donts6 pages / 238 KB​​The Human Rights and Democracy Network (HRDN), of which OMCT is a 
member, presents another case of a human rights defender, in the framework of its one year-long campaign: Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders. HRDN is an informal group of 48 NGOs operating at the EU level in the areas of human rights, democracy and peace building.The HRDN has drafted a “Do’s and Don’ts in EU public statements on HRDs”
 as a practical, examples based illustration of some good practices in 
communicating about HRDs at risk, in a way that is helpful to them and 
to other defenders, and hopefully maximises chances of securing their 
release, the dropping of charges against them, and the end of other 
forms of harassment. It also outlines unhelpful messages that can 
unwittingly undermine their protection. It also includes a ‘baseline’ 
asking the EU to always issue statements in case of the killing of a 
human rights defenders, which should never be ignored. The EU and Member
 States committed to “improve public diplomacy and communication on its 
human rights actions” in the EU Action Plan on Human Rights and 
Democracy, and HRDN will be meeting with the EEAS, and other key EU 
actors in order to discuss these ideas, over the coming weeks.The document is available here as well as in HRDN's Website.
 



Who
  is a human rights defender?
To
  be a human rights defender, a person can act to address any human right (or
  rights) on behalf of individuals or groups. Human rights defenders defend the
  universality of human rights as laid out in the Universal Declaration of
  Human Rights,[1] seeking the promotion and
  protection of civil and political rights as well as the promotion, protection
  and realization of economic, social and cultural rights. The actions taken by
  human rights defenders are always non-violent.



 
Members and
official bodies of the European Parliament are encouraged to be more public
with their human rights messaging, in the form of press releases after missions
and joint meetings, in cases of HRDs at risk.
 
Human
rights defenders should be helped in holding their own governments accountable for
human rights violations: they are a 'local solution to a local problem'. But
where governments are not allowing them to do this work, the international
community must publicly denounce abuses.  The EU’s Guidelines on HRDs,
specify that "The EU's objective is to influence third countries to carry
out their obligations to respect the rights of human rights defenders and
to protect them from attacks and threats from non-State actors. The overall
objective should be to bring about an environment where human rights defenders
can operate freely". 
Ahead
of a trial or in case of other violations against HRDs (harassment, threats,
intimidation, physical assault, killings, etc.)
DO
·      
Seek the informed consent of the
HRD about the aspects of the statement that concern them to minimise the
security risk to them, and ensure they support the calls included in the
statement, including advising on what to call for. If this is not possible,
seek the informed consent of their representative, such as a lawyer or family
member;
·      
Describe the individual as a human rights
defender (HRD): openly recognising them as such helps legitimise
their work, and can increase their protection; it further raises the issue of
the state's obligation to protect them under the UN Declaration on HRDs;
·      
Refer to relevant wording
within the UN Declaration on HRDs[2] as
well as the EU Guidelines on HRDs in the
statement;
·      
Consult international or regional sources that
assess the legitimacy of the actions taken against the HRD (ICCPR commitments, UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, Council of Europe, African
Commission on Human and People’s Rights, Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, etc.) and cite
them in the statement in order to increase its weight and legitimacy;
·      
Explicitly point out the connection
between the actions taken (arrest, judicial action, harassment,
intimidation, etc.) to the HRD's legitimate human rights work;
·      
Call for the violations against the HRD
to cease and use the opportunity of your appeal to call for the
state to ensure that similar actions against other HRDs (only name them if you
have their informed consent) cease as well;
·      
Highlight the links between the
individual case and the wider trends of HRD harassment, and
denounce this trend; infer what the repercussions of this case could be on the
wider human rights situation (silencing of other HRDs, the shrinking of civil
society space, etc.); urge the government to repeal any harmful legislation
restricting HRD work (freedom of association, expression, NGO financing...);
·      
Imply what the repercussions of the case
could be on the international standing of the country and on
relations with the EU and the Member State(s);
·      
Ask for specific actions from the
authorities: ensuring the HRD's safety, an end to harassment,
their release from detention, permission for the international community to
visit them in detention, access to lawyers, medical care, etc;
·      
Call for the adoption of policies, or to
implement fully existing legislation (if present) for
the protection of defenders, including precautionary measures, and in
pretrial detention, the respect of international Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners;
·      
Always issue a condemnation in the
strongest possible terms in case of an HRD's killing; call
for an immediate independent, impartial investigation; the protection of
witnesses, the HRD's friends, family and colleagues; the implementation of
necessary measures to prevent the recurrence of an HRD killing; and the
guarantee for all HRDs in the country to carry out their legitimate human
rights activities without fear of reprisals and free of all restrictions.
DO NOT
·      
Sound apologetic about raising the case
and your concerns: states commit themselves to international scrutiny when
ratifying international human rights agreements;
·       Simply
state your concern without calling for specific actions.



Examples
  of best practice
DO
  say
→ 'I
  urge your government to fulfil its obligations under international law and release
  all HRDs who have been arbitrarily detained in violation of their fundamental
  rights'
→
  'We condemn the use of administrative detention by the authorities as an
  instrument aimed at creating pressure, fear and uncertainty'
→
  'The detention of human rights defender[insert name of HRD] resulted directly
  from his/her exercise of legitimate work aiming at improving the promotion
  and protection of [insert human right e.g. free expression or sexual and
  reproductive rights]'[3]
→
  '[Such actions] curtail the exercise of freedom of expression and of assembly
  in country X. We therefore call on country X to honour its international
  human rights obligations'.
→
  'We condemn in the strongest terms the killing of X, renowned human rights
  defender. We call for the swift reaction of the authorities to thoroughly
  investigate this murder and bring to justice those responsible. This crime
  cannot go unpunished.'
→
  'We urge the government to guarantee by all means possible the protection of
  human rights defenders who legitimately defend the rights of their
  communities through peaceful means.'



 
When
an HRD is standing trial
All of
the above +
DO
·      
Call for the trial to meet fair trial
standards;[4] call
for the monitoring of the trial by the EU (either by an official from the EU delegation
and/or from an EU Member State embassy), preferably from the highest level
;  monitor the trial yourself (if the HRD
agrees and if external monitoring is allowed) send MEPs to monitor the trial;
·      
Mention if there is clear evidence that
the judiciary is not independent or if there have been flaws in
previous similar prosecutions (flawed trials, trumped-up charges, excessive
sentences, etc.) that lead you to doubt the fairness of the trial;
·      
Denounce laws or practices that
criminalise legitimate human rights work and are used to
unfairly charge HRDs and ask for them to be repealed.
DO NOT
·       Say
that you will await the outcome of the legal process in countries where the
judiciary is not independent, or where the legislation is flawed, without
making reference to fair trial standards;
·       Simply
ask for national laws to be respected or ask for the sentence to be
proportionate to the scale of the crime if the legislation on which charges are
brought is known to fall short of international standards.



Examples
  of best and bad practice
DO
  say
→
  'The overly broad offences established by law X constitute an unjustified
  restriction on expression rights and on fair trial rights'.
→
  'We call on you to ensure that the HRD, X, has full access to the assistance
  of legal counsel and that the proceedings related to this case are open to
  the public, the media, and members of the diplomatic community'.
 
DO NOT say
→ 'La Délégation reste attentive à la poursuite de la procédure engagée
  et se veut convaincue qu’elle aboutira à un jugement juste et équitable.'



 
If an
HRD is convicted in an unfair trial
All of
the above +
DO
·      
Describe the outcomes of your trial
observations and enumerate the flaws of the trial[5]
citing international and regional sources to reinforce your argument;
·      
Appeal to the authorities to re-examine
the case; mention the rights of the HRD that have been violated
and the state's international obligations; consult with the HRD and local civil
society representatives for other case-specific calls – the HRD may not want
you to appeal for a pardon on their behalf.
DO NOT
·      
Mention compassion, dignity or
humanitarian concerns as the sole reasons for releasing an imprisoned HRD; only
call for compassionate release if there is no other recourse for an HRD being
liberated, and you have their explicit consent.



Examples of best and bad practice
DO
  say
→
  'While the authorities have asserted that the prosecution of these
  individuals is unrelated to their work as journalists, independent inquiries
  have found that this is not the case. For example, the United Nations Working
  Group on Arbitrary Detention held that the imprisonment of X, violated your
  country's obligations under international law, and requested his immediate
  release.'
→
  'The EP condemns the life sentence for alleged “charge Z” handed out today to
  HRD  X, which is completely
  unjustified. The EU deplores that the due process of law was not respected,
  in particular with regard to the right to a proper defence. We call for his
  immediate and unconditional release as well as the release of all his
  supporters detained in relation to his case.'
 
DO NOT say
→ 'Le Parlement européen souhaite que tout puisse être mis en œuvre pour
  que sa situation soit traitée avec humanisme et dans le respect des règles et
  procédures énoncées par les lois du pays X... Dans l’attente du prochain
  jugement...'
→ '(l'UE) se félicite que la justice, dans le respect des lois et des
  engagements internationaux du pays X, ait fait prévaloir les principes
  d'humanité et de dignité dues aux personnes'.



 
If an
HRD is released
DO
·      
Mention what remains to be done: free
other HRDs (only name them if you have their informed consent), amend
legislation, reform the judiciary, end impunity, etc.
·      
Highlight and express concern if the
release is conditional upon restrictions such as house
arrest, ban on performing human rights work, loss of previously held positions
(ex. teacher, public servant), etc.
·      
Call on the government to guarantee in
all circumstances that all human rights defenders in country X are able to
carry out their legitimate human rights activities without fear of reprisals
and free of all restrictions.



Examples
  of best practice
DO
  say
→
  'We welcome the release of human rights defender X after almost X years of
  imprisonment motivated directly by their legitimate and peaceful human rights
  work. This should be followed without delay by the release of all the
  remaining detained human rights defenders and the reinstatement of their full
  human rights.'
→
  'We call on the government to guarantee in all circumstances that all human
  rights defenders in country X are able to carry out their legitimate human
  rights activities without fear of reprisals and free of all restrictions.'



 
When
an HRD is a women human rights defender (WHRD)
All of
the above +
DO
·      
Reference the General Assembly resolution 68/181 of 18
December 2013, focusing
specifically on women human rights defenders;
·      
Acknowledge women defenders are more at risk of certain forms of violence (including
gender-based violence) and restrictions, and are more vulnerable to prejudices,
exclusion and public repudiation by state forces and social actors especially
when engaged in the defence of women’s rights; when they are perceived to defy
cultural norms and social constructs on gender, sexuality and femininity; or
when they challenge social structures vested in economic interest or
traditional practices;
·      
Express particular concern about systemic and structural discrimination and
violence faced by women human rights defenders of all ages, and call upon the
government to take all measures necessary to ensure their protection and to
integrate a gender perspective into their efforts to create a safe and enabling
environment for the defence of human rights;
·      
Emphasize the need for the participation of women human rights defenders in the
development of effective policies and programmes related to their protection,
recognizing their independence and expertise with regard to their own needs,
and the need to create and strengthen mechanisms for consultation and dialogue
with women human rights defenders.
DO NOT
·      
Ignore or perpetuate gender stereotypes, which stop women and girls from fully exercising
their rights, and allow customs, traditions or religion to be used to justify
discrimination or harmful practices which contravene international human rights
standards.
 



Examples
  of best practice
DO say
→ 'The killing of human rights defender
  Ms X is a tragic reminder of dangers women face from the lack of justice in
  country Y.'



 
In all of these cases ensure that there is follow-up on the case,
either in the course of visits to the country concerned by Delegations,
Committees or individual MEPs, in resolutions or committee/delegation/plenary
debates, or by ensuring close scrutiny of the action of other EU
institutions.  Do debrief civil society
on actions taken on behalf of HRDs.
 
How to show support for HRDs at risk by
using social media?
Showing support on social media to HRDs and their organisations is a
way to express solidarity, recognise the importance of their work, and help
them counter negative public messaging. Here a few tips on how to show
solidarity using social media:
·     If
NGOs tag you in a campaign or an appeal requesting help for the HRD, retweet
it. Or even better, draft your own tweet using the same language the NGO uses
·     Tweet
messages of support to HRDs linking to positive news or info about their work
(i.e. their profile page on FLD website) 
·     Always
Tweet, Facebook, or hyperlink to credible, positive sources of news and info
about the HRD -- the internet is flooded with negative, defaming content about
HRDs. Use websites like those of HRDN members to access content that is
HRD-approved, and promote this when you reference them or want to hyperlink to
something. That way you can be assured it is productive, safe, and approved by
the HRD. This will help to counter act defamation campaigns
·     Similarly,
if you prepare a briefing or note about an HRD, hyperlink their name to a positive
news item or FLD website (again, the lessens the chance that another politician
will google them and receive a negative / false result) 
·    
Consistently check the social media
accounts of respected NGOs for the latest news about HRDs, and RT or Fbook it. Even
the smallest act of retweeting something can improve an HRDs credibility and
security both internationally and locally.
 
Public or private diplomacy? Some thoughts:
Do not
accept that authorities declare human rights to be 'internal affairs', or
that raising issues is ‘giving lessons’. Human rights are not only
European values and should not necessarily be private. International human
rights standards are amongst the most signed and/ or ratified developed set of
international agreements, and their discussion in the public sphere are
explicit parts of the agreement: governments having accepted to hold each other
accountable, at State level; just because governments rejecting this scrutiny
when there are problems should not be accepted as legitimate. This includes the
EU too.
Should
you speak up or try private diplomacy? First consult the defender or his/her
representatives, who are best placed to assess the situation and how they want
it addressed, including facing any risks that raising their case brings up, for
themselves or others. They might agree that private diplomacy is a first step;
but should that not work, that public diplomacy should be pursued thereafter.
The
need to act publicly in case of risk is acknowledged in EU guidelines such as
those on freedom of expression: "The EU will publicly condemn the
killings, attack, execution, torture, enforced disappearance or other acts of
serious violence or intimidation against any individual for exercising his or
her right to freedom of opinion and expression". This is a recognition of
the need for public diplomacy to be instantly activated in cases of high risk
(in consultation with the HRD);
Defenders need help in
counteracting all the negative messaging made by states aimed at criminalising
and de-legitimising their work. General statements on the work of defenders are
not necessarily useful as audiences might not recognise whom you are talking
about, and indeed might believe the authorities' rhetoric labelling individuals
as traitors, saboteurs, terrorists etc: so only naming individuals allows the
public to understand that the EU does not stand by and allow them to be smeared
on the public scene. 
 
It is important to keep in mind
that if you only express praise or support for the authorities of a country you
visit, this can be either mis-represented in the media as supporting
violations, or understood by the public as unconditional support. Especially
when the EP has taken a strong stance on a country in a resolution, MEPs on
official visits should ensure these concerns are reflected in their
positions.  Avoiding mentioning these
concerns or downplaying their strength could be seen as undermining the EP’s
stance and is unhelpful for HRDs.
 



[1]           http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/



[2]          The Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect
Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms


[3]                 See EP Guide on Visiting Places of Detention outside the EU - a
Guide for MEPs, June 2015



Properties Date: April 29, 2016Activity: Human Rights DefendersType: StatementsCountry: European Union (EU)Subjects: Human Rights DefendersShare thisTweetRelated articlesHRDN Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders Campaign: Featured case: Damián Gallardo
Urgent Interventions / September 21, 2016LanguagesThis page is available in:EnglishYou can also translate it on the fly: 
  function googleTranslateElementInit() {
    new google.translate.TranslateElement({
      pageLanguage: "en",
      autoDisplay: false
    }, "google_translate_element");
  }
  Recently Viewed Articles 