Iran:  Supporter of "Mourning Mothers", Ms. Mansoureh Behkish, sentenced to 4.5 years of prison
April  5, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / AprilIran: Supporter of "Mourning Mothers", Ms. Mansoureh Behkish, sentenced to 4.5 years of prisonFARSI_Supporter of "Mourning Mothers", Ms. Mansoureh Behkish, sentenced to 4.5 years of prison2 pages / 164 KB

THE OBSERVATORY - PRESS 
RELEASE
 
IRAN: Supporter of “Mourning Mothers”, Ms. 
Mansoureh Behkish, 
sentenced to 4.5 years of prison
 
Paris-Geneva, April 5, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), deplores the sentencing of human rights 
defender Ms. Mansoureh Behkish and calls for an end to her judicial 
harassment.
 
On April 3, 2012, Ms. Mansoureh Behkish, a supporter of the “Mothers of Laleh Park” (the “Mourning Mothers” of 
Iran)[1], also known for fighting against the death penalty, was informed 
that she had been sentenced to four years and six months of imprisonment. Branch 
15 of the Islamic Revolution Court, which heard the case on December 25, 2011, 
sentenced her to four years on charge of “assembly and collusion against 
national security through the establishment of the Mourning Mothers” and six 
months on charge of “spreading propaganda against the system”. Ms. Mansoureh 
Behkish, who remained free on the date of publication, intends to appeal the 
sentence.
 
The Observatory recalls that on June 12, 2011, Ms. Mansoureh Behkish 
was arrested by a group of security agents in a street of Tehran at 8 p.m., 
before being released on bail on July 9, 2011. In addition, Ms. Behkish was 
subjected to several interrogations and arbitrary detentions in the past as a 
result of her human rights activities.
 
In Iran, supporters of the “Mourning Mothers” are particularly 
targeted with harassment, arbitrary arrest and detention. In November 2011, Ms. 
Jila Karamzadeh-Makvandi, Ms. Leyla Seyfollahi and Mr. Nader Ahsani were sentenced to two years of prison on charges of “assembly and 
collusion to commit crimes against the national security and propaganda against 
the State”. The court ruling accused them of involvement in the establishment of 
“an illegal organisation against the national security, namely the Mourning 
Mothers” and claiming to be “human rights defenders”. Ms. Jila Karamzadeh 
Makvandi was arrested on December 27, 2011 and taken to Evin Prison to serve her 
sentence, where she remains to this date.
 
“The authorities criminalise all those who act for the request of human rights and 
attempt to stifle any kind of human rights work in the country”, 
says Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President. “The 
international community must denounce strongly this worrying 
situation”. 

 
“The 
authorities in Iran are doing their utmost to marginalise human rights defenders 
by imposing heavy sentences of imprisonment, exile, and ban on professional 
practice. Prisoners of conscience and other political prisoners are consistently 
subjected to torture and other ill treatment as well as the death penalty. All 
this is aimed to intimidating the whole society into a deadly 
silence”, 
adds Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. 
 
The Observatory believes that the sentence against Ms. Mansoureh Behkish merely aims at intimidating her and impeding her from carrying out her human rights activities. More generally, it also aims at intimidating all human rights defenders in Iran. 
 
The 
Observatory therefore urges the Iranian authorities to immediately and 
unconditionally put an end to the judicial harassment against Ms. Mansoureh Behkish and 
release all human rights defenders arbitrarily detained, and more generally to 
conform to the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights instruments 
ratified by Iran.
 
For further information, please contact:
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet : + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·      OMCT: 
Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39
 




[1] The “Mourning Mothers” (“Madaran-e Azardar”) are women whose family 
members were killed, executed, detained or disappeared in the context of
 political violence since 1981. They call for the acknowledgement of 
secret political executions and disclosure of burial places of the 
victims. In the aftermath of the post-election violence in June 2009, 
they organised silent public protests each Saturday evening in Tehran’s 
Laleh Park, calling for the release of all political prisoners. 