United Arab Emirates:  Open Letter to Drivers, Teams and Performers at the Abu Dhabi F1 Grand Prix 2018
November 19, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / United Arab Emirates / 2018 / NovemberUnited Arab Emirates: Open Letter to Drivers, Teams and Performers at the Abu Dhabi F1 Grand Prix 2018 Dear friends,
As you ready yourselves to hold the 
limelight on the stages and tracks of the final Formula One race of the 
season, we the undersigned NGOs, wish to draw your attention to the 
reality of the human rights situation in the United Arab Emirates (UAE),
 which is a far cry from the glitz and glamour the country intends to 
project to the world.
Since 2011, the UAE authorities have 
embarked on a crackdown to silence their critics including human rights 
defenders, judges, lawyers, academics, students and journalists. They 
have been harassed, arbitrarily detained, subjected to enforced 
disappearance, tortured and otherwise ill-treated, and convicted 
following trials that failed to meet international standards of 
fairness. Critics and dissidents in the UAE are serving lengthy prison 
sentences simply for peacefully exercising their right to freedom of 
expression and we consider them to be prisoners of conscience who should
 be released immediately and unconditionally.
The UAE authorities have tightened and 
amended their already repressive laws to further suppress human rights 
and particularly to silence peaceful dissent and other expression on 
public issues. As a result, human rights defenders and other critics of 
the government have been sentenced to lengthy prison terms.
The UAE is listed as ‘closed’ on the CIVICUS Monitor
 which is the lowest and most oppressive category as far as protection 
of civic freedoms of expression, association and peaceful assembly is 
concerned.
Today we are launching a campaign to call for the release of prisoners of conscience in the UAE and we urge you to lend us your support.
We call upon you, drivers, teams and 
performers to be the champions of human rights on the circuit and on 
stage; to be the voices of those who have been silenced and unfairly 
detained. We urge you to use your celebrity status to call on the UAE 
authorities to immediately and unconditionally release all prisoners of 
conscience who have been detained solely for peacefully criticizing the 
authorities, or for calling or advocating for the respect and protection
 of human rights.
Please tweet, post and speak about their
 stories online and in your media appearances so that these prisoners 
are not forgotten. You can use the hashtags #AbuDhabiGP #F1 and 
#Formula1.
These are the stories of some of the 
hundreds of prisoners of conscience detained for peacefully exercising 
their rights to freedom of expression:
Blogger and poet Ahmed Mansoor
 is a prominent human rights defender, who received the prestigious 
Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders in 2015. He is a member 
of the advisory committee of Human Rights Watch’s Middle East and North 
Africa Division, as well as of the advisory board of the Gulf Centre for
 Human Rights (GCHR). He has documented the human rights situation in 
the UAE since 2006 and has publicly spoken out in defence of human 
rights in his blog, social media and in interviews with international 
media. Up until his arrest on 20 March 2017, Ahmed Mansoor was the last 
remaining human rights defender in the UAE who had been able to 
criticize the authorities publicly. On 29 May 2018, Ahmed Mansoor was 
sentenced to 10 years imprisonment. The trial was held in secret, and 
there is no public record of the proceedings. It is unclear if he had a 
lawyer. On 4 October, the European Parliament passed a resolution calling for his release. He is held in solitary confinement at al-Sadr prison in Abu Dhabi.
Dr Mohammed al-Roken is
 a prominent human rights lawyer from the emirate of Dubai, and former 
president of the UAE’s Jurists Association. He was arrested on17 July 
2012 and for the next three months, he was held in solitary confinement 
at an undisclosed location. His fate and whereabouts were unknown in 
what amounted to enforced disappearance. He was sentenced in July 2013 
to 10 years’ imprisonment, at the end of the grossly unfair trial of 94 
reform advocates which became known as the “UAE 94” trial.
Many of the UAE 94 defendants and others
 standing trial before the State Security Chamber of the Federal Supreme
 Court have alleged in court that they were tortured or otherwise 
ill-treated in pre-trial detention, where they were often held 
incommunicado for months in secret State Security detention facilities. 
The State Security Chamber of the Federal Supreme Court has not 
adequately investigated these allegations, despite mounting evidence 
that State Security is abusing detainees.
Online activist Osama al-Najjar
 was arrested on 17 March 2014 and sentenced to three years in prison 
after sending tweets to the Minister of Interior expressing concern that
 his father Hussain Ali al-Najjar al-Hammadi had been 
ill-treated in prison, where he is serving over 11 years. Osama 
al-Najjar was due for release from al-Razeen Prison in Abu Dhabi in 
March 2017, having fully served his prison sentence. However, the 
authorities decided to extend his detention on the pretext that he 
remained a threat. Following his arrest, Osama al-Najjar was denied 
access to a lawyer for over six months. After his arrest he was held in 
solitary confinement for four days at a secret detention facility where 
he said he was tortured and otherwise ill-treated.
Prominent economist, academic and human rights defender, Dr Nasser bin Ghaith, was
 arrested in August 2015 and subjected to enforced disappearance for 
more than seven months. He did not have access to a lawyer until the 
beginning of his trial in April 2016 and was not allowed to prepare an 
effective defence. In March 2017, he was sentenced to ten years in 
prison on charges including “posting false information” about UAE 
leaders and their policies on Twitter.
Signed:
Americans for Democracy and Human Rights (ADHRB)
Amnesty International
CIVICUS
FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Gulf Center for Human Rights (GCHR)
International Service for Human Rights (ISHR)
Martin Ennals Foundation
Pen International
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 