Bangladesh:  Mahmudur Rahman finally freed after more than three years in arbitrary detention
November 24, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2016 / NovemberBangladesh: Mahmudur Rahman finally freed after more than three years in arbitrary detention
Paris-Geneva-Hong-Kong,
November 24, 2016 - After 1,322 days in arbitrary detention, journalist Mr.
Mahmudur Rahman has been finally released on bail this afternoon. The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT) and the
Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) welcome his long-overdue release, and urge
authorities to drop all pending charges against him.
 
Acting editor
of the Daily Amar Desh, a national daily newspaper in Bangladesh, Mr.
Mahmudur Rahman was detained since April 11, 2013, when the police raided and
shut down the offices of Daily Amar Desh, and charged Mr. Rahman with
sedition. Over the past three and half years, Mr. Rahman was charged in 74
separate politically motivated cases. He was repeatedly granted bail by the
Courts, but each time he was about to be released the police presented a new
criminal case against him in order to keep him in jail.[1] On November 3, 2016, the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court
finally upheld Mr. Rahman’s release on bail in the last case to be filed
against him, but the judiciary and police took three weeks to actually release
him.
 
“We welcome Mahmudur
Rahman’s release, after more than three years in arbitrary detention for simply
exercising his rights to free expression. The authorities must stop this type
of harassment and repression of defenders and journalists in Bangladesh,” said FIDH President Dimitris Christopoulos.
 
Despite his
release on bail, Mr. Rahman is still facing prosecution under 74 different
criminal cases. These cases are case widely regarded to be fabricated and
politically motivated, in several instances accusing Mr. Rahman of involvement
in crimes that took place while he was already under police custody. It is not
yet known when he will be summoned to Court for trial in these cases. 
 
“The cases mounted
against Mahmudur Rahman are a clear example of judicial harassment and must be
closed. Our organisations urge the authorities to drop all charges against him,” added AHRC Representative Md. Ashrafuzzaman Zaman.
 
Upon his
release Mr. Rahman was admitted to United Hospital in Dhaka, as his health had
severely deteriorated while in detention. Mr. Rahman, now 64 years old, was
subjected to several types of ill-treament and denied medical care while in
jail. Doctors at United Hospital today diagnosed him with the following
conditions caused by his treatment during detention: Hypertension; Malnutrition;
Severe weakness and urinary problems due to dehydration; Severe Irritable Bowel
Syndrome; Vertigo; Severe back pain causing insomnia and difficulties walking. Mr.
Rahman is still in hospital for further medical examinations and treatment.
 
“We strongly condemn the judicial harassment that led to the prolonged
arbitrary detention of Mahmudur Rahman and the ill-treatment he suffered in
this framework. We call upon the authorities of Bangladesh to
order an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial investigation into
the above-mentioned facts, and to stop criminalising human rights
defenders with the clear aim to muzzle them”, concluded OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human
Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
The Asian
Human Rights Commission (AHRC) works towards the radical rethinking and
fundamental redesigning of justice institutions in order to protect and promote
human rights in Asia. Established in 1984, the Hong Kong based organisation is
a Laureate of the Right Livelihood Award 2014.



[1] For more information see Observatory Urgent Appeal BGD 001/0516/OBS 037,
published on May 4, 2016. 