Israel:  The Public Committee Against Torture in Israel, Marking UN International Day in Support of Victims of Torture: Statement on the Continuation of Torture and Ill Treatment and on the Abuse of Detainees
June 24, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Israel / 2011 / JuneIsrael: The Public Committee Against Torture in Israel, Marking UN International Day in Support of Victims of Torture: Statement on the Continuation of Torture and Ill Treatment and on the Abuse of Detainees"It
was on June 26, 1987 that the United Nation's Convention against Torture first
came into force and in 1997, to highlight their plight, the UN General Assembly
officially proclaimed June 26 as the International Day in Support of Victims of
Torture"
The Public Committee Against Torture in Israel (PCATI) reminds the public and Governments in Europe and the Middle East
of the absolute prohibition on torture and ill treatment. We call on all States
and Official National Parties in the Region to, if they are signatories of the
UN Convention Against Torture to reconfirm their support of the Convention and
if they are not to sign and ratify the Convention. We similarly call on all
parties to sign the Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture and to
implement open and transparent detention and interrogation center monitoring
mechanism in their jurisdictions.
We remind all parties holding detainees, whether they are suspected of
participation in terrorist activities, young people accused of throwing stones,
demonstrators or a single soldier held incommunicado for years that their
rights must be scrupulously guarded. 
We remain concerned with the ongoing use of torture and ill treatment
against detainees in our region and the abject impunity that facilitates it. In recent months we have witnessed legitimate
expressions of protest on the part of civilians in our region and the
subsequent illegitimate use of excessive and deadly force against these civilians. Civilian demonstrators continue to face
violence by the security forces they continue to be arrested and to face
physical and psychological abuse in detention, including torture and ill
treatment. The arrest of security
suspects in our region continues and they continue to be held incommunicado and
to face torture or ill treatment. 
We endorse the OMCT International Campaign for the Absolute Prohibition of Torture and Ill-treatment ‘Nothing can
justify torture under any circumstances."Detainees MUST be permitted access to
outside visitation be it by attorneys, the Red Cross or by other parties, allowed
access to medical treatment and families must be apprised of their condition
and status.Claims filed by detainees that include
allegations of torture or ill treatment must be investigated in an open and
reliable manner by the authorities and perpetrators should be held accountable.All national medical and health
professional associations in our region should clarify that to physicians',
psychologists', nurses' or medics' the responsibility to report suspicion of
torture to the proper authorities and to take action to prevent any ongoing
abuse of their patients.
26 June 2011 serves as a reminder and as a challenge. Let us draw
together to meet the challenge and put an end to torture!
Further Information: 
Louis Frankenthaler
Louis@stoptorture.org.il 