Malaysia:  New security bill risks entrenching arbitrary detention and abuse
April 17, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2012 / AprilMalaysia: New security bill risks entrenching arbitrary detention and abuse    
PRESS 
RELEASE
MALAYSIA: 

New security bill risks entrenching 
arbitrary detention and abuse
Geneva, 17 April 
2012. The World Organisation 
Against Torture (OMCT) urges the Malaysian authorities to withdraw the new 
Security Offences (Special Measures) Bill 2012 falling short of international 
standards. 
In September 2011, Prime 
Minister Najib Razak had announced in a widely regarded speech his governments’ 
intention to revoke the ISA, a colonial style security legislation used to 
detain persons without trial or charge, and to introduce a new legislation to 
safeguard peace and order. While OMCT had positively welcomed the announcement 
to revoke the ISA, it had also expressed its concerns over the replacement of 
the law by a new security bill providing equivalent powers.
“This new law will only 
serve to entrench arbitrary detention. Even worse, in our experience with 
similar provisions around the world it risks to open the door to torture and 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment” said Gerald Staberock. 

The new proposed bill 
allows for detention for a period of 28 days without charge or any judicial 
scrutiny, on the mere basis that the police “has reason to believe” that a 
person may be involved in security offences. The bill further allows delays of 
48 hours before the suspect has access to a lawyer and gives power to the public 
prosecutor and the police to intercept communications of suspect without 
judicial authorization. After release, the police can also unilaterally impose 
electronic monitoring devices on individuals, a serious violation of personal 
liberty. 
 “After decades of arbitrary detention under 
the Internal Security Act, measures should seek to strengthen the accountability 
of the security services, by ensuring effective judicial oversight, and should 
seek to strengthen the capacities of the criminal justice system to try 
terrorist suspects before independent courts comporting fully to the right to a 
fair trial”, said Gerald Staberock. 
OMCT calls anew on the 
Malaysian authorities to follow through on its commitment to revoke ISA and all 
emergency legislation. It should further withdraw this new Security bill which 
falls short of international standards and instead rely on existing legislations 
such as the Criminal Code and Criminal Procedure Code to bring terrorist 
suspects to justice. 
OMCT also calls on the 
government to immediately release all remaining individuals detained under the ISA and other 
detention-without-trial laws in the absence of valid legal charges and judicial 
process consistent with international legal standards. If such charges exist, the authorities should bring them 
before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights 
at all times. 
Finally, OMCT also calls 
on the government of Malaysia to take the necessary 
steps to sign and ratify without delay, and thereafter effectively implement 
the United 
Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment as well as the Optional Protocol to this 
Convention.
Contacts: 
Alexandra Kossin, Tel. +41 22 809 49 
39 