China:  Open letter to Mr. Hu Jintao: Recent crackdown on human rights defenders in the People’s Republic of China
December 12, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2008 / DecemberChina: Open letter to Mr. Hu Jintao: Recent crackdown on human rights defenders in the People’s Republic of ChinaParis-Geneva, December 12, 2008  Re: Grave concern with the recent crackdown on human rights defenders in the People’s Republic of China Dear Mr. President, The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has been informed by Human Rights in China (HRIC) and Chinese Human Rights Defenders (CHRD) of the severe crackdown on several human rights defenders on the eve of the celebration of the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). According to the information received, five of the organisers of the Guizhou Fourth Annual Human Rights Symposium – MM. Chen Xi, Shen Youlian, Liao Suangyuan, Huang Yanming and Du Heping were subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention and forced disappearance[1]. To commemorate the aforementioned Human Rights Day, a group of 303 Chinese writers, intellectuals, lawyers, journalists, retired Party officials, workers, peasants and businessmen issued the "08 Charter", which calls for legal reforms, democracy and protection of human rights, such as reforms to ensure freedom of expression and religion, and a separation of legislative and judicial powers. The existence of many of these rights is already recognized in Chinese law, which purports to protect them. These and other rights called for by the Charter are also recognized in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which the People’s Republic of China has signed, but yet not ratified. On December 8, 2008, at 11:00 p.m. Police officers in Beijing arrested MM. Liu Xiaobo and Zhang Zhuhua, apparently for their participation in drafting the Charter. After Mr. Zhang's detention and questioning, he was released to find his home ransacked, and his personal effects such as his cash, credit cards, books, and computer confiscated. Mr. Liu is still under detention for "inciting subversion of state power". According to his family, his computers have been confiscated as well. The Observatory notes with dismay that other signatories of the Charter have faced harassment as well; four days earlier, signatory of the Charter and writer Mr. Wen Kejian was barred from visiting Hong Kong for a business trip. Police indicated that he was barred because of his connection with the Charter, and that he should not leave the city or pursue any similar activities. The Observatory notes the irony of the timing of this wave of repression. Mr. Xiaobo and Mr. Zhuhua were arrested in conjunction with their human rights activities, one hour before the 10th anniversary of the UN's Declaration on human rights defenders. Other activists have been harassed in the days approaching the anniversary of the UDHR, and several were not able to celebrate the anniversary of the UDHR, because of their involvement in commemorating or discussing it. The Observatory would like to recall that in April of 2006, the PRC submitted a document to the UN in order to support its candidacy to the Human Rights Council’s first election, in which it affirmed amendments to the Constitution meant for “defining the position of human rights in the overall national development strategy”, and further that as a member of the Human Rights Council, the PRC “shall uphold the highest standards in the promotion and protection of human rights”. The Observatory also recalls that both the UDHR and the UN Declaration on human rights defenders have a universal character, and constitute the core of the United Nations and its actions. Harassment of human rights defenders in general, and notably on the eve of these anniversaries undermines these landmark documents, and the basis of the United Nations. The Observatory calls upon the government to immediately release MM. Liu Xiaobo and Zhang Zhuhua and all imprisoned human rights defenders in the People’s Republic of China, insofar as their detention is arbitrary as it seems to merely aim at sanctioning their human rights activities[2]. The Chinese authorities should also take prompt action in order to locate MM. Chen Xi, Shen Youlian, Du Heping, Liao Suangyuan and Huang Yanming who have disappeared, make public their whereabouts, and ensure their immediate release. In consequence, the Observatory strongly urges the Chinese authorities to stop harassment against human rights defenders and their families, and to guarantee in all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity. We express our sincere hope that you will take these considerations and requests into account, Yours sincerely, Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President Eric Sottas, OMCT Secretary General Cc. Ambassadors of the People’s Republic of China in Belgium, Switzerland, the United States and France.    [1]    See Observatory Urgent Appeal CHN 011 / 1108 / OBS 209   [2] In particular Ms. Mao Hengfeng, Ms. Liu Jie, as well as Messrs. Chen Guangcheng, Wu Lihong, Lü Gengsong, Adruk Lopoe, Li Guohong, Li Hong, Yang Chunlin and Qi Chonghuai (See Open Letter of the Observatory of January 18, 2008 and Urgent Appeals CHN 001/0208/OBS 024.2 and CHN 003/0508/OBS 085, issued respectively on April 1 and May 16, 2008). 