Saudi Arabia:  Ongoing incommunicado detention of ten human rights defenders
March 26, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2007 / MarchSaudi Arabia: Ongoing incommunicado detention of ten human rights defendersSAU 001 / 0307 / OBS 015.1 Incommunicado detention Saudi Arabia March 26, 2007 The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Saudi Arabia. Brief description of the situation: The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing incommunicado detention of ten human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia. According to the information received, as of March 23, 2007, Messrs. Sulaiman al-Rashudi and Essam al-Basrawi, lawyers, Mr. Saud al-Hashimi, a doctor, Messrs. Musa al-Qirni and Abdel Rahman al-Shumayri, university professors, and Messrs. Abdelaziz al-Khariji and Al-Sharif Saif Al-Ghalib, whose profession remain unknown, were remaining in incommunicado detention in the offices of the General Intelligence Service (al-Mabahith al-‘Amma) in Jeddah. Moreover, since their arrest, neither their lawyers nor their relatives were granted access to the detainees, despite their repeated requests. All men are known for their peaceful human rights activities. In particular, they engaged in the past in signing petitions addressed to King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud calling upon him to initiate for political and democratic reforms in the Kingdom and the respect human rights. Although the men are reportedly suspected of “illegally collecting money and funnelling funds to suspicious elements outside the country”, no official charge was brought against them. It is important to outline that Mr. Basem Alam, one of their lawyers, is also subjected to acts of harassment due to his involvement in this case. For instance, he was prevented from leaving the country by the authorities about three weeks ago. The Observatory expresses its deep concern about the ongoing incommunicado detention of these ten men, which appears to be solely aimed at sanctioning their human rights activities, and fears for their physical and psychological integrity. Background information: On February 3, 2007, at 3 am, Messrs. Sulaiman al-Rashudi, Essam al-Basrawi, Saud al-Hashimi, Messrs. Musa al-Qirni and Abdel Rahman al-Shumayri, and Messrs. Abdelaziz al-Khariji and Al-Sharif Saif Al-Ghalib were arrested and placed in incommunicado detention. While some were arrested in Madinah city, others were arrested by officials of the General Intelligence Service in a residential area called “Bahra”, in Jeddah city, were they had met to discuss the organisation of peaceful activities in favour of political and democratic reforms in the Kingdom. The same officials also raided the house of Mr. Essam al-Basrawi and confiscated several books and computer units belonging to him and his family. The officials would also have destroyed some furniture and some personal belongings of the family. On February 5, 2007, Mr. Essam Basrawi’s son was denied the right to visit his father, ordered to return home and warned to never ask again to meet his father. He wanted to hand him some medicine, as Mr. Essam Basrawi is ill and disabled. Action requested: Please write to the authorities of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia urging them to:  Guarantee, in all circumstances, the psychological and physical integrity of Messrs. Sulieman al-Rushudi, Saud al-Hashimi, Essam al-Basrawi, Al-Sharif Saif Al-Ghalib, Musa al-Qirni, Abdel Rahman al-Shumayri, Abdelaziz  al-Khariji and all persons detained; Guarantee their right to receive visit and communicate with their lawyers and relatives; Release them immediately and unconditionally since their detention is arbitrary; Put an end to all acts of harassment against the ten above-mentioned men, as well as their lawyer, Mr. Basem Alam, and all other human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia; Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels” and article 12.2, which states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards ratified by Saudi Arabia.  Addresses:  King Abdullah Bin ‘Abdul ‘Aziz Al-Saud, The Custodian of the two Holy Mosques, Office of His Majesty The King, Royal Court, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Fax: + 966 1 403 1185 His Royal Highness Prince Naif bin ‘Abdul ‘Aziz Al-Saud, Minister of the Interior, Ministry of the Interior, P.O. Box 2933, Airport Road, Riyadh 11134, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Fax: +966 1 403 1185 / +966 1 403 3614 His Royal Highness Prince Saud al-Faisal bin ‘Abdul ‘Aziz Al-Saud, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Nasseriya Street, Riyadh 11124, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Fax: +966 1 403 0645 Abdulwahab Abdulsalam Attar, Ambassador, Mission of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Route de Lausanne 263, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland, Email: saudiamission@bluewin.ch, Fax: +4122 758.00.00 Embassy of Saudi Arabia in Brussels, 45 avenue F.D. Roosevelt, 1050 Ixelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 647.24.92, Email: beemb@mofa.gov.sa  Please also write to the diplomatic representations of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in your respective countries. *** Geneva - Paris, March 26, 2007 Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply. The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of human rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic. To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 33 (0) 1 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 (0) 22 809 49 29 Email : Appeals@fidh-omct.org 