OMCT Intervention to the 15th Annual Meeting of Special Rapporteurs
June 26, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Statements / 2008 / JuneOMCT Intervention to the 15th Annual Meeting of Special RapporteursMadam Chair,  OMCT follows with great interest the work undertaken by the Special Procedures mandate holders  within the framework of  their annual meetings and welcomes the opportunity to share its comments  and experiences.  The relationship between NGOs and the Special Procedures is a symbiotic one: the Special Procedures  mechanism is reinforced when mandate holders receive support and reliable and well-targeted  information from NGOs, and these same NGOs benefit from the exposure that the Special Procedures  system can give to specific issues in the forum of the UN and beyond. The challenge in reinforcing  this mutually-beneficial arrangement lies to a large extent in the issue of follow-up. In light of this, OMCT would like to raise the following issues:  1/ CommunicationsOMCT welcomes the increase in joint communications issued by the Special Procedures as  highlighted in various mandate holders’ annual reports. In terms of follow-up, OMCT understands that  the response depends upon the government involved: while some respond and investigate, others give  pro forma responses or no answer, and still others respond by listing the alleged crimes of the  detainee. OMCT would like to know if joint communications have increased the response rate of  States or, indeed, changed the nature of the responses received?  2/ Country visits OMCT understands that joint country missions by mandate holders are more complicated to organise  and coordinate, but it firmly believes that they have the advantage of being able to address a complete  issue and not just aspects thereof. OMCT welcomes the next joint mission by the Special Rapporteur  on the question of torture and the Special Rapporteur on violence against women to Moldova in July  2008 and would like to know if further joint missions are planned in the coming months.  From the same perspective, OMCT would like to know if joint missions with regional Special  Procedures mechanisms are also planned in addition to that to Togo by the Special Rapporteur on the  situation of human rights defenders and the Special Rapporteur of the African Commission on Human  and People’s Rigths on human rights defenders in Africa. In last year’s report on the Special Procedures mechanism [1], it was mentioned that, in an effort to  increase the impact of the work of Special Procedures and improve follow-up  to country visits  recommendations, several mandates have developed a follow-up procedure which includes sending  questionnaires to the Government representatives and civil society actors met during the visit. OMCT  would like to know if this procedure is being adopted by other Special Procedure mandates and  whether an assessment of this procedure is already available. Could this tool become “formalised”  element of the Special Procedures?   OMCT believes OHCHR field offices can also take a leading role in monitoring the implementation of  recommendations made by Special Procedures, in particular in the absence of relevant feedback from  the States. Has there been any such collaborative initiative to date, and is there any assessment  available?  3/ UPR  OMCT welcomes the discussion initiated by the Special Procedures on the UPR and would like to  share the following:  The OHCHR compilation reports include the number of interventions sent to States and the response  rate. However, there is no mention of the nature of these responses. In her last report, Ms. Hina Jilani  makes a detailed analysis of the nature of responses that she received (para 41 and following). OMCT  believes it would be worthwhile asking OHCHR to integrate this aspect in the next UPR country  compilations.  On another level, OMCT would like to suggest that Special Procedures consider the possibility of  taking into account relevant commitments made by States in the UPR process, provided it falls within  their mandate, for example, extending invitations.   4/ Code of conduct In light of the Human Rights Council reforms and the adoption of the code of conduct, OMCT would  like to know if a first assessment of the constraints linked to the adoption of the code of conduct could  be shared. Are there any restrictions in the definition of an urgent appeal and the way it is transmitted?  Could you share examples of countries with which diffusion of communications through the Foreign  Affairs Ministries has been maintained and, on the contrary, countries that have requested that  communications be sent only through their diplomatic missions in Geneva?  Finally, the NGO participants from 14 countries from around the world currently taking part in the  OMCT Seminar “Addressing the economic, social and cultural root causes of violence through the UN  Special Procedures System” here in Geneva encourage the mandate holders to focus attention,  individually and collectively, on dealing with the root causes of violence in all their activities,  including follow-up. They also wish to thank both those mandate holders who have met or will meet  with them and the Secretariat for having facilitated these important exchanges. Thank you.     [1] Report entitled Enlarging the network of civil society actors working with special procedures and  strengthening the collaboration between special procedures mandate holders, OHCHR special procedures  branch and civil society actors. 