Bahrain:  Ongoing arbitrary arrests and judicial harassment of human rights defenders
March 19, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2013 / MarchBahrain: Ongoing arbitrary arrests and judicial harassment of human rights defenders

BAHRAIN: Ongoing arbitrary arrests and judicial
harassment 
of human rights defenders
                     
Paris-Geneva, March 19, 2013. As new cases
of arbitrary arrests and ongoing judicial harassment against Ms. Zainab
Al-Khawaja have been reported in Bahrain, the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), remains
extremely concerned with the very repressive climate faced by human rights
defenders in the country.
 
On
February 27, 2013, human rights activist Zainab Al-Khawaja was once
again arrested while she was protesting alone in front of the King's palace in
Qudaibiya, Manama, against the culture of impunity and the refusal by the
authorities to release the body of Mr. Mahmood Al-Jazeeri who died on February
22, 2013 as a result of tear gas canister shot at his head from a close range.
Ms. Al-Khawaja stood with a banner saying "you've arrested our fathers
& children, even our bodies. Let your palaces hear, we don't fear your
prisons". She was arrested and taken to Al Hoora police station where
she was charged with “obstructing traffic”, “damaging public property”,
“prejudice to authority” and “inciting hatred of the regime”. 
 
On
the same day, the Third High Criminal Court upheld the one-month imprisonment
sentence against her on charges of “participating in an illegal gathering” and
“entering a restricted zone”, i.e. the Pearl Roundabout, which has been guarded
by security and military forces since March 2011 after protesters gathered
there at the beginning of the uprising on February 14, 2011. The same court
also upheld another two-month imprisonment sentence rendered by the Lower
Criminal Court on charges of “damaging Ministry of Interior property”, after
Ms. Al-Khawaja teared a photograph of the King of Bahrain, although she had
already served that sentence after a previous arrest. As a result, the Public
Prosecution announced in a statement that Ms. Al-Khawaja was to start serving
her sentence on February 28, 2013; a total of three months and 20 days
according to her lawyer. In addition, on February 28, the Court of Appeal
overturned the acquittal by the Court of First Instance in another case related
to charges of “insulting a police officer” in a military hospital, charges that
she was acquitted for on May 2, 2012. Ms. Al-Khawaja was protesting inside the
Bahrain Defence Forces hospital when her father, Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja,
jailed prominent human rights defender, former MENA Director at Front Line and
former President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), was on hunger
strike in that hospital. The Public Prosecution then appealed the acquittal
verdict of the Court of First Instance, and the Court of Appeal sentenced Ms.
Al-Khawaja to three months imprisonment. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that Ms. Zainab Al-Khawaja has been arrested several times
for protesting against human rights violations and has spent a total of four
months in prison previously. She currently has four ongoing cases against her
and remains detained at the Jail for Women of the Town Police Station. On March
18, 2013 afternoon, she reportedly started a hunger strike after she was denied
visits from relatives.
 
      The
Observatory firmly denounces the ongoing judicial harassment against Ms.
Al-Khawaja and other human rights defenders in Bahrain. Accordingly, the
Observatory urges the Bahraini authorities to immediately and unconditionally
release Ms. Al-Khawaja as her detention is arbitrary and only aims at
sanctioning her human rights activities.
 
Furthermore,
the Observatory reiterates its call on the Bahraini authorities to put an end
to any act of harassment against human rights defenders, and recalls their
obligation to comply with the international human rights instruments ratified
by the Kingdom of Bahrain, as well with the 1998 Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur
Manet/Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Delphine
Reculeau: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 