Egypt:  JOINT STATEMENT  CSOs strongly condemn the use of travel bans against human rights defenders in Egypt
November 10, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / NovemberEgypt: JOINT STATEMENT  CSOs strongly condemn the use of travel bans against human rights defenders in Egypt JOINT STATEMENT | CSOs strongly
condemn the use of travel bans against human rights defenders in Egypt 09 Nov 2016, Brussels. The undersigned organisations
strongly condemn the travel ban against Malek Adly, prominent Egyptian human
rights lawyer and director of the Lawyers Network
of the Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights (ECESR). On 2 November 2016, after his
passport had already been stamped at the departures of Cairo International
Airport, Malek Adly was informed by the Egyptian Security that a travel ban had
been placed upon him and that he was prevented from boarding his flight. He was
given no explanations about the reasons behind the travel ban, he was
questioned by the security and had his bag searched. Our organisations denounce the
systematic use of travel bans by the Egyptian government against human rights
defenders and civil society in Egypt as a tool to crackdown against the
independent civil society. Malek Adly’s case is not isolated, and the list of human rights defenders prevented from travelling abroad
is worryingly long. This incident is part of a wider
crackdown against human rights defenders, independent civil society, labor
union movement and journalists, perpetuated by the Egyptian government that
risks to bring to a complete eradication of the human rights community in
Egypt. While civil society, human rights defenders, journalists and independent
unions are the cornerstone of a pluralist and democratic society, and essential
to the realization of national reform processes, the Egyptian government is
heavily shutting down civic space and systematically violating the rule of law
on security and counter-terrorism grounds. The recent ruling of the Cairo
Criminal Court in favor of the asset freezing of
prominent human rights organisations and human rights defenders is one
of the most worrying developments. In this context, our
organisations urge the Egyptian government:             To immediately lift
the travel ban against Malek Adly and against all other human rights defenders
and journalists in Egypt in reprisal for merely engaging in peaceful
activities;              To put an end
to all acts of harassment against human rights defenders, journalists and civil
society and to immediately and unconditionally revoke the asset freeze
measures as part of the 173/2011 criminal case, also known as ‘foreign
funding case’.  Moreover, in
the context of EU-Egypt bilateral cooperation, we call upon the EU institutions
and its Member States:              To urge the
Egyptian government to lift the travel bans and stop all measures of
judicial and administrative harassment linked to the foreign funding case;              Make the
closure of the foreign funding case a condition for the pursuit and conclusion
of the EU-Egypt Partnership Priorities and the holding of an Association
Council;              To free all
detained journalists and human rights activists in Egypt. 