Kenya:  Press Release: Authorities should re-register leading human rights NGOs harassed for election monitoring work
August 16, 2017
Human rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2017 / AugustKenya: Press Release: Authorities should re-register leading human rights NGOs harassed for election monitoring workDownload full article2 pages / 296 KB
PRESS
RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORYKENYA: Authorities should
re-register leading human rights NGOs harassed for election monitoring work
 
Paris-Geneva, August 16, 2017 – One week after the elections, Kenya’s NGO
Coordination Board de-registers the Kenya Human Rights Commission (KHRC) and
the Africa Centre for Open Governance (AfriCOG) and instructs authorities to
restrain their work. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership), denounces this as a retaliation against
the involvement of both organisations in monitoring the elections.
 
On August
14, 2017, three days after the contested official results of the Kenyan
elections were announced, the local media leaked a letter in which Mr. Fazul
Mohammed, the Executive Director of the NGO Coordination Board, stated that
KHRC had been de-registered on grounds of tax evasion, illegal bank accounts
and illegal hiring of expatriates. They also requested the Central Bank of
Kenya to freeze KHRC’s assets and the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) to recover
accrued taxes. This letter has not yet been sent to KHRC. 
 
“KHRC has been at the frontline of human rights work in
Kenya. There is no doubt that this is a retaliation of their human rights
monitoring of the elections. This is a shameful move that calls again into
question the role of the NGO Coordination Board and the need to urgently
implement the Public Benefit Organisation (PBO) Act as adopted in 2013”
declared Alice Mogwe, FIDH Secretary General.
Ahead of
the elections, KHRC and FIDH published a joint report criticising the lack of
reforms in the security and judiciary sectors[1].
KHRC has also been vocal in highlighting several concerns about the electoral
process and the violence in the aftermath of the electoral results. KHRC and its
partners have been considering the option of filing a petition to challenge
procedural irregularities in the elections results.
 
KHRC is
regularly harassed by the NGO Coordination Board which has been leading a smear
campaign against the organisation on similar baseless grounds since 2015. These
same allegations were successfully challenged by KHRC before the High Court in
2015[2] but this didn’t stop the
NGO Coordination Board from reviving these matters in late 2016[3]
and now against the backdrop of the just concluded elections. 
 
In
addition, on August 15, 2017, the NGO Coordination Board instructed the
Directorate of Criminal Investigations to immediately shut down AfriCOG, an
independent non-profit organisation working on governance and public ethics issues
in both the public and private sectors to address the structural causes of the
crisis of governance in Kenya, and arrest its directors for allegedly failing
to register and operating illegal bank accounts. Recently, AfriCOG had filed a
case seeking to compel the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission to
open up the electoral roll for scrutiny. The case is due to be heard by the
High Court on August 17, 2017. 
 
On August
16, 2017, the police and KRA attempted to raid AfriCOG premises in Nairobi but
failed after being denied entry over claims that the court order presented was
illegal. Shortly after, Mr. Fred Matiang’I, acting Interior Cabinet Secretary,
has directed the NGO Coordination Board to suspend any actions against KHRC and
AfriCOG pending investigation to review the compliance status of the two
organisations.
 
“The Observatory has strongly
urged the Kenyan authorities to protect human rights defenders
in this electoral context, but
the attacks have increased since the beginning of the election.
Kenyan authorities must seriously improve the safety of human rights defenders
and put immediately an end to any forms of harassment against civil society”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this program is to prevent
or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and
OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
For more information, please
contact:
• FIDH: Samuel Hanryon
(French, English): +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)
• OMCT: Delphine Reculeau
(French, English): +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva)
• KHRC: Andrew Songa /
George Kegoro (English): +254-020-3874998/9 - 3876065/6  (Nairobi) 
 



[1]      See FIDH-KHRC joint report “Kenya’s Scorecard on Security and
Justice : Broken Promises and Unfinished business”, August 2017. 


[2]      See Kenya Human Rights Commission v Non-Governmental Organisations Co-Ordination Board [2016] eKLR


[3]      See the Observatory Press release, published on January 13,
2017. 