Belarus:  Judicial harassment of Mr. Sergei Kaspiarovich and Ms. Natalia Satsunkevich
December  3, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2015 / DecemberBelarus: Judicial harassment of Mr. Sergei Kaspiarovich and Ms. Natalia Satsunkevich

BLR
001 / 1215 / OBS 100
Administrative
harassment
Belarus
December 3, 2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the FIDH (International Federation for Human Rights) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Belarus.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the judicial
harassment of Mr. Sergei Kaspiarovich and Ms. Natalia Satsunkevich,
observer-volunteers at the joint "Viasna" human rights centre and
Belarusian Helsinki Committee observation project, following a peaceful
demonstration that took place on November 24, 2015, in the centre of Minsk.
 
According to the information received, on
November 24, 2015, Mr. Kaspiarovich and Ms. Satsunkevich, along with seven
participants and three journalists[1], were issued administrative reports based on article
23.34 of the Administrative Code, which sanctions by a fine or administrative
detention the organisation and/or the participation in an unauthorised mass
event as well as picketing. 
 
On November 24, 2015, a peaceful protest was carried out in the streets
of Minsk to mark the nineteenth anniversary of the 1996 referendum, a poll
highly criticised both in Belarus and abroad for dramatically increasing
President Lukashenka's powers by modifying several aspects of the Constitution.
The protest was organised by the opposition leader and former political
prisoner Mr. Mikalai Statkevich, and gathered around 100 people. Before the
protest, observers invited at the gathering in the framework of the
above-mentioned joint observation project were prepped according to the OSCE
Guidelines on Freedom of Peaceful Assembly, wearing blue jackets marked
“observer” as well as badges with a photo and their names to facilitate their
distinction from participants by the police. Observers from Viasna and the
Helsinki Committee monitoring the event did not engage in any activities during
the protest, yet they were regarded as participants and issued administrative
reports.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing
administrative harassment of Mr. Sergei Kaspiarovich and Ms.
Natalia Satsunkevich as well as other observers arrested during the protest, which only aims at sanctioning their peaceful human
rights activities.
 
The Observatory is more generally concerned by
these attempts by the Belarusian Government to curtail the freedom of
association, assembly, and expression of human rights defenders. 
 
Actions requested :
 
Please write to the authorities of Belarus,
urging them to: 
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
and psychological integrity of Mr. Sergei Kaspiarovich et Ms. Natalia
Satsunkevich as well as of the above-mentioned activists and journalists and
all human rights defenders in Belarus;
 
ii. Put an end to all harassment, including at the administrative level,
against Mr. Sergei Kaspiarovich and Ms. Natalia Satsunkevich as well as against
the above-mentioned activists and journalists, and
against all human rights defenders in Belarus.
 
iii. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
- Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
- its Article 12.1 which provides that “Everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to participate in peaceful
activities against violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms;”
- its Article 12.2 which states that “The State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights
referred to in the present Declaration. “
 
iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Belarus.
 
Addresses:
 
·     President
Aliaksandr Lukashenka, vul. Karla Marksa, 38, 220016 Minsk, Belarus, Fax: + 375
172 26 06 10 or + 375 172 22 38 72, Email: contact@president.gov.by 
·     General
Prosecutor, Alexander Konyuk, vul. Internatsyjanalnaya. 22, 220050 Minsk,
Belarus, Fax: + 375 17 226 42 52
·     Minister
of Justice of Belarus, Mr. Oleg Slizhevsky, vul. Kalektarnaya, 10, 220004
Minsk, Belarus, Email: kanc@minjust.by 
·     President
of the Supreme Court of Belarus, Mr. Valiantsin Alehavich Sukala, vul.
Lenina, 28, 220030 Minsk, Belarus, Email: scjustrb@pmrb.gov.by 
·     H.E.
Mr. Mikhail Khvostov, Permanent Mission of Belarus to the United Nations
in Geneva, 15 avenue de la paix, 1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 748
24 51. Email: mission.belarus@ties.itu.int

·     H.E.
Mr. Andreai Yeudachenka, Embassy of Belarus in Brussels, 192 avenue Molière,
1050 Ixelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2.340.02.87, Email: belgium@mfa.gov.by 
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Belarus in your respective
countries.



[1]      The
other individuals prosecuted are activists Mikalai Statkevich, Uladzimir
Niakliayeu, Maksim Viniarski, Ales Makayeu, Antos Zhylko, Stanislau
Paulinkovich, Andrei Davidovich, as well as 
journalists Dzmitry Halko (from Novy Čas), Halina Abakunchyk (from Radio
Svaboda), and Katsiaryna Andreyeva (from Narodnaja Volya). 