25th session of the UN Human Rights Council: Joint statement delivered during the Interactive Dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders
March 10, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2014 / March25th session of the UN Human Rights Council: Joint statement delivered during the Interactive Dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders 

HUMAN RIGHTS
COUNCIL
25th session
Agenda Item
3
 
 
Joint oral statement
by the International Federation for Human Rights Leagues (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
 
Clustered Interactive
Dialogue with the Special Rapporteurs on the Situation of Human Rights
Defenders and on Torture
 
 
March 10,
2014
 
Check
against delivery
 
Mr.
President,
Madam
Special Rapporteur,
 
FIDH
and OMCT, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, commend the work Special Rapporteur Margaret Sekaggya has
carried out the past six years as she is presenting her last report to the
Council, and welcome the latter’s focus on the work of the mandate and on the
main elements of a safe and enabling environment for human rights defenders.
 
Madam
Sekaggya,
 
We are
concerned by the number of States that persistently deny country visits, and by
the lack of replies to your communications. As the review of the mandate offers
an important opportunity for the Human Rights Council to reaffirm its strong
commitment to the protection of human rights defenders, we call on the Council
to renew the mandate, to urge States to cooperate fully with it and to take
effective measures to ensure defenders' unhindered access to regional and
international human rights bodies without fear of reprisals.
 
While States have the duty to protect human
rights defenders and to ensure that they operate in a safe and enabling
environment as rightly mentioned in your report, attacks, judicial harassment,
restrictive laws, smear campaigns as well as impunity for human rights
violations against the latter continue to perpetuate an environment of hostility
for their activities.
 
In Azerbaijan, Belarus, Ethiopia,
India and Russia, laws restricting access to
funding for NGOs have continued to jeopardise human rights actions, as was
recently the case for the Russian NGO ADC “Memorial”, which was officially declared
a “foreign agent” following an unfair trial in December. Drafts on the question
of NGO funding are also still pending in Bangladesh, Bahrain,
Egypt and Israel.
 
The multiplication of anti-LGBT laws have been another dangerous setback
in a number of countries such as Nigeria, Russia,
and more recently Uganda, putting the activities of defence of
LGBT rights at serious risk.
 
In addition,
in many countries known for repressing dissenting voices, we are concerned that
human rights defenders remain arbitrarily detained in relation to their
peaceful activities: Hilal Mammadov
in Azerbaijan,
Nabeel Rajab in Bahrain, Ales Bialiatski in Belarus,
David Ravelo Crespo in Colombia,
Abdolfattah Soltani in Iran, Mazen Darwish in Syria,
Muharrem Erbey in Turkey, Somyot Prueksakasemsuk in
Thailand, as well as a number of defenders in Uzbekistan,
to quote a few among many others.
 
Impunity for
violations such as extra-judicial killings and enforced disappearances is
another worrying trend that maintains civil society in a climate of fear, and
impedes the development of a safe and enabling environment. In Thailand,
as March 12 will mark the 10-year anniversary of the disappearance of human
rights lawyer Somchai Neelapaijit, we are seriously concerned over the
Thai government’s recent indication that it wants to close the investigation.
In Mexico, Sri Lanka and Syria, the
whereabouts of human rights defenders have remained unknown, and no proper
investigation has been conducted.
 
Over the
past years, in a number of countries, defenders advocating for the right to
land or denouncing the environmental impacts resulting from the activities of
transnational corporations have also been on the forefront of repression from
both State or non-State actors. Here again, the general context of impunity has
compelled these defenders to operate in a disabling environment.
 
In light of
this alarming situation, we sincerely hope, Ms. Sekaggya, that the States will
comply with the recommendations of your report, so that the space of action for
human rights defenders be expanded rather than shrunk, that human rights
defenders be duly protected rather than criminalised, that all violations
against the latter be duly investigated and sanctioned.
 
Thank you
very much. 