Syrian Arab Republic:  White Wave for Syria
March 12, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Events / Syrian Arab Republic / 2013 / MarchSyrian Arab Republic: White Wave for Syria

A WHITE WAVE FOR SYRIA
With THE World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL FRANCE,
the INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION  FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (FIDH), 
the HUMAN RIGHTS LEAGUE (LDH), HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH, REPORTERS WITHOUT BORDERS, ACAT
Collectif du
http://aerocms.omct.org/15 mars pour la démocratie en Syrie, LE COLLECTIF URGENCE SOLIDARTE SYRIE,
ORDRE DES
AVOCATS DE PARIS, Council of European Municipalities and Regions (CCRE),
LE RESEAU EURO-MEDITERRANEEN DES
DROITS DE L’HOMME, Déclaration de Damas,

APPEL
D’AVIGNON, CGT, UNEF. 
 
(and with the support of the  international agency TBWA)
 
Friday 15 March 2013
The 15th of March will mark the
second anniversary of the start of the Syrian revolution which has seen
millions of people in Syria displaced, both inside and outside the country.    
During these two years, according to
the United Nations, more than 70,000 persons were killed while tens of
thousands of others have been detained or disappeared.  
Thousands of Syrians have been
submitted to torture and ill-treatments, sexual violence and looting. 
In order to say
STOP to these crimes against civilians, to demand justice for the victims and
to let the Syrian people know they are not alone, the White Wave Committee,
with the support of Amnesty International France, the FIDH, Human Rights Watch,
the LDH, Reporters sans Frontières, Réseau Euromed pour les droits de l’Homme,
Souria Houria, Déclaration de
Damas, Collectif du 15 mars pour la démocratie en Syrie, OMCT, ACAT, Appel d’Avignon, Ordre des avocats de
Paris and Collecti urgence solidarité Syrie is organising an unprecedented
international event on that day in solidarity with the Syrian people: 
“A White Wave for Syria”                  

2' pour la Syrie - Noémie Kocher par vagueblanchepourlasyrie
The idea is simple: to ask people all
over the world to support the Syrian people, at the same local hour, from 7 to
7.30 pm, by holding up a piece of white fabric or white paper with the word
STOP written on it.    
In this way, right across the world,
from one time zone to the next, a huge white “ola” of protest will unfurl, to be broadcast throughout the day
by the media.  

To ensure excellent visibility,
meeting points in front of, or close to, city halls will be announced in
advance. Other assembly points will be left to individual initiatives in the
workplace or leisure areas.    
On that evening, everyone can post
his or her photo, holding the word STOP, on the site:    http://www.vagueblanchepourlasyrie.org, thus creating a huge demonstration
on the internet and social networks, in particular on the Facebook page
dedicated to the event.    
Everyone, everywhere, can be part of
this mighty wave.    
Over 500 personalities already took
part in the “White Wave” organized on 17 April last (anniversary of Syria’s
independence), when the movement was launched at the Trocadéro in Paris, and in
several other French cities. Thousands of photos were posted on the site.     
Today the movement must be taken up
in every corner of the globe to strengthen
the chain of NGOs  defending human
rights, and to reach a maximum number of city halls, twinned cities, the
medical world, the business community, the world of broadcasting and
entertainment, the social networks and international celebrities.    
We are appealing to individual
initiative, civil society, and the creative talents of all to raise white flags
worldwide, in demonstrations large and small, as an act of solidarity for the
respect of the rights and dignity of the Syrian people, free of any political,
state or partisan influence. 