Libyan Arab Jamahiriya:  Libya: Sentences on the trial of 152 prisoners of conscience
February 27, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Libyan Arab Jamahiriya / 2002 / FebruaryLibyan Arab Jamahiriya: Libya: Sentences on the trial of 152 prisoners of conscienceCase LBY 130601.3 Follow-up of Case  LBY 130601 Right to life / Fair trial   Geneva, February 27, 2002  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Libya.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of further developments in the trial of 152 prisoners of conscience in Libya.  According to the information received, the verdict concerning the trial of the 152 prisoners of conscience, was announced on 16 February 2002. All defendants had been accused of their alleged membership of the Muslim Brotherhood. Two of them, Abdullah Ahmed Izzedien and Salem Abu Hanak, were sentenced to death by the People’s Court, over 80 were given sentences ranging from 10 years’ to life imprisonment. The rest were considered to have spent their time and will presumably be released.  The detainees have been imprisoned for more than three years awaiting this decision. They were held in incommunicado detention until the opening of their trial in March 2001. OMCT considers that their trial failed to conform with international standards for fair trial. Their request to choose their own lawyers was refused by the court, which instead provided them with inexperienced lawyers. Several hearings planned at the People’s Court in Tripoli during the trial were repeatedly postponed or adjourned after only having lasted a few minutes. All of these sessions were closed to the public.  According to the information received, the detainees were accused of being members of a political group called the "Brotherhood Movement", also known as the "Libyan Islamic Group". or law 71 of 1972(2), under which political activists can be tried by the authorities for opposition to the principles of the September 1st 1969 revolution, leading to possible sentencing for treason, which is punishable by death.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the death penalties and long term prison sentences imposed, following the violations of the 152 detainees’ proceedural rights during their lengthy trial, notably the fact that they were not provided with lawyers capable of ensuring their defence in an effective way.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, a group of around 152 prisoners of conscience were being tried before the people’s court, having been arbitrarily arrested en masse in Libya’s main cities during June 1998, ostensibly on the grounds of political opposition and, more specifically, for supporting or showing sympathy for the underground Islamic movement, the Libyan Islamic Group. This movement is not known to have used or advocated violence. The detainees include university lecturers, engineers, medical doctors, university students and businessmen.   Action requested :  Please write to the authorities in Libya urging them to:  i. immediately repeal the death sentence given to Mr. Abdullah Ahmed Izzedien and Mr. Salem Abu Hanak; i. review the trial and guarantee that all the defendants are subjected to impartial legal proceedings and, in the absence of valid legal charges, order their immediate release; ii. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses :  ·	Colonel Mu'ammar al-Kaddafi, Leader of the Revolution, Office of the Leader of the Revolution, Tripoli, Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Fax : + 218 21 333 01 85 ·	Imbarak Abdalla El Shamek, Prime Minister, Secretary of the General People's Committee Tripoli, Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Fax : + 218 54 60 017 ·	Mohammed Mohammed Belgassem al-Zuia, Minister of Justice and General Security, Office of the Minister of Justice and General Security, Tripoli, Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.  Fax : + 218 21 444 16 74 ·	The General People's Congress (Human Rights section). Fax : + 218 21 361 39 07  Please also write to the embassies of Libya in your respective country.  Geneva, February 27, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 