South Korea: crackdown against undocumented migrant workers
January 12, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / Korea, (South) Republic of / 2004 / JanuaryKorea, (South) Republic of: South Korea: crackdown against undocumented migrant workersCase KOR 120104.ESCR Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Concern  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT  intervention in the following situation in South Korea (Republic of  Korea).   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian  Human Rights Commission (AHRC), a member of the OMCT network, about  the ongoing crackdown against undocumented migrant workers and their  representatives in South Korea, notably through forced deportation,  arbitrary detentions and manhunts.   The crackdown against 'illegal' migrant workers was launched on  October 24, 2003. Since that date, around 27,000 migrant workers have  reportedly been deported or have left the country. Currently, an  estimated 120,000 illegal migrant workers, who have been in South  Korea for more than four years, are facing forced deportation by the  South Korean government from 16 November 2003 onwards if they don't  leave the country voluntarily before this date. Company owners who  employ illegal workers who have stayed for more than the legal term  of 4 years will face up to three years in prison and fines of 20  million won (about US$17,000). The number of foreign workers in South  Korea is estimated to be 360,000. According to current law, 290,000  are classified as illegal residents.  According to the information received over the last two months, the  South Korean government has been launching bi-weekly crackdown  manhunts of migrant workers in their neighbourhoods, factories and in  downtown shopping districts, causing migrant workers to be in  constant fear. In a statement, the South Korean Justice Ministry  reportedly said that 50 special squads would round up workers on,  immediately expelling those who had air tickets and passports. The  Minister also said that he would work with home country embassies to  repatriate those without documents and tickets.  As a result, many  migrant workers have reportedly left the country and others have  taken to the hills, hiding out in the mountains until the crackdown  ends. Due to the pressure of crackdown and deportation, already six  migrant workers from Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Russia and Uzbekistan  have reportedly committed suicide, while two young workers have died  of heart attacks.  It is also reported that employers have also been hit with exorbitant  fines, forcing them to lay off their already paid foreign workers.  Other reports, quoting local media sources, have alleged that South  Korean employers were taking advantage of the impending expulsions to  withhold some $2.6 million in wages owed to 1,460 workers.  In response to this situation, demonstrations and protests have been  organised by the Equality Trade Union-Migrants' Branch (ETU-MB), the  only nationwide migrant labour union that was build up and created by  migrant workers. Reports indicate that ETU-MB members and supporters  have been physically attacked by riot police and immigration  authorities during recent demonstrations. The ETU-MB also organised a  sit-in struggle at the Myeongdong Cathedral, demanding the  abolishment of the Industrial Trainee System (ITS), the establishment  of a five-year working visa, freedom to choose one's place of work,  the release of all migrant workers being held in detention centres,  legalization of all undocumented migrant workers and the guarantee of  the three basic labour rights stipulated by the South Korean  Constitution: the rights to organise, of collective bargaining and of  collective action. It is reported that whenever the ETU-MB members  poked their heads out of the Myongdong Cathedral, there were police  ready to detain and deport them.   Reports also indicate that the South Korean government has already  made it clear that it intends to break the ETU-MB and deport its  leaders. In this respect, two Bangladesh migrant workers of the ETU- MB, Khademul Islam Bidduth and Jamal Ali were forcibly deported by  the South Korean' authorities on 30 December 2003 to Bangladesh. Both  are now reportedly facing prosecution by the Bangladesh government,  at the request of the South Korean authorities, for having associated  with trade unions and civil society groups while in Korea.   Background Information   In South Korea, the Industrial Trainee System (ITS) is a common  source of cheap and docile labour, allowing systematic exploitation  and abuse of migrant workers. The ITS only guarantees migrant workers  a three-year legal stay in Korea, but as a trainee, not a legal  worker. After three years, the 'trainees' must go back to their  country. As trainees, migrant workers have no 'legal' rights and  bargaining power. Moreover, they do not receive protection from local  unions or state regulatory bodies because they are not 'legitimate'  workers, even though they perform the same jobs as regular ones. At  present, migrant workers are not allowed to join unions.  Migrant workers are mainly employed in small factories as trainees  with labour intensive production and they have to perform the so- called 3-D (dirty, dangerous and difficult) jobs with very low  payment (around US$ 350 per month), long working hours and no labour  rights. Despite frequent industrial accidents, they are not entitled  to compensation. It is no wonder that migrant workers employed as  trainees run away from their work and become undocumented workers.  Around 80 percent of all foreign workers in South Korea are  reportedly illegal migrants.  The Employment Permit System (EPS), introduced in legislation in the  summer of 2003, was originally intended to replace the much disdained  ITS. However, the EPS and ITS will now run alongside each other, and  there is no guarantee that the EPS could improve the condition of  migrant workers in any positive way. The main point of EPS is that  the government will control employers by applying strict standards in  the allowance of hiring migrant workers, and through that, the  government intends to improve working environment for migrant  workers.  According to the new EPS, migrant workers residing in South Korea for  more then 4 years - the majority of migrants - have to leave the  country without any possibility of coming back. With the recent  crackdown, those migrants who are deported will be replaced by  'workers', who in four years' time will also become illegal, causing  the government, migrant workers and Korean society to face the same  problems they face today.    Action requested: i.	 put an immediate stop to the deportation and crackdown against  migrant workers and ETU-MB activists.   ii.	ensure that no workers are forcibly sent back to countries where  they are at risk of being tortured, ill-treated or arbitrarily  detained and that each worker subject to deportation receives and  full and fair individual determination;  iii.	extend the deadline for expulsion to ensure that mass  deportations of people are not carried out, to discuss pending issues  such as wages owed to the workers and rights of children born to an  illegal worker and a South Korean partner, and to set up co-operation  schemes with countries of origin to ensure rehabilitation of the  workers on their return;  iv.	guarantee that the search for illegal workers and any return of  individuals is carried out in a way which does not violate human  rights safeguards and ensures the physical integrity and safety of  individuals;  v.	ensure that the workers are paid all wages and benefits owed to  them, and that respect for family life and humanitarian  considerations are taken into account and workers with these needs  are regularised;  vi.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and  psychological integrity of the workers who are at risk of  deportation;    Addresses:   Mr. Roh Moo-hyun, President, 1 Sejong-no, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-820,  REPUBLIC OF KOREA; Tel: +822 770-0018; Fax: +822 770-0347 or 770-0001  / +822 770-2579; E-mail: president@cwd.go.kr or  president@president.go.kr   Ms. Kang Kum-sil, Minister of Justice, 1 Jungang-ro, Gwachon-si,  Gyonggi Province, 427-760, REPUBLIC OF KOREA; Fax: +822 504 3337 /  +822 503 7046 (HR Department); E-mail: jk.kim@moj.go.kr or  kskang7@moj.go.kr   Mr. Kwon Ki Hong, Minister of Labour, 1 Jungang-ro, Gwacheon-si,  Gyonggi Province, 427-760 REPUBLIC OF KOREA; Tel: +82 2 2110 2114; Fax: +82 2 6494 6494 Chang-kook Kim, President, National Human Rights Commission of Korea,  16 Euljiro 1-ga, Jung-gu, Seoul 100 842, REPUBLIC OF KOREA; Tel: +82  2  2125 9700; Fax: +82 2 2125 9811 / 9666; E-mail:  nhrc@humanrights.go.kr  Please also write to the embassies of South Korea in your respective  country.  Geneva, January 12, 2003   Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this  appeal in your reply. 