Bahrain:  Joint Open Letter to Boris Johnson calling for the release of jailed human rights defender Nabeel Rajab
February  3, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / FebruaryBahrain: Joint Open Letter to Boris Johnson calling for the release of jailed human rights defender Nabeel Rajab 
Boris Johnson
Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
King Charles Street 
London
SW1A 2AH
 
 
3 February 2017
 
Dear Mr Johnson,

In light of recent
developments in Bahrain, we write to raise our deep concern over the punitive
trials of prominent human rights defender Nabeel
Rajab, who is being prosecuted in three separate cases for exercising his
right to freedom of expression. As Foreign Secretary you have re-committed your
Office to counter the shrinking of civil society space and promote the work of
human rights defenders. We therefore urge you to give effect to this commitment
by calling for the release of Nabeel Rajab. 

Nabeel Rajab is the
President of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights, a member of Human Rights
Watch’s Middle East Division advisory committee and a founding director of the
Gulf Center for Human Rights. He faces up to 17 years in prison on several
charges, all related to his free speech.
 
Nabeel Rajab, who has
been in detention, largely in solitary confinement, since his arrest on 13 June
2016, currently faces two separate trials related to his right to free speech.
In the first of these, he is charged with “spreading rumours in wartime”,
“insulting a neighbouring country” (Saudi Arabia) and “insulting a statutory
body”. The first two charges relate to Nabeel Rajab’s tweets published in March
2015 alleging torture in Jaw prison and criticising the killing of civilians in
the Yemen conflict by the Saudi Arabia-led coalition. The verdict in his trial
has been postponed several times suggesting that this is part of a deliberate
strategy to harass him. His next hearing on this case is due to take place on
21 February.

On 28 December, during a hearing on the Twitter case, the high criminal court authorised
Nabeel Rajab’s release on bail; he was then immediately rearrested for
investigation into the charge of “spreading false news in media interviews”.  According to the prosecution, Nabeel Rajab's
charge relate to comments given to media outlets in which he stated that
foreign journalists and international NGOs cannot enter Bahrain and that the
imprisonment of opposition actors was political and illegal. However, multiple
international NGOs including Human Rights First, and Reporters Without Borders,
as well as academics and journalists, have been denied access since 2012. Amnesty International has also not been granted access to
Bahrain since January 2015. Meanwhile, political and unlawful imprisonments are
common in Bahrain: Bahrain was the subject of six UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention rulings in 2014. Amnesty International has also documented many
prisoners of conscience in Bahrain. Nabeel Rajab’s next hearing on this case is
scheduled for 7 February.
 
In addition, Nabeel Rajab
has a third charge against him for “spreading false news” after he an Op-Ed written in his
name was published in the New York Times in
September 2016.
 
We note the UK Government’s
statements in recent years relating to Nabeel Rajab. In 2014 for example, at
the UN Human Rights Council the UK together with 46 other states, urged Bahrain “to release all persons imprisoned solely for exercising human rights,
including human rights defenders, some of whom have been identified as
arbitrarily detained according to the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention.”
Also, since your appointment as Foreign Secretary, the Government has, through
Parliament and the UN Human Rights Council, expressed concern at the re-arrest
of Nabeel Rajab and confirmed that UK officials continue to raise his case with
the Government of Bahrain and attend each of his hearings.  While such efforts are welcome, it appears that
the UK Government has not yet called for his release. 
 
Since your appointment,
the human rights situation in Bahrain has further deteriorated. The recent
resumption of executions and excessive use of force against protesters,
contradict the Bahraini authorities’ rhetoric of progress being made. 
 
We strongly believe that
the UK, following your and the Prime Minister’s visit to Bahrain in December,
and particularly now that the UK has regained a seat on the UN Human Rights
Council, should review its current policy on the human rights situation in
Bahrain, publicly condemn regressive measures and call for the release of
Nabeel Rajab and others detained solely for peacefully exercising their right
to freedom of expression such as Sheikh Ali Salman, the Secretary General of
al-Wefaq National Islamic Society. 
 
The UK’s significant
historical, economic, security and political ties with Bahrain incur a
responsibility to acknowledge and criticise negative human rights developments
within the country. The UK’s voice is strongly heard in Bahrain, and we urge
you to act publicly and promptly in support of Nabeel Rajab’s human rights work
and call for his release.
 
We would like to request
a meeting with the FCO to discuss our human rights concerns in Bahrain and Nabeel
Rajab’s case and hear the FCO’s views on his case and what the UK government
can do to uphold its commitment to reverse the shrinking civil society space in
Bahrain.
 
Yours sincerely,
 
Americans for Democracy & Human
Rights in Bahrain (ADHRB)
Amnesty International UK
ARTICLE 19
Bahrain Center for Human Rights
(BCHR)
Bahrain Institute for Rights and
Democracy (BIRD)
Bahrain Youth Society for Human
Rights
Canadian Journalists for Free
Expression (CJFE)
English PEN
European Centre For Democracy and
Human Rights (ECDHR)
FIDH, under the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
Index on Censorship
Lawyer's Rights Watch Canada (LRWC)
No Peace Without Justice
PEN International
Rafto Foundation
The Bahrain Press Association
World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), under the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
 
Individuals
Clive Stafford Smith (OBE), director
of Reprieve
Professor Damian McCormack​ 