Philippines:  'Philippines: extrajudicial execution of an indigenous Mangyan family
August 29, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2003 / AugustPhilippines: 'Philippines: extrajudicial execution of an indigenous Mangyan familyCase PHL 290803/PHL 290803.CC URGENT APPEAL / CHILD CONCERN Extrajudicial execution  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Philippines.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC-HK) and Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), both members of the OMCT network, of the extrajudicial execution of an indigenous Mangyan family - comprising a pregnant mother, 2 infants and their father - by army personnel in Philippines.  According to the information received, on 21st July 2003, Roger Blanco, 8-month pregant Olivia Blanco, Kevin John Blanco (3 years old) and Dexter Blanco (1 1/2 years old) were killed in Sitio Talayob, Nicolas, Magsaysay, Occidental Mindoro during what was claimed by the military to be an 'encounter ' between the 16th Infantry Battalion (IB) of the Philippine Army (PA) and the New People's Army. During the 'encounter', soldiers fired indiscriminately at the Blanco's house, and Roger and Olivia Blanco, and their children, were killed.   According to the information received, there was no encounter between the military and the New People's Army, and the attack on the Blanco family was unprovoked. The only witness to the event was told to put his signature on a scrap of paper (the foil insert from a cigarette packet). The witness was not aware of what was subsequently added to the paper, and the piece of paper with the witness' signature on it was produced the following day.  Indigenous peoples in the Philippines are repeatedly the victims of violations at the hands of the military, and the Mangyans are often unjustly accused of being members, sympathizers and supporters of the New People's Army.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the unnecessary and discriminatory use of force by the 16th Infantry Battalion (IB) of the Philippine Army (PA), which has resulted in the death of the whole Blanco family. OMCT strongly condemns the extrajudicial executions and impunity of the perpetrators. OMCT urges the authorities of the Philippines to grant adequate reparation to the community of the deceased. Furthermore, OMCT urges the Government to take all necessary measures to guarantee an immediate, impartial and effective investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial tribunal, and apply the sanctions provided for by law. OMCT recalls that two of the victims were children, and that their mother was 8-months pregnant. The Philippines has signed and ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which states, under Article 6, that “State Parties recognise that every child has the inherent right to life” and under Article 38, Paragraph 4) that: “In accordance with their obligations under international humanitarian law to protect the civilian population in armed conflicts, States Parties shall take all feasible measures to ensure protection and care of children who are affected by an armed conflict.”  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Philippines urging them to:  i.   order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.  put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment of the Mangyan community; iii. provide adequate reparation to the bereaved community; iv. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President, Republic of the Philippines, New Executive Building, Malacañang, Palace Compound, J.P. Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, Philippines, Fax no.: + 632 736 1010 / 832 3793, Email: opnet@ops.gov.ph or kgma@yahoogroups.com ·	Angelo T. Reyes, Secretary, Department of National Defense, Camp General Aguinaldo, Quezon City, Fax: +632 911-6213, Email: osnd@philoneline.com ·	Hon. Simeon Datumanong, Secretary, Department of Justice, DOJ Bldg., Padre Faura, 1004, Manila, Fax: +632521-1614 Email: sechbp@info.com.ph ·	Hon. Purificacion Valera Quisumbing, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC bldg., UP complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: +632 926 6188 / 928 7240, Email: apnr@chr.gov.ph  or drpvq@chr.gov.ph ·	Col. Eduardo Matillano, CIDG, Police Superintendent, Fax no.  +632 7051-526 ·	Hon. Loretta Ann Rosales, House of Representatives, Chairman Comm. On Civil/Political Rights, Telefax no. (02) 9316288   Email: conglapr@nsclub.net ·	Hon. Francisco Pangilinan, Office of the Senate, Fax no. +632 5526601, Email: kiko@fplaw.com.ph ·	Ambassadeur, Ramel, Samuel T., Av. Blanc 47, CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail : philippine.mission@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 716 19 33  Please also write to the embassies of Philippines in your respective country.  Geneva, August 29th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 