Russian Federation:  Assaults and threats against Messrs. Alexey Etmanov and Vladimir Lesik
November 20, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2008 / NovemberRussian Federation: Assaults and threats against Messrs. Alexey Etmanov and Vladimir LesikRUS 010 / 1108 / OBS 194 Assaults / Threats / Harassment Russian Federation November 20, 2008 The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in the Russian Federation. Brief description of the situation: The Observatory has been informed by the Russian-Chechen Friendship Society (RCFS) about the assaults and threats against Mr. Alexey Etmanov, co-Chairman of the Inter-regional Trade Union of Automobile Industry worker (ITUA), an independent inter-regional trade union, and Chairman of its affiliate organisation at the Ford car factory located in the city of Vsevolozhsk, close to St Petersburg. According to the information received, on November 8, 2008, Mr. Alexey Etmanov was attacked by three unknown assailants armed with brass knuckles as he had just parked his car outside his home after returning from his shift late at night. Mr. Etmanov managed to draw a stun gun and fire against his assailants. Mr. Etmanov first thought that the attackers were mere street hooligans. However, the next day, Mr. Vladimir Lesik, Deputy Chairman of the factory’s independent trade union, received a call warning him that the nightly incident had nothing to do with a robbery. “You were warned lightly. If you continue to mess with us, you will die”, the anonymous caller said. Furthermore, on November 14, 2008, Mr. Alexey Etmanov was once more assaulted as he was returning from work at around 1 am at night together with his wife. Two trade union activists waited in the car outside Mr. Etmanov’s house to make sure he got safely home. Mr. Etmanov then noticed that the lights were out on his floor and the floor below. Sensing danger, he drew his stun gun. He noticed there was a man hiding in the corridor. Mr. Etmanov asked the man to come out. The latter then pounced on Mr. Etmanov, holding a steel pipe. Mr. Etmanov shot into the air with his stun gun and managed to escape through the exit. Mr. Etmanov’s colleagues blocked the exit, and Mr. Etmanov called the police. The police patrol arrested a young man, aged around 25 years. The police found a metal pipe and an abandoned mobile telephone in the corridor. The police took the man to the local precinct. The police is now considering whether to open a criminal investigation. Messrs. Alexey Etmanov and Vladimir Lesik, by their active involvement in the development of the first independent Inter-regional Trade Union of Automobile Industry workers, caused the ire of the management of car plants in other regions, including Taganrog and Togliatti, and their puppet unions. The attack and threats faced by Messrs. Etmanov and Vladimir Lesik may be related to this event. The Observatory expresses its deepest concern about these assaults against Mr. Alexey Etmanov as well as about the threats against Mr. Vladimir Lesik, which seem to aim at sanctioning their human rights activities. The Observatory recalls that according to Article 12.2 of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”. The Observatory further recalls that the Russian Federation was elected to the Human Rights Council in June 2006 for three years and is committed, in this regard, to “uphold the highest standards in the promotion and protection of human rights”. In addition, as a participating State of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Russian Federation acknowledges that “the [1998] UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders [... places] a responsibility [...] on states to adopt and implement adequate legislation and administrative procedures that would provide for a conducive environment for human rights defenders to promote and strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, and recognises “the need for particular attention, support and protection for human rights defenders by the OSCE, its Institutions and field operations, as well as by participating States”[1]. The Observatory also points out that under the terms of the Declaration of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe for enhanced protection of human rights defenders, adopted on February 6, 2008, member-States are required to “create an environment conductive to human rights defenders, to take effective measures to protect, promote, and respect them, to ensure their access to effective remedies, to take action to prevent attacks and harassment against them, and to ensure their effective access to the European Court of Human Rights”. Actions requested: The Observatory urges the authorities of the Russian Federation to:   Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Alexey Etmanov and Vladimir Lesik, and more generally of all human rights defenders in the Russian Federation;  Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned events, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them the penal sanctions provided by the law;  Put an end to all acts of harassment against all human rights defenders in the Russian Federation, and ensure in all circumstances that they be able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrances;  Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, as well as with the above-mentioned Article 12.2;  Comply with the provisions of the Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the 2nd Conference on the Human Dimension of the Cooperation and Security Conference in Europe (CSCE) (1990), and uphold in all circumstances the principles and provisions enshrined in the international and regional human rights instruments ratified by the Russian Federation and which, in particular, guarantee freedoms of association, demonstration, expression and opinion, in particular the European Convention on Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;  More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by the Russian Federation.  Addresses:  Dmitri Medvedev, President of the Russian Federation, Kremlin, Moscow, Russia, Faxes:+ 7 095 206 5173 / 230 2408, Email: president@gov.ru; Mr. Yuriy Chaika, General Public Prosecutor of Russian Federation, 125993, Moscow, GSP-3, 15a B. Dimitrovka str. RUSSIA, Fax: +7 (495) 692-96-00  Mr. Sergey Romanyuk, Public Prosecutor of Leningrad region, 194044, Saint Petersburg, av. Lesnoi, str. 20, kor. 12, RUSSIA. Fax: +7 812 542 00 15 Chairwoman of the Presidential Human Rights Commission of the Russian Federation, Ella Pamfilova, 103132 g. Moskva, Staraya ploshchad, d 8/5,pod 3, Russian Federation, Fax:+70952064855; Vladimir Lukin, Russian Federal Ombudsman for Human Rights, Fax: +7 495 207-53-37; Minister of Internal Affairs, Rashid Nurgaliev, ul. Zhitnaya, 16, 117049 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Rossiia, 117049, Moskva, Fax: + 7 095 237 49 25; Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sergey Lavrov, Smolenskaya-Sennaya pl, 32/34, 121200 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Fax:+ 7 095 244 2203; Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations in Geneva Av. de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland, e-mail : mission.russian@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 734 40 44; Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 31-33 boulevard du Régent, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 513 76 49.  Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Russian Federation in your respective country.  Geneva-Paris, November 20, 2008 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic. To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / +33 1 43 55 18 80  Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29    [1]   See OP 6 & OP 8 of the Resolution on Strengthening OSCE Engagement with Human Rights Defenders and National Human Rights Institutions, adopted by the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly on July 10, 2007. 