Three Human Right Defenders from China, Bangladesh and Mexico Selected as Final Nominees for the Martin Ennals Award 2014
April 23, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Events / 2014 / AprilThree Human Right Defenders from China, Bangladesh and Mexico Selected as Final Nominees for the Martin Ennals Award 2014

Geneva, 23 April 2014
 
 This award is selected by the International
Human Rights Community (See Jury Below)
and given to Human Rights Defenders who have shown deep commitment and face
great personal risk. The aim of the award is to highlight their work and
protect them through increased visibility.

Cao Shunli (China): Her death in detention was announced on March
14th. She disappeared on Sept 14th shortly before
boarding a flight order to participate in the Human Rights Council. Chinese authorities only acknowledged her
detention months later. She died in custody after being denied medical
attention for known health conditions until it was too late. Since 2008, she
vigorously advocated for access to information, freedom of speech, and freedom
of assembly. For this, she spent over two years in the “re-education through
labour” system and was subjected to repeated harassment. This is a tragic
example of reprisals suffered by human rights defenders who work with
international human rights mechanisms.

“The Human Rights Council, its President and other UN Member States must
now support an independent investigation into her death, and hold China
accountable for this reprehensible reprisal against a committed and peaceful
human rights defender”, said Michael Ineichen of the International Service for
Human Rights.
Adilur Rahman
Khan (Bangladesh),
Since the 1990’s, he has worked on a wide range of human rights issues,
such as illegal detention, enforced disappearances, and extra-judicial
killings. His organization, Odhikar, is one of the few independent voices left
in Bangladesh. Personally he is facing criminal prosecution for documenting the
extrajudicial deaths of 61 people during demonstrations against the government.
In August 2013, he was detained by police with no arrest warrant, who then at
first denied holding him. Immediate widespread publicity is credited with
saving his life. Currently, his organization is facing closure. Donor funds
destined for Odhikar are being blocked by the Prime Minister’s Office.
Mr Adilur Khan stated “[my nomination for…] this
prestigious award will further inspire me personally, and my fellow colleagues
who shoulder the struggles for democracy and the rule of law aiming to achieve
social justice in Bangladesh. As a symbol of recognition for the human rights
defenders it will enhance the visibility and protection for the families of the
victims of human rights abuses.” 
Alejandra
Ancheita
(Mexico), Founder and Executive Director of ProDESC. For over 15 years she has
worked with migrants, workers, and indigenous communities to protect their land
and labour rights vis a vis transnational mining and energy companies. These
disputes have included violent attacks on those she is trying to protect. She
is also one of the pioneers in seeking accountability for transnational
companies in Mexican courts when local communities’ rights are not taken into
account. In Mexico, there is a clear pattern of attacks, threats,
criminalization, and murders of human rights defenders. Ms Ancheita and ProDESC
have been subjected to surveillance, a defamation campaign in the national
media, and a break in at their offices.
 
Ms Ancheita, stated, “This recognition calls attention to the
increasing violence being suffered by human rights defenders in Mexico,
particularly women defenders. I hope that it provides better conditions and
increased security not just for me, but for all human rights defenders in my
country.”
 
The Award will be presented on October 7th
2014 at a ceremony hosted by the City of Geneva.
 
The main award of the human rights movement. The Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders
(MEA) is a unique collaboration among ten of the world’s leading human rights
organizations to give protection to
human rights defenders worldwide.  The Jury is composed of the following NGOs:






-      
Amnesty International, 
-      
Human Rights Watch, 
-      
Human Rights First, 
-      
Int’l Federation for Human
Rights, 
-       World
Organisation Against Torture 
-      
Front Line Defenders
-      
International Commission of
Jurists,
-      
EWDE Germany, 
-      
International Service for Human
Rights  
-      
HURIDOCS. 



Electronic version with Bios, Photos, and Video: http://bit.ly/QoZniC
 
For further information, please contact:
Michael Khambatta +41 79 474 8208
khambatta@martinennalsaward.org or visit www.martinennalsaward.org 