Kazakhstan:  EU urged to insist on concrete measures to address pressing human rights issues
November 23, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2016 / NovemberKazakhstan: EU urged to insist on concrete measures to address pressing human rights issues 
            EU urged to insist on
concrete measures to address pressing human rights issues in Kazakhstan
Brussels/Almaty, 23 November 2016. Today the EU will hold the
eighth round of its annual Human Rights Dialogue with Kazakhstan in Brussels.
This meeting comes at a time when the EU has begun establishing closer political
and economic relations with the Central Asian country under an Enhanced
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement. Brussels-based International Partnership
for Human Rights (IPHR), the World Organization against Torture (OMCT) and the Polish Helsinki
Foundation for Human Rights (HFHR) together with Kazakhstan International
Bureau for Human Rights and Rule of Law (KIBHR) have urged the EU to use this
dialogue to insist on concrete measures by Kazakhstan’s government to deal with
pressing human rights concerns.   
Ahead of today’s meeting, the four NGOs have
briefed the EU on key issues and cases of concern in Kazakhstan, which it would
be important to raise with the Kazakhstani authorities. 
“As part of a wider trend seen in the former Soviet Union, the climate
for free speech is currently alarming in Kazakhstan,” said Brigitte Dufour, IPHR Director. “The European Parliament decried the
situation in a resolution adopted in March 2016, and this issue should be
addressed as a priority in the EU’s relations with Kazakhstan,” she
continued.
There are only few media outlets left in
Kazakhstan that are openly critical of the government, and several of them have
recently faced debilitating defamation lawsuits. News and other sites that
report unfavourably on government policies are blocked. Recently a growing number of criminal cases have also been initiated
against journalists, bloggers and civil society activists. 
Among these cases is that of civil society activists Maks Bokayev and
Talgat Ayan, who are currently on trial over their role in peaceful land reform
protests that took place in Kazakhstan this spring. At a trial that has been
deemed “political” in nature even by the judge, prosecutors are now seeking
eight-year prison terms for the two activists on charges of “violating the
procedure for holding protests”, as well as “disseminating information known to
be false” and “inciting social discord”. Charges brought under the latter two
broadly worded criminal code provisions, which have been criticized by
international human rights bodies, are often used against outspoken individuals.
Editor Guzyal Baydalinova, civil society activists Ermek Narymbaev and Bolatbek
Blyalov and political activist Serikzhan Mambetalin have all been convicted on
such charges this year.
“The EU should call on the Kazakhstani authorities to stop using criminal
prosecution as a tool for suppressing the legitimate exercise of freedom of
expression, freedom of association and assembly and other fundamental rights in
violation of international standards,” said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. 
Widespread violations
of the right to freedom of assembly were documented in connection with the
peaceful protests on land reforms and broader issues held in Kazakhstan in
April-May 2016. Hundreds of people were detained and dozens, including
well-known civil society activists, human rights defenders and social media
users were fined or locked up for up to 15 days. In addition to Maks Bokayev
and Talgat Ayan, also other activists have been charged with criminal offenses
in relation to these protests. Human rights defender Makhambet Abzhan, who was
active on social media about the protests, has been convicted of allegedly
resisting police and sentenced to two years’ of court-imposed restrictions on
his freedom of movement.
New legislation
adopted in Kazakhstan last year imposes excessive and unjustified reporting
requirements on NGOs. Recent Tax Code amendments require organizations and individuals
receiving foreign funds for certain types of public activities to notify tax
authorities about the receipt of funds and provides for the creation of a
public database featuring such information, which may result in stigmatization
and discrimination of those concerned. Several NGOs have been targeted by
intrusive tax inspections. 
A total of 115 new cases of torture and ill-treatment registered by the NGO
Coalition against Torture in Kazakhstan in the first nine months of 2016 are
believed to be only the tip of the iceberg. Investigations into allegations of
torture and ill-treatment remain ineffective,
in spite of positive legislative changes on reporting and investigating crimes,
and impunity is still the norm. At the heart of the problem lies the
authorities’ reluctance to expose the law enforcement system to public
criticism. 
“In order to effectively address the problem of impunity, it is crucial
th 