Azerbaijan:  Severe Torture and Unfair Trials of Members of the Nardaran Community
December 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2016 / DecemberAzerbaijan: Severe Torture and Unfair Trials of Members of the Nardaran CommunityUrgent Appeal Nardaran Case3 pages / 102 KB
The World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Azerbaijan.
Description of the situation:
The OMCT has been informed
by reliable sources about severe torture and unfair trials in the cases of 18
members of the Shiite minority of Nardaran including Mr. Taleh Bagirzadeh, Mr.
Jahad Balakishiev, Mr. Shamil Abdylaliev, and Mr. Bahruz Askerov. They were
arrested on 26 November 2015 during a special operation of the Main Directorate for
Combating Organized Crime in Nardaran in an attempt to crack down the Muslim
Unity, a Shiite organisation that presents an Islamist alternative to the
State. In this so-called “Nardaran case”, the arrested are charged with serious
crimes including murder, terrorism, riots, illegal possession of weapons,
violent seizure of power, incitement to religious hatred.
According to information
received by his lawyer, Mr Taleh Bagirzadeh
the head of Muslim Unity, was arrested and was brought to a van where officers
proceeded in hitting his face, smashing his head on the ground, trying to break
his back and verbally abusing him. Mr. Bagirzadeh was subsequently brought to
the offices of the Main Organized Crime Department where he was forced to lay
on the ground and was severely beaten resulting in blood loss and open flesh
wounds. Two to three days after his arrest, an investigator from the General
Prosecutor’s office visited Mr. Bagirzadeh and expressed shock about his
condition. However, no investigation was initiated.
During his arbitrary
detention on the premises of the Organized Crime Department, Mr. Bagirzadeh was
repeatedly beaten and threatened to confess allegations of terrorism and
espionage and to testify against the other accused. Moreover, he was regularly
brought to the basement of the building while his head was covered with a sack.
There, an officer would sit on his shoulder, while others stroke at his legs
until they swell to an unrecognizable shape. 
On 29 December 2015 Mr.
Bagirzadeh was finally allowed to see his lawyer, who immediately filed a
torture complaint. The dates for hearings were repeatedly postponed until the
wounds on his body had healed. However, Mr. Bagirzadeh withdrew his complaint
on 23 February 2016 because of repeated threats and torture. 
The trial against Mr
Bagirzadeh, which started on 19 July 2016, raises serious concerns: The torture
allegations raised by his lawyer during the hearing were dismissed by the judge
and his right to participate in the trial was refused. At a hearing on 30
November 2016, Mr Bagirzadeh, was removed from the courtroom for expressing
resentment about inappropriate statements by the witness, an employee of the Sabunchu District
Police Office, directed towards his lawyer. When the hearing continued on 2 December
2016, Mr Bagirzadeh and the other 17 accused were brought to the court but not
allowed to enter the room of the hearing. The judge stated that he will exclude
the accused from the hearing as long as he deems appropriate. On subsequent
hearings held on 16 and 19 December, the accused were again not allowed to
participate in the hearing. 
According to information by
family members, the conditionsof at least three other
accused are also alarming. Mr Jahad Balakishiev, Mr
Shamil Abdylaliev, and Mr Bahruz Askerov were severely wounded by
gunshots during their arrest on 26 November 2015. As of today, they have not
received proper medical treatment. According to information by family members a
bullet has been left in Mr Balakishiev’s body close to his heart and in Mr
Askero’s leg and two bullets remain in Mr Abdylaliev’s body. This results in
severe suffering and leaves the three detained disabled and unable to walk on
their own.  
Background
Information:
The mass arrests and torturing of Mr. Taleh
Bagirzadeh, Mr. Jahad Balakishiev, Mr. Shamil Abdylaliev, and Mr. Bahruz
Askerov and the 14 other accused has to be understood in President Ilham
Aliyev’s general crackdown of government critics and opposition in an attempt to
consolidate power and to establish an autocracy with a system of patronage and
oppression. While the government is alleging terrorism, observers depict the attacks
and trials as breaking dissent. 
Discontent within opposition groups and
civil society grew particularly after the unfair elections in 2013. Human
Rights Defenders started publishing information on the President’s involvement in
corruption and criticized his omnipotence. The government responded to the rising activism with a
general crackdown on civil society, imposing high fines for participation in
and organization of unauthorized protests. Amendments to NGO laws were introduced
with stricter registration requirements, restrictions on funding, and higher
fines for administrative offenses, which made the day-to-day operation of civil
organizations increasingly difficult. This crackdown resulted in the virtual
non-existence of a secular opposition to Aliyev’s government. It has been
suggested that some thus turned to religious movements that currently present
the sole alternative to the government.
In addition,
in 2014 most key figures of the human rights movement were imprisoned and sentences
with fabricated charges. While some prominent Human Rights Defenders have been
released after international pressure including from the UN Committee against
Torture that reviewed Azerbaijan’s fourth periodic report in November 2015,
several government critics remain in prison. The accused in the Nardaran case
have barely received international attention despite the repeated and severe
attack against their community. Already in 2002 the Ministry of Interior
carried out a similar operation arresting 28, killing one and sentencing 23
people for espionage for Iran. However, by the end of 2005 all detainees were
released. 
In this new
wave of attacks, that started in November 2015, a total of 78 people have been
prosecuted. More recently, in August 2016, the government has arrested two more
people Mr Fuad Ahmadli and Mr Faig Amirov for allegedly supporting Fethullah
Gulen who is accused by the Turkish government of attempting a military coup.
Actions requested:
Please write to the
authorities of Azerbaijan asking them to:
i. Guarantee fair trial to
all accused in the Nardaran case;
ii. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of detainees including Mr.
Taleh Bagirzadeh, Mr. Jahad Balakishiev, Mr. Shamil Abdylaliev, and Mr. Bahruz
Askerov;
iii. Conduct a thorough,
impartial, and transparent criminal investigation into the above-mentioned acts
of torture in order to identify those responsible, bring them before a
competent and impartial tribunal, and apply to them the sanctions
provided by the law;
iv. Refrain from torturing
members of the Shiite minority of Nardaran;
v. Stop any reprisals
against the detained, including solitary confinement, for complaining about
torture;
vi. Guarantee access to independent
medical examination and treatment to all 18 accused including Mr. Taleh
Bagirzadeh, Mr. Jahad Balakishiev, Mr. Shamil Abdylaliev, and Mr. Bahruz
Askerov; 
vii. Release from prison
all Human Rights Defenders and people detained for exercising their fundamental
human rights.
Addresses:
- Mr. Ilham Aliyev, President
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Office of the President of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, 19 Istiqlaliyyat St., Baku AZ1066, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 492
06 25, (+994) 412 92 28 68, E-mail: office@pa.gov.az, office@apparat.gov.az.
- Mr. Zakir Garalov,
Prosecutor General of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Prosecutor’s Office, 7 Nigar
Rafibeyli St., Baku, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 492 06 82, (+994) 12 492 26 63,
E-mail: z.qaralov@prosecutor.gov.az, info@prosecutor.gov.az. 
- Mr. Eldar Mahmudov,
Minister of National Security, Ministry of National Security of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, Parliament Avenue 14, Baku AZ1006, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12
493-76-22, E-mail: cpr@mns.gov.az.
- Mr. Ramil Usubov, Minister
of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Azerbaijani Republic,
Fax: (+994) 12 492 45 90.
- Mr. Elmar Mammadyarov, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Azerbaijan, E-mail: katiblik@mfa.gov.az.
- Mr. Fikrat F. Mammadov,
Minister of Justice in Azerbaijan, Inshaatchilar Prospekti, 1 Baku, Azerbaijan,
e-mail: contact@justice.gov.az; Fax (+994) 12 430 09 81.
- H.E. Mr. Murad N.
Najafbayli, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations
in Geneva, Route des Fayards 237, CH-1290 Versoix, Switzerland, Fax: (+41) 22
901 18 44, E-mail: geneva@mission.mfa.gov.az.
- Embassy of Azerbaijan in
Brussels, Avenue Moliere 464, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 2 345 91 85.
Please also write to the
diplomatic missions or embassies of Azerbaijan in your respective country.
For more information, please contact:
OMCT,
Nicole Bürli: Tel: +41 22 809 49 39; E-mail: nb[at]omct.org 