Iran:  Iran: Open letter concerning the extradition, torture and possible execution of two refugees
June 18, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2003 / JuneIran: Iran: Open letter concerning the extradition, torture and possible execution of two refugeesOpen Letter to President Khatami of the Islamic Republic of Iran   Geneva, June 18th 2003  Concerning: the extradition, torture and potential execution of Mr. Khodabandeh and Mr. Bassam   The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the world’s largest network of NGO’s fighting against torture, has been informed by reliable sources of serious concerns for two Iranian nationals, who currently have refugee status in Great Britain since granted refugee status between 1979 and 1980, and have been extradited from Syria to Iran, where they are allegedly being subjected to torture and may face execution.  According to our source, Mr. Abrahim Khodabandeh, an electrical engineer born May 3rd, 1953 in Tehran, (passport # RP 0195251) and Mr. Jamil Bassam, an electrical engineer born February 8th, 1954 in Tehran, (passport # RP 0157502), have resided in Great Britain for more than 25 years, where they have been granted asylum as political refugees. Both men are reportedly well known for their activities in Great Britain, where they are affiliated with exiled Iranian opposition group, the National Council of Resistance of Iran.   The two men allegedly travelled to Syria, having been issued travel documents by the UK, to visit members of their families who are living there. On April 18th, 2003, Mr. Khodabandeh and Mr. Bassam were arrested in Syria and were then held for several weeks without charges. They have allegedly been subjected to torture in Syrian prisons, before being forcefully sent to Tehran on Syrian Airlines flight no. 373 on Thursday, June 12th, 2003. The flight left Damascus at 7.40 pm and arrived in Tehran at 11.55 pm. Eyewitnesses have reported that the Iranian Intelligence Ministry officials came to the plane and took the two refugees away. British and American government officials and lawyers have reportedly attempted to prevent Mr. Khodabandeh and Mr. Bassam’s extradition to Iran. Syria, however, permitted the extradition, and there are now allegations that the two men are being subjected to torture in Iran and face possible execution.   OMCT vigorously condemns Syria’s alleged use of torture upon Mr. Khodabandeh and Mr. Bassam as well their subsequent extradition to Iran, where they have reportedly been taken to the notorious Evin prison and their lives are now in considerable danger. The forcible return of recognised refugees to a country where they face threats to their life or freedom is a violation of the principle of non-refoulement, which, as a principle of customary law, is binding upon Syria.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by for Mr. Khodabandeh and Mr. Bassam’s physical and psychological integrity, given that they have allegedly already been subjected to torture in Syria and are now facing further torture and the possibility of execution in Iran. OMCT urges your Excellency to allow immediate access to these prisoners by the UNHCR office in Tehran. OMCT further calls on your Excellency to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the two men during their detention in Iran and to immediately release the two men in the absence of valid legal charges, and allow them to leave the country and to return safely to Great Britain, where they have been granted political refugee status.   I thank you for the careful consideration that you will give this matter.   Yours sincerely,    Eric Sottas Director   Cc: 	His Excellency President Bashar al-Assad, President of the Syrian Arab Republic 	Rt Hon Jack Straw MP, UK Secretary of Sate for Foreign Affairs 	Mr. Theo van Boven, UN Special Rapporteur on Torture 