Turkey:  Continuing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ramazan Demir and Ay?e Acinikli, members of OHD
June 15, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2016 / JuneTurkey: Continuing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ramazan Demir and Ayşe Acinikli, members of OHD
New information
TUR 003 / 0316 / OBS 025.1
Judicial harassment / 
Arbitrary detention
Turkey
June 15, 2016
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Turkey.
New
information:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about continuing arbitrary
detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Ramazan Demir and Ms. Ayşe
Acinikli, members
of the Association of Lawyers for Freedom (Ozgurlukcu Hukukcular Dernegi –
OHD).
According
to the information received, on May 25, Judge Bulent Dalkiran, President of the
Istanbul 14th Criminal Court of Peace, assisted by magistrates
Mehmet Celik and Ferhat Korkmaz, denied the request for release that had been
filed by Mr. Demir and Ms. Acinikli's lawyers on May 18. The judge justified
his decision on the grounds that he had “not been able to hear the accused”.
It
has to be recalled that on April 6, 2016, Mr. Demir and Ms. Acinikli were
referred by the Istanbul Public Prosecutor Office to the Istanbul 3rd
Criminal Court of Peace, which remanded them in custody. As of issuing this
Urgent Appeal, both remain in pre-trial detention under terrorism-related
charges (see background information)[1].
The
first hearing against Mr. Ramazan Demir, Ms. Ayşe Acinikli, as well as nine
other OHD members, Messrs. İrfan Arasan, Hüseyin Boğatekin, Şefik
Çelik, Adem Çalışçı, Tamer Doğan, Mustafa Ruzgar, Ms. Ayşe
Gösterişlioğlu, Mr. Sinan Zincir and Ms. Raziye Ozturk[2],
is scheduled for June 22, 2016 before the 14th Heavy Penal Court.
The Observatory calls upon
the Turkish authorities to release immediately and unconditionally Mr. Ramazan
Demir and Ms. Ayşe Acinikli, as their detention is arbitrary since it only aims
at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities, and to put an end to
the ongoing harassment, including at judicial level, against them and more in
general against all human rights defenders and lawyers. The Observatory is also
concerned over the health conditions of Mr. Ramazan Demir, who reportedly lost
over 7 kilograms in detention.
The Observatory recalls
that this wave of arbitrary arrests and detentions is part of wide-range
anti-terrorism operations, started in late July 2015. Such operations turned
into a massive crackdown on some civil society organisations depicted as
“terrorist networks”. This campaign has been targeting dozens of peaceful
activists who have been involved in the monitoring of human rights violations
resulting from anti-terrorism operations and who have been advocating for a
peaceful resolution of the Kurdish issue[3].
These peaceful activists include human rights defenders, particularly Human
Rights Association (IHD) members, lawyers, political party representatives and
journalists[4].
The
Observatory draws the attention of the Turkish authorities on the Principle of
the United Nations Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers (attached), in
particular Principles 16, 18, and 20 on Guarantees for the functioning of
lawyers, and Principle 23 on Freedom of expression and association.
Background
information:
In
the early morning of March 16, 2016, OHD members Messrs. İrfan Arasan, Hüseyin
Boğatekin, Şefik Çelik, Adem Çalışçı, Tamer Doğan, Ramazan Demir and Mustafa
Ruzgar, as well as Ms. Ayşe Acinikli and Ms. Ayşe Gösterişlioğlu were arrested
and saw their houses in Istanbul raided by the police, within the framework of
an anti-terrorism operation which targeted at least 89 individuals in several
cities (Aydın, Diyarbakır, Bingöl, Ağrı,
Konya, Bitlis, Erzurum, Mus, Mardin, Şırnak, Siirt, Elazığ, İzmir, Muğla, Urfa,
Antep, Maraş and Sakarya). 
The nine lawyers were arrested on charges of
“membership of an illegal organisation” reportedly for events that took place
between 2011 and 2014. During their interrogation, they were questioned about
interviews they gave in the media, complaints they lodged before the European
Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) and visits to their clients. According to our
information, the authorities have yet to disclose the reasons behind the
alleged offences that led to the searches and arrests. To date the case file on
the arrests remains confidential pursuant to the Article 153.2 of the Turkish
Criminal Code Procedure (No. 5271). 
On March 17, the lawyers were to plead the case of the
46 lawyers tried for participating in the defence of Mr. Abdullah Öcalan, one
of the founding members of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK). During the
hearing, the lawyers who could be present said that they could not defend
adequately their clients whilst their colleagues were in custody. A delegation
of lawyers from France, the Netherlands, Switzerland and the United Kingdom was
also attending the trial. 
Moreover, as a civil society group attempted to
deliver a press statement outside the court to denounce the illegal arrest and
detention of the nine lawyers, the gathering was attacked by Turkish police in
riot gear, equipped with tear gas and water cannons.
On March 18, Istanbul First Criminal Court of Peace,
chaired by judge Mr. Bakır Altun ordered the release of Messrs. İrfan Arasan
and Mustafa Ruzgar.
On March 19, the Istanbul First Criminal Court of
Peace ordered the release of the seven remaining ÖHD lawyers arguing that the
evidence provided was insufficient and that detention was a disproportionate
measure of restraint under the circumstances. The public prosecutor, Mr. Orhan Aydın,
objected this decision in a hearing that lasted 13 hours. As the court
confirmed its decision, the public prosecutor objected the court's decision.
On
March 21, the Istanbul First Criminal Court
of Peace rejected the public prosecutor’s objection a second time. The public
prosecutor filed an objection before the Istanbul Second Criminal Court of
Peace. 
On March 22, the Istanbul Second Criminal Court of
Peace, chaired by Judge Mr. Durmuş Karacalı, accepted the objection and ordered
the arrest of four lawyers, namely Hüseyin Boğatekin, Ayşe Acinikli, Ramazan
Demir and Ayşe Gösterişlioğlu, together
with 17 other individuals. The court argued that there was enough
evidence showing that they had committed the alleged crime, and that they could
run away or damage the evidence. The court did not inform the defense lawyers
of the hearing and failed also to ask for counter arguments. The defense
lawyers filed an objection against this order. 
The same day, Mr. Hüseyin Bogatekin and Ms. Ayse
Gösterişlioğlu were arrested and detained in the courthouse, while the police
could not find Ayşe Acinikli and Ramazan Demir. Overnight, the Istanbul Eight
Criminal Court of Peace, chaired by Mr. Atila Öztürk, heard Hüseyin Bogatekin
and Ayse Gösterişlioğlu. The court limited the number of defense lawyers to
three per accused. It decided to remand them to detention in Metris Prison for
males in Istanbul and Bakırköy Prison for females respectively.
Actions
requested:
Please
write to the authorities in Turkey, urging them to:
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. İrfan Arasan, Ayşe Acinikli, Hüseyin
Boğatekin, Şefik Çelik, Adem Çalışçı, Ayşe BaşarTamer Doğan, Ramazan Demir and
Mustafa Ruzgar, and Ms. Ayşe Acinikli and Ms. Ayşe Gösterişlioğlu as well as of all human rights
defenders in Turkey;
ii. Release Mr. Ramazan Demir and Ms. Ayşe
Acinikli immediately and unconditionally, as their detention is arbitrary since
it only aims at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities;
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment,
including at judicial level, against Messrs. İrfan Arasan, Ayşe Acinikli, Hüseyin Boğatekin, Şefik Çelik,
Adem Çalışçı, Ayşe BaşarTamer Doğan, Ramazan Demir and Mustafa Ruzgar, and Ms.
Ayşe Acinikli and Ms. Ayşe Gösterişlioğlu,
as well as all human rights defenders in Turkey;
iv.
Put an end to the crackdown on civil society under the pretext of countering
terrorism and publicly recognise the legitimate role of human rights defenders
in line with Turkey’s international commitments;
v.
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-
its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
-
its Article 6(a), which foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and
in association with others, to participate in peaceful activities against
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”;
- its Article 9, which provides that “in the
exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the promotion and
protection of human rights as referred to in the present Declaration, […]
everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, inter
alia: […] (c) to offer and provide professionally qualified legal assistance or
other relevant advice and assistance in defending human rights and fundamental
freedoms”.
- its Article 11, which provides that “everyone
has the right, individually and in association with others, to the lawful
exercise of his or her occupation or profession”. 
-
its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary
action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights
referred to in the present Declaration”;
vi.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Turkey.

Addresses:
·      
President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Cumhurbaşkanlığı
Külliyesi 06560 Beştepe-Ankara, Tel: (+90 312) 525 55 55, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58
31, E-mail: contact@tccb.gov.tr
·      
Prime Minister of Turkey Ahmet
Davutoglu tel: (0312) 422 10 00 ; Fax: +90 (312)
403 62 82
·      
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, No: 8 Balgat / Ankara
- Turkey 06100; Tel : +90 (312) 292 10 00
·      
Minister of Justice, Mr. Bekir Bozdağ, 06659 Kizilay, Ankara; Tel: +90
(312) 417 77 70; Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33 70; E-mail: info@adalet.gov.tr
·      
Minister
of Interior, Mr. Efkan Ala; tel: +90 (312) 422 40 00; Fax: +90 (312)
425 61 30; Email: ozelkalem@icisleri.gov.tr
·      
Ambassador Izzet Selim
Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the European Union in Brussels, Avenue
des Arts 36-38, 1000 Bruxelles, Belgium; Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50
·      
Ambassador Mehmet Ferden
Çarikçi, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in Geneva, Chemin du
Petit-Saconnex 28B 1211 Geneva 19, Tel: +41 22 918 50 80; Fax: +41 22 734 08
59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Turkey in your respective
country.



[1]                
Besides, some members of the Association of Families of Prisoners (TUAD),
composed essentially of relatives of convicted and detained persons, are also
reportedly targeted.


[2]                 On March 16, 2016, an arrest
warrant was issued against Mr. Sinan Zincir and Ms.
Raziye Ozturk, who turned themselves in to the 14th Heavy Penal Court on May
11, 2016. Both were released after the hearing.


[3]           See among others the Observatory Urgent Appeals TUR 001 /
1015 / OBS 081 of October 1, 2015; TUR 001 / 1015 / OBS 081.1 of October 6,
2015; TUR 003 / 1215 / OBS 111 of December 21, 2015; TUR 001 / 0116 / OBS 010
of January 19, 2016; and TUR 002 / 0216 / OBS 017, of February 11, 2016. 


[4]                 For more information see FIDH Press
Release of 21 September 2015. 