Uzbekistan:  Uzbekistan: a child arbitrary arrested and tortured
January  2, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2002 / JanuaryUzbekistan: Uzbekistan: a child arbitrary arrested and torturedCase UZB 310102.CC CHILD CONCERN Torture/arbitrary detention  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrest and torture of Dildosh, a 15 year old boy in Djizak, Uzbekistan.  According to the information received, Dildosh, son of Mavliuda Eshanhanova, was arrested by two police officials during the night of January 14, 2002, allegedly for committing a robbery. While in custody, Dildosh was subjected to torture until the next morning. He was beaten in the kidney region and forced to put on a gas mask. The boy was most severely tortured by an official named Olim. He allegedly bound the boy to a table and started pricking him with a needle. When Dildosh lost consciousness, the official poured cold water on him. They also forced a large nail into his rectum.  Dildosh was discharged the next day, as the person having actually committed the robbery had been found. The boy was subsequently brought home, where he fainted after entering the house. The boy had to stay in bed for 6 days. According to his mother, the boy’s body was covered with bruises. She wanted to bring her son to the court for forensic-medical examination, but the policemen had asked the boy to be silent.   The International Secretariat of OMCT condemns the arbitrary arrest and torture of Dildosh and is gravely concerned by his psychological integrity, taking into account his young age and the traumatic secondary effects that such a treatment might leave on him.   OMCT recalls that, as a State party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Uzbekistan has to abide by the articles of the Convention. More specifically, article 37 states that “no child shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment,” and that “every child deprived of liberty shall be treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person...”.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Uzbekistan urging them to:  i.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of this incident in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.	guarantee adequate reparation, including physical and psychological recovery, to Dildosh, and ensure him social reintegration;  iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, especially the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  Addresses  President of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Islam Abduganievich KARIMOV, Respublika Uzbekistan, 700000 g. Tashkent, pr. Uzbekistansky, Rezidentsia Prezidenta, Prezidentu Respubliki Uzbekistan, KARIMOVU I.A. Fax: ( 998 71) 139 53 15  Minister of Justice of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Siradzhuddin MIRSAFAYEV, Respublika Uzbekistan, 700047 g. Tashkent. ul. Sayilgokh, 5 Ministerstvo yustitsii Respubliki Uzbekistan Ministru MIRSAFAYEVU S. Fax: (998 71) 133 51 76  Oliy Majlis Commissioner for Human Rights, Sayora RASHIDOVA (Ms), Respublika Uzbekistan, 700008 g. Tashkent, pl. Mustakillik, 2 Oliy Majlis Respubliki Uzbekistan, Upolnomochennoy po pravam, heloveka pri Oliy Majlis, RASHIDOVOY S. Fax: (998 71) 139 85 55  Please also write to the embassies of Uzbekistan in your respective country.  Geneva, January 31, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 