Bahrain:  Ongoing arbitrary arrests and judicial harassment of human rights defenders
August  9, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / AugustBahrain: Ongoing arbitrary arrests and judicial harassment of human rights defenders


PRESS RELEASE -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
BAHRAIN: Ongoing arbitrary arrests and judicial
harassment of human rights defenders
 
Paris-Geneva, August 9, 2012 – As new cases of arbitrary arrests and
ongoing judicial harassment have been reported in Bahrain, the Observatory
remains extremely concerned with the very repressive climate faced by human
rights defenders in the country.
 
On
August 2, 2012, Ms. Zainab Al-Khawaja was once again arrested while she
was protesting alone at Al Qadam roundabout against the arbitrary detention of
her father Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, founder of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR), former President of
the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), and former MENA Director at Front
Line. While arresting Ms. Al-Khawaja, police officers verbally
assaulted her and threatened her with reprisals as she was legitimately
resisting their orders to give a blood sample. She was finally forcibly led to
the Fort Prison Hospital before being transferred to Isa Town Detention Center,
where she was kept handcuffed despite a serious leg injury sustained after security forces shot her with tear gas canisters at close range. On August 4, 2012,
the Public Prosecution remanded her into custody for seven days.
 
The
Observatory further recalls that Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the BCHR, Director of the GCHR and FIDH
Deputy Secretary General, has faced constant judicial
harassment, as four cases have been brought against him since May 2012 in relation
with his human rights activities. Mr.
Rajab is still facing three of this cases. In particular, he has been detained
since July 9, 2012 and sentenced to 3 months' imprisonment for alleged libel
after he tweeted the following on June 2: "Khalifa, leave the residents
of Al Muharraq, its Sheikhs and its elderly. Everyone knows that you are not
popular here, and if it wasn't for the subsidies, they wouldn't have gone out
to welcome you. When will you step down?"
 
      After
his arrest and sentencing, his lawyers immediately filed two appeals. One of
them requests the suspension of the sentence on the grounds that the
investigation did not provide any solid legal basis to convict Mr. Rajab. After
several postponments, this appeal was scheduled to be considered by the Higher
Appeal Court on August 5, 2012. However, on that day, the judge decided again
to postpone the hearing to August 12, officially in order to call the police
officer who was in charge of the investigation procedure to the stand.
 
      The
Observatory is deeply concerned about this new postponement, as its only aim
seems to be to keep Mr. Nabeel Rajab in detention as long as possible, by
delaying the examination of the request filed by his lawyers against his
3-month imprisonment sentence. The Observatory reiterates its call on the
Bahraini authorities to immediately and unconditionally release him as his
detention is arbitrary and only aims at sanctioning his human rights
activities.
 
The
Observatory firmly denounces these new developments against human rights
activities in Bahrain, and recalls the authorities’ obligation to comply with
the international human rights instruments ratified by the Kingdom of Bahrain,
and with the 1998 Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
 
For more information,
please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur Manet: +
33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·     
OMCT: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 