Thailand:  In landmark review, UN calls for protection of women human rights defenders
July 24, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2017 / JulyThailand: In landmark review, UN calls for protection of women human rights defenders





Bangkok-Geneva-Paris,
July 24, 2017: The Thai Government must
fully implement the recommendations made by the United Nations women’s rights
body to protect women human rights defenders, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership) said today.
 
On July 24, 2017, the UN Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) released
its Concluding Observations on Thailand following the review of
the country’s combined sixth and seventh periodic reports on July 5, 2017. The
Committee oversees State parties’ compliance with their legal obligations under
the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
 
“For the first time, the CEDAW
acknowledged that women human rights defenders are under attack in Thailand.
It’s time for the Thai Government to stop denying that women human rights
defenders are being targeted and take urgent measures to protect them instead,” said FIDH Vice-President
Guissou Jahangiri.
 
In
its Concluding Observations, the Committee expressed serious concern that women
human rights defenders have increasingly become targets of lawsuits,
harassment, violence, and intimidation by authorities and business enterprises
due to their work. The Committee called on the Thai Government to adopt and
implement, without delay, effective measures for the protection of women human
rights defenders to enable them to freely undertake their important work
without fear or threat of lawsuits, harassment, violence, or intimidation. It
also urged Thailand to effectively investigate, prosecute, and adequately
punish all cases of harassment, violence, and intimidation against women human
rights defenders, and provide effective remedies to victims.
 
“Women human rights defenders remain
at risk of attacks, harassment, threats, and intimidation. The Thai Government
must go beyond words and show it is genuinely committed to implementing the UN
Committee recommendations and ensuring the protection and safety of women human
rights defenders,” said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
The concerns and recommendations
expressed by the CEDAW echoed those raised by the Observatory, Protection
International (PI), and the Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development
(APWLD) in their joint report “In harm’s
way: Women human rights defenders in Thailand.” The report, released
ahead of Thailand’s CEDAW review, documented the pattern of repression of women
human rights defenders in Thailand, especially rural women, since the 22 May
2014 coup d’état.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
For more
information, please contact:
·     FIDH: Samuel Hanryon / Audrey Couprie: (+ 33) 1 43 55 25 18
·     OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: (+41) 22 809 49 39 