Cambodia:  Release immediately land rights activist Yorm Bopha!
November 19, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Cambodia / 2013 / NovemberCambodia: Release immediately land rights activist Yorm Bopha!

TAKE ACTION! 
 
Please take action to call for the
end of the judicial harassment against land rights activist YORM BOPHA! To do
so, kindly copy the enclosed letter and send it to the addresses provided.
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken at omct@omct.org.
Thank you for taking action!
 
·    
Mr. Hun
Sen, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of
Cambodia, Fax: +855 23 36 06 66 / 855 23 88 06 24 (c/o Council of Ministers),
Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh/ cppparty@gmail.com 
·    
Mr. H.E.
Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of Justice, No 240, Sothearos Blvd, Phnom Penh,
Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: 023 364119. Email: moj@cambodia.gov.kh
·    
Mr. Sar
Kheng, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior,
275 Norodom Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: + 855 23 212708. Email:
moi@interior.gov.kh
·    
Mr. Hor
Nam Hong, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, 161 Preah
Sisowath Quay, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: + 855 23 21 61 44 / + 855
23 21 69 39. Email: mfaicasean@bigpond.com.kh
·    
Ambassador
Mr. Sun Suon, Permanent Mission of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva,
Chemin de Taverney 3, Case postale 213, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, Switzerland, Fax:
+ 41 22 788 77 74. Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh; cambodge@bluewin.ch 
 
Please also write
to diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective countries.
 
 
Your
Excellency,
 
I have
been informed by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) that on 22
November 2013 an appeal hearing for land and housing rights activist
YORM Bopha will be held at
Cambodia’s Supreme Court in Phnom Penh.
 
Ms. Yorm Bopha is
a 29-year old land rights activist from
the Boeung Kak Lake community in Phnom Penh. She has been actively involved in
her community’s struggle against forced evictions and emerged at the forefront
of a campaign for the release of thirteen of her fellow activists (the “Boeung
Kak 13”) who were arrested, charged, convicted and imprisoned as a result of a
peaceful land rights demonstration in May 2012.
 
Ms.
Yorm Bopha was arrested on 4 September 2012 and is currently serving
a two-year prison sentence after being found guilty on bogus charges of assault
widely perceived as related to her activism. Her conviction was upheld on
appeal on 14 June 2013 when the original custodial sentence of three years was
reduced to two on the grounds that she did not directly commit violence. It is
alleged by the court that she and her husband masterminded the assault of two
suspected thieves. Her husband’s full three-year prison sentence was suspended
by the Phnom Penh Municipal Court, while Ms. Yorm Bopha was immediately
detained.
 
Ms.
Yorm Bopha then appealed to the Supreme Court. In the
meantime, she remains detained in correctional center Police Judiciaire
Prison, Phnom Penh, where she is expected to serve
the rest of her sentence until September 2014. The OMCT was able to meet Ms.
Yorm Bopha in September 2013, during a mission in
Cambodia in the framework of its project “Defend the defenders”. She was in good health at the time of OMCT’s visit.
 
The
facts and circumstances of her arrest, as well as a thorough examination of the
charges and evidence produced against her, clearly suggest that the criminal
proceedings against Ms. Yorm Bopha were instigated in retaliation for her
activities as a high-profile land and housing rights advocate. The judicial
process was marred by significant irregularities and her fundamental rights
have been repeatedly breached. Her sentencing thus represents a gross
miscarriage of justice and is yet another blow to rule of law and the
credibility of Cambodia’s judicial system.
 
I
am concerned that Ms. Yorm Bopha is being detained merely for being at the forefront of
the campaign in favour of the Boeung
Kak Lake community’s rights and calling for the release of community
members who were arbitrarily arrested in May 2012 after protesting their forced evictions. As such Ms. Yorm Bopha’s imprisonment amounts to arbitrary detention as it merely aims at
obstructing her human rights activities, therefore contradicting international human rights
standards and Cambodia’s obligations. Accordingly, she
should be released immediately and unconditionally.
 
More generally I urge
the authorities of Cambodia to conform to the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
international human rights instruments ratified by Cambodia.
 
I thank you for your attention to this urgent matter.
 
Sincerely yours,





 
As
  an appeal hearing for land and housing rights activist YORM BOPHA will be
  held at Cambodia’s Supreme Court on 22 November 2013, the World Organisation
  Against Torture (OMCT) reiterates its call to the Cambodian authorities for Ms. Yorm Bopha's immediate and unconditional release.
 



 
Ms. YORM Bopha is a 29-year old land rights activist from the Boeung Kak Lake
community in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
 
She
has been actively involved in her community’s struggle against forced evictions
and emerged at the forefront of a campaign for the release of thirteen of her
fellow activists (the “Boeung Kak 13”) who were arrested, charged, convicted
and imprisoned as a result of a peaceful land rights demonstration in May 2012.
 
Ms.
Yorm Bopha was arrested on 4 September 2012 and is currently serving
a two-year prison sentence after being found guilty on bogus charges of assault
widely perceived as related to her activism. Her conviction was upheld on
appeal on 14 June 2013 when the original custodial sentence of three years was
reduced to two on the grounds that she did not directly commit violence. It is
alleged by the court that she and her husband masterminded the assault of two
suspected thieves. Her husband’s full three-year prison sentence was suspended
by the Phnom Penh Municipal Court, while Ms. Yorm Bopha was immediately
detained.
 
Ms.
Yorm Bopha then appealed to the Supreme Court. In the
meantime, she remains detained in correctional center Police Judiciaire
Prison, Phnom Penh, where she is expected to serve
the rest of her sentence until September 2014. The OMCT was able to meet Ms.
Yorm Bopha in September 2013, during a mission in
Cambodia in the framework of its project “Defend
the defenders”. She was in good health at the
time of OMCT’s visit.
 
On 22 November 2013, an appeal hearing for Yorm
Bopha will be held at Cambodia's Supreme Court
in Phnom Penh.
 
The
facts and circumstances of her arrest, as well as a thorough examination of the
charges and evidence produced against her, clearly suggest that the criminal
proceedings against Ms. Yorm Bopha were instigated in retaliation for her
activities as a high-profile land and housing rights advocate. The judicial
process was marred by significant irregularities and her fundamental rights
have been repeatedly breached. Her sentencing thus represents a gross
miscarriage of justice and is yet another blow to rule of law and the
credibility of Cambodia’s judicial system.
 
The
OMCT considers that Ms. Yorm Bopha is being
detained merely for being at the forefront of the campaign in favour of the Boeung Kak Lake community’s
rights and calling for the release of community members who were arbitrarily arrested in May 2012 after protesting their forced
evictions. As such Ms. Yorm Bopha’s imprisonment amounts to arbitrary
detention as it merely aims at obstructing her human rights activities, therefore contradicting international
human rights standards and Cambodia’s obligations. Accordingly, she should be released immediately and
unconditionally.
 
The OMCT more generally
urges the authorities of Cambodia to conform to the United Nations Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
international human rights instruments ratified by Cambodia.
 
TAKE ACTION! Help us
release land
rights activist Yorm Bopha!
 
To do so,
please send a letter to the authorities of Cambodia calling upon them to
end the harassment against land rights activist YORM BOPHA. You just need to
click on the “Take action” button above, copy the enclosed letter and send it
to the addresses provided.
 
Thank
you!
 
For
more information, check out
our latest statements:
- Press
Release, 4 September 2013: “Release immediately land
rights activist Yorm Bopha, arbitrarily detained since one year!”
- Urgent
Appeal, 18 June 2013: “Upholding of the conviction
of housing rights activist Yorm Bopha”
- Urgent
Appeal, 28 March 2013: “Refusal by the Supreme
Court to grant bail to Ms. Yorm Bopha”
 
Check
out also the Free Yorm Bopha Campaigns Page of the Cambodian Center for Human Rights (CCHR),
OMCT network member in Cambodia and Download Yorm Bopha Timeline here 