Press release: The african Commission finally adpots a "focal point" on the situation of defenders of human rights in Africa
December  3, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / 2003 / DecemberPress release: The african Commission finally adpots a "focal point" on the situation of defenders of human rights in Africa'PRESS RELEASE    The African Commission finally establishes a focal point   on Human Rights defenders in Africa !    Paris - Geneva, 3rd December 2003 - Within the framework of their joint programme, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, the FIDH and the OMCT welcome the establishment by the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights of a focal point on human rights defenders at its 34th Ordinary Session held in Banjul, Gambia, from 6 to 20 November 2003.     The Observatory welcomes the appointment of Commissioner Jainaba Johm to head the focal point on Human Rights defenders and offers her its full support.    The creation of this focal point is a genuine step forward, towards which the Observatory has been working for several years. The Observatory has since 1997 unremittingly worked to achieve recognition of the role played by Human Rights defenders and the need to protect them at regional level.    To this end, the Observatory has actively participated for several years in the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights, and has contributed to the creation of an item about human rights defenders on the agenda of each of its sessions. At each session of the African Commission, the Observatory has drawn Commissioners' attention to the violations and to the threats against defenders in Africa. In 2002, the Observatory and the International Service for Human Rights also facilitated attendance by the Special Representative of the UN Secretary General on Human Rights Defenders, Mrs. Hina Jilani, at the Pretoria session where she met with Commissioners, government representatives and NGOs.    This regional mechanism to protect defenders in Africa complements existing instruments : the post of the Special Representative of the UN Secretary General on human rights defenders (2000) and the special Human Rights Defenders Unit within the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (2001).    This ongoing process holds out hope for all those who struggle day by day to defend and foster rights and fundamental freedoms in Africa and who are under threat because of their commitment. It also recognizes the role they play in working for peace, democracy and the Rule of Law.    The Observatory stays at the disposal of Commissioner Jainaba Johm, in order to provide her with the necessary information to help her in fulfilling her mandate. The Observatory calls on Commissioner Jainaba Johm to work closely with the UN Special Representative on Human Rights Defenders, Mrs. Hina Jilani, and her team.    The Observatory also welcomes the creation by the Commission of focal points on the prevention of torture and on freedom of expression and of a focal point on refugees and displaced persons in Africa.    Press Contact : FIDH, 01 43 55 25 18 ; OMCT : 00 41 22 809 49 39 