Bahrain:  Acts of harassment and intimidation against Messrs. Abdulla Alderazi and Essa Al-Ghayeb
May 27, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2011 / MayBahrain: Acts of harassment and intimidation against Messrs. Abdulla Alderazi and Essa Al-Ghayeb
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
BHR 007 / 0511 / OBS 083
Acts of harassment and Intimidation
Bahrain
May 27, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in Bahrain.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the 
summons of Mr. Abdulla Alderazi, Secretary General of the Bahrain Human Rights Society (BHRS), for 
interrogation by the Military Prosecutor as well as about the travel ban imposed 
on Mr. Essa Al-Ghayeb, BHRS Deputy Secretary General. 
 
According to the information received, on May 22, 2011, Mr. 
Abdulla Alderazi was summonsed to the Office of the Military Prosecution for 
an interrogation without being given any explanations. When he got to the 
military premises, Mr. Alderazi was interrogated for more than two hours during 
which he was extensively questioned about his human rights activities and his 
communication with both international and local media outlets, like 
Al-Jazeera and Al-Manar. Mr. Alderazi was also accused of participating in the peaceful 
demonstrations movement that took place in February 2011, although he reminded 
his interrogators that the right to peaceful assembly was protected by the 
Constitution of Bahrain. 
 
Mr. Alderazi was told that he might be referred to the military court 
for trial on the charges of “spreading false information about Bahrain” pursuant 
to Articles 167 and 176 of the Criminal Code of Bahrain, punishable by six 
months to one year of imprisonment and/or a fine of 100 Bahraini Dinar (187 
Euros). He immediately denied these allegations. 
 
In addition, on April 17, 2011, Mr. Alderazi received a letter that “suspended 
until final decision” him from his work at the University of Bahrain where he 
was teaching as a lecturer in the English department. To date, he remains 
without further news about this new measure against him. To that extent, the 
Observatory recalls that hundreds of Bahraini have recently been dismissed from 
their positions for their assumed participation in the demonstrations or for 
their human rights activities. The Observatory further recalls that on September 
8, 2010, the Ministry of Development and Social affairs published a ministerial 
order ordering the dissolution of the Board of Directors of BHRS, the dismissal 
of its Secretary General and the appointment of an employee of the Ministry to 
administer the NGO until the holding of a general assembly, pursuant to Article 
23 of the Law of Association No. 21 of 1989. On September 19, 2010, the Board of 
Directors lodged a complaint against the Ministry. The case was referred to the 
Urgent Matters Commission, which has failed to date to decide on the 
matter.
 
Furthermore, on May 26, 2011, Mr. Essa Al-Ghayeb, who was due to 
participate in a seminar on the death penalty in Kuwait taking place on May 
27-28, was prevented by passport control officers from boarding the plane at the 
Manama International Airport and informed that he was banned from travelling. 
Indeed, since the entry into force of a state of emergency on March 15, 2011, 
the authorities may issue travel bans without providing further details nor any 
means to challenge it.
 
The Observatory denounces these acts of intimidation and reprisals against Messrs. Abdulla Alderazi and Essa Al-Ghayeb, which seem to merely aim at sanctioning their human rights 
activities and preventing them from carrying out such activities. 
 
The Observatory recalls that dozens of human rights defenders 
are currently facing charges or threatened thereof for their alleged 
support of the social protest demonstrations of February 2011 or face travel 
bans to prevent them from addressing regional and international fora about human rights 
violations committed in Bahrain.
 
More generally, the Observatory is also increasingly concerned about 
the context of great insecurity that human rights defenders face in Bahrain, in 
light of the current violent repression of protests. The Observatory once again 
calls for the immediate end to the harsh repression, which blatantly 
violates fundamental human rights such as freedom of expression and peaceful 
assembly. 
 
Actions requested:
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
i.         
Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. 
Alderazi and Essa Al-Ghayeb as well as all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
ii.       
Put an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial and 
administrative level, against Messrs. Alderazi and Essa Al-Ghayeb as well as against all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 

 
iii.      
Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations 
General Assembly, in particular :
-          
its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and 
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels” ;
-          
its Article 5.b, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, at the national and international 
levels, (…) to form, join and participate in non-governmental organizations, 
associations or groups”;
-          
its article A.b, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others (…) freely to publish, impart or 
disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms”;
-          
and its Article 12.2 which states that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
iv.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 
 
Addresses: 
 
·         
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA , King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 
587
·         
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: 
+973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032
·         
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic 
Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·         Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 
chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, 
Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 
50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your 
respective countries. *** Paris-Geneva, May 27, 2011
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29 