Kenya:  Press Release: High Court orders the commencement of the PBO Act without further delays, 1,000 days after its signing into law
November  4, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2016 / NovemberKenya: Press Release: High Court orders the commencement of the PBO Act without further delays, 1,000 days after its signing into lawKenya_2016.11.04_PR1 page / 146 KB


THE
OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE

 
Geneva-Paris,
November 4, 2016
– “A week after a fact-finding mission to Kenya, we
welcome the High Court ruling on the long awaited commencement of the 2013
Public Benefit Organisations Act (PBO Act), which civil society has been waiting for almost four years”, said the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders today.
 
On October
31, 2016, Justice J. Onguto of the High Court ruled that the Cabinet Secretary
of the Ministry of Devolution and Planning, Mr. Mwangi Kiunjuri, had 14 days to
set and gazette the
date of entry into force of the PBO Act[1] 2013. Justice Onguto further declared
that the delayed gazetting of the Act for more than 1,000 days since its
signing into law on January 14, 2013, was “an abuse of discretion”, which should be exercised in public
interest, and deemed it “unconstitutional”.
 
The Plaintiff, Trusted
Society of Human Rights Alliance, brought a judicial review action against the
Minister, following his failure to implement the PBO Act, as well as his
attempt to restrict freedom of association through the appointment of a
governmental taskforce in 2015 which proposed draconian amendments to the
already adopted legislation. The Court also declared unlawful
those amendments, since, although they were defeated thanks to the advocacy
work of the Kenyan civil society, they were made before the coming into force
of the law and would therefore infringe on the principle of separation of
powers.
 
“Last week, Kenyan civil society organisations stressed
to the Observatory’s mission that the delay
in the implementation of the PBO Act has for too long left the door open for
abuses against them. For the past four years, despite the adoption of a legal
framework conducive to human rights work, NGOs have continued to operate under
the threat of arbitrary de-registrations and asset freezes, continuous attacks
and smearing campaigns”,
declared Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
The Observatory welcomes the
Kenyan High Court ruling which at last ordered the entry into force of the 2013
PBO Act. This should allow for a more open space for civil society work in
Kenya, with clear straightforward criteria regarding NGOs’ registration,
enhanced accountability, set timelines for processing applications, as well as
tax incentives and benefits for organisations conducting “public benefit
activities”.
 
“The Kenyan government still has a long way to go to make the PBO Act a
tool that effectively facilitate NGO work. The Cabinet Secretary of the
Ministry of Devolution and Planning should first of all implement the High
Court ruling by immediately operationalising the PBO Act. Secondly, the Kenyan
authorities should ensure that the rights guaranteed by the Act will not be
restricted by any subsequent legislation or regulation”,
said FIDH President, Dimitris Christopoulos. 


For more information, please
contact:
• OMCT: Chiara Cosentino: +41228094937
• FIDH:
Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33143552518





[1]                 The PBO Act is available on: http://pboact.or.ke/resources/documents/category/3-legislation 