Joint Statement: NGOs express their concern for the lives of death row prisoners after actions taken at risk of imminent execution by Saudi government
November 27, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2018 / NovemberJoint Statement: NGOs express their concern for the lives of death row prisoners after actions taken at risk of imminent execution by Saudi government
Joint Statement:
NGOs express their concern for the lives of death row prisoners after actions
takenat risk of imminent execution by Saudi government
ESOHR, ADHRB and OMCT are concerned over the imminent
execution in Saudi Arabia of 15 individuals and call on the government to annul
their death sentences. 
On 1 November 2018, the case of 12 men convicted of spying for Iran and
spreading the Shia faith, including that of Abbas Al-Hassan, was transferred to
the Presidency of the State Security (PSS) by Royal Decree, indicating what may
be their imminent execution, despite concerns about the fairness of
their trials by the international community and the United
Nations. The PSS was established by royal decree in mid-2017, with the intelligence
and security capabilities previously held by the Ministry of Interior and
directly overseen by the King. With the ratification of the King, this case
will mark the first death penalty case to come before this body.
During trial, which was held in breach of basic fair
trial rights, a number of the defendants confirmed before the judge that
during interrogation they had been subjected to torture to extract confessions.
In spite of this, their sentences were based on evidence obtained under these
conditions. Those arrested and tried additionally indicated that they were denied
access to legal representation during questioning, and that their lawyers were
not allotted sufficient time to adequately present a proper defense. Moreover,
a number of the charges that the defendants faced
did not constitute crimes under international law, including dissemination of
the Shia faith. 


In a separate case, according to sources close to the families, three other
young men sentenced to death were transferred to Riyadh on 7 November 2018. This
included Mustafa al-Khayat, convicted on charges such as participating in demonstrations,
disrupting security, and carrying weapons. Although their location is currently
unknown, it is believed that these individuals were transferred to Haer prison days after an
exceptional visit from their families. The move bears concerning similarities
to executions that occurred in July 2017, when four prisoners were moved to the
capital to enforce their death sentences. Similar steps were also taken in the
case of Sheikh Nimr, executed in 2016. 
The Saudi government’s record of unfair trials and executions have
previously attracted the attention of UN human rights experts, who have issued
repeated urgent appeals urging the Kingdom to ensure
fair trial rights and to halt the execution of prisoners accused of espionage
for Iran as well as death sentences on children. The UN Committee against Torture had also raised these concerns in their
recommendations to Saudi Arabia during the country’s review in 2016. 
Given the recent measures taken by the Saudi government to refer the 12
men’s case to the PSS and to relocate the prisoners to Haer prison as well as the
Kingdom’s poor human rights track record, we express serious concerns for the
safety and physical and mental integrity of the 15 individuals, who may be executed at any
time without their families being notified. 
We call for the Saudi government to comply with its obligations under international
human rights law, including the Convention against Torture, halt the executions
of the 15 men and annul their death sentences. We also call for any re-trial to
be conducted in accordance with international law and standards in order to ensure that fair
trial rights are respected. 