India:  Historic Supreme Court Case on Extrajudicial Killings in Manipur Must be Complied with and Implemented
September 26, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / India / 2018 / SeptemberIndia: Historic Supreme Court Case on Extrajudicial Killings in Manipur Must be Complied with and Implemented

Geneva, 26 September
2018
The
World Organization Against Torture (OMCT), the principal global coalition
against torture, is deeply concerned about attempts to delay, frustrate and
dilute one of the most significant rule of law judgements rendered in Asia over
the past years. The decision must be implemented, victims, witnesses and human
rights defenders protected, and attempts for a de facto class impunity for law
enforcement and the army firmly rejected. 
The
Supreme Court of India examined the case of 1,528 alleged extrajudicial
killings carried out by the police and security forces in Manipur in two
landmark judgements in 2016 and 2017. It was a historic step towards addressing
grave human rights violations and a key turning point to come to terms with
past impunity. The cases were brought to the Supreme Court in 2012 by victims,
their families and nongovernmental groups in Manipur. Some of the cases date
back to 1979 and the most recent ones are from 2012. The victims’ families and
human rights organizations around the world have applauded the historic
judgments, some of which have been waiting for their right to truth, justice
and redress for almost 40 years. 
The
long-awaited Supreme Court judgement of 2016 established that any allegations on
the use of excessive or retaliatory force by uniformed personnel resulting in
death required a thorough inquiry into the incident and that use of such force
was never permissible, including in operations led against suspected insurgents
and terrorists. Further, the Court stressed the importance of investigations
and that legal judgements for a much broader truth-seeking approach is required,
taking into account the magnitude of the extrajudicial executions. Following
this worldwide acclaimed judgement, in July 2017 the Supreme Court directed the
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to examine 98 killings by police, army,
and paramilitary forces in Manipur. Despite some initial delays, the CBI
investigation has moved forward, raising the hopes of the victims’ families to
at last obtain justice and redress. 
Yet
more than a year after the 2017 judgement, there are serious concerns about
attempts to defeat the very meaning of the landmark ruling. 
The CBI investigation that has
been slow and burdensome has yet again been delayed by a petition presented by
the Army challenging the investigations into the Manipur cases 
The
petition was filed by 356 soldiers and officers of the Indian Army in August
2018 and it would, if entertained by the court, in fact result in a class
impunity action for military personnel implicated in crimes under international
law. It is particularly frightening to read the reasoning behind the Army’s
petition that investigations and responsibility for crimes under Indian and
international law should disturb the moral of the troops. The OMCT firmly
believes that abiding by the law, acting in a disciplined fashion, and serving the
country and its people is what should fuel the morale of the troops, not the blanket
immunity from prosecution to those who breach the law. 
International
law leaves no space for such an exclusion of law enforcement and the Army and
its reasoning is deeply flawed and incompatible with the core notion of the
rule of law.
The
OMCT also recalls that such an interpretation would be in clear violation of
basic principles of the rule of law in a democratic society, and contrary to international
legal obligations binding on India. International treaty law, such as the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) ratified by India
in 1979, provide an unequivocal obligation to bring those responsible to
justice, along the chain of command, and to provide reparation to the victims
and their families. The protection of the rights to remedy and reparation has
been further elaborated in consistent universal jurisprudence. What is more,
there is not only an obligation to investigate when presented with allegations
of extrajudicial killings, the state has a positive obligation to investigate
grave human rights violations irrespective of whether or not a formal complaint
has been lodged. Lastly, as repeatedly pointed out by the Indian Supreme Court,
the victims right to know the truth has gained increasing protection in
international law as captured in the UN High Commissioner on Human Rights Study
on the right to the truth.[1]
No justice obtained without the
protection of victims, their families, witnesses, human rights defenders and
lawyers working on the case
Further,
OMCT is recalling the importance to ensure that victims and their families,
activists, lawyers and human rights defenders working on this case are
protected from any reprisals and is seriously concerned about reports it has
received about threats and harassments. 
It
recalls the obligation not only to refrain from such acts but the positive
obligation of the state to protect victims, witnesses and human rights
defenders, especially pertinent in sensitive cases such as this one. 
Need to review the role of the
Armed Forces Special Powers Act and to overcome de facto immunity and impunity
regimes
The OMCT
recognizes the specific context of Manipur, with the presence of armed groups with
claims to the right for self-determination. The Armed Forces Special Powers Act
(AFSPA) in force in Manipur and Jammu/Kashmir, is regulating the use of force
by the armed forces in these so-called “disturbed areas”. AFSPA was adopted in
1958 and has long been an anomaly in the Indian legislation. The Act and its
application have long been a major impediment to human rights compliance and
carries a legacy of impunity contrary to international human rights and
humanitarian law standards. Members of the armed forces are also protected from
prosecution under the AFSPA. The Act has for decades created a legislative
loophole for impunity for the law enforcement, creating confusion and
discrepancies on the rule of law in India. The AFSPA has also consequently been
criticized by the UN Special Rapporteur on extra judiciary, summary and
arbitrary executions following the mandate holder’s visit to India in 2012.[2] 
The OMCT
recognizes that the government of India recently announced its intention to
amend the AFSPA, removing references to the use of lethal force to maintain
public order. This advancement would be a welcomed first step to reduce some of
the shortfalls and discrepancies contrary to international human rights and
humanitarian law standards.
Finally,
the Supreme Court rulings from 2016 and 2017 were steadfast in their human rights’
compliant interpretations and findings. They have been acclaimed across the
region and have given hope to victims and new faith in the fundamentals of the
rule of law as a rule of rights.
The
two landmark judgements should not be questioned. Instead they should be
implemented, upheld and treasured as one of the biggest legal milestones of
India and beyond.



[1] Promotion and
Protection of Human Rights: Study on the right to the truth. Report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; 8th February,
2006. Commission on Human Rights, Sixty-second session, Item 17 of the
provisional agenda.


[2] UN Special Rapporteur
on extra judiciary, summary and arbitrary executions, Mission to India Report,
26 April 2016, A/HRC/23/47/Add.1, and Follow-up to country
recommendations: India, 6 May 2015, A/HRC/29/37/Add.3.For further information:Ylva L. Hartmann, Human Rights Adviser, OMCTylh@omct.org +41 22 809 49 26 