Philippines:  Death threats against Mr. Arthur “Jun” Agarado Sapanghari, Jr.
January 31, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2014 / JanuaryPhilippines: Death threats against Mr. Arthur “Jun” Agarado Sapanghari, Jr.

PHL 001 / 0114 / OBS 007
Death threats /
Fear
for the physical
integrity
Philippines
January
31, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in the Philippines.
 
Description of the information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP)
about death threats against Mr. Arthur
“Jun” Agarado Sapanghari, Jr., a field reporter and radio broadcaster of dxDB Bandilyo Bukidnon -
Radio Veritas based in the city of Valencia, Bukidnon province. Mr. Sapanghari is particularly
known for reporting on human rights issues including corruption, illegal
logging, and human trafficking.
 
According
to the information received, on December 7 and 10, 2013, and on January 21, 2014, Mr. Arthur “Jun”
Sapanghari, Jr. received death threats through text messages. The one received
on December 10 said: “I am listening to your program. Conceited! You will be
gone before Christmas. You will suffer the same fate as Joas Dignos a commentator
in Maramag, Bukidnon, who was gunned down by two motorcycle-riding assailants
in Valencia on November 29, 2013”. On January 21, 2014, he received another
text message saying: “I saw your wife and daughter. I will kill them”. 
 
On December 18, 2013 at around 8:00 pm, while
at home, Mr. Sapanghari saw three men get down from a motorcycle. One of them
walked towards the kitchen door. Mr. Sapanghari saw the man getting something
from his sling bag. Alarmed that it might be a gun, Mr. Sapanghari pushed his
daughter to a corner of the house and closed the kitchen door. He then dashed
towards their front door to close it, and turned off the lights. He called the
police for help, but when they arrived, the three men had gone. He then went to
Valencia city police station to file a police report.
 
On January 17, 2014, at around 8:00 am, a man
on a motorcycle went to Mr. Sapanghari’s house and asked his wife about his
whereabouts. When his wife answered that he was not at home, the man went away.
From the description his wife gave to Mr. Sapanghari, he remembered one of the
suspects in the killing of a number of people in Valencia and Maramag. At the
time of those events, Mr. Sapanghari was at Maramag police station to investigate
a murder case in Musuan. He then boarded a bus to Musuan to get his motorcycle.
But as he was about to get off the bus, he saw six persons on board of three
motorcycles near the spot where his motorcycle was parked. Uneasy, he went
directly to Valencia and called a friend to get his motorcycle. When his friend
reached Mr. Sapanghari’s motorcycle, he noticed a pickup truck without plate
number and two other motorcycles in the area. When his friend started Mr.
Sapanghari’s motorcycle and drove on, the pickup truck followed him. It only
stopped when he was about to enter Valencia.
 
Furthermore, on January 21, a friend of Mr.
Sapanghari, Mr. Randie Makipotin, also received death threats through text
messages. He was threatened to be killed for helping Mr. Sapanghari and after
the latter would be “done with”. The threat started after Mr. Makipotin offered
his multicab as a vehicle for Mr. Sapanghari to use.
 
Following those events, Mr. Sapanghari
requested police protection to the police provincial Director in Bukidnon. In
response to his request, the Director ordered the Valencia police chief to assign
two police officers to the protection of Mr. Sapanghari. However, after a week,
police protection was discontinued.
 
The
Observatory expresses its deepest concern about the death threats against
Messrs. Arthur
“Jun” Sapanghari and Randie Makipotin, which seem directly related to Mr. Sapanghari’s human rights activities. The
Observatory urges the authorities of the Philippines to conduct an immediate, thorough, effective, and
impartial investigation into the above-mentioned facts in order to identify all
those responsible, bring them to justice, and apply the sanctions provided by
the law.
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Philippines, urging them to:
 
i.       Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs.
Arthur “Jun” Sapanghari and
Randie Makipotin, their relatives, as well as all human rights defenders in the Philippines;
 
ii.     
Order
an immediate, thorough, transparent, effective, and impartial investigation
into the above-mentioned death threats against Messrs. Arthur “Jun” Sapanghari and Randie Makipotin in order to identify all those responsible, bring
them to justice, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii.    
Put
an end to any kind of harassment against Mr. Arthur “Jun” Sapanghari and all human rights defenders in the Philippines and ensure in all circumstances
that they are able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrance and
fear of reprisal;
 
iv.   Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially
regarding the following Articles:
-       
Article
1: everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels; 
-       
Article
12.2: the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights [...]; 
 
v.     Ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by the Philippines.
 
Addresses:
 
·  Mr. Benigno Simeon Aquino
III, President, Republic of the Philippines, Malacanang Palace, JP Laurel
Street, San Miguel, Manila 1005, Philippines; Fax: +63 2 736 1010;
E-mail: op@president.gov.ph 
·       Ms. Loretta Ann P. Rosales,
Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights (CHR), SAAC Bldg., Commonwealth
Avenue, U.P. Complex, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines; Fax: +63 2929 0102;
E-mail: rosales.chr@gmail.com
·    Police Director General
Alan LA Madrid Purisima, Chief, Philippine National Police, Camp General Rafael
Crame, Quezon City, Philippines; Fax: +63 2 724 8763 / +63 2 723 0401;
E-mail: feedback@pnp.gov.ph
·       Governor Jose Maria R. Zubiri, Jr., Province of Bukidnon, Provincial Capitol,
Malaybalay City, Bukidnon, Philippines, 8700. Fax: +63 (088)
813-3845; 813-2457
·    H.E. Ms. Cecilia B. Rebong,
Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of Philippines to the United Nations. 47, Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva 19.
Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 716 19 32. E-mail: geneva.pm@dfa.gov.ph 
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Philippines in your
respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, January 31, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of human
rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.

 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT (+41)
(0) 22 809 49 39 / (+41) 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH (+33) (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / (+33)
1 43 55 18 80 