Switzerland:  Authorities should not turn a blind eye to torture evidence on Basque case
March 24, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Switzerland / 2017 / MarchSwitzerland: Authorities should not turn a blind eye to torture evidence on Basque case

Geneva, 24 March 2017 – Switzerland’s decision to send back home a Spanish citizen
sentenced to jail in spite of evident signs her confession was obtained under
torture falls short of basic due process and fair trial standards of Swiss
extradition rules.
Ms. Nekane Txapartegi claims she had been tortured in 1999 in Spain while held incommunicado, following an arrest on suspicion of collaboration
with Basque separatist armed group Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA). Rising evidence of recurrent torture of Basque
terror suspects between 1960 and 2013 has raised serious doubts about Spain’s
compliance with Article 15 of the Convention Against Torture, which rules out
of legal proceedings the use of evidence obtained under torture. 
Ms. Txapartegi, who fled her home country in 2007 to
escape her sentence to six years and 9 months in prison, has been held in Swiss
prisons awaiting extradition since she was arrested on Swiss soil on 6 April
2016. Yesterday, the Swiss Federal Office of Justice (OFJ) cleared her extradition
to Spain alleging Ms. Txapartegi had not provided credible evidence to
substantiate her torture claims. This
case raises serious concerns about how evidence is gathered and about the way
torture allegations are treated in asylum and extradition proceedings in
Switzerland.
“This is very worrying,” said OMCT Vice President Dick Marty. “This decision is legally flawed and appears to systematically ignore
or downplay serious and converging indications suggesting that torture occurred in
Spanish custody.” 
Despite the existence of evidence provided by the
defence – including a medico-legal report conducted by two forensic experts who
examined Ms. Txapartegi – indicating that she was tortured to extract self-incriminating
statements leading to her conviction, the Swiss authorities have failed to assess
by their own means the credibility of Ms. Txapartegi’s claims. Switzerland seems to have based its decision exclusively
on the information provided by the Spanish authorities, which are precisely the
ones accused of torture by the alleged victim. 
Effectively
assessing torture claims 
In asylum, migration and
extradition proceedings, Switzerland should conduct a physical and
psychological examination of claimants who allege having been victims of
torture or ill-treatment, in line with the so-called Istanbul
Protocol, a set of United Nations guidelines for the effective
investigation and documentation of torture. 
“Regardless of the accusation
weighing over Nekane, the question here is whether or not she was tortured,” said Gerald Staberock, OMCT’s Secretary General. 
 The OFJ decision also ignores several other
forensic studies indicating that the Spanish authorities had resorted at the
time of Ms. Txapartegi’s detention to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment[1], especially of detainees held under incommunicado detention in connection with
terrorist-related investigations. 





The OFJ justifies this lack of involvement into the
assessment of the torture claims by pointing out that Ms. Txapartegi herself did
not exhaust all remedies available to obtain justice for the torture suffered
since she did not complain to the European Court of Human Rights. Swiss
authorities ignored, however, that Ms. Txapartegi fought her case within the Spanish
legal system for more than 10 years in a process slowed by countless obstacles
and appeals.
Background information
On 9 March 1999, Ms. Txapartegi had been apprehended
by the Spanish Guardia Civil (Civil Guard) and held for five days in
incommunicado detention. During the 120 hours in custody, she was subjected to
brutal acts of torture including rape by multiple perpetrators, beatings,
suffocation through plastic bags, threats of electric shocks, sleep deprivation,
forced nudity and a mock execution.
Despite the existence of solid evidence including
eyewitness testimony and medical reports identifying multiple injuries and
psychological sequela consistent with torture, information extracted during the
period of incommunicado detention was used as a key piece of evidence to
convict her. In addition, the complaint of torture lodged by Ms. Txapartegi was
shelved without previously questioning the vast majority of suspects.
Spain has been condemned on numerous occasions over
the last years by international human rights bodies for the use of
incommunicado detention and the lack of prompt, effective and independent
investigations into acts of torture, in particular in the framework of the
fight against ETA. The European Court on Human Rights has ruled against Spain
on seven occasions for breaches of article 3 of the Convention (prohibition of
torture and inhuman or degrading treatment), the last one being the case Xabier
Beortegui Martínez v. Spain (judgment
of 31 May 2016). 
See our previous press release on this case here.  
For further information, please contact OMCT International Secretariat: Helena Solà Martín (hs@omct.org, +41 22 809 49 39) / Lori Brumat (lb@omct.org, +41 22 809 49 39) 
About the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
OMCT is short
for the World Organisation Against Torture – in French, as the organization
created in 1985 is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. OMCT works for, with
and through an international coalition of over 200 non-governmental
organizations – the SOS-Torture network – fighting torture, summary executions,
enforced disappearances, arbitrary detentions, and all other cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment in the world.
For more information, please visit: www.omct.org.



[1] According to the
preliminary findings, made public in June 2016, of a report commissioned by the
Basque regional Government to the University of the Basque Contry-Basque
Institute of Criminology, more than 4'000 people were tortured in the Basque
Country between 1960 and 2013. See also report
« Incommunicado detention and torture » (2014), available
in English on the website of the Mental Health & Psychosocial Network
(MHPSS Network): http://mhpss.net/?get=195/Informe-Incomunicacion-tortura-Analisis-protocolo-Estambul-Eng.pdf 