Kyrgyzstan:  Parliament must reject discriminatory bill targeting NGOs
April 13, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2016 / AprilKyrgyzstan: Parliament must reject discriminatory bill targeting NGOsParis-Geneva, April 13, 2016 - The
new version of a draft law on NGOs to be examined by Parliament in second
reading tomorrow could restrain Kyrgyz civil society activities if adopted, the
Observatory (FIDH-OMCT) warned today. The authorities must create the best
possible enabling environment for civil society, including for civil society
actors engaged in the promotion and protection of human rights.
 
On April 14, 2016, the Parliament will discuss in
second reading a draft law amending several provisions of the Law on
Non-Commercial Organisations. A revised text was adopted in less than a minute
by the Human Rights and Constitutional Legislation Committee at its weekly
hearing on April 12.
 
The draft law was first proposed in 2013 by three
former Members of Parliament and initially attempted to impose the label of
“foreign agent” on all NGOs receiving funding from abroad and engaging in any
deemed to be “political activities” - a broad term with negative connotations.
A similar legislation was adopted in Russia in 2012 and led to the designation
of more than 120 organisations in the country as “foreign agents” and to the
closure of a dozen of them. 
 
While, the new version of the law has been scrapped
from most of repressive and discriminatory content, the new provisions still
place onerous reporting obligations on non-commercial organisations. Such
provisions fail to meet States’ obligation to create the best possible enabling
environment for civil society. First, they are discriminatory as they impose
restrictions on associations that are stricter than those applying for
businesses[1].
Second, they are also contrary to international human rights standards, which
require that any restrictions be “necessary in a democratic society in the
interests of national security or public safety, public order, the protection
of public health or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms of
others” (Article 22.2 of ICCPR).
 
“These new provisions seem to
consider NGOs as a special source of concern for national security, thus again
creating an environment of suspicion towards the NGO community. As a member of
the UN Human Rights Council, Kyrgyzstan must demonstrate its genuine commitment
towards the promotion and protection of human rights by creating a more
enabling environment for civil society organisations”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji. 
 
“Such differential treatment between non-commercial and
commercial entities is not legitimate, as it only aims at shrinking the space
for civil society to peacefully carry out its work in defense of human rights
and fundamental freedoms. Our organisations urge the Kyrgyz Parliament to
reject the current draft and create the best possible enabling environment for
civil society, by removing all existing restrictive legislation”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created
in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders.



[1] See
Maina Kiai’s third report to the United Nations General Assembly, Comparative
study of enabling environments for associations and businesses, UN Document
A/70/266, August 4, 2015. 