Brazil:  Global anti-torture movement recognizing truth commissions report and calls for reparation of victims
December 12, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Brazil / 2014 / DecemberBrazil: Global anti-torture movement recognizing truth commissions report and calls for reparation of victims




 Brazil: Global anti-torture movement recognizing truth commissions
report and calls for reparation of victims
Geneva, 12 December
2014. The OMCT welcomes the final report of the Brazilian
National Truth Commission (CNV) that examined and investigated the grave human
rights violations committed during the 21 years of military dictatorship in the
country.
After two years of research, analysis of historical documents, and
public hearings, the Commission concluded that practices of unlawful detention,
torture, sexual violence,
executions and forced disappearances were performed systematically by state
agents under Brazil's military rule, and constituted crimes against humanity.
The final report describes the
stories of 434 deaths and political disappearances, and names more than 300
public agents and individuals that acted on the name of the State that were
involved in the grave human rights violations committed during that period.
Among its recommendations
the report asks for the recognition of the Armed Forces of their institutional
responsibility for the crimes committed during 1964 to 1985, and for the non-application
of the Amnesty Law (6.683/79) to the public agents involved in grave human
rights violations, since crimes against humanity are imprescriptible and
ineligible for amnesty.
“Recognizing the facts is an important first step; the families of the
victims and/or the victims themselves are entitled to accountability and
compensation for the horrible crimes committed against them.” Said Gerald Staberock,
Secretary General of the OMCT. “It is now
to honor the recommendations of the Commission. An amnesty law for torture is
unlawful and should have no place in the 21st century’.
The CNV also recognized the
persistency of grave human rights violations in the current days in Brazil,
reflected in police violence and the practice of unlawful detentions, torture
and forced disappearances.
The OMCT calls the Brazilian
Government to act upon the CNV’s recommendations and ensure that concrete steps
are taken towards justice and reconciliation.
 For further information please contact:
Carolina Bárbara, +41 (0)22
8094939 cb@omct.org 