Bangladesh:  Bangladesh: Lootings
March 20, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2003 / MarchBangladesh: Bangladesh: LootingsOPEN LETTER TO MRS. KHALEDA ZIA  PRIME MINISTER OF BANGLADESH   Geneva, March 20th 2003   Ms. Prime Minister,  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) would like to bring to your attention the demolition of houses belongings to members of the Hindu community of the Chakribakri, Madhukhali, Radhanagar, Bigordana and Parmadhukhali villages (Khulna district) by the police, as a form of punishment for their alleged support for so-called terrorist groups.   OMCT would like to inform you of the fact that 8 houses have been ransacked and damaged by the police between January 5th and January 18th 2003, with the personal values, belongings, furniture and worship shrines of the victims having been destroyed and around 20 persons –including women and children- having been wounded during the operation.   Police Inspector and the Officer-in-Charge of the Paikgachha police station, Mr. Golam Mohammad, along with six Sub Inspectors - Mr. Babar Ali, Mr. Abdur Rauf, Mr. Abdul Aziz, Mr. Akul Bishwas, Mr. Md. Ibrahim and Mr. Dev Brat- and about 12 other police officers raided these houses on suspicion that their occupants were giving shelter to so-called terrorists.   In this respect, on January 5th 2003, the police attacked the houses of Nirapad Sirkar and Khitish Candra Dhali in the Chakribakri village. On January 6th 2003, the police reportedly ransacked the house of Goshai Bairagi in the village of Madhukhali, as well as the house of Pravash Mondol in the village of Parmadhukhali. On January 8th 2003, it is reported that the police attacked the house of Abdul Kashem Gazi in the Radhanagar village. In the same village, on January 15th 2003, the police reportedly looted the houses of Manoj Mondol and Pankoj Kanti Bishwas. Eventually, on January 18th 2003, the house of Rabindarath Mondol, in the Bigordana village, came under attack by the police.   As previously mentioned, around 20 persons have been wounded in these operations, including Mrs. Sonamoti Rani (40 years old), Mrs. Laxmi Rani Dhali (32 years old), Momita Bishwas (12 years old), Mrs. Shanchita Sirkar (35 years old), Mrs. Maloti Rani Mandol (48 years old) and Bishnupado Bishwas.  These acts are affecting members of the Hindu community living in villages that are adjacent to the Indian border. These villages are characterised by backward communications systems and infrastructures, along with a high level of violence including rape, kidnapping, smuggling and money extortion. According to reliable sources, part of the problem is related to the operations of the so-called terrorist groups, which are forcing the villagers to give shelter to their members and are taking advantage of the lack of infrastructure and the proximity of the Indian border to develop their activities. Reports from reliable sources indicate that the victims have no link with the terrorists and are, in fact, living in constant fear of being targeted either by the police or by the so-called terrorists.   Since January 2003, the Officer-in-Charge of the Paikgachha police station, Mr. Golam Mohammad, has been denying the police’s involvement in these incidents. On the other hand, Mr. Babar Ali, a Sub-Inspector of the Paikgachha police station, did not deny the police’s involvement but explained that their actions was performed in order to ensure respect for human rights.  In view of these considerations, OMCT hopes that your Government will take immediate measures to ensure that the rights of these afore-mentioned victims are protected and upheld, in particular their right to adequate housing, as well as their right to be protected from any cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, in conformity with the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, as well as the General Comments No. 4 and No. 7 of the U.N. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights respectively on the right to adequate housing and forced evictions.  OMCT also hopes that these measures will be accompanied by the provision of adequate compensation, reparation and rehabilitation to all the victims. Finally, OMCT urges your Government to take all the appropriate steps in order to guarantee that an immediate investigation is launched into the looting of the houses, identify those responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial tribunal, and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law.   We thank you in advance for your careful consideration of this matter, and remain,   Yours Sincerely,    Eric Sottas Director 