Turkey:  Holding a meeting on human rights is not a terrorist conspiracy
July 10, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2017 / JulyTurkey: Holding a meeting on human rights is not a terrorist conspiracy





On 5 July 2017, ten participants in a human rights training
meeting were detained at Büyükada, one of the Princes' Islands near İstanbul,
Turkey. The group consisted of eight representatives of Turkish civil society
organisations working on human rights and two foreign consultants on digital
security and information management. By the afternoon of July 6, the lawyers of
the detained persons learned that their clients are being investigated for
membership of an armed organization, a terrorist offense, and will stay in
investigative detention initially for seven days.
The undersigned organisations, national and international
human rights NGOs from the OSCE region, members of the Civic Solidarity
Platform, strongly reject this operation by the Turkish authorities. We appeal
for the immediate and unconditional release of the detained persons,
participants in a peaceful meeting to advance human rights. Human rights work
should not be criminalized. Civil society work for human rights is an important
contribution to a healthy society. Holding a meeting on human rights is not a
terrorist conspiracy.
The Turkish citizens arrested are Özlem Dalkıran (Helsinki Citizens’ Assembly), lawyer Nalan Erkem (Helsinki Citizens’
Assembly), İlknur Üstün (Women’s
Coalition), İdil Eser (Amnesty
International Turkey director), Veli Acu
(Human Rights Agenda Association), lawyer Günal
Kurşun (Human Rights Agenda Association), Şeymus Özbekli (Rights Initiative), and Nejat Taştan (Equal Rights Watch Association). The two consultants
are Ali Gharawi, from Sweden, and Peter Steudtner, from Germany.
In the past years, human rights defenders have on several
occasions been targeted by governmental repression. This latest attack on human
rights defenders comes amidst a wave of repression after the failed coup
attempt of 15 July 2016 which has affected a much wider group of persons than
those who may have been directly involved in the coup attempt, including
journalists, lawyers and politicians. Only last month, Taner Kiliç, the
president of Amnesty International Turkey, was arrested together with 22 other
lawyers.
1.      Article 19
(international, London)
2.      Association
of Ukrainian Human Rights Monitors on Law Enforcement
3.      Barys
Zvozskau Belarusian Human Rights House
4.      Bir Duino
(Kyrgyzstan)
5.      Center for
Civil Liberties (Ukraine)
6.      Centre for
the Development of Democracy and Human Rights (Russia)
7.      Center for
Participation and Development (Georgia)
8.      DRA -
German-Russian Exchange (Germany)
9.      Fair Trials
(international, London)
10.   Golos Svobody
(Kyrgyzstan)
11.   Helsinki
Citizens Assembly Vanadzor (Armenia)
12.   Helsinki
Foundation for Human Rights (Poland)
13.   Human Rights
Center of Azerbaijan
14.   Human Rights
House Foundation (international, Oslo)
15.   Human Rights
Information Center (Ukraine)
16.   Human Rights
Matter (Germany)
17.   IDP Women
Association "Consent" (Georgia)
18.   International
Partnership for Human Rights (international, Brussels)
19.   International
Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims (international, Copenhagen)
20.   Institute
for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety (Azerbaijan)
21.   Italian
Coalition for Civil Liberties
22.   Kadyr
Kasiyet (“Dignity") (Kazakhstan)
23.   Kazakhstan
International Bureau for Human Rights and the Rule of Law
24.   Kharkiv
regional foundation Public Alternative (Ukraine)
25.   Legal Policy
Research Center (Kazakhstan)
26.   Libereco -
Partnership for Human Rights (Germany)
27.   Moscow
Helsinki Group
28.   Netherlands
Helsinki Committee
29.   Norwegian
Helsinki Committee
30.   Office of
Civil Freedoms (Tajikistan)
31.   Promo-LEX
(Moldova)
32.   Protection
of rights without borders (Armenia)
33.   Public
Verdict (Russia)
34.   Regional
Center for Strategic Studies (Azerbaijan)
35.   Solidarus
(Germany)
36.   SOVA Center
for Information and Analysis (Russia)
37.   Swiss
Helsinki Committee
38.   Ukrainian
Helsinki Human Rights Union
39.   Women’s
International League for Peace and Freedom (Germany)
40.   World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) (international, Geneva) 