Second Edition OMCT Handbook Series
November 23, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Reports and Publications / 2014 / NovemberSecond Edition OMCT Handbook Series
OMCT’s Handbook Series consists of
four volumes, each one providing a detailed guide to the practice, procedures,
and jurisprudence of the regional and international mechanisms that are
competent to examine individual complaints concerning the violation of the
absolute prohibition of torture and ill-treatment.
Volume 1 - Article
3 of the European Convention on Human Rights: A Practitioner’s Handbook
The purpose of this Handbook is to
provide practical advice to persons wishing to bring a case to the European
Court of Human Rights under Article 3 of the European Convention on Human
Rights, which prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
As such, the Handbook contains an accessible
but comprehensive treatment of the procedure and practice of the European
Court, as well as a detailed analysis of the Court’s jurisprudence in the area
of torture and ill-treatment. Reference materials are included in the
appendices as a further resource for litigants. 
This book is available in English
and Russian.
Volume 2 - The Prohibition of Torture and Ill-Treatment in the
Inter-American Human Rights System: A Handbook for Victims and their Advocates
The purpose of this Handbook is to
provide practical advice to persons wishing to bring individual complaints
concerning violations of the prohibition of torture and other forms of
ill-treatment before the Inter-American Human Rights System. As such, the
Handbook provides an accessible and comprehensive guide to the practice and
procedure of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights, as well as a detailed analysis of the
substantive law developed by the Commission and Court concerning torture and
ill-treatment. Reference materials are included in the appendices as a further
resource for litigants.
This book is available in English
and Spanish.
Volume 3 - The Prohibition of Torture and Ill-Treatment in the African Human
Rights System: A Handbook for Victims and their Advocates
This Handbook aims to provide an
introduction to the African regional human rights system, by presenting an
overview of the framework and evolving norms and jurisprudence of the regional
and sub-regional human rights bodies. The updated handbook also covers the
evolution of case law, pinpointing settled and emerging jurisprudential
approaches regarding the nature and substance of the obligations contained in
Article 5 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, as well as the
content of procedural duties and the scope of reparations for victims of
torture. Additionally, this Handbook seeks to act as a practical guide for
civil society actors and NGOs by detailing procedures and requirements for
utilising the various human rights tools built into the system. In general,
this publication will describe the accomplishments, potential and challenges of
this system to deal with the pervasive problem of torture. Reference materials are included in
the appendices as a further resource for litigants.
This book is available in English,
French and Arabic.
Volume 4 - Seeking Remedies for Torture Victims: A Handbook on the
Individual Complaints Procedures of the UN Treaty Bodies
The purpose of this Handbook is to
give practical guidance to persons seeking redress for torture and other
ill-treatment before the United Nations human rights treaty bodies. It provides
an overview of the mandate and functions of the Human Rights Committee, the
Committee against Torture and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women and describes in detail the individual complaints procedures of
these bodies with special emphasis on providing strategic advice to persons
litigating torture cases. It also contains a comprehensive thematic analysis of
the relevant jurisprudence of the three Committees. Reference materials are
included in the appendices as a further resource for litigants.
This book is available in English,
Spanish, French, Arabic and Russian.
Copyright © 2014 World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT)
Material from OMCT’s Handbook Series
may be reproduced for educational, training, advocacy and other non-commercial
purposes as long as OMCT is fully acknowledged and the volume in question
appropriately cited. No part of the Handbook Series may be reproduced for any
commercial purpose. 
For
questions about the OMCT Handbook Series, please contact Helena Solà
Martín at hs@omct.org. The OMCT wishes to thank the European Union, Oak Foundation, Hans Wilsdorf Foundation and the Swiss Confederation for making possible the publication of the 2nd edition of the OMCT Handbook Series. 