United Arab Emirates:  Joint Statement: Lift travel ban on 2015 finalist Ahmed Mansoor, urges Martin Ennals Award Jury
September 15, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / United Arab Emirates / 2015 / SeptemberUnited Arab Emirates: Joint Statement: Lift travel ban on 2015 finalist Ahmed Mansoor, urges Martin Ennals Award Jury Ten human rights groups
represented in the Martin Ennals Award Jury today called on the United Arab
Emirates (UAE) authorities to lift the travel ban imposed on Ahmed Mansoor, one
of the three human rights defenders nominated for the 2015 Award, and to issue
him a passport.
 
Widely respected as one
of the few voices within the UAE to provide a credible independent assessment
of human rights developments in the country, Ahmed Mansoor regularly raises
concerns regarding arbitrary detention, torture or degrading treatment, and failure
to meet international standards of fair trial. He also draws attention to other
human rights abuses, including against migrant workers.
 
As a result, Ahmed
Mansoor has faced repeated intimidation, harassment, and death threats from the
UAE authorities or their supporters, including arrest and imprisonment in 2011
following an unfair trial. He and four other activists who called for
democratic rights in the UAE were jailed in 2011 on the charge of “insulting
officials”. Although pardoned and released later that year, Ahmed Mansoor has
been banned from travel and had his passport confiscated. 
 
As a result of his
courageous work, Ahmed Mansoor was selected as one of the three finalists of
the Martin Ennals Award who will be recognized at a ceremony hosted by the city
of Geneva on October 6th. The Award is usually handed out by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 
 
As matters stand,
however, Ahmed Mansoor will be prevented from attending the ceremony, to be
held in the city of in Geneva, because the UAE authorities have arbitrarily
imposed a travel ban on him and have refused to return his passport, which they
have confiscated since 2011. Both the travel ban and the confiscation of his
passport violate Ahmed Mansoor’s right under international human rights law to
freedom of movement, as these measures were taken to punish him for his
peaceful human rights activism. 
 
The Martin Ennals Award Jury
today noted with concern : “Ahmed Mansoor’s absence at the ceremony would mark
a very disappointing position for the UAE, which is a country that prides
itself as one of the hubs of international business and tourism in the Middle
East, as well a safe haven in the region. As a member of the UN Human Rights
Council, which is running for a second term, we expect the UAE authorities to
honour their obligations to uphold human rights and protect human rights defenders.
The UAE government must match its rhetoric on the international stage with
meaningful actions at home, starting with immediately lifting the travel ban on
Ahmed Mansoor, to returning and renewing his  passport, and allowing him to travel to Geneva
for the ceremony.”
 
Ahmed Mansoor is a member
of the Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch’s Middle East and North Africa
Division, as well as the Advisory Board of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights.
 Martin Ennals Award Jury:
 


-  Amnesty
International, 
-  FIDH, 
-  Human Rights
First, 
-  HURIDOCS,
-  International
Service for Human Rights,  
 -  EWDE Germany, 
-  Front Line
Defenders,
-  Human Rights
Watch,
-  International
Commission of Jurists,
-  World Organisation Against
Torture.
 
 

For further information, please contact: MEA: Michael
Khambatta +41 79 474 8208 khambatta@martinennalsaward.orgOMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +41228094924The Press Release is available in: English: United Arab Emirates_2015.09.15_MEA_Statement_EnglishArabic: United Arab Emirates_2015.09.15_MEA_Statement_Arabic 