Philippines:  Press Release: Dismissal of the case filed against Mr. Bacalso and Mr. Fortaleza for their peaceful protest
January 29, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2015 / JanuaryPhilippines: Press Release: Dismissal of the case filed against Mr. Bacalso and Mr. Fortaleza for their peaceful protestGeneva-Paris,
January 29, 2015 – The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an OMCT-FIDH joint programme, welcomes
the decision of the Regional Trial Court to dismiss false charges filed against
two human rights defenders, Mr. Edcil Bacalso and Mr. Wilson Fortaleza, in
relation to their legitimate activities in defence of labour rights.
 
The Observatory has just been
informed that in a decision dated October 27, 2014, Branch 67 of the Regional
Trial Court of Pasig City dismissed the judicial case against Mr. Edcil Bacalso, member of NAGKAISA, a
coalition of labour groups, and Mr. Wilson Fortaleza, member of the Partido ng Manggagawa (Workers
Party), by dropping all the charges against them. In a landmark decision, the
judges recognised the fundamental democratic role of freedom of assembly and
expression and argued that “the right to peacefully assemble and petition for
redress of grievances is, together with freedom of speech, of expression and of
the press, a right that enjoys primacy in the realm of constitutional
protection” and “constitute the very basis of a functional democratic polity,
without which all the other rights would be meaningless and unprotected”[1].
AsiaPro Cooperative has however submitted a motion for reconsideration for all
charges they had filed against Mr. Bacalso and Mr. Fortaleza.
 
On September 2, 2014 the Observatory
strongly condemned the judicial harassment of Mr. Edcil Bacalso and Mr. Wilson
Fortaleza, and called on the Philippines authorities to drop the case and
charges against them, as they seemed to be only aimed at obstructing their
human rights activities and at weakening their campaign against the
exploitation of workers[2].
 
On April 25, 2014, Messrs. Bacalso
and Fortaleza had taken part in a peaceful rally along with other 200 workers
against AsiaPro Cooperative, a company that supplies contract workers to
several large corporations, for violating the labour rights of its members and
employees, including through the non-payment of wages and other mandatory
benefits such as social security allowances. In March 2014, the Supreme Court
had ruled that AsiaPro must comply with core labour standards and other
labour-related laws, but the organisation continued its illicit activities.
 
On July 14, 2014, Mr. Bacalso and
Mr. Fortaleza were both charged with defamation, illegal assembly, alarm and
scandal in connection with the April-25 protest. The case was filed against
them by officials of the AsiaPro Cooperative, who accused them of distributing
defamatory materials to the public, of obstructing the flow of traffic and
blocking the pedestrians and, finally, of disturbing the public affairs with
the loud speaker system used in the protest.
 
The Observatory expresses its hope
that the decision of the Regional Trial Court will represent an important step
towards strengthening the protection of human rights defenders’ right to
peaceful assembly and demonstration in the Philippines and that this decision
will be confirmed when the Court decides on the new motion filed by AsiaPro
Cooperative .
 
 
For more information, please
contact:
·   
   FIDH: Audrey Couprie/Arthur Manet: + 33 (0) 1 43 55
25 18
·   
   OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49
24




[1]           
Regional Trial Court, branch 67, Resolution Civil Case 74422, p.6.


[2]            See Observatory’s Urgent Appeal PHL 004 / 0914 / OBS 074 of September 2,
2014. 