Bahrain:  The UN finds the detention of Nabeel Rajab as arbitrary; it is urgent to release him
November 27, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2013 / NovemberBahrain: The UN finds the detention of Nabeel Rajab as arbitrary; it is urgent to release himOpinion of the WGAD on the detention of Nabeel Rajab10 pages / 87 KBParis-Geneva, November 27, 2013. The detention of
Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) and
Deputy Secretary General of FIDH, was characterised as arbitrary by the United
Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) at its 66th
session. This decision, published on July 25, 2013, was eventually passed on to
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT joint
programme) on November 26, who welcomes this decision and calls upon the
Bahraini Government to immediately comply with this UN decision and release Mr.
Rajab.
 
In its Opinion A/HRC/WGAD/2013/12, the WGAD considered
that the detention of Mr. Nabeel Rajab contravenes “articles 19, 20 and
21 of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and articles 9, paragraph 1,
14, 21 and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights”. The
WGAD requested the “Kingdom of Bahrain to take necessary steps to remedy the
situation of Mr. Rajab and emphasised that “the adequate remedy would be to
immediately release Mr. Rajab and to accord him an enforceable right to
compensation in accordance with article 9, paragraph 5, of the [ICCPR]”.
This decision follows a communication which had been addressed by the
Observatory to the WGAD on August 31, 2012 to challenge the legality of Mr.
Rajab's detention.
 
“The decision of the WGAD is a landmark victory as it
recognises that the detention of Nabeel Rajab is arbitrary under international
law, as it results from his exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression, as defined in universal and international human rights instruments” said today Karim Lahidji, President of the
International Federation for Human Rights. 
 
In its decision, the WGAD highlighted that “from
the Government’s response, it is clear that Mr. Rajab was detained and convicted under existing domestic laws of Bahrain,
which seem to deny persons the basic right to freedom of opinion, expression and assembly,
either individually or in association with others”.
 
“The decision of the WGAD stands for a continuous pattern of
arbitrary detentions of those who defend the rights of others or exercise their
freedom of expression, including bloggers or twitter activists. The case of
Naji Fateel, from the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights, is but one of
those ‘other’ cases”, said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), commenting on the decision. “The
message of today must be to end the silencing of dissent through detention and
prosecution. It is time to stop repeating the same mistakes: arbitrary
detention, unfair trials and impunity for ill-treatment can but exacerbate
tensions, resentment and possible conflict”.
 
The WGAD underlined that “the right to a fair trial
includes access to counsel, production of evidence and defence witnesses. Since Mr. Rajab’s arrest on 5 May
2012, a number of court hearings have taken place where these rights have been
partially respected”. Denial of timely facilitation for foreign witnesses
to attend the hearing as well as showing video evidence in camera were cited as
violations of such right. The Group added that the courts of Bahrain would have to “confront
and rule on the matter of the legality of the law banning public demonstrations”,
and that “denial of a universally accepted human right to freedom of opinion
and expression cannot be
condoned by a domestic court, as seen in the case of Mr. Rajab”. 
 
The WGAD eventually found Mr. Rajab's detention was
arbitrary as it resulted from the exercise of his universally recognised human
rights and as his right to a fair trial had not been guaranteed, his detention
therefore being arbitrary under categories II and III as defined by the Group. 