Bahrain:  Third Anniversary of Arrest: Calls for the Release of Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja
April  9, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2014 / AprilBahrain: Third Anniversary of Arrest: Calls for the Release of Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja
International and Local Civil
Society Groups Call for Immediate and Unconditional Release of Bahraini Human
Rights Defender Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja on the Third Anniversary of His Arrest
 
The undersigned civil society
organizations express their serious concern for the health and well-being of
imprisoned Bahraini human rights defender Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja. Mr. Al-Khawaja
was arrested three years ago today, on 9 April 2011, and continues to require
medical attention for injuries sustained during his arrest and subsequent
torture. 
 
Former president  and co-founder of the Bahrain Centre for
Human Rights (BCHR), Mr. Al-Khawaja was sentenced to life in prison in June
2011 by a military court as part of a group of human rights activists and
political leaders known as the Bahrain 13. We believe that Mr. Al-Khawaja is
being unjustly persecuted for his legitimate human rights activity. 
 
In its September 2012 decision,
the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention concluded that Mr.
al-Khawaja’s arrest was due to his exercise of the fundamental rights to
freedom of expression, peaceful assembly, and association. According to the
Working Group, the charges against Mr. al-Khawaja—including membership in a
terrorist organization— were “vague” and “raise doubts as to the actual purpose
of detention.”  The Working Group also concluded that throughout Mr.
Al-Khawaja’s arrest, detention, and trial, “the Government violated numerous
international norms to the right to fair trial.”
 
The Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry (BICI)
further concluded that Mr.
Al-Khawaja was subjected to torture and inhumane treatment during his arrest and detention. Mr.
Al-Khawaja was severely beaten, resulting in a broken jaw, and later spent two
months in solitary confinement where he was subjected to physical,
psychological and sexual torture. A full testimony from Mr. Al-Khawaja
regarding his torture can be found here. 
 
Mr. Al-Khawaja continues to be
denied adequate medical attention and suffers from severe medical complications
as a result of his mistreatment in detention. Mr. Al-Khawaja has reported that
he has cramps in his facial muscles from metal plates and screws that were set
in his jaw after it was broken by security officials in four places in 2011.
Mr. Al-Khawaja also continues to experience acute pain due to an injury to his
coccyx sustained during torture in 2011.
 
Mr. Al-Khawaja and his family
have repeatedly requested that the various operations he is in need of are
performed by an independent doctor due to legitimate concerns about the
impartiality of the doctor appointed by the Bahrain Defense Force Hospital, Dr.
Al-Muharraqi, who in 2011 stated that Mr. Al-Khawaja was not subjected to
torture. It is also deeply alarming that during his most recent examination,
Dr. Al-Muharraqi informed Mr. Al- Khawaja that his entire medical file had gone
missing from the system. Mr Al-Khawaja’s lawyers have been requesting a copy of
his medical files since 2011, as it would serve as evidence of the multiple
injuries and medical conditions caused by torture.
 
Despite his incarceration, Mr.
Al-Khawaja and his colleagues continue to be the target of defamation
campaigns. On the 27 February, 2014, a 12 minute video published on YouTube
accused Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, activist Zainab Al-Khawaja, BCHR President Nabeel
Rajab and BCHR Acting President Maryam Al-Khawaja of inciting terrorism,
“taking the country hostage” and branding them as racists. The video included
footage that could have only been obtained from official authorities, including
the use of an interview with a police officer which requires the approval of
the Ministry of Interior. The video unjustly targets the four human rights
defenders as a result of their legitimate activities and could be seen to
incite violence against them given the accusations presented.
 
In an attempt to test the legal
procedures of combating defamation of human rights defenders in Bahrain, Mr.
Al-Khawaja submitted a complaint to the Jaw Prison Administration which was
then submitted to the Public Prosecutor in response to a degrading article  about Mr. Al-Khawaja published on 28 May 2013
in the Gulf Daily News (GDN). In response, the GDN published a letter on 22 May 2013 accusing Mr. Al-Khawaja of “instruct[ing]
rioters to attack military bases in Bahrain and is one of the master planners
for an armed military coup.” Nearly a year later, no steps have been
taken to address Mr. Al-Khawaja’s complaint. 
 
The undersigned civil society
organizations call for the immediate and unconditional release of Abdulhadi
Al-Khawaja as well as immediate access to independent medical examination and
treatment. In addition, we urge the Bahraini authorities to cease harassment
and persecution of human rights defenders including unwarranted defamation
campaigns. 
 
The co-signed organizations are:
AMAN Network for Rehabilitation
and Defending Human RightsAmericans for Democracy and Human
Rights in Bahrain (ADHRB)Bahrain Center for Human Rights
(BCHR)Bahrain Human Rights Observatory
(BHRO)Bahrain Human Rights Society
(BHRS)Bahrain Institute for Rights and
Democracy (BIRD)Bahrain InterfaithBahrain Rehabilitation and
Anti-Violence Organization (BRAVO)Bahrain Youth Society for Human
Rights (BYSHR)Cairo
Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS)Canadian
Journalists for Free Expression (CJFE)CEARTAS
– Irish Lawyers for Human RightsCIVICUS:
World Alliance for Citizen ParticipationEuropean
Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR)Front
Line DefendersGulf
Center for Human Rights (GCHR)Gulf
Civil Society Associations Forum (GCSAF)Human
Rights First (HRF)International
Media Support (IMS)Khiam
Rehabilitation Center for Victims of TortureLawyers
Rights Watch Canada (LRWC)LuaLua
Center for Human Rights (LCHR)No
Peace Without Justice (NPWJ)PEN
American Center Pen
InternationalThe
Arab NGO Network for Development (ANND)The
National Lawyers Guild International CommitteeThe
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT)Tunisian
Initiative for Freedom of ExpressionVivarta 