Egypt:  Harassment and restrictions to freedom of association against several human rights organizations
June 11, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2015 / JuneEgypt: Harassment and restrictions to freedom of association against several human rights organizationsUA Egypt AR3 pages / 293 KBEGY 003 / 0615 / OBS 049
Harassment /
Restrictions to freedom of
association
Egypt
June 11, 2015
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the harassment and restrictions to freedom of association faced by
several Egyptian human rights organization, including the Cairo Institute for
Human Rights Studies (CIHRS), a member organisation of FIDH. 
According to information received, on June 9, 2015, the investigating judge appointed to investigate human
rights NGOs mandated a “Committee of Experts” to visit the Cairo office of the
CIHRS within the framework of case No. 173/2011 (known as “the foreign funding
case against NGOs”) in order to examine whether the CIHRS engages in activities
of civic associations under the provisions of Law 84/2002. The committee
requested the staff present in the office to provide documentation relating to
the administration of the NGO, such as its registration, founding contract and
statute, as well as the budgets, financial accounts, and funding contracts for
the past four years. One additional demand the staff were instructed to comply
with, was to provide documentation that proved that the CIHRS was not
conducting NGO work. The latter demand clearly demonstrates that the Egyptian
authorities are moving forward with the ultimatum made towards civil society
organisations to register as associations under the repressive Law No. 84 or
face legal consequences[1].
The Observatory recalls that the current law places severe restrictions on the
independence of civil society organisations and the activities they can carry
out. 
According to the information received, the CIHRS is
the second organisation to be targeted by the investigating judge but other
organisations such as the Hisham Mubarak Law Center and the Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights would
also be currently under a similar investigation. The Committee of Experts[2]
was established by the investigating judge in April 2015 to inspect the files
of the Egyptian Democratic Academy (EDA) and has the duty to determine whether
an organization complies with its mandate as a civic association and to check
its sources of funding. It is worthy to note that despite the EDA's
registration in compliance with the ultimatum[3],
they are still being investigated and there are currently travel bans imposed
on 4 of their staff and founders. 
The Observatory expresses its utmost
concern over the escalation of the legal harassment faced by human rights
non-governmental organisations in Egypt. The Observatory believes that the
specific targeting of the CIHRS amounts to an act of reprisal against the CIHRS General Director who was
heard on May 28 by the European Parliament Human Rights Subcommittee (DROI)
during a session about the general human rights situation in Egypt. 
The Observatory recalls that at the
occasion of the Universal Periodic Review of Egypt in November 2014, the
Egyptian authorities accepted at least five recommendations on the protection
of human rights defenders, including a commitment to reforming the current NGO
law with a widespread consultation of NGOs, and a commitment to guarantee the
right to freedom of association in accordance with international standards. 
The Observatory urges the Egyptian
authorities to guarantee the implementation of the accepted recommendations,
and reminds them of their pledges made to the international community in which
they “affirmed that civil society is an essential partner to the government in
strengthening human rights”[4]. 
The Observatory urges the Egyptian
authorities to immediately cease all acts of harassment against human rights
organisations, and to comply with its constitutional obligations (in particular
Article 78 and Article 93 of the 2014 Egyptian Constitution which respectively
recognise freedom of association and Egypt's compliance
with international human rights conventions ratified by Egypt) as well as its international legal
obligations (in particular Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR)). 
Background information:
On June 4, 2013, the North Cairo Criminal Court sentenced 43 Egyptian
and foreign staff members of five foreign civil society organisations to
imprisonment ranging from one to five years for “managing unlicensed branches”
of their organisations, “conducting research, political training, surveys, and
workshops without licenses”, “training political parties and groups” and
“illegally receiving foreign funding” [5].
The court also ordered the confiscation of funds and the closure of Egypt-based
branches of Freedom House, the International Republican Institute, the National
Democratic Institute, the International Centre for Journalists (ICFJ), and
Konrad Adenauer Foundation. The “foreign funding” case was divided into two
cases: one against international civil society organisations and the second
against Egyptian civil society organizations. 
In September 2014, President Al-Sisi signed into law amendments to
Article 78 of the Penal Code. These amendments include the provision that
receiving foreign funding for the purpose of “harming national security” is
punishable by life imprisonment[6]. 
Actions
requested:
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them
to:
i.Withdraw the ultimatum and stop immediately
investigations and criminal cases targeting human rights NGOs;
ii.Revise the law on associations to comply with
international human rights standards, while ensuring that independent civil
society organisations are meaningfully consulted in the drafting process;
iii.Put an end to all forms of harassment against all
human rights organisations and defenders in Egypt;
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-     
its Article
1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
levels”;
-     
its Article
5(a): “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,
at the national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully”
-     
its Article
6(a), which foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to participate in peaceful activities against
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-     
its Article
12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure
the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
v.Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Egypt.
Addresses:
·        
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel
Fattah el-Sisi, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998
·        
Prime Minister, Mr. Ibrahim Mehleb, Magles El Shaab
Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016.
Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·        
Minister of the Interior, General Mohamed Ibrahim
Moustafa, Ministry of the Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo,
Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
·        
Minister of Justice, Mr. Ahmed Al-Zanad, Ministry of
Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·        
Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Hisham Barakat Dar
al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577 4716
·        
Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National Council
For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·        
H.E. Ms.
Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in
Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·        
Embassy
of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32
2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or
embassies of Egypt in your respective country.


[1]     The ultimatum was made public
in July 2014, and in September 2014, the deadline was pushed back to  November 10, 2014. 


[2]     The committee is composed of
Ministry of Social Solidarity officials but they report to the investigating
judge. 


[3]     The EDA is registered under
the Associations Law No. 84/2002 since September
2014.


[4]     Oral statement by the Egyptian
Delegation, http://www.upr-info.org/sites/default/files/document/egypt/session_20_-_october_2014/egypt_upr_egy_42.pdf


[5]     See https://www.fidh.org/International-Federation-for-Human-Rights/north-africa-middle-east/egypt/urgent-statement-on-the-situation-in-egypt-13383


[6]     The unofficial translation of
the amendment: “an individual requesting or receiving transferred or liquid
money or arms or equipment from a foreign country or a foreign or local private
organization, with the aim of pursuing acts harmful to national interests or
destabilizing to general peace or the country’s independence and its unity,
shall be penalized with a life sentence and a fine of no less than
LE500,000.....Anyone who mediates the execution of the crimes mentioned above
whether it was a request, or acceptance, or an offer, or mediation through
writing (print or electronic) shall face the same charges...if the act is
committed by a public servant, then the death penalty can be prescribed”. 