Moldova, Republic of:  Judicial harassment by the Transnistrian Security Committee of Promo-LEX
April 22, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Moldova, Republic of / 2015 / AprilMoldova, Republic of: Judicial harassment by the Transnistrian Security Committee of Promo-LEXMoldova_PR2 pages / 49 KBPRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORYMOLDOVA:
Judicial harassment by the Transnistrian Security Committee of Promo-LEX, FIDH
member organisation
Paris-Geneva,
April 22, 2015 - The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,
a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), expresses its concerns after the
opening of a criminal case against Promo-LEX, FIDH member organisation based in
the Transnistrian region of Moldova.
On
April 17, 2015, the de facto Transnistrian Committee for State Security
(Transnistrian KGB) issued a statement
describing civil society organisations receiving funds from abroad as a threat
to Transnistrian security. The statement, which particularly targets the human
rights organisation Promo-LEX reveals that a criminal case has been filed
against the organisation, following the Committee's conclusions on their
subversive activities conducted in the Transnistrian region of Moldova.
“Since its
establishment, Promo-LEX has been involved in human rights activities in the
Transnistrian region by providing legal protection to human rights defenders,
by assisting Transnistrian inhabitants - Moldovan, Russian and Ukrainian
citizens - in obtaining justice and by building capacity of local
Transnistarian NGOs to promote and defend human rights”, said FIDH President, Karim Lahidji.
The
Observatory fears that the exposure of Promo-LEX in the statement will lead to
even more obstructions in its work in a region, which is already one of the
least accessible territories for human rights defenders in Europe. As of now,
there are no efficient mechanisms or institutions to monitor the situation of
human rights in the Transnistrian region.
Transnistria's
disputed status is a source of serious human rights violations, and the victims
often have no access to justice. Last year, FIDH together with Promo-LEX looked
into these situations and denounced numerous human rights violations, among
them the infringement of the right to freedom of movement, the right to
citizenship, the right to an adequate standard of living, the right to
property, and the right to health and education. The report also shed light on
numerous cases of arbitrary detention, acts of torture and ill-treatment by the
police as well as the critical detention conditions.
The
Observatory recalls that it is not the first time that a human rights
organisation working for the development of NGOs in the Transnistrian region is
described as subversive by the Transnistrian de facto administration.
Last year, the local de facto Parliament initiated a draft law on
"foreign agents" that specifically targeted civil society
organizations working on election monitoring and receiving funding from abroad.
The draft bill was adopted in the first plenary reading back in November 2014
but has been put on hold. 
The
pressure on human rights defenders working in the Transnistrian region has
intensified since 2013. Numerous representatives of the civil society and
journalists are being intimidated and subjected to libel on a daily basis for
their work to promote and defend human rights in the region. 
“This public
communication by the Transnistrian Security Committee announcing the criminal
prosecution of Promo-LEX is yet another attempt by the de facto Transnistrian administration to
curb any independent human rights organisation denouncing the lack of justice
in this disputed area”, concluded OMCT
Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
The
Observatory calls upon the international actors, especially the participants of
the Transnistrian conflict settlement talks in the 5+2 format and parties to
the Geneva and Minsk processes, to increase the focus on human rights in their
relations with de facto and de jure Transnistrian authorities.
This would help advance concrete solutions to challenges faced by human rights
organisations which are to a large extent the result of persecution and
harassment by the de facto Transnistrian authorities.  
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in
1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective
of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders.
For
more information, please contact :
·        
FIDH : Lucie Kroening
(French/English/Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris) / Arthur Manet
(French/English/Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)
·        
OMCT : Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui (French/English/Spanish) - Tel: +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva) 