Bahrain:  Continued judicial harassment, arbitrary detention and ill-treatment of Mr. Nabeel Rajab
October 27, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / OctoberBahrain: Continued judicial harassment, arbitrary detention and ill-treatment of Mr. Nabeel Rajab

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

New information
BHR 006 /
0812 / OBS 048.31
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment /
Ill-treatment
Bahrain
October 27, 2017
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continued judicial
harassment, arbitrary detention and ill-treatment of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, co-founder and President of the Bahrain Center for
Human Rights (BCHR), founding Director of the Gulf Center for Human Rights
(GCHR), FIDH Deputy Secretary General and a member of the Middle East advisory
committee at Human Rights Watch. Mr. Nabeel Rajab has been one of the country’s
most vocal human rights defenders, denouncing human rights violations within
the country’s Jaw prison, and denouncing Bahrain’s participation in bombings of
the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen.
 
According to
the information received, on October 26, 2017, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was transferred
from the Ministry of Interior's “Qaala” police clinic to Jaw Prison. It has
been reported that Mr. Nabeel Rajab is being held in solitary confinement and
was subjected by prison guards to degrading treatment, including humiliating
and degrading body searches, forcibly shaving his hair, arbitrarily raiding his
cell at night and confiscating his personal items. 
 
Since the
begging of his detention on June 13, 2016, Mr. Nabeel Rajab has been held under
particularly harsh detention condition, including solitary confinement, and is
regularly prevented from accessing his lawyers.
 
Mr. Nabeel Rajab is being harassed by Bahraini
authorities in two different court cases. 
 
On October 26, 2017, an appeal hearing in the “Television
interviews case” was postponed to November 7, 2017. On July 10, 2017, the Manama’s Lower Criminal Court handed down a two years’ prison sentence
against Mr. Nabeel Rajab under charges of “deliberately spreading false
information and malicious rumours with the aim of discrediting the State” in
relation to television interviews he participated to. Mr. Nabeel Rajab faces
additional charges in at least two other cases related to articles published in
foreign newspapers about Bahrain’s human rights record (see background
information).
 
In the so-called
“Twitter case”, Mr. Nabeel Rajab is being accused of “insulting a statutory
body” (Article 216 of the Penal Code), “disseminating false rumours in time of
war” (Article 133) and “offending a foreign country [Saudi Arabia]” (Article
215), which carries up to 15 years in prison. Those charges are related to
tweets he posted denouncing the torture of detainees in the Kingdom’s Jaw
Prison, where he is now being detained, and the human rights violations
perpetrated by the Saudi-Arabia led coalition air strikes in Yemen. The case
which suffers endless postponements since July 2016 will next be heard on
November 19, 2017.
 
The Observatory expresses its outmost concerns
over reports of ill-treatment of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, whose health has severely
degraded since the beginning of his detention. The Observatory thus urges the
Bahraini authorities to guarantee Mr. Nabeel Rajab’s physical and psychological
integrity.
 
In its
concluding observations on Bahrain published on May 12, 2017, the United
Nations Committee Against Torture (UN CAT) drew attention to the fact that “excessive
use of solitary confinement constitutes cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment
or, depending on the circumstances, even torture (...)”[1].
The UN CAT added that it was “deeply concerned” by the arbitrary imprisonment,
torture and ill-treatment of detained human rights defenders, including
Mr. Nabeel Rajab[2].
 
The Observatory denounces
the continued arbitrary detention of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, which seems to be yet
another evidence of a long-standing pattern of harassment against him to
sanction his legitimate human rights activity.
 
The Observatory calls
upon the Bahraini authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr.
Nabeel Rajab, to put an end to any act of harassment against him and, in the
meantime, to ensure that all judicial proceedings against him are carried out
in full compliance with the right to due process, the right to a fair trial and
the right to be presumed innocent, as protected under international law.
 
Background information:
 
On July 9, 2012, Mr. Rajab was sentenced to three months’
imprisonment for several tweets posted on his twitter account. On August 23,
2012, he was acquitted by the Higher Appeal Court.
 
On August 16, 2012, the Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Rajab
to three years of imprisonment for his participation in peaceful gatherings. In
December 2012, the Appeals Court reduced the sentence to two years. He was
released in May 2014 after serving his term.
 
On October 1, 2014, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was arrested by the General
Directorate of Anti-Corruption and Economic and Electronic Security of the
Criminal Investigation Department (CID) for “insulting a public institution”
via Tweeter (Article 216). The case related to a tweet he published in
September 2014, in which he criticised the military institutions for generating
extremist ideologies (the “terrorism tweet” case). On November 2, 2014, the
Third Lower Criminal Court ordered his release but barred him from leaving the
country.
 
On January 20, 2015, the Third Lower Criminal Court sentenced him to
six months’ imprisonment for “insulting public institutions and the army”
(Article 216).
 
In 2015, two other criminal charges were brought against
Mr. Rajab. On February 26, 2015, he was summoned for investigations for
charges of “inciting hatred towards the regime” in relation to a speech he made
in February 2011 during a funeral (the “funeral speech case”). To date, the
police investigation is ongoing.
 
In addition, on April 2, 2015, Mr. Rajab was arrested, sent to the
General Directorate of Anti-Corruption and Economic and Electronic Security,
and placed in detention in solitary confinement in Isa Town Police Station. On
April 3, 2015, he was interrogated by the CID regarding two new charges brought
against him under criminal case No. 2015/38288. The first charge was “insulting
a statutory body”, referring to the Ministry of Interior in relation to tweets
he posted denouncing the torture of detainees at Jaw Prison (the “Jaw torture
tweets” case). The second charge was “disseminating false rumours in time of
war”, in relation to tweets he published about the Saudi-Arabia led coalition
air strikes in Yemen (the “Yemen tweets” case). 
 
On May 14, 2015, the Bahrain Criminal Court of Appeal upheld the
six-month prison sentence (the “terrorism tweet” case).
 
On July 13, 2015, the King of Bahrain Hamad Ben Issa Al-Khalifa ordered
through Royal Pardon the release of Mr. Nabeel Rajab for health reasons.
Mr. Rajab had already served three of the six months’ jail sentence.
Moreover, on the same date, the Public Prosecution imposed a travel ban against
Mr. Rajab in relation to the Jaw torture and Yemen tweets cases.
 
In the morning of June 13, 2016, police forces reportedly led by the
Cybercrime Unit arrested Mr. Nabeel Rajab, after raiding his house and
seizing a number of electronic devices. In the afternoon, he was able to
contact his wife by phone, and reported being detained at East Riffa police
station.
 
On June 14, Public Prosecution remanded him in custody on accusations
of “publishing and broadcasting false news that undermine the prestige of the
State” (Article 134[3]).
 
On June 28, 2016, he was transferred from police custody to the Bahrain
Defence Force (BDF) Hospital due to unprecedented heart problems. On the same
day, he was examined by a doctor, and was transferred back to West Riffa police
station.
 
On July 12, during the hearing, the judge dismissed the request for
release filed by Mr. Rajab’s lawyers and the hearing was postponed to
August 2.
 
On August 2, 2016, the High Criminal Court decided to postpone the
trial to September 5 without justification.
 
On September 4, Mr. Rajab was summoned and questioned by CID
officials. He was denied access to a lawyer on this occasion.
 
On September 5, 2016, the Public Prosecution announced that additional
charges had been brought against Mr. Nabeel Rajab, for deliberately
disseminating “false news and information and tendentious rumours that
undermine the kingdom’s prestige and stature”, in relation to a letter
published in the New York Times on
September 4, 2016[4], describing his judicial
harassment and arbitrary detention. If convicted, this could add one year to
his final sentence. In total, he now faces up to 16 years in prison. 
 
On October 3, 2016, Mr. Nabeel Rajab underwent surgery to remove
his gallbladder as a consequence of his poor detention conditions.
 
On October 6, 2016, the High Criminal Court decided after a five-minute
hearing to postpone the trial to October 31, without providing any
justification. Before the hearing, Mr. Rajab’s lawyers asked the Court a
copy of his medical reports after the Ministry of Interior and the Public
Prosecution failed to provide them, in clear violation of Mr. Rajab’s
right to be informed of his own health condition.
 
Once more on October 31, 2016, the Fourth High Criminal Court postponed
the trial until December 15 in order to obtain a technical expert from the
Cyber-Crime Unit to determine who runs Rajab’s twitter account. Rajab arrived
at the court right before the hearing, and was taken out immediately after the
Judge made his pronouncements, while Rajab’s lawyers were still making
applications.
 
On December 15, 2016, after a fifteen-minute hearing during which
Mr. Nabeel Rajab was not allowed to speak, the Fourth High Criminal Court
postponed the verdict until December 28, 2016 and refused to release him.
 
On December 21, 2016, the Cybercrime Unit of the Ministry of Interior
took Mr. Nabeel Rajab out of custody for interrogation following the
publication of a letter[5]
quoting him in French newspaper Le Monde
on December 19, 2016. The Cybercrime Unit accused Mr. Rajab of using the
article to “spread false information and tendentious rumours insulting Bahrain
and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) States and harming their relations”.
Investigations on those publications were still underway.
 
On December 28, 2016, Manama’s Fifth High Criminal Court acceded to an
application for Mr. Nabeel Rajab’s temporary release following a failure
to give any basis or any sufficient evidence of a link between him and the
Twitter account with respect to the Yemeni and Jaw prison tweets.
 
Then Mr. Rajab was taken to the CID for temporary release.
However, he was re-arrested later on the same day and referred to the Public
Prosecution in relation to an investigation into televised interviews dating
from 2014, which commenced in mid-June 2016.
 
On December 28, 2016, the Public Prosecution ordered the pre-trial
detention for seven days of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, pending investigation into
televised interviews dating back to 2014. These interviews with television
networks Lua Lua Channel, Al Etijah TV and Al-Alam News Network were related to
the human rights situation in Bahrain. In this case, Mr. Nabeel Rajab is
being prosecuted on charge of “deliberately spreading false information and
malicious rumours with the aim of discrediting the State” (Article 134 of the
Penal Code)[6], which carries up to three
years in prison.
 
On January 5, 2017, the Public Prosecution renewed Mr. Nabeel
Rajab’s pre-trial detention for a further 15 days, pending investigation.
 
On April 5, 2017, Mr. Nabeel Rajab underwent surgery for bleeding
ulcers at Manama’s military hospital. His family was denied the right to visit
him while in hospital. Only two days after the surgery, Mr. Rajab was sent
back to West Riffa police station where he has remained in solitary confinement
most of the time.
 
On April 8, 2017, Mr. Rajab was rushed to the police hospital in
an ambulance because of an infected wound that followed the operation. Since
that date, Mr. Nabeel Rajab is recovering from his medical condition and remains
in Qaala clinic, which is a division of the Ministry of Interior[7].
 
On July 10, 2017, the Manama’s
Lower Criminal Court handed down a two years’ prison sentence against Mr.
Nabeel Rajab under charges of “deliberately spreading false information and malicious
rumours with the aim of discrediting the State” (Article 134 of the Penal Code)
in the so called “Television interviews case”, in
relation to television interviews in which Mr. Nabeel Rajab was talking about
Bahrain’s human rights record.  
 
On August 8,
2017, a Bahraini Court held its 15th hearing in the so-called “Twitter case”
against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and decided again to postpone the hearing until
September 11, 2017, despite a request by Mr. Rajab’s lawyers to hold the next hearing sooner. Furthermore, the
court stated that by then, new judges will be seating in the court.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities of Bahrain urging them to: 
 
The
Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel
Rajab and that of all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
ii. Release
Mr. Nabeel Rajab immediately and unconditionally, as his detention is arbitrary
and its conditions amount to ill-treatment and are endangering his life; 
 
iii. Put an
end to any act of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr.
Nabeel Rajab and against all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
iv. Conform
in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular its Articles 1, Article 6 (c), 9, 11 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in
all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Bahrain. 
 
Addresses: 
 
·       Cheikh Hamad
bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·       Cheikh Khaled
Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax : 00973 17 21 05 75; ofd@mofa.gov.bh
·       Cheikh Khalid
bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Fax: +973 175 31
284
·       Lt. Gen.
Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·       H.E.
Mr. Yusuf Abdulkarim Bucheeri, Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
·       H.E. Ahmed
Mohammed Yousif Aldoseri, Embassy of the Kingdom of Bahrain to the Kingdom of
Belgium, Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail: Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh
 
***
Paris-Geneva, October 27, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
Tel and fax FIDH: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 /
+ 41 22 809 49 29



[1]                 See Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, Opinion
A/HRC/WGAD/2013/12 No. 12/2013, July 25, 2013, par. 20.


[2]                 The Concluding Observations also refer to Mr. Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, former BCHR President,
sentenced to life in prison in June 2011 for politically motivated charges and
whose health conditions have also been worsening.


[3]                 Article 134 of the Penal Code provides that “A
punishment of imprisonment for at least 3 months and a fine of at least BD100,
or either penalty, shall be inflicted upon every citizen who deliberately
releases abroad false or malicious news, statements or rumours about domestic
conditions in the State, so as to undermine financial confidence in the State
or adversely affect its prestige or position, or exercise in any manner
whatsoever activities that are harmful to the national interests. The
punishment shall be imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 years if an
offence is committed in wartime”.


[4]                 See “Letter from a Bahraini jail”, September 4,
2016, The New York Times.


[5]                 See “Berlin et Paris,
révisez vos liens avec les monarchies du Golfe”, in Le Monde December 19, 2016.


[6]                 An investigation into these char
Properties Date: October 27, 2017Activity: Human Rights DefendersType: Urgent InterventionsCountry: BahrainSubjects: Arbitrary arrests and enforced disappearances, Human Rights Defenders, Threats, intimidation and harassment, Torture and violenceShare thisTweetRelated articlesBahrain:  Continued ill-treament of Mr. Nabeel Rajab
Urgent Interventions / April 24, 2018Bahrain:  Fears for Nabeel Rajab’s life inside his prison
Urgent Interventions / January 25, 2018Bahrain:  Call for immediate release of Nabeel Rajab, as prison sentence is upheld
Urgent Interventions / November 22, 2017Bahrain:  15 Rights Groups to US, UK and EU: Support Nabeel Rajab Ahead of the Appeal Judgement Against 2-Year Sentence For Speaking to Press
Urgent Interventions / November 21, 2017Bahrain:  Nabeel Rajab's hearing postponed until September 11, 2017
Urgent Interventions / August 10, 2017Bahrain:  Joint Press Release: FCO Silence on Nabeel Rajab “Appalling”, Say 17 Rights Groups & MPs
Urgent Interventions / August  6, 2017LanguagesThis page is available in:EnglishYou can also translate it on the fly: 
  function googleTranslateElementInit() {
    new google.translate.TranslateElement({
      pageLanguage: "en",
      autoDisplay: false
    }, "google_translate_element");
  }
  Recently Viewed Articles 