Bahrain:  Press Release: New trial against Nabeel Rajab to start on October 19
October 17, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2014 / OctoberBahrain: Press Release: New trial against Nabeel Rajab to start on October 19Bahrain_1710141 page / 137 KBParis-Geneva, October 17, 2014 – Human rights defender Nabeel Rajab,
President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), Director of the Gulf
Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and FIDH Deputy Secretary General, will face a
new trial on October 19. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), along with numerous
institutions and NGOs have called for his release and the end of his judicial
harassment. In addition, the Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to
facilitate the access of international human rights experts to the country for
trial observation and release.
 On October 19, 2014, the Third Lower
Criminal Court will open the trial against Mr.
Nabeel Rajab on charge of “insulting a public institution” via Twitter.
The alleged offence concern tweets he published on Twitter, which the CID
deemed insulting to the Ministry of Interior, pursuant to Article 216 of the
Bahraini Penal Code, punishable by up to three years of imprisonment. Mr. Rajab
has been detained since the date of his summons for interrogation on October 1.
Mr. Rajab had just returned to Bahrain
following an international advocacy tour at the United Nations and European
Union, and there are strong reasons to believe that he has been targeted in
particular due to his advocacy for human rights violations committed in his
country in violation of international human rights standards.
Mr. Rajab had recently been released from
prison after completing a two year sentence (see background information). In
another case, he had already been tried on similar charges in relation to
tweets deemed to be insulting to the Ministry of Interior, before being
acquitted.
In 2013, the United Nations Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention (UN WGAD) had found that Mr. Rajab's detention was
arbitrary, following a previous conviction related to his freedom of opinion,
expression and assembly. The UN WGAD had concluded that the “domestic laws of
Bahrain (…) seem to deny persons the basic right to freedom of opinion,
expression”.
Such ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention is one more
evidence of the continued criminalisation of human rights defenders'
activities. This particular case has drawn the attention of many institutions,
NGOs and third countries. The Observatory intended to send a trial observation
mission for the October 19 hearing, but could not get a response in time from
the authorities to guarantee its trial observer an unhindered access to the
country. Thus, the Observatory calls on the authorities to facilitate the
access to the country for international trial observers by guaranteeing the
automatic issue of visas.
 For
more information, please contact:
·        
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey
Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·        
OMCT: Miguel Martin: +41 22
809 49 24 