Syrian Arab Republic:  88 Arab lawyers express solidarity with Syrian human rights lawyer Mohanad Al Hassani
November  9, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2009 / NovemberSyrian Arab Republic: 88 Arab lawyers express solidarity with Syrian human rights lawyer Mohanad Al Hassani    To the attention of:      Mr. 	Nizar Assakkef, President of the Syrian Bar Association    Mr. 	Mohammad Jihad Al-Lahham, President of the Damascus section of the 	Syrian Bar Association   Dear Sirs,   We have been informed that the Disciplinary Board of the Bar Association of Damascus has been examining since August, 11, 2009 a case concerning Mr. Mohanad Al Hassani and might issue its ruling on November 10, 2009.  As lawyers, we wish to share our strong concern in relation to the fate of Mr. Al Hassani, a human rights lawyer, President of the Syrian Organization for Human Rights “Sawasiya” and member of the Damascus Bar Association for 15 years.  Mr. Al Hassani is accused of having failed to request the President of the Bar Association’s authorisation to create the above-mentioned human rights organisation, of having attended hearings before the Supreme State Security Court (SSSC) within the framework of his judicial observation activities related to the respect of international standards on fair trial in the absence of any authorisation, and of having expressed slanderous comments undermining the image of the State. We are aware that Mr. Al-Hassani is also facing criminal charges brought against him by an investigating judge at the end of July for allegedly “weakening national sentiment” and “spreading false information that could debilitate the morale of the nation and harm the reputation of the state abroad”.  Such charges have been frequently used by the judiciary to target human rights defenders and political dissidents, and we consider them politically motivated. The fact that the Bar Association’s referral of the case of Mr. Al-Hassani to its disciplinary board occurred within a week and was based on similar grounds is therefore of particular concern to us.    These two proceedings, in themselves, appear to contravene international standards relating to the independence of lawyers and the role of human rights defenders, including as contained in the United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998 and to the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers adopted in September 1990. Article 16 of the Basic Principles provides that lawyers must be “able to perform all of their professional functions without intimidation, hindrance, harassment or improper interference” and that they “shall not suffer, or be threatened with, prosecution or administrative, economic or other sanctions for any action taken in accordance with recognized professional duties”.  The role of the Bar Association is to defend the role of lawyers in the society, in particular in their capacity as human rights defenders, and to promote debates on the law and its implementation. Without intending to interfere with the competencies or independence of the Syrian Bar Association we wish to share with you our strong concerns and urge you to drop all accusations against Mr. Al Hassani, as they manifestly aim at obstructing his human rights activities and his right to freedom of expression and association. We hope that you will take this request into consideration.  Sincerely,       Mr. 	Hafez ABU SAADA, Lawyer and General Secretary of the Egyptian 	Organization For Human Rights (EOHR), Egypt   Mr. 	Mokhtar TRIFI, Lawyer and President of the Tunisian League for Human 	Rights (LTDH), Tunisia   Mr. 	Mostefa BOUCHACHI, Lawyer and President of the Algerian League for 	the Defense of Human Rights (LADDH), Algeria   Mr. Abchi MOHSEN, Lawyer 	at the Tripoli Bar Association, Lebanon   Mr. Abdelaziz NOUAYDI, 	Lawyer and President of Adala, Morocco   Mr. 	Houcine BARDI, Lawyer at the Paris Bar, France   Mr. 	Hassan SEMLALI, Lawyer at the Kenibra Bar, Morocco   Mr. 	Sofiane CHOUITER, Lawyer, Algeria   Mr. 	Amine SIDHOUM, Lawyer and human rights defender, Algeria   Mr. 	Anouar KOUSRI, Lawyer before the Cassation Court, Tunisia   Mr. 	Zarad Al- Sayed, Lawyer and member of the Mousawa Center for Human 	Rights, Egypt   Mr. 	Ahmed Dorgam, Lawyer and member of the Mousawa Center for Human 	Rights, Egypt   Mr. 	Hanim Elbaz, Lawyer and member of the Mousawa Center for Human 	Rights, Egypt   Mr. 	Ahmed Abo Msalam, Lawyer and member of the Mousawa Center for Human 	Rights, Egypt   Mr. 	Rimaz Zarad, Lawyer and member of the Mousawa Center for Human 	Rights, Egypt   Mr. 	Mohamed Bayoumi, Egyptian Lawyer and Executive Director for Egyptian 	Foundation for Refugee Rights (EFRR)   Mr. 	Ahmed Badawy, Egyptian Lawyer and EFRR Chairman   Dr. 	Martin David Jones, Canadian Lawyer and Vice Chairman for EFRR   Mr. 	Mohamed Ahmed, Lawyer, Bahrain   Mr. 	Mohamed Al Tajer, Lawyer, Bahrain   Mr. 	Mohammed Al Jishi, Lawyer, Bahrain   Mr. 	Mohamed Amarti, Lawyer and member of the Moroccan Organisation for 	Human Rights (Organisation 	marocaine des droits humains 	– OMDH)   Mr. 	Mohamed Abdel Monem, Lawyer and member of the Association for Human 	Rights Legal Aid (AHRLA), Egypt   Ms. 	Kahina Azdaou, Lawyer, Algeria   Mr. 	Abdesattar Ben Moussa, Lawyer and former President of the Bar 	Council of Tunisia   Mr. 	Abderazak KILANI, Lawyer and President of the Tunis Branch of the 	Bar Council, Tunisia   Ms. 	Radia Nasraoui, Lawyer, former member of the Bar Council and 	President of the Tunisian Association Against Torture (Association 	tunisienne de lutte contre la torture), Tunisia   Mr. 	Abderaouf Ayadi, Lawyer, former member  member of the Bar Council 	and former secretary general of the National Council for Freedoms in 	Tunisia (Conseil 	national des pour les libertés en Tunisie 	– CNLT), Tunisia   Mr. 	Ayachi Hammami, Lawyer, Tunisia   Mr. 	Mohammed Abbou, Lawyer, Tunisia   Mr. 	Faouzi Ben Mrad, Lawyer and former member  of the Association of the 	Young Lawyers in Tunisia (Jeunes 	Avocats de Tunisie)   Ms. 	Amel Abada, Lawyer, militant and member of the Algerian league for 	defense of human rights (Ligue algérienne pour la défense des 	droits de l'Homme – LADDH)   Ms. 	Maya Mansour, Lawyer, member of the Beirut Bar Association and 	lecturer at the university, Lebanon   Mr. 	Nizar Saghieh, Lawyer at the Beirut Bar Association (Lebanon)   Mr 	Karim NATOURI, Lawyer and President of the Bejaia branch of the 	LADDH, Algeria   Ms. 	Zaha al Majali, Lawyer and member of Amman Centre for Human Rights 	Studies, Jordan   Mr. 	Aissa RAHMOUNE, Lawyer and President of  "oumouhand amrane" 	office, LADDH of Tizi-Ouzou, Algeria   Mr. 	Abdelhamid REHIOUI, Lawyer at the Bar of Constantine a,d President 	of the Constantine Branch of the LADDH, Algeria   Mr. 	Mohammed Naji Saleh Alaw, Lawyer, Yemen   Mr. 	Abdulkarim Alkhaiwani, Lawyer, Yemen   Mr. 	Bechir Essid, President of the Bar Association of Tunisia   Mr. 	Ibrahim Bouderbala, Lawyer and former persident of the Tunis Branch 	of Lawyers, Tunisia   Mr. 	Khaled Krichi, Lawyer and member of the Tunisian Association of 	Young Lawyers, Tunisia   Mr. 	Chokri Belaid, Lawyer, Tunisia   Mr. 	Jalel Hammami, Lawyer, Tunisia   Mr. 	Amor 	Satraoui, Lawyer, Tunisia   Mr. 	Reda Bel Haj, Lawyer, Tunisia   Mr. 	Slah Ourimi, Lawyer, Tunisia   Mr. 	Bassam Trifi, Lawyer, Tunisia   Mr. 	Gamal Eid, Lawyer , Executive Director of the Arabic Network for 	Human Rights Information – Egypt   Mr. 	Emad Mubarak, Lawyer and Executive Director of the Foundation for 	Freedom of thought and expressio, Egypt   Mr.Improved 	Bahnasi, Lawyer, Legal Aid Society for Human Rights, Egypt     Mr. 	Mohammad Zarea, Lawyer and Director of the Arab Organization for 	Penal Reform, Egypt     Mr. 	Nasser Amin, Lawyer and Director of the Arab Center for the 	Independence of the Judiciary and Lawyers, Egypt     Mr.Negad 	Albourae, Lawyer before the cassation court and Director of the 	Legal Unit of the United Group, Egypt     Ms. 	Inas Ismail Hussein, Lawyer and member of the United Group ,Egypt     Ms. 	Sarah Hisham, Lawyer and member of the United Group, Egypt     Mr.Abdul 	Hamid Salim Abdul-Hamid, Lawyer and member of the United Group, 	Egypt     Mr.Karim 	Ahmadinejad, Lawyer and member of the United Group, Egypt     Mr. 	Muhammad Ali, Lawyer and member of the United Group, Egypt     Mr. 	Yasser Shook, Lawyer and member of the United Group, Egypt     Ms. 	Rawda Ahmed Sayed, Lawyer and member of the Arabic Network for Human 	Rights, Egypt     Mr. 	Najah Wakim, Lawyer and former member of Parliament, Chairman of the 	People's Party, Lebanon   Mr. 	Radwan Seydou, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Ethene Mahmoud, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Sulaiman Ismail, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Masood Caso, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Mustafa Owusu, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Abdullah Khalil, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Abdallah Imam, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Hassan Abdel-Azim, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Habib Issa, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Mahmoud Marei, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Samer Al-Huwaidi, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Ali Fares, Lawyer, Syria   Ms. 	Daad Moses, Lawyer, Syria   Ms. 	Razan Zaytoon, Lawyer, Syria   Ms. 	Catherine Tally, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Radeef Mustafa, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Abdul Razak Zureik, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Burgess El Fna, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Nazem Al Hammadi,Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Tayseer Kardas, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Hussein Issa, Lawyer, Syria   Mr. 	Nasr-Eddine Lezzar, Lawyer and human rights defender, Algeria   Mr. 	Wadie Meraghni, Lawyer and member of the LADDH, Algeria   Mr. 	Siham Hammache, Lawyer and member of the Algiers Bar, Algeria   Mr. 	Raji Sourani, Lawyer, Palestine 