Turkey:  Release and ongoing judicial harassment of four academics and researchers
April 27, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2016 / AprilTurkey: Release and ongoing judicial harassment of four academics and researchers
New information

TUR 001 / 0116 / OBS 010.2
Release /
Judicial harassment
Turkey
April 27, 2016

 

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the 
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and 
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in  
Turkey.

 

New information:

 

The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the release 
and ongoing judicial harassment of four academics and 
researchers, Ms. Esra Mungan Gürsoy, Ms. Meral 
Camcı, Mr. Kıvanç Ersoy and Mr. 
Muzaffer Kaya.

 

According to the information received, on April 22, 2016, Ms. Esra Mungan 
Gürsoy, Ms. Meral Camcı, Mr. Kıvanç Ersoy and Mr. Muzaffer 
Kaya appeared before the Istanbul 13th Heavy Penal Court to face 
charges of “terrorist propaganda” (Article 7/2 of Anti-Terrorism 
Law) after denouncing human rights violations in a press statement and a 
petition.

 

The prosecutor announced that he intended to suspend the investigation 
which he had initiated based on Article 7/2 and to launch a new 
investigation for breach of Article 301 of the Penal Code (“insulting 
Turkishness”)[1]. Then 
the court decided to release the four on bail, and adjourned the hearing to 
September 27, 2016, without confirming nor reversing the Prosecutor’s 
decision.

 

The Observatory welcomes the release of the four afore-mentioned 
academics, and calls upon the Turkish authorities to put an end to any kind 
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against them as well as 
against all human rights defenders in Turkey.

 

Until all charges are dropped against Ms. Esra Mungan Gürsoy, Ms. 
Meral Camcı, Mr. Kıvanç Ersoy and Mr. Muzaffer Kaya, the 
Observatory further urges the Turkish authorities to ensure that all 
judicial proceedings against them are carried out in full compliance with 
their right to a fair trial, as protected under international law.

 

Background information:

 

On January 15, 2016 an anti-terrorism police operation targeting more than 
1.000 academics in Turkey who had signed a statement denouncing State 
violence on Kurdish provinces was launched, leading to the arrest of 20 of 
them 
[2], among whom Mr. M.D. Ümit 
Biçer, Board Member of the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey 
(HRFT)and professor at the Kocaeli University, under laws 
prohibiting “making propaganda for a terrorist organisation” and 
the ”denigration of the Turkish Nation”. Later on the same date, 
all academics were released. At the time of publication of this Urgent 
Appeal, the investigation was ongoing.

 

On January 11, 2016, more than 1,400 academics in Turkey and abroad had 
published a statement led by Academics for Peace entitled “We will not 
be a Party to This Crime”. The statement expressed concern that the 
ongoing curfews, which have been declared in several cities across South 
East Turkey, are exposing their inhabitants to severe human rights 
violations and asked that they are immediately lifted and that solutions for 
a permanent peace process be established. Furthermore, it called the State 
of Turkey to put an end to violence and prepare the conditions for peace 
negotiations. However, soon after its publication, President Recep Tayyip 
Erdoğan heavily criticised the academics and compared them to terrorists. 
In a public speech made on January 15, 2016, he referred to the academics as 
“the darkest of dark” and accused them of having committed 
“the same crime as those who carry out massacres”. The President 
also called the academics the “fifth column” for terrorists. 
Several academics are also said to have received threats via social media 
and by telephone, including from nationalist mafia boss Sedat Peker, who has 
publicly threatened the group saying: “we will bathe in your 
blood”.

 

The arrests of the academics have taken place against the backdrop of the 
deteriorating human rights situation in Turkey. The authorities have 
launched a wide-range anti-terrorism operation, started in late July 2015 
under the pretext of countering terrorism. In this context, at least 58 
curfews have been imposed in several cities in South East Turkey (Cizre, 
Sirnak, Sur, Mardin, Diyarbakir, Hakkâri, Muş, Elazığ and Batman), 
leading to restrictions in access to basic services for approximately 
1,377,000 people living in these districts and to the death between August 
16, 2015 and March 18, 2016 of at least 310 civilians (including 62 women, 
72 children, 29 people aged over 60)[3].

 

The operation turned into a massive crackdown against peaceful civil 
society actors depicted as part of “terrorist networks”. This 
campaign has been targeting dozens of peaceful activists who have been 
involved in the monitoring of human rights violations resulting from 
anti-terrorism operations and advocating for a peaceful resolution of the 
Kurdish issue. These peaceful activists include human rights defenders, 
particularly members of HRFT and the Human Rights Association(İHD) members, 
lawyers, political party representatives, academics and journalists[4].

 

Ms. Esra Mungan Gürsoy, Mr. Kıvanç Ersoy and Mr. Muzaffer 
Kaya were arrested on March 15, 2016 and were detained in high security 
closed prisons in İstanbul, Bakırköy Prison for Women and Silivri 
Prison for Men, respectively. Ms. Meral Camcı was arrested upon her return 
to Turkey on March 31, 2016 and was detained in Bakırköy Prison for 
Women.

 

The indictment against them referred to a press statement which they read 
out on March 10, 2016 on behalf of the Academics for Peace, as well as to 
“We will not be a Party to This Crime” statement.

 

Actions requested:

 

Please write to the authorities in Turkey, urging them to:

 

i. Drop all charges against all signatory academics, particularly Ms. 
Meral Camcı, Ms. Esra Mungan Gürsoy, Mr. Kıvanç Ersoy and Mr. 
Muzaffer Kaya and, in the meantime, ensure that any judicial proceedings 
against them is carried out in full compliance with the defendants' 
right to a fair trial, as protected under international law;

 

ii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of all human rights defenders in Turkey, including the 
above-mentioned academics;

 

iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial 
level, against all human rights defenders in Turkey;

 

iv. Put an end to the ongoing crackdown on civil society under the pretext 
of countering terrorism and recognise the legitimate role of human rights 
defenders, in line with Turkey’s international obligations;

 

v. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on 
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:

- its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for 
the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at 
the national and international levels”;

- its Article 6(a-b-c), which foresees that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, (a) to participate in peaceful 
activities against violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms, (b) 
as provided for in human rights and other applicable international 
instruments, freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, 
information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms, (c) 
to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and 
in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these 
and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those 
matters”;

- its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse 
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of 
his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present 
Declaration”;

 

vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Turkey.


Addresses:

 

·       President of Turkey, Recep 
Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31, E-mail: contact@tccb.gov.tr

·       Prime Minister of Turkey 
Ahmet Davutoglu, Fax:+90 (312) 403 62 82 ; Email: ozelkalem@basbakanlik.gov.tr


·       Minister of Justice of Turkey 
Mr. Kenan Ipek, Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33 70; E-mail: info@adalet.gov.tr

·       Minister of Interior of 
Turkey Mr. Efkan Ala,Fax: 90 312 418 1795;Email: ozelkalem@icisleri.gov.tr

·       Ambassador Izzet Selim Yenel, 
Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the European Union in Brussels, Belgium; 
Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50

·       Ambassador Mehmet Ferden 
Çarikçi, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in 
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int


 

Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Turkey in your 
respective country.

 


 



[1] 
               
In order to launch this investigation against public officers, the 
prosecutor must get permission from the Ministry of Justice.



[2] 
             The 
20 university academics and researchers are Associate Prof. Dr.  
Aynur Özuğurlu, Associate Prof. Dr. Burcu Yakut 
Çakar, Assistant Prof. Dr. Derya Keskin, 
Associate Prof. Dr. Gül Koksal, Associate Prof. Dr. 
Güven Bakırezer, Associate Prof. Dr. Hakan 
Koçak, Assistant Prof. Dr. Hülya Kendir
, Prof. Dr. Kuvvet Lordoğlu, Prof. Dr. Mehmet 
Cengiz Erçin, Assistant Prof. Dr. Mehmet Rauf 
Kesici, Assistant Prof. Dr. Mehmet Ruhi Demiray, 
Prof. Dr. Nilay Etiler, Prof. Dr. Onur 
Hamzaoğlu, Associate Prof. Dr. Özlem 
Özkan, Prof. Dr. Ümit Biçer, Prof. Dr.  
Veli Deniz, Associate Prof. Dr. Yücel Demirer 
, Prof. Dr. Zelal Ekinci, Research Assistant Adem 
Yeşilyurt, and Assistant Prof. Dr. Emek Bayrak 
.



[3] 
                
Data collected by HRFT Documentation Center.



[4] 
           For more 
information see FIDH Press Release of 21 September 2015: 
https://www.fidh.org/International-Federation-for-Human-Rights/europe/turkey/turkey-rights-groups-strongly-condemn-escalating-violence-and-human 