Bangladesh:  New NGO Law aims at suppressing  independent human rights work
June 18, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2014 / JuneBangladesh: New NGO Law aims at suppressing  independent human rights work
Geneva-Paris,
June 18, 2014. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, are concerned about
the pending adoption of a new Law in Bangladesh reinforcing government control
over the
work of civil society organisations.

On June 2, 2014, the Government of Bangladesh approved the draft “Foreign Donations
(Voluntary Activities) Regulation Act, 2014” at a regular meeting of the
Cabinet, which was chaired by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina. The Bill is due to
be placed before the Bangladesh Parliament soon for enactment into law. With the adoption of the Act,
the previous Foreign Donations Voluntary Activities Regulation Ordinance, 1978,
and the Foreign Contributions Regulation Ordinance, 1982 will be repealed. Although the Government claims the law aims to ensure better
transparency and accountability for the use of foreign donations by
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in the country, it de facto severely
restricts freedoms of association by hindering NGOs’ access to funding.
“The absurd effect is that NGOs documenting
human rights violations, including torture and enforced disappearances, can be
closed arbitrarily by the authorities to use funds for doing so. Bangladesh has
a history of abusing funding restrictions to curtail critical human rights work”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “Instead
of coming clean and lifting those restrictions the Law reinforces government
control, including by appointing an administrator that will directly monitor
NGOs that receive funding from abroad”, Mr. Staberock added.
Section 3 of the Act
stipulates that NGOs will not be allowed to receive
foreign donations without prior permission from the NGO Affairs Bureau (NGO-AB)
for any project they wish to undertake. NGOs will have to declare to the Government
the source of foreign donations and how they will be used. In addition, they
will have to be registered with the NGO-AB to undertake such activities, and
they will have to renew their registration after 10 years (Section 4).
Importantly, under the Act, the NGO-AB, which is
placed under the supervision of the Prime Minister's Office, has the authority
to inspect, monitor and assess the activities of NGOs that receive foreign
funding, allowing direct control and surveillance over their activities
(Section 10). To this end, the Bill gives all related power to the Director
General (DG) of the NGO-AB and its executive administrative officers (the Divisional Commissioners, the Deputy
Commissioners and the Upazilla Nirbahi Officers). They will have full
control over the activities of NGOs receiving foreign funding, including through regular visits of NGO offices
and monthly coordination meetings. In
addition, NGOs will not have the right to challenge the decisions of the
executive officers before the judiciary. The DG can also unilaterally appoint
an administrator to file or oversee a case in order to close down or dissolve
any NGO (Section 14).
Moreover, the Act provides
for punitive measures in cases of violations of the law, which includes
cancellation or suspension of registration and imposition of fines (Section
16).
The Act also prohibits
political parties, judges of the Supreme Court, lawmakers, elected local
representatives, and government and semi-government employees from receiving
foreign donations (Section 5).
The Observatory is
concerned that such proposed legislative reforms are contrary to
international law regulating the right to freedom of association, as they
would establish a set of harsh restrictions towards NGOs, which would go
far beyond what is permissible under international law. The right
of NGOs to freedom of association is a fundamental and universal right
enshrined in numerous international treaties and standards, especially
Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), which Bangladesh has ratified. While this right may be restricted
by the Government, especially for purposes of transparency and good
governance, any restrictions must always be “prescribed by law” and
“necessary in a democratic society”, and respect the primacy of
the general interest and the principle of proportionality (Article 22.2 of
ICCPR and case-law of the United Nations Human Rights Committee). It
should be emphasised that freedom shall remain the rule, while
restrictions should always be an exception admissible under the above-mentioned
conditions.
“We strongly condemn the above-mentioned law, which is likely to be used against human rights NGOs and activists by further shrinking
the space of civil society organisations working for the defence of human
rights in Bangladesh, where defenders and their organisations have been increasingly
harassed over the past months”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji. “Accordingly, we urge the Parliament of Bangladesh not
to enact the “Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities) Regulation
Bill, 2014”, Mr. Lahidji added.
“Independent human rights work is a fundamental feature
of any democratic society and not for profit organisations naturally depend on
funding. This is why a right to seek funding is recognised under international
law”, Messrs.
Staberock and Lahidji concluded. 