OMCT provides expert briefing to UN anti-torture body: ‘Urgent need to prevent transfers to torture’
August 11, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Reports and Publications / 2015 / AugustOMCT provides expert briefing to UN anti-torture body: ‘Urgent need to prevent transfers to torture’ Geneva, 07
August 2015. With migration pressures increasing around the world,
new conflicts emerging and an aggressive counter-terrorism debate portraying
foreigners and migrants as unwanted or security threats, the OMCT warns of an
increasing risk that States are sending people back to torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment.
In a thematic briefing to the UN Committee against
Torture, the UNs main anti-torture body, the OMCT presented its concerns
regarding the lack of implementation and protections against transfers to
torture as a growing and under-reported global problem. 
‘States who send persons back to real risks of torture
are complicit for such violations under article 3 of the UN Convention against
Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. It is
alarming to see that protections against such transfers are lacking or not
applied in many regions of the world. There is a need to think collectively on
how to reinforce an effective protection strategy to prevent transfers to
torture in reality”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
The briefing set out the legal framework on the
principle under comparative human rights law, the implementation of fundamental
preventive safeguards and the reinforcement of effective national and
international remedies against return. Another key topic has been the numerous
legal policy challenges posed by counter-terrorism laws and practices post
9-11. States have sought to limit or circumvent this fundamental principle and
transferred persons to countries with a real risk of torture. The OMCT called
for the development
of a clear, comprehensive and systematic set of guidelines on how to
enforce the prohibition of refoulement and how to put in place effective
remedies against it - including reparation. Indeed the Committee against
Torture has reaffirmed at numerous occasions the absolute nature of the
principle. States should apply no exception based on national security concerns
and counter-terrorism policies. 
The briefing to the UN Committee Against Torture
included Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General, and OMCT legal experts,
Helena Solà Martín and Nicole Buerli, and other international experts,
including Dr. Fabián Salvioli, the Chairperson of the UN Human Rights
Committee, Dr. Mark Villiger the Judge of the European Court of Human Rights,
and leading civil society experts Carla Festmann, Director of Redress, and Ian
Seiderman, Head of Legal Policy at the International Commission of Jurists. 
Please
see also:
OMCT submission to the UN Committee Against Torture
OMCT briefing paper on the UN Convention Against
Torture
OMCT Handbook for further details on the jurisprudence of CAT on
non-refoulement
For further
information, please contact:
Astrid Salcedo Pinzon
asp@omct.org, +41 22 809 49 39 