China:  Arbitrary arrest of at least nine women's and LGBTI rights defenders
March 13, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2015 / MarchChina: Arbitrary arrest of at least nine women's and LGBTI rights defendersCHN 001 / 0315 / OBS 
018Arbitrary arrests / Arbitrary detention /Judicial harassment 
/ Denial of access to lawyersPeople’s Republic of 
ChinaMarch 13, 2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International 
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention on the 
following situation in the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC).
 
Description of the situation:
 The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the 
arbitrary arrest of at least nine women's and LGBTI rights defenders, namely, 
Ms. Li Tingting, also known as “Li Maizi”, Manager of the LGBTI 
program at the Beijing Yirenping Center, Ms. Wu Rongrong, 
Founder and Executive Director of the Weizhiming Women’s Center in Guangzhou, 
Ms. Zheng Churan, staff member of Yirenping based in Guangzhou, 
Ms. Wei Tingting, Director of LGBTI rights organization Ji’ande 
in Beijing, Ms. Wang Man, Beijing-based coordinator for the 
Global Call to Action Against Poverty (GCAP), Ms. Xu Ding, 
member of the LGBTI group Rainbow Coalition in Wuhan, Ms. Yu 
Lian, student volunteer at the Beijing Yirenping Center, Ms. Ai 
Ke, coordinator of the Chinese production of the play “The Vagina 
Monologues”, and Ms. Gao Lei a trans-gender rights activist, 
Founder of Good Men for Feminism, and the continuing arbitrary detention of five 
of them. 
According to the information received, on March 6-7, 2015, the police 
arrested Ms. Li Tingting, also known as “Li Maizi”, Ms. Wu Rongrong, Ms. Zheng 
Churan, Ms. Wei Tingting, Ms. Wang Man, Ms. Xu Ding, Ms. Yu Lian, Ms. Ai Ke, Ms. 
Gao Lei, and Ms. Xiao La. The nine defenders have been promoting equal rights 
for women in the country and were about to launch a nationwide campaign to raise 
awareness about sexual harassment aboard public transportation and to join a 
march against sexual harassment in a Beijing park on the eve of the 
International Women's Day on March 8. In light of the National People's Congress 
and the Chinese People's Political consultative conference which began on March 
5, authorities have increased their surveillance and repression of NGOs 
throughout the country.
 
Four were released on March 8, the evening after being interrogated, namely 
Ms. Xu Ding, Ms. Yu Lian, Ms. Ai Ke, Ms. Gao Lei, and Ms. Xiao La. As of issuing 
this appeal, at least five others remain arbitrarily detained namely Ms. Li 
Tingting, also known as “Li Maizi”, Ms. Wu Rongrong, Ms. Zheng Churan, Ms. Wei 
Tingting and Ms. Wang Man.
 
On March 12, the five were put under criminal detention on charges of 
”picking quarrels and provoking troubles” and transferred to Haidian District 
Detention Center in Beijing. If convicted, they face up to five years in 
prison.
 
According to the information received, only Li Tingting has been allowed to 
see her lawyer; the other four have been denied access to their lawyers since 
their arrest. Li Tingting's first meeting her lawyer took place on March 12 in 
Beijing, one week after her arrest. Li Tingting mentioned that on the day of her 
arrest, the police officers did not present their badges. Her lawyer observed 
that she seems to be in good health and that she stands by her innocence of any 
wrongdoing.
 
The Observatory was also informed that the houses of Ms. Li Tingting, Ms. 
Zheng Churan and Ms. Wu Rongrong were searched and some of the banners and other 
materials meant for use during the anti-sexual harassment campaign were seized. 
Moreover, Ms. Zheng Churan and Ms. Wu Rongrong, who were arrested in Guangzhou, 
were transported to Beijing for their detention, which is 2,000 kilometres from 
their residence. This increases the difficulties they face in being able to 
communicate with their lawyers and families.
 
The Observatory is also concerned about Ms Wu Rongrong's health in 
detention, as she suffers from diabetes and severe digestion issues and may not 
receive proper medical care in detention. Her lawyer has requested an assessment 
of her health in detention, but sources indicate that authorities have not yet 
responded to this request.
 
All of the nine activists arrested on March 6 and 7 have fought for the 
rights of individuals suffering from HIV/AIDs and Hepatitis B; disabled persons; 
women discriminated against in rural land entitlement cases, employment, and 
higher education; female victims of rape or sexual harassment; as well as the 
rights of LGBTI individuals. Furthermore, Ms. Li Tingting, Ms. Wu Rongrong and 
Ms. Zheng Churan have actively promoted the UN Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in China, by conducting 
trainings, disseminating information, organizing events to raise public 
awareness, documenting cases of rights violations, and participating in CEDAW 
reviews. It is worth noting that the CEDAW Committee, in its concluding 
observations in November 2014, expressed its concerns about reprisals against 
NGOs and activists taking part in the review process and about restrictions and 
censorship faced by NGOs in China.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the arbitrary arrest of all nine 
above-mentioned activists and further condemns the ongoing arbitrary detention 
and judicial harassment of Ms. Li Tingting, Ms. Wu Rongrong, Ms. Zheng Churan, 
Ms. Wei Tingting, and Ms. Wang Man, which seem aimed only at preventing them 
from carrying out their peaceful human rights activities. The Observatory calls 
upon the Chinese authorities to immediately and unconditionally release these 
activists.
 
The Observatory is further concerned by the latest measures introduced by 
the Chinese government regulating the work of NGOs, including a draft law to 
restrict the funding and the operations of foreign NGOs in China's mainland by 
requiring their projects and work to be pre-approved by government 
agencies.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China, urging 
them to:
 
i. Immediately and unconditionally release Ms. Li Tingting, Ms. Wu 
Rongrong, Ms. Zheng Churan, Ms. Wei Tingting, and Ms. Wang Man, since their 
detention is arbitrary and seems only aimed at sanctioning their human rights 
activities;
 
ii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity 
of Ms. Li Tingting, also known as “Li Maizi”, Ms. Wu Rongrong, Ms. Zheng Churan, 
Ms. Wei Tingting, Ms. Wang Man, Ms. Xu Ding, Ms. Yu Lian, Ms. Ai Ke, Ms. Gao 
Lei, and Ms. Xiao La, as well as of all human rights defenders in the People’s 
Republic of China;
 
iii. Put an end to the harassment - including at the judicial level - 
against Ms. Li Tingting, Ms. Wu Rongrong, Ms. Zheng Churan, Ms. Wei Tingting, 
and Ms. Wang Man, as well as against all human rights defenders in the People’s 
Republic of China;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 
1998, especially:- Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the 
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the 
national and international levels”; and- Article 12.2, which provides that 
“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the 
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, 
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse 
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his 
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present 
Declaration”;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by the People’s Republic of China.
 
Addresses:
 
• Mr. LI Keqiang, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China: Guojia 
Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 
100017, People’s Republic of China; Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs)• Ms. WU Aiying, Minister of Justice of the People’s 
Republic of China: Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, 
Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China; Fax: +86 10 6529 2345; Email: 
minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn• Mr. YANG Jiechi, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China: Buzhang 
Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of 
China; Fax: +86 10 6588 2594; Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn• Mr. GUO Shengkun, 
Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China: Buzhang, 
Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s Republic 
of China; Fax: +86 10 63099216• Ambassador WU Hailong, Permanent Mission of 
the People’s Republic of China to the United Nations: Chemin de Surville 11, 
P.O. Box 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland; Fax: +41 22 7937014; 
E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int;• Embassy of the People’s Republic of 
China in Brussels: Avenue de Tervuren, 1150 Woluwe Saint-Pierre, Belgium; Tel: 
+32-2-7711497, +32-2-7711495; Fax: +32-2-7792895; Email: 
chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the People’s 
Republic of China in your respective country. 