Uganda:  Assault against Messrs. Gerald Kankya and Simon Amanyire, staff members of the Twerwaneho Listeners Club (TLC)
February 13, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uganda / 2015 / FebruaryUganda: Assault against Messrs. Gerald Kankya and Simon Amanyire, staff members of the Twerwaneho Listeners Club (TLC)UGA 001 / 0215 / OBS 010Assault / Theft of documentsLimitations of right to access to justiceUgandaFebruary 13, 2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Uganda.
 
Description of the situation :
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Twerwaneho Listeners Club (TLC)
about the assault of two of its staff members, its Executive Director, Mr. Gerald
Kankya, and its monitoring and documentation Officer, Mr. Simon Amanyire.
TLC has been running a petition campaign to the President Mr. Yoweri Museveni
against Queen Mother Best Kemigisa Nursery, Primary and Vocational School, a
private commercial project developed on land grabbed from illegal
expropriations.
 
According to the information received, on January 23, 2015, at 2:30 p.m.
in Fort Portal town, Messrs. Gerald Kankya and Simon Amanyire were attacked by
approximatively 30 men wearing Queen Mother Best Kemigisa Nursery, Primary and
Vocational Schools traffic reflectors jackets, armed with clubs and allegedly
commanded by the District Police commander Mr. Geoffrey Kahebwa and another
police officer. As the two defenders were on their way to their offices, the
group of men started moving towards them allegedly on instructions of the
District Police Commander. 
 
After they were violently wrestled to the ground, the attackers
attempted to steal important office files in their possession, including a
document compiling cases on land grabbed by the Queen Mother Best Kemigisa
project as part of the petition addressed to the President of Uganda. The
attackers were allegedly each promised 20,000 Uganda shillings (approximately
EUR 6) and were offered an extra 50,000 Ugandan shillings (approximately EUR
15) if they obtained the documents.
 
According to the medical examination carried out after the assault at
Fort Portal Regional referral hospital, which qualified the attack as “grievous
harm”, Mr. Kankya suffers from bruises on the left knee, bruises on the left
hand, injuries in the mouth, a broken incisor tooth and sprained right hand
thumb.
 
On January 24, 2015, Mr. Kankya was examined by a doctor at the request
of the local police in order to be able to file a complaint. However, despite
of this several police officers refused to record a complete statement, arguing
that they were under strict orders not to record any statement from a member of
TLC on charges related to assault. They also refused to accept the medical
report obtained by Mr. Kankya, and informed him that three of the alleged
perpetrators had filed a complaint against him for assault.
 
TLC broadcasts weekly programs on human rights education, performs
capacity building to enhance the ability of human rights defenders to perform
their activities in the region, provides civic education, monitors and
documents human rights violations, and challenges unlawful government actions
in court.
 
Since 2006, it has been working to combat unlawful evictions from public
community land. Lately, TLC in partnership with local leaders and 25 victims of
illegal evictions petitioned the President of Uganda against the Queen Mother
Best Kemigisa Nursery, Primary and Vocational School project. TLC reportedly
sent out over 1000 messages to members of parliament, Ministers and citizens
informing them of the alleged land grabbing, and calling on them to appeal to
the President not to go forward with the launching of the project.
 
The Observatory
expresses its deep concern about the above-mentioned events, and fears that
Messrs. Gerald Kankya and Amanyire were attacked as a result of their human
rights activities. The Observatory calls for an immediate, thorough,
transparent investigation into the assault of Messrs. Gerald Kankya and Amanyire, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law.
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities in Uganda, urging them to:
 
i.     
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Messrs. Gerald Kankya and Amanyire as well as all
human rights defenders in Uganda, including those addressing land-related
concerns;
 
ii.    
Order an immediate, thorough, transparent
investigation into the beating of Messrs. Gerald Kankya and Amanyire, in order
to identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal,
and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii.   
Order an immediate, thorough, transparent
investigation into the limitation of Mr. Gerald Kankya’s right to access to
justice following the refusal by the Fort Port local police to record his
statement in order to identify those responsible for the order, bring them
before an independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the
law;
 
iv.   
Conform with the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
-
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
-
Article 5, which underscores the right of every individual to form, join, and
participate in non-governmental organizations; and
-
Article 12.2, which provides that the State shall “take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”; 
 
v.    
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Uganda.
 
Addresses:
 
·        
President Kaguta Yoweri Museveni, President of
the Republic of Uganda, Office of  the
President of Uganda, State House Nakasero, P.O. Box 24594, Kampala, Uganda.
Fax: +256 (0) 414 436 102 / + 256 41 4235459 / +256 41 4344012. E-mail:
museveni@starcom.co.ug / aak@statehouse.go.ug
 
·        
Attorney General and Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Affairs, Hon. Kahinda 
Otafiire, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament
Avenue, P.O.Box 7183, Kampala, Uganda. Fax: + 256 41 4250829. E-Mail: mojca@africaonline.co.ug
 
·        
Mr. Mike Chibita, Director of Public
Prosecutions, Ministry of Justice, Constitutional Affairs & the Attorney
General, Tel: +256-414-332-502/332-504, Fax: +256-414-258-565/341-316, Email:
admin@dpp.go.ug
 
·        
Minister of Internal Affairs, Hilary Onek, Jinja
Rd, PO Box 7191, Kampala, Uganda. Fax: + 256 414343088
 
·        
Dr. Steven Kasiima, Inspector General of Police,
Telephone: +256 (0) 712 755 999
 
·        
H.E. Mr. Christopher Onyanga Aparr, Permanent
Mission of Uganda to the United Nations in Geneva, 6 bis rue Antoine Carteret,
1202 Genève, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 340 70 30. Email:
mission.uganda@ties.itu.int.
 
·        
Embassy of Uganda to the EU in Brussels, 317
avenue de Tervueren, 1150 Woluwe- Saint-Pierre, Belgium. Fax : + 32
2.763.04.38. Email: ugembrus@brutele.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Uganda in
your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies
in Uganda. 