Sudan:  Authorities should release human rights defenders arbitrarily detained facing death penalty and drop charges against them
July  7, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2017 / JulySudan: Authorities should release human rights defenders arbitrarily detained facing death penalty and drop charges against them




Sudan: Human rights defenders detained, face 
death penalty 

Authorities should release all in arbitrary 
detention, drop charges 

					 

					 

(7 July 2017) 
 –  Sudanese authorities have 
been unjustly holding Dr. Mudawi Ibrahim Adam, Hafiz Idris, and Mobarak Adam 
Abdalla, three human rights defenders,  and have charged them with ‘crimes against the state which carry the death penalty, 26 
human rights groups said today. Dr. Mudawi Ibahim Adam and Hafiz Idris have 
been held for approximately seven months, and Mobarak Adam Abdalla for over 
three months. Authorities should immediately release the men and drop the 
bogus charges against them, the groups said. 

					 

Authorities are also holding seven other human 
rights activists in detention, some apparently solely because they are 
alleged to have had contacts with international human rights organizations. 
These individuals also face criminal charges in a related case. A trial date 
has not yet been set. Sudanese authorities should also immediately drop all 
criminal charges related to their legitimate human rights work and release 
the group. 

					 

Sudanese national security officials arrested 
Mudawi and Hafiz on December 7 and November 24, respectively, and held 
both men in detention in Khartoum for over five months without charging them 
with any offence. Mobarak, a student at El Fashir University who 
participated in the 15th Creative Student Festival in Khartoum, was 
arrested on 25 March 2017. Credible sources report that Hafiz and Mobarak 
were severely beaten, and that Hafiz was given electric shocks and forced to 
make a confession. Dr. Mudawi has been denied essential medication. All 
three men are currently being held in Kober prison.The next court session for Mudawi, Hafiz and 
Mobarak will take place on July 20. 
 

On March 26, the prosecutor called for Mudawi 
and Hafiz’s 
release on bail, but the National 
Intelligence and Security Services (NISS) refused to release them. Instead, 
on May 11 the Attorney General charged both men with crimes under the 1991 
Criminal Act: article 21 (Joint acts in execution of criminal conspiracy), 
article 50 (Undermining the constitutional system), article 51 (Waging war 
against the State), article 53 (Espionage against the country), article 64 
(Provoking hatred against or amongst sects), article 65 (Criminal and 
terrorist organizations), and article 66 (Publication of false news). Two of 
the charges carry the death penalty. 

					 

Mobarak was 
only added to the case at an unknown date in late May. Authorities alleged that Mudawi, Hafiz, and Mobarak 
assisted in the production of the Amnesty International report “
Scorched Earth, Poisoned Air: Sudanese Government Forces Ravage Jebel Marra, 
Darfur”, which 
alleges the Sudanese Government used 
chemical weapons in Jebel Marra. This attempt to implicate them in 
 Amnesty’s work on chemical weapons is 
another cynical ploy to punish them for their legitimate work. The charges are baseless, and should be dropped. 


					 

Our organizations are concerned that Sudanese 
authorities cannot guarantee a fair trial. In a recent example, employees 
of TRACKs who faced similar trumped-up charges were sentenced to a year in 
prison and a fine after 24 court sessions. They were detained 86 days 
without charge. The trial proceedings did not comply with international fair 
trial standards including the right to a public hearing. The defendants were 
not given a written list of the charges they faced, or copies of the 
evidence for the alleged crimes in order to prepare a defence for 
court.
 We are also concerned about Sudan’s 
long 
record of abuse of detainees. Our 
organisations have reported on patterns and cases of torture and 
ill-treatment in state custody, including sexual 
violence. 



We call on the Government of Sudan to guarantee the 
safety and physical and psychological well-bring of all detainees, and to immediately release Mudawi, Hafiz, and Mobarak and all other 
human rights defenders detained on trumped up political charges. In the 
event that the authorities fail to drop the bogus charges against them, we 
also affirm the rights of Mudawi, Hafiz and Mobarak to a fair trial before 
an impartial, independent, and competent tribunal. 


					 

Background


					 

International organizations have repeatedly called 
for release of Mudawi and Hafiz and expressed concern about the conditions 
of detention. The European Union and the United Nations 
Independent Expert 
on the human rights situation in Sudan
, Aristide Nononsi, have both issued statements concerning Hafiz 
and Dr. Mudawi’s ongoing detention. 

					 


Hafiz Idris, a human rights defender from North 
Darfur, was arrested by the National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS) from Dr. Mudawi’s 
home in Khartoum on 24 November 2016. 
Dr Mudawi, winner of the 2005 Front Line Defenders Award for Human Rights 
Defenders at Risk, was arrested by the NISS from the University of 
Khartoum, where he is a professor in Mechanical Engineering, on 7 December 
2016 alongside his driver, Adam El-
Sheikh Mukhtar. Both men’s families were not officially alerted to their arrest by the NISS until one week 
later. 

						 

Mobarak Adam Abdalla was arrested by the NISS in Khartoum on 25 March 
2017 after participating in the 15th Creative Student Festival in 
Khartoum. He was held incommunicado at Kober prison without access to 
his family or lawyers from 25 March  
– 20 June 2017, and subjected to 
daily interrogations at the NISS offices near Shande bus station. He was added to Mudawi and Hafiz’ case 
at an unknown date in late May. Very 
little is known about his case, other than that he is alleged to have 
provided information to Hafiz. 

							 

Adam El Sheikh Mukhtar was released without charge 
on 13 March 2017 after being detained for over four months, though his 
present legal situation remains unclear, alongside a number of other 
individuals detained and subsequently released because of their alleged 
links to Dr. Mudawi. Seven others are currently facing criminal charges in a 
related case which does not yet have a trial date, including Abu Bakar Omar 
Ishag, Abdelhamid Abdelkareem Abdalla, Mukhtar Ishag Abakar, Naser Aldeen 
Oshar Adam, Musa Ahmed Siraj, Adam Ahmed Al Bashir Abdel Bari, and Sidig 
Ahmed Abdallah. It is believed that Hafiz will also stand trial in this 
case. 

Both Mudawi and Hafiz were held incommunicado 
without charge or access to their lawyers until 15 February, when they were transferred from the NISS wing of Kober prision to the Office of the State Prosecutor. Their transfer came shortly after Dr. Mudawi went on a 
hunger strike in late January and February protesting his continued 
detention without charge. 



Family members who were allowed to see Dr. Mudawi 
at the NISS facility on 27 January reported that Dr. Mudawi appeared to 
be in poor health with visible weight loss, and that the NISS had 
prevented him from receiving essential medication for a pre-existing heart 
condition. Between 7 December and 15 February, Dr. Mudawi was allowed three 
brief visits from family members, all of which were supervised by the NISS. 
Hafiz was not allowed visits by his family until after his transfer to the 
Office of the State Prosecutor on 15 February. 

								 

Hafiz was also detained at the NISS facility then 
transferred to Kober. On 15 February 2017 Hafiz told his lawyer that he had 
been severely tortured, including by beatings and electrical shocks, and 
forced to make a confession, in which he falsely stated that he and Dr. 
Mudawi had received funds from the American embassy in Khartoum. Hafiz also 
reported that he was repeatedly kicked in the testicles until he urinated 
blood. Hurriyat newspaper also reported that Hafiz was taken to the 
hospital in late December for treatment following beatings received in NISS 
custody. 





A 
British journalist held by the NISS for two months, Phil Cox, reported in 
April on Channel 4 that he was detained next to Dr. Mudawi, and saw NISS 
officials force him to sit in the sun for long periods and stated that Dr. 
Mudawi was held in an overcrowded cell. 





Since 
October 2016, international organisations have documented dozens of arrests 
of political opposition members, trade union members, 
activists and human rights defenders. 

The NISS enjoys broad powers of arrest and 
detention under the National Security Act 2010 (NSA), which provides that 
suspects can be detained for up to four-and-a-half months without judicial 
review. NISS officials often use these powers to arbitrarily arrest and 
detain individuals, many of whom have been tortured or subjected to other 
forms of ill-treatment. Under the same Act, NISS agents are provided with 
protection from prosecution for any act committed in the course of their 
work, which has resulted in a pervasive culture of impunity.










Signatories 








					 

Organisations 


Act for Sudan 


African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies 



Al Khatim Adlan Centre for Enlightenment and Human 
Development (KACE) 


Alkarama Foundation 


Amnesty International 


Arab Coalition for Sudan 


Darfur Bar Association 


DefendDefenders 


Face Past for Future 


FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for 
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 


Horn of Africa Civil Society Forum 



HUDO Centre 


Human Rights Watch 


International Justice Project 


International Refugee Rights Initiative 



Investors against Genocide 


Journalists for Human Rights 


Massachusetts Coalition to Save Darfur 



Never Again Coalition 


Sudan Consortium 


Sudan Democracy First Group 


Sudan Unlimited 


Sudanese Rights Group (Huqooq) 


SUDO UK 


Vanguard Africa 


World Organization Against Torture (OMCT), within 
the framework of the Observatory for the 

Protection of Human Rights Defenders 



Individuals 


Mark van Dorp, the Netherlands 


Asha Khalil Elkarib, Sudan 


Najlaa Ahmed, human rights defender 



Dr A. M. Girshab: Human Rights Consultant - MENA 
Region 


Hajooj Kuku, Sudanese filmmaker 


Contact 

For Human Rights Watch in NY, USA, Jehanne Henry, 
Senior Researcher, Africa, +1 917 443 2724 (roaming, WhatsApp) 

For the African Centre for Justice and Peace 
Studies, Mossaad Mohamed Ali/ Emily Cody: +256 
 779584542/ +256 788695068 (Kampala), or info@acjps.org. 