Angola:  Why the “Angola 15” trial is a parody of justice?
December 18, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Angola / 2015 / DecemberAngola: Why the “Angola 15” trial is a parody of justice?






The trial of pro-democracy activists arrested in June 2015
finally opened on November 16, 2015 before the Luanda Provincial Tribunal. They
are charged with “preparatory acts to rebellion” and “plotting against the
President and other institutions”, both of which constitute crimes against the
security of the State. 
 



Since then, Messrs. Henrique
Luaty Beirão (a.k.a. Brigadeiro Mata-Frakuxz), Manuel Nito Alves, Nuno Alvaro Dala, Nelson Dibango
Mendes Dos Santos, Alfonso Jojo Matias (a.k.a. Mbanza Hamza), Sedrick de Carvalho, Fernando António Tómas
(a.k.a. Nicola Radical), Hitler
Chiconda (a.k.a. Samussuku), Italiano Arante Kivuvu, Benedito Dali (a.k.a. Dito
Dali), Albano Bingobingo
(a.k.a. Albano Liberdade), José Gomes
Hata (a.k.a. Cheik Hata), Inocénio De Brito (a.k.a. Drux), Domingos da Cruz, journalist, as well
as Osvaldo Caholo, a reserve military officer acquainted to one of the 16, had been in
preventive detention, until they were placed under house arrest on December 18,
2015, after nearly six months of detention. Two other human rights defenders, Rosa Kusso Conde and Laurinda Manuel Gouveia, are facing
similar charges, but were not detained. They face up to 12 years of imprisonment.

 
The 17 activists are known pro-democracy activists, who have
been organizing peaceful protests against the 35-year-regime of Angolan
President Eduardo Dos Santos since 2011. These protests were often repressed by
the authorities. From May to June 2015, they held a handful of meetings, on
Saturdays, at the bookstore “Livraria Kiazele”, in Luanda, to discuss peaceful
means of protest. Inspired by the work of American academic Gene Sharp, the
journalist, university lecturer and fellow detainee Domingos da Cruz, adapted
Sharp’s writings to the Angolan reality in a manuscript which he entitled
“Tools to Destroy a Dictatorship and Avoid a New Dictatorship – a Political
Philosophy for the Liberation of Angola”. The manuscript served as a starting
point for the youths’ debates on peaceful means of protest. It is being used as
the primary evidence of the youths’ intentions to seize power, which the state
alleges would have involved violent means.
 
Numerous national and international
observers had announced their intention to attend the trial hearings, including
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT).
Unfortunately, since the beginning of the proceedings, access to the courtroom
has been restricted, in violation with the right to a public hearing.
Restrictions particularly targeted journalists, representatives from embassies,
as well as supporters of the “Angola 15”. To date, no diplomat has been allowed
into the courtroom. Some journalists were allowed to enter the room on the
eight day of the hearing, on the condition that they
do not film, record nor take pictures of the session. The room where the
proceedings take place is relatively small given the number of accused.


The accused are brought into the courtroom only when and
once they have been heard by the court. 
 
The information provided below has been gathered from
several independent sources. Unfortunately, it arises from the information
provided below that the proceedings are marred with numerous violations of the
right to a fair trial.






 
The “Angola 15” must be released!
  Take action for their release!
 




 
Monday, January 25,
2016
On
January 25, 2016, the Luanda Provincial Tribunal postponed to February 8, 2016
the hearing in the trial against the 17 above-mentioned persons. The Court is
still due to hear more than 50 declarants. 

Thursday, December 3,
2015 - Monday, December 13, 2015
 
During the hearings, four additional defendants were called
in to provide testimony, namely, Arante Kivuvu, José Gomes Hata, Sedrick de
Carvalho, Fernando António Tómas and Osvaldo Caholo. 
Sedrick de Carvalho, who worked with Domingos da Cruz at the magazine Folha 8,
designed the layout of “Tools to Destroy a Dictatorship and Avoid a New
Dictatorship – a Political Philosophy for the Liberation of Angola” and took
part in the meetings as both colleagues sought to edit and improve the
manuscript with the critical contributions emerging from the debates. That is
his crime, according to the state authorities.
During the hearings, rough footages of the book club
meetings and debates were displayed. The footages were screening only parts of
the meetings taken out of context in order to sustain the accusations pending
against the activists. 
All the defendants who appeared during these sessions
categorically refused to respond to the questions related to the content of the
videos, upholding that the footages were illegally obtained and were not the
original ones.
The defense filed another complaint to the Constitutional
Court insisting on that matter, highlighting the fact that according to the
Angolan legislation, material can not be used as evidence if it has already
been shared with other people and institutions, as it has been the case with
the videos, shared to the media. 
Moreover, the defendants issued a public letter, directed to
President dos Santos, indicating their intention to initiate a collective
hunger strike to protest against delays in the trial.
On December 10, 2015, four of the defendants started a
hunger strike, including Sedrick de Carvalho, Luaty Beirão, Domingos da Cruz
and José Gomes Hata. On December 14, 2015, they were eight defendants on hunger
strike. This is the second time the human rights defenders start a hunger
strike to raise awareness about their case. In the previous occasion, in
October 2015, they were protesting against the excessive length of their
pre-trial detention, which exceeded the 90-day limit prescribed by law. After
such a term, a court is required to rule on the extension of the detention,
which did not happen within the prescribed time-limit.
Moreover, in an open letter addressed to his family and
friends from the São Paulo Prison, Sedrick de Carvalho threatened to commit
suicide in protest against his 176 days of unlawful detention. He added that,
during his six months in detention, he spent more than 2,000 hours straight in
solitary confinement without being able to see daylight. According to him, this
is a deliberate strategy by the Angolan authorities to drive the prisoners
insane with psychological torture, humiliation and other abuses.
 
Wednesday, December 2,
2015
 
Luaty Beirão remained silent as the prosecution kept probing
him with questions. The prosecution presented as evidence items such as a chalk
board that was used in the lectures the group held to discuss strategies from
the book “Tools to Destroy a Dictatorship and Avoiding a New Dictatorship –
Political Philosophy for the Liberation of Angola” of Domingos da Cruz who is
also being tried.The prosecution presented two videos. The defense asked for
transcripts of them. The videos have images of the two meetings the young
activists had before the 15 were arrested between June 20 and 24. Henrique
Luaty Beirão stated that he was not committing a crime by claiming that Angola
was a pseudo-democracy and that President José Eduardo dos Santos a dictator.
 
Tuesday, December 1,
2015
 
Henrique Luaty Beirão was called in to provide testimony.
Luaty Beirão denied before the court that the meetings the group used to have,
from May until the detentions in June, were meant to promote violent acts to
overthrow the president. He said the gatherings were solely academic
discussions around a book, and that there were no personal political agendas.
Beirão criticized what he called Angolan "pseudodemocracy" and
repeated calls he has been making since 2011 for the resignation of President
José Eduardo dos Santos whom he called a dictator - just as in the secret
recordings that the prosecution has presented in the trial.
 
Monday, November 30,
2015
 
Inocéncio De Brito (a.k.a. Drux) was called in to speak. The
judge screened again the same video presented at the previous hearings of
Domingos da Cruz (on November 20) and Nuno Alvaro Dala (on November 24).
 
Friday, November 27,
2015
 
Alfonso Matias was called in to speak again. The defense
asked questions regarding the circumstances of the arrest and the current
detention of the accused. Domingo da Cruz and Manuel Nito Alves were supposed
to appear before the Court since Thursday. They were not present because they
are sick. They had to see a doctor. The defendants reported acts of
ill-treatment by prison guards in the prison cells.
 
Thursday, November 26,
2015
 
The video that was secretly filmed during one meeting
attended by the activist group was screened again. The video footage displayed
Domingo da Cruz and Luaty Beirão discussing about the struggle for freedom and
national interests.
Alfonso Matias (a.k.a Mbanza Hamza) was called in to speak.
He was asked whether he thought Angola was a dictatorship. He answered yes and
denounced President José Eduardo dos Santos’ rule for 36 years. At some point
of the hearing, the mother of Alfonso Matias fainted in the courtroom. She was
immediately taken to the hospital.
 
Wednesday, November
25, 2015
 
Nuno Alvaro Dala was called in to speak again. The court
tried to play the defendants off against each other, mentioning an alleged
letter written by him, in which he accused Domingos da Cruz of treason. He
denied having written any such letter.
Following the pressure exercised by the Journalist Union,
the Judge allowed some media representatives into the court room, on the
condition that they do not film, record nor take pictures of the session. 
The defense team submitted an appeal to the Constitutional
Court for Habeas Corpus. They are contesting the decision of the Supreme Court
which denied HC a while back.
 
Tuesday, November 24,
2015
 
Nuno Alvaro Dala was called in to provide testimony.
However, it was reported that his lawyers were not allowed to see him or speak
to him prior to the court session. The lawyers complain to the judge, who
dismissed the complaints. The judge also refused to register this matter in the
minutes of the hearing. In protest, a defense lawyer left the room. An assigned
lawyer was then appointed to defend Mr. Dala, who refused to speak in the
absence of his own lawyer.
Another part of the video was screened, revealing a
discussion between Messrs. da Cruz and Beirão about the necessity to mobilise
international support and solidarity with their group, and condemning the
involvement of any military groups. The judge stroke out the complaints filed
the day before by the defense, and indicated that the decision could be
appealed to a higher court. The defense invoked Articles 6 and 34 of the
Constitution, to no avail. Speaking to the media, the defense lawyers announced
their intention to file formal complaints against the judge and the Bar
Association with regards to the violations of basic rules and rights of the
lawyers during the trial proceedings.
 
Monday, November 23,
2015
 
The session resumed with the questioning of Domingos da
Cruz, for almost five hours. The Public Prosecutor interrogated him again about
his book, asked questions on the relationship between “a revolution” and “the
military”, as well as on notions of funding and violence. The defendant
systematically responded “nothing to declare” to questions asked.
 
Friday, November 20,
2015
 
The judge ordered to resume the reading of the book. Later
on, only three defendants were questioned and allowed to speak, namely Manuel
Nito Alves, Hitler Chiconda and Domingos da Cruz. In the meantime, activists
who had come to show support to the “Angola 15” were severely reprimanded by
the police. Twelve individuals were arrested and held at the Benfica Police
station for six hours until the trial session was over. The prosecution
requested an authorisation to screen a video footage which had been filed as an
evidence against the accused. The defense lawyers objected, on the ground that
this footage had been illegally obtained. Nonetheless, the request was approved
by the judge. The defense filed a complaint against the judge´s decision, and
also requested the suppression of all evidence unlawfully collected from the
defendant´s computers (and other electronic devices) which were planned to be
presented in court. The request was not taken in consideration. The video
footage pictured Domingo da Cruz speaking during a group discussion, reading and
explaining some passages of his book to Henrique Luaty Beirão and another
unidentified individual. Mr. da Cruz was further interrogated about the
circumstances of his detention and the nature of the discussion meetings. 
While the trial hearings were scheduled to last until
November 20, they resumed the following after.
 
Thursday, November 19,
2015
 
Mr. Domingos da Cruz, a journalist and academic, author
of the unpublished book “Tools to destroy a dictator and avoid a new
dictatorship - Political Philosophy for the Liberation of Angola”, was in turn
interrogated by the judge and the public attorney about his book. When
Mr. da Cruz was asked who was the dictator mentioned in the title and what
were the tools to “destroy” him, he responded “read the book!”. The judge asked
for a copy of the book to be brought to him and ordered the reading of the
entire book in the court room. One of the defense lawyers left the room
outraged. By the time they got to page 36, the session was adjourned to the
next day. A court clerk read out the 187-page manuscript in court - a task
which took two full days.
At the end of the session, the judge ordered to only bring
to the court the defendants who were called to testify. The others would remain
in prison. The defense lawyers challenged the decision. Representatives from
the EU, US and Norway were present outside of the courtroom every day, but
again denied access.
 
Wednesday, November
18, 2015
 
The railing on the side of the court was sealed with red
colored zinc sheets to restrict access to the courthouse. No cellphones and
water bottles are allowed inside the court room. All t-shirts showing slogans
of support with the accused were confiscated by the judge. Five of the “Angola
15”, namely Nuno Alvaro Dala, Alfonso Jojo Matias, Henrique Luaty Beirão,
Hitler Chiconda, and Benedito Dali were announced that they were facing
additional charges of “destruction of state property” for writing slogans on
their prison uniforms. Allegations of physical violence against the defendant
Albano Bingobingo were presented to the Court as well as against Alfonso Jojo
Matias and Hitler Chiconda, both assaulted by the police the day before. Hitler
Chiconda was in turn questioned. The defense lawyer asked him if he had a gun
or knew how to operate one. The prosecution objected. Finally, the Court
charged him with an additional accusation of “defamation against Angolan
President Dos Santos” for having written “Dos Santos´ prisoner!” on his prison
uniform. Representatives from the EU, US and Norway were present outside of the
courtroom every day, but again denied access.
 
Tuesday, November 17,
2015
 
Observers, including journalists, were again barred from the
courtroom and told to return only for the reading of the verdict. The
atmosphere was tense. The Military Intelligence and Security Service of the
Angolan Armed Forces deployed 80 officers to the trial. Half of them posed as
unknown relatives of the defendants or law students and filled the courtroom.
As a result, diplomats, observers and the public were kept outside of the
courtroom. The other half of the armed forces was deployed in the vicinity of
the courthouse. Supporters of the ruling People’s Movement for the Liberation
of Angola (MPLA) party continued to rally outside the court, where tents were
strategically provided for them. They are wearing and chanting the slogan
“Justice without pressure”.
Two of the “Angola 15”, namely Alfonso Jojo Matias and
Hitler Chiconda, were assaulted by the police for wearing slogans on their
prison uniforms. The interrogation of Manuel Nito Alves resumed.
Representatives from the EU, US and Norway were present outside of the
courtroom every day, but again denied access.
 
Monday, November 16,
2015
 
The trial opens before the Luanda Provincial Tribunal. The
defense is not able to see the complete 1,000 long file case ahead of the
hearing, including part of the evidence against the Angola 15, which is a
procedural violation under Angola laws and international human rights law.
Furthermore, although it was announced that the trial would be open to the
public, only two relatives per detainee were allowed inside the court room.
Representatives from several embassies, including the United States, the
European Union, Norway and Portugal were barred from observing the court
proceedings. Mr. Manuel Nito Alves, the youngest defendant, was
interrogated during about seven hours. The main questions he was asked were
related to a trip to Brazil, where he attended the Conectas Annual Human Rights
Colloquium. Questions related notably to the funding of his trip, and contacts
made there. A video of an interview he gave to a Brazilian journalist was
presented to the Court as evidence against him, pointing out to some
contradictions in his declarations to the court with regards to the ones he made
at the pre-trial investigation stage. Mr. Alves responded that during the
pre-trial investigation, he was being pressured by the instructors. 