Kazakhstan:  Judicial harassment of Ms. Larisa Kharkova, President of KNPRK, and threats against her relatives and colleagues.
October  4, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2017 / OctoberKazakhstan: Judicial harassment of Ms. Larisa Kharkova, President of KNPRK, and threats against her relatives and colleagues.


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY                                                                               
 
KAZ 003 / 1017 / OBS 107
Judicial harassment /
Arbitrary detention / Threats
Kazakhstan
October 4, 2017
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Kazakhstan. 
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about
the judicial harassment of Ms. Larisa
Kharkova, President of the Confederation of Independent Trade
Unions of the Republic of of Kazakhstan (KNPRK), as well as threats against her
relatives and colleagues. KNPRK is the country’s largest independent trade
union confederation. Under Ms.
Kharkova’s leadership, the confederation has publicly criticized the 2014 Law
on Trade Unions[1] and
the restrictions to freedom of association in Kazakhstan[2].
In January 2017, Kazakh authorities shut down KNPRK for failing to comply with
the restrictive 2014 Trade Union law. In June 2017, this decision was
recognized by International Labour Organization (ILO) as a clear violation of
the its Convention 87 on freedom of association.
 
According to the information received, on September 29,
2017, the South Kazakhstan Regional Appeal Court, in the city of Shymkent
upheld a sentence providing 100 hours of forced labour per year during four
years, four year of restricted movement, a five-year ban on holding office in
any NGO or public organisation and a 100 hour of forced labour sentence against
Ms. Larisa Kharkova for “abuse of office” (Article 250 of the Criminal Code). A
first instance court had convicted her on July 25, 2017 under the same
above-mentioned charge (see background information). 
 
It is also reported that before the appeal trial started, several
acts of intimidation took place against KNPRK members and against Ms.
Kharkova’s relatives. On September 12, 2017, in Almaty, an explosive-looking
device was found at the bottom of the car of KNPRK Press Secretary’s husband.
The police, firefighters, mine-clearing experts, representatives from the
Ministry of Emergency Situations of Kazakhstan and other officers from the
operational response were called up. After one hour, police officers announced
that they had not found any explosive in the device. They took the package and
refused to show its content.
 
Two days later, on September 14, 2017, a car owned by Ms.
Larisa Kharkova's son, Vladimir, caught fire in Ms. Kharkova's mother courtyard
in Shymkent under suspicious circumstances. Firefighters put out the fire and
police officers inspected the location of the incident in the evening of the
next day. After examining the place of the fire and the burnt-out car, they
took a statement from Vladimir, and left. As of publication of this Appeal, it
is unclear whether an investigation in the matter had been opened.
 
The Observatory fears that the above-mentioned charges have
been pressed against Ms. Larisa Kharkova solely in reprisal for her defense of
trade union rights, and that KNPRK’s colleagues and her family have been
targeted to intimidate her. 
 
Furthermore, her judicial harassment is part of a wider
campaign of harassment against KNPRK and the independent trade union movement
(see background information). This takes place in a context of severe limitations
to the rights to freedom of association and assembly in Kazakhstan as
illustrated by situations such as the conviction of human rights defenders Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov[3].
 
The Observatory urges Kazakh authorities to put an end to
all forms of harassment including at the judicial level against Ms. Larisa
Kharkova, as well as all human rights defenders, including trade unionists, and
to immediately and unconditionally release Messrs. Nurbek Kushakbaev and Amin Eleusinov.
 
The Observatory further urges Kazakh authorities to allow
trade unions to freely organise, ensure full respect for freedom of association
and to uphold its international obligations with respect to freedom of
association and expression.
 
Background
information:
 
On January 4, 2017, Shymkent Economic Court shut down KNPRK
on allegations that it did not meet legal requirements on registration under
the 2014 Law on Trade Unions. This decision was upheld on appeal on March 28, 2017, during a one-hour long court
hearing.
 
On January 9, 2017, Kazakh authorities opened a criminal
case against Ms. Larisa Kharkova on charges of “misappropriation or
embezzlement of assets” (Article 189 of the Criminal Code) and “fraud” (Article
190 of the Criminal Code), searched her home and confiscated her computer.
During interrogation, police officers threatened to take further action against
Ms. Kharkova unless she stepped down as confederation president.
 
On January 20, 2017, Messrs. Nurbek Kushakbaev, KNPRK
Deputy Chairman, and Amin Eleusinov, leader of KNPRK’s affiliate union
at the Oil Construction Company plant, were arrested in Western Kazakhstan and
sent to a pre-trial detention facility in Astana.
 
Their arrest occurred as they joined a hunger strike
launched on January 5, 2017, by about ninety oil workers at the Oil
Construction Company in Mangistau region to protest the decision to shut down
KNPRK.
 
On January 22, 2017, the Mangistau Regional Court in Aktau
handed down fines ranging from 114 to 288 Euros each, against 15 oil workers
for “organising an illegal strike”. During the hearing, a journalist was
prevented from entering the courtroom.
 
On January 23, 2017, the same court ordered 28 other
participants to the hunger strike to pay total compensation of more than 3.5
million Tenge (approx. 8,629 Euros) for the damage allegedly caused to the
company from the hunger strike. The judge turned down a request from the oil
workers to provide them with sufficient time to prepare their defence and to
get legal representation, arguing that a civil lawsuit could proceed without a
lawyer.
 
In April 2017, M. Nurbek
Kushakbaev was sentenced to two and a half years in prison on charges of
“calling for an illegal strike”.
 
In May 2017, M. Amin Eleusinov was sentenced in a separate trial to two years in
prison on charges of “embezzlement of union funds”.
 
The two have denied the charged pressed against them. In
addition, they were both imposed a multi-year ban on trade union activities.
 
On July 25, 2017, Ms. Larisa Kharkova was sentenced to 100
hours of forced labour per year during four years, four year of restricted
movement with confiscation of property and a ban for five years on holding
office in any NGO or public organisation by Enbekshi District Court under for “abuse of office”. 
 
Ms. Larisa Kharkova appealed the sentence.
 
On September 27, 2017, an appeal trial against Ms. Larisa
Kharkova opened before the South Kazakhstan Regional Appeal Court, in the city
of Shymkent. 
 
During the hearing, Ms. Larisa Kharkova submitted to the
court a 36-page long document detailing various violations of her due process
and fair trial rights committed during the investigation and first instance
trial phases. The hearing was suspended until September 28, 2017 in order for
the parties to get familiar with the document. 
 
On September 28, 2017, the judge refused to call one expert
witness as requested by Ms. Larisa Kharkova’s lawyers.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of
Kazakhstan asking them to:
 
i.      
Put
an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms.
Larisa Kharkova and her relatives, and trade unionists in Kazakhstan;
 
ii.    
Immediately
and unconditionally release Messrs. Nurbek Kushakbaev and Amin Eleusinov;
 
iii.   
Re-register
the Confederation of Independent trade unions of the Republic of Kazakhstan and
put an end to any form of restriction to freedom of association and expression,
in accordance with international human and labour rights standards;
 
iv.   
Repeal legal provisions limiting freedom of association including
those contained in the 2014 Law on Trade
Unions;
 
v.     
Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially
Articles 1, 5, 6 and 12.2; and
 
vi.   
More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
Kazakhstan.
Addresses:
·  Mr. Nursultan NAZARBAEV, President
of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Fax: +7 7172 74 56 31 / 74 56 67
·  Mr. Kalmukhanbet Kassymov,
Minister of Internal Affairs of Kazakhstan. Email: Kense@mvd.kz
·  Mr. Zhakyp Assanov, Prosecutor
General of Kazakhstan. Fax: +7 7172 506 402
·  Mr. Askar Shakirov, Human
Rights Commissioner of Kazakhstan. Fax: +7 7172 74 05 48
·  Ambassador Ms. Zhanar Aitzhanova,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Kazakhstan to the UN Office and
other international organizations in Geneva. Fax: +41 (0) 22 788 66 02. Email: mission@kazakhstan-geneva.ch
·  Ambassador Mr. Almaz KHAMZAYEV,
Embassy of Kazakhstan in Brussels. Fax : (+32) 2 374 50 91. Email: brussels@mfa.kz.
·  Permanent Delegation of the Republic
of Kazakhstan to the OSCE in Vienna. Fax: +43 1 890 80 08 20. Email:
kzosce@kazakhstan.at
Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of Kazakhstan in your respective country.
***
 
Paris-Geneva, October 4, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code
of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
•  
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
•  
Tel
and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
•  
Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 



[1]                This
legislation imposes a burdensome registration process that results in trade
unions being denied registration on spurious grounds. It also obliges trade
unions to affiliate with higher-tier unions, which undermines their right to
freely determine their structures.


[2]                Including at the International
Labour Conference in Geneva, in June 2017.


[3]                See the Observatory’s Press Relase
on August 24, 2017, “Kazakhstan: UN body declares the detention of Max Bokayev
and Talgat Ayanov arbitrary”. 