Egypt:  Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against six members of the performance satirical group Atfal al-Shawarea (“Street Children”)
July  5, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / JulyEgypt: Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against six members of the performance satirical group Atfal al-Shawarea (“Street Children”)
EGY 003 / 0716 / OBS 054

Arbitrary and secret detention /

Judicial harassment

Egypt

July 5, 2016

 

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a 
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), 
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in 
Egypt.

 

Description of the situation:

 

The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary 
detention of Messrs. Ezz al-Din Khaled, Mohamed 
Dessouky, Mohamed Adel, Mohamed Gabr, Mohammed Yehia 
and judicial harassment against Mostafa Zein, six 
young artists, members of the performance satirical group Atfal 
al-Shawarea (“Street Children”)[1], known for posting videos on YouTube[2] commenting Egypt's 
politics and news, and in particular criticising arbitrary detention and the 
use of torture in police stations.

 

According to the information received, on July 2, 2016, the East Cairo 
district prosecutors decided to extend the detention of Messrs. Ezz al-Din 
Khaled, Mohamed Dessouky, Mohamed Adel, Mohamed Gabr, Mohammed Yehia for 
another 15 days. The four had been arrested on May 10 for publishing videos 
critical of state institutions and inciting protests.

 

On May 8, 2016, Mr. Ezz al-Din Khaled, was also detained for two days in 
relation to the same videos and released with a bail of 10,000 LE (1,012 
euros) pending investigation and trial. Mr. Mostafa Zein, although he was 
not arrested, also faces similar charges.

 

The East Cairo district prosecutors interrogated the four detained men 
about the following accusations: “taking part, with others, in 
establishing a group that aims at undermining the basics principles for a 
stable state”, “participating with others in disseminating false 
news and information with the effect of undermining general security, and 
damaging general interests”, “calling on others to resist 
authorities” and “inciting on toppling the regime established in 
Egypt” (Articles 171 and 174 of the Criminal Code). Prosecutors also 
questioned the four men about “indirectly” inciting 
“terrorist crimes” and indirectly disseminating terrorist 
thoughts by participating in videos that contained terrorist ideas (Articles 
86 and 86 bis of the Criminal Code). They face up to ten years of 
detention.

 

On June 18, the prosecutor renewed their detention for 15 days.

 

On June 20, their case was sent by the East Cairo Public Prosecution 
Office to the Supreme State Security Prosecution. However, the latter 
decided to send back the case to the East Cairo Public Prosecution Office 
and produced a confidential report on the case.

 

The four will have to appear before the prosecutors again on July 13, 
2016. Since their arrest, the four have not been brought before a judge, in 
violation of international human rights provisions related to fair 
trial.

 

During the custody, they have faced verbal abuse by police officers. The 
four are still detained in Cairo's Heliopolis Police Station.

 

The Observatory strongly condemns the aforementioned judicial harassment 
and arbitrary detentions, as they only aim at sanctioning the right to 
freedom of expression of the six artists and their legitimate human rights 
activities.

 

The Observatory calls upon the Egyptian judicial authorities to 
immediately and unconditionally release those detained and end the judicial 
harassment of members of “Street Children” by dropping all 
charges against them.

 

Finally, until the charges are dropped against them, the Observatory 
further urges the Egyptian authorities to ensure that all judicial 
proceedings against the six artists are carried out in full compliance with 
their right to a fair trial, as protected under international law.

 

Actions requested:

 

Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:

 

i.               
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of 
Messrs. Ezz al-Din Khaled, Mohamed Dessouky, Mohamed Adel, Mohamed Gabr, 
Mohammed Yehia and Mostafa Zein as well as of all human rights defenders in 
Egypt;

 

ii.              
Release immediately and unconditionally Messrs. Mohamed Dessouky, Mohamed 
Adel, Mohamed Gabr and Mohammed Yehia, as well as all human rights defenders 
currently in detention,as it seems to only aim at curtailing their human 
rights activities;

 

iii.            
Immediately drop all charges against Messrs. Ezz al-Din Khaled, Mohamed 
Dessouky, Mohamed Adel, Mohamed Gabr, Mohammed Yehia and Mostafa Zein as 
they only aim at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities;

 

iv.             
Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, 
against the members of “Street Children” and all human rights 
defenders in Egypt;

 

v.              
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human 
Rights Defenders, in particular with:

- its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for 
the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at 
the national and international levels”;

- its Article 6(b)(c), which foresees that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to [...] as provided for in 
human rights and other applicable international instruments, freely to 
publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on 
all human rights and fundamental freedoms; to study, discuss, form and hold 
opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights 
and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to 
draw public attention to those matters”;

- its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse 
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of 
his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present 
Declaration”

 

v.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human 
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Egypt.

 

Addresses:

 

·       President of the Arab 
Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, 
Fax: +202 23901998

·       Prime Minister, Mr. Sherif 
Ismail, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 
202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email:  
primemin@idsc.gov.eg

·       Minister of the Interior, 
General Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, Ministry of the Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan 
Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 
2031 / 2794 5529

·       Minister of Justice, Mr. 
Ahmed El Zend, Ministry of Justice, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, 
Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103

·       Public Prosecutor, Counsellor 
Nabeel Sadek, Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 
2577 4716

·       Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President 
of the National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. 
Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg

·       H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim, 
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 49 
avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: 
mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15

·       Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 
19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; 
Email: egyptembassy@embassyofegypt.be

 

Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in your 
respective country.
 
 



[1] 
                
“Street Children” is composed of six members, all around twenty 
years old, who wanted to perform in the street to make their shows 
accessible to people who cannot not afford it. They started posting videos 
on YouTube in January 2016. They are singing about diverse topics such as 
the Muslim Brotherhood or the value of the Egyptian pound in the street. 
Their channel has more than 1.1 million views.



[2] 
                
Youtube channel:  
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCCFxjNrwVKLbTFqvjjFG4Rg 