Thailand:  Charges of sedition and violating the ban on political gatherings against Sirikan “June” Charoensiri, a human rights lawyer with TLHR
October 28, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / OctoberThailand: Charges of sedition and violating the ban on political gatherings against Sirikan “June” Charoensiri, a human rights lawyer with TLHR

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New
information
THA 002 / 0715 / OBS 055.7
Ongoing Judicial Harassment
Thailand
October 28, 2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Thailand.
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about charges of sedition and violating the ban on political gatherings against
Ms. Sirikan “June” Charoensiri, a
human rights lawyer with the organisation Thai Lawyers for Human Rights (TLHR)[1], in connection with her work
representing 14 student activists from the Neo Democracy Movement (NDM).

According to
the information received, on October 22, 2016, Ms. Sirikan was charged with
sedition (Article 116 of the Criminal Code) and violating the ban on political
gatherings of five of more people (Article 12 of the Head of National Council
for Peace and Order (NCPO) Order 3/2015) at Bangkok’s Samranrat Police Station.
The charges alleged Ms. Sirikan was an accomplice in anti-NCPO demonstrations
organized by NDM student activists on June 25-26, 2015. (See Background
information).
 
If indicted,
Ms. Sirikan will be tried in a military court because the alleged acts with
which she has been charged were committed prior to the enforcement of the Head
of NCPO Order 55/2016. This order, issued on 12 September 2016, ends the
practice of military trials of civilians for certain crimes committed after
that date. If convicted, Ms. Sirikan faces up to seven years in prison.
 
Her first
hearing has not yet been scheduled.  Ms.
Sirikan faces two additional charges under the Criminal Code in connection with
events that followed the arrest of the 14 NDM students on June 26, 2016. (See
Background information).
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing judicial harassment against Ms.
Sirikan, which aims to hinder her legitimate work as a human rights lawyer, and
calls on the Thai authorities to immediately drop all charges against her.
 
Until
all charges are dropped against Ms. Sirikan, the Observatory further urges the
Thai authorities to ensure that all judicial proceedings against her are
carried out in full compliance with her right to a fair trial, as provided
under international law.
 
Background information: 
 
On June 26,
2015, police arrested 14 student activists of the Neo Democracy Movement (NDM)[2]
pursuant to an arrest warrant issued by the Bangkok Military Court. All were
charged with violating the Head of National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO)
Order 3/2015, which bans political gatherings of five or more people, and
Article 116 of the Criminal Code (“sedition”). Ms. Sirikan, together with seven
other TLHR lawyers, assisted the 14 student activists at the Bangkok Military
Court.
 
On the night
of June 26-27, 2015, after Ms. Sirikan had finished providing legal assistance
to the 14 activists, more than 10 police officers who were at the Bangkok
Military Court, including Pol. Maj. Gen. Chayapol Chatchaidej, commander of the
Sixth Division of Metropolitan Police Bureau, requested access to Ms. Sirikan’s
car in order to search for the student activists’ mobile phones. Following Ms.
Sirikan’s refusal due to the lack of a court warrant and relying on the special
protection of lawyers and lawyer-client confidentiality, the police officers
impounded Ms. Sirikan’s car overnight.
 
At 12:45pm
on June 27, Ms. Sirikan filed a complaint against Pol. Maj. Gen. Chayapol
Chatchaidej and others for “malfeasance” (Article 157 of the Criminal Code) for
illegally impounding her car. While Ms. Sirikan was in the process of filing
the complaint, a police team arrived at the site of her seized car at 3:30pm
with a search warrant. Officials from the Office of Police Forensic Science
accompanied the police to conduct the search.
 
Upon
presentation of the search warrant, Ms. Sirikan agreed to open her car. The
items found in the car included TLHR’s case files, the personal computers of
the seven TLHR lawyers, and the personal belongings of the student activists
including mobile phones. Five mobile phones belonging to the students were
confiscated and placed in a sealed envelope, which was turned over to the
Office of Police Forensic Science.
 
Ms. Sirikan
subsequently returned to the Chanasongkram Police Station in Bangkok to file a
second complaint against Pol. Maj. Gen. Chayapol Chatchaidej and his
subordinates for “malfeasance”, despite being threatened that the police would
file a counter suit against her.
 
On June 28,
2015, Metropolitan Police Commissioner Pol. Lt. Gen. Srivara Rangsipramkul told
reporters that the police had recovered important evidence from Ms. Sirikan’s
car and that they were considering whether to press charges against her.
 
On June 29,
2015, police visited the house of Ms. Sirikan’s parents in her hometown and
asked her mother to identify Ms. Sirikan in various photos and asked her about
Ms. Sirikan’s background.
 
On July 7,
2015, the Bangkok Military Court ordered the release of the 14 student
activists. However, the charges against them remain pending.
 
On February
2, 2016, Ms. Sirikan received a police summons to report to Bangkok’s
Chanasongkram Police Station on February 9, 2016, to hear the criminal charges
filed against her under Articles 172 (“filing a false police report”) and 368
(“failure to comply with official orders”) of the Criminal Code as a result of
the complaints filed by Ms. Sirikan against the police officers for
“malfeasance” in June 2015.
 
On February
9, 2016, Ms. Sirikan went to the Chanasongkram Police Station in Bangkok and
was formally charged with “failure to comply with official orders” (Article 368
of the Criminal Code) and “concealing evidence” (Article 142 of the Criminal
Code).

On April 27, 2016, Ms. Sirikan was summoned to appear before the Public
Prosecutor at the Subdistrict 3 Court in Dusit, Bangkok, at 10am on May 12,
2016. On that occasion, Ms. Sirikan submitted a petition letter to the Public
Prosecutor describing the circumstances of the events of the night of June
26-27, 2015, as well as requesting the prosecutor to hear the accounts of more
witnesses, including members of the NDM, herself, Ms. Yaowalak Anuphan (the
Head of TLHR), and the inquiry official who had received the complaint for
“malfeasance”. The prosecutor announced he would continue with the
investigation and adjourned the hearing to July 27, 2016.
  On July 27,
2016, at 9:30am, Ms. Sirikan reported to the Office of the Prosecutor of Dusit
District in Bangkok to hear if the prosecutor had decided to prosecute her on
charges of “concealing evidence” (Article 142 of the Criminal Code)[3]
and “failure to comply with an official order” (Article 368 of the Criminal
Code)[4].
The Prosecutor decided to postpone the hearing to September 29, 2016, due to
ongoing investigations. If found guilty of all charges, Ms. Sirikan could face
up to three years in prison and/or a fine of up to 6,000 baht (approximately
156 Euros).
On 27
September 2016, Ms. Sirikan received a new summons from the Thai police
following accusations that she violated Article 12 of the Head of NCPO Order
3/2015, which bans political gatherings of five or more people, and Article 116
of the Criminal Code (“sedition”)[5].
According to the summons, the accusations were made by an army officer, Lt.
Col. Pongsarit Pawangkanan.
Ms. Sirikan
received the summons, dated 20 September 2016, when she returned to Thailand
after attending the 33rd Session of the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva where
she was conducting advocacy on the human rights situation in Thailand. Ms.
Sirikan did not receive the earlier summons, dated 14 September 2016, that
police claimed had been sent to her apartment, as she was not home at the time.
Actions requested:

Please write to the authorities of Thailand asking them to:

i. Immediately and unconditionally drop all charges against Ms. Sirikan and put
an end to all acts of judicial harassment against her as well as against all
human rights defenders in Thailand;
 
ii.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms.
Sirikan and all human rights defenders in Thailand;
 
iii. Comply
with the national and international legislation safeguarding the independence
of lawyers and protecting them from unlawful interference in their professional
activities;

iv. Conform to the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998,
especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;

v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Thailand.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Gen
Prayuth Chan-ocha, Prime Minister of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131
·    
Don
Pramudwinai, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·    
Gen
Paiboon Khumchaya, Minister of Justice, Fax: +66 (0) 2 953 0503
·    
Pol
Gen Somyot Poompanmoung, Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai Police, Fax:
+66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2 251 8702
·    
Mr.
Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand;
Email: help@nhrc.or.th
·    
H.E. Mr. Thani Thongphakdi,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
Thailand to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 715 10 00 /
10 02; Email: mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·    
H.E.
Ms. Busaya Mathelin, Ambassador, Embassy of Thailand in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 648 30 66; Email: thaibxl@thaiembassy.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of Thailand in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
October 28, 2016
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The Observatory was created in 1997 by OMCT and FIDH. The objective
of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented
by international civil society.
 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line:
•       E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
•       Tel
and fax OMCT +41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +41 22 809 49 29
•      
Tel and fax FIDH +33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
 



[1]               TLHR is an organisation that was
set up after the 2014 coup to provide legal aid to civilians arrested and/or
prosecuted by military, and monitor and document the post-coup human rights
situation, including human rights violations throughout Thailand.


[2]               NDM
is an organisation advocating for the restoration of democracy, the end of trials
against civilians before military courts, and the respect of human rights and
freedoms. The 14 activists were: Mr. Rangsiman Rome, Mr. Wasant Sadesit, Mr.
Songtham Kaewpanphruek, Mr. Payu Boonsopon, Mr. Apiwat Suntararak, Mr. Rattapol
Supasophon, Mr. Supachai Pookhlongploy, Mr. Apisit Sapnapaphan, Mr.Panupong
Sritananuwat, Mr. Suvicha Pitungkorn, Mr. Pakorn Areekul, Mr. Chatupat
Boonyapatraksa, Mr. Pornchai Yuanyee, and Ms. Chonticha Chaengreo.


[3]               Article 142 states: “Whoever, damaging, destroying, concealing, making away with, losing or
rendering useless any property or document seized or being kept by an official,
or ordered to be sent as evidence or for execution of the law, whether the
official keeps such property or document himself, or ordering such person or
the other person to send or keep it, shall be punished with imprisonment not
exceeding three years or fine not exceeding six thousand baht, or both.”


[4]               Article 368 states: “Whoever, being informed
of an order of an official given according to the power invested by law,
refuses to comply with the same without any reasonable cause or excuse, shall
be punished with imprisonment not exceeding ten days or fined not exceeding
five hundred baht, or both. If such order is an order authorized by law requiring
a person to assist in carrying on the activities in the function of an
official, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment not exceeding one
month or fined not exceeding one thousand baht, or both.”


[5]               Article 12 of Head of NCPO Order
3/2015 (which prohibits the public assembly of five or more people for
political purposes) carries a maximum penalty of six months’ imprisonment or a
fine not exceeding 10,000 baht or both. “Sedition” under Article 116 of the
Criminal Code carries a maximum sentence of seven years’ imprisonment. 