Kazakhstan:  Physical attack against Mr. Ramazan Yesergepov, chairman of the Journalists in Trouble Public Foundation
May 19, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2017 / MayKazakhstan: Physical attack against Mr. Ramazan Yesergepov, chairman of the Journalists in Trouble Public Foundation


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
KAZ 002 /
0517 / OBS 056
Physical attack
Kazakhstan
May 19, 2017
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention
in the following situation in Kazakhstan.

 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the physical attack
against Mr. Ramazan Yesergepov,
chairman of the Journalists in Trouble Public Foundation, member of the public
committee for the defence of the arrested journalist and public figure Zhanbolat
Mamai and former editor of the Alma-Ata
Info newspaper.
                  
According to
the information received, on May 14, 2017, Mr. Yesergepov was assaulted by two
unidentified persons who stabbed him three times for no apparent reason in the
vestibule of a train carriage in which he was traveling from Almaty to Astana.
Mr. Yesergepov was found bleeding and weakened by a conductor who rang the
alarm, which allowed him to be removed from the train at the Shu station, in the Jambyl region, and
taken to a local hospital where he underwent surgery and where he is currently
being treated.
 
When the
physical attack took place, Mr. Ramazan Yesergepov was traveling to Astana in
order to meet with representatives of European diplomatic missions regarding
the case of Mr. Zhanbolat Mamai, editor and publisher of the Sayasi Kalam Tribuna newspaper, who was
arrested on February 10, 2017, on trumped-up charges of money laundering, as
well as about the lack of implementation of a decision of the UN Human Rights
Committee in his own case.
 
In 2009, Mr.
Yesergepov was sentenced to three years in prison for publishing critical
materials about alleged illegal activities of the heads of the Zhambyl regional
administration of the National Security Committee. Following his release from
prison in 2012, Mr. Yesergepov has fought to have his sentence overturned and
in 2016, the UN Human Rights Committee concluded that his right to a fair trial had been violated
during the judicial process in which he had been convicted. Mr. Yesergepov had
been advocating for the decision to be enforced, including through a lawsuit
which he filed on May 12, 2017.
 
Following
the physical attack against Mr. Yesergepov, members of a special commission of
the Ministry of Internal Affairs would have visited him at the hospital. The
Observatory is however concerned by the fact that the investigators seem to be
trying to link this assault to a conflict with another passenger at the Almaty
railway station, which has been denied by Mr. Yesergepov and a family member
who was at the station with him before he boarded the train.
 
The
Observatory condemns the physical attack against Mr. Ramazan Yesergepov, which
seems to be linked with his legitimate human rights activities, and calls on
the Kazakh authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, transparent and impartial investigation.

Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Kazakhstan asking them to:
 
     
i.       
Order an immediate, thorough, transparent investigation into the attack
against Mr. Ramazan Yesergepov in order to identify all those responsible,
bring them before an independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions
provided by the law; 
 
    
ii.       
Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ramazan
Yesergepov, as well as all human rights defenders in Kazakhstan;
 
   iii.       
Conform with the provisions of the
UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of
the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially Articles 1, 5, 6 and 12.2;
 
   iv.       
More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Kazakhstan.
Addresses:
·       Mr.
Nursultan NAZARBAEV, President of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Fax: + 7 3172 32
61 82, 007 / 3172 / 32 40 89 
·       Mr. Kalmukhanbet
Kassymov, Minister of Internal Affairs of Kazakhstan. Email: Kense@mvd.kz
·       Mr. Zhakyp
Assanov, Prosecutor General of Kazakhstan. Fax: +7 7172 506 402
·       Mr. Askar
Shakirov, Human Rights Commissioner of Kazakhstan. Fax: +7 7172 74 05 48
·       Ambassador
Ms. Zhanar Aitzhanova, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Kazakhstan
to the UN Office and other international organizations in Geneva. Fax: +41 (0)
22 788 66 02. Email: mission@kazakhstan-geneva.ch
·       Ambassador
Mr. Almaz KHAMZAYEV, Embassy of Kazakhstan in Brussels. Email: brussels@mfa.kz.
·       Permanent
Delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan to the OSCE in Vienna. Fax: +43 1 890
80 08 20. Email: kzosce@kazakhstan.at
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Kazakhstan in your
respective country.
***
Geneva-Paris,
May 19, 2017
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line:
•   E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
•   Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
•   Tel
and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 