Iran:  Arbitrary arrest of Ms. Nargess Mohammadi to serve six year of imprisonment
April 23, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / AprilIran: Arbitrary arrest of Ms. Nargess Mohammadi to serve six year of imprisonment
THE OBSERVATORY - PRESS 
RELEASE
 
IRAN: Arbitrary arrest of Ms. Nargess Mohammadi to serve six year of 
imprisonment
 
Paris-Geneva, April 23, 2012. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), deplores the arrest of human rights 
defender Nargess Mohammadi.
 
On April 21, 2012, Ms. Nargess Mohammadi, Spokesperson and Vice-President of the Defenders of Human Rights 
Centre (DHRC), was arrested by the police in her parents' house in the city of 
Zanjan and taken into custody in Tehran’s Evin prison to serve her six-year 
imprisonment sentence. On the same day, the State media reported that she had 
been summoned to prison to serve her six-year sentence that had been upheld on 
appeal. 
 
The Observatory is appalled that Ms. Nargess Mohammadi was arrested 
on the same day of her summons and was not even given a proper chance to get 
prepared and report herself to prison authorities, though she is the mother of 
two young children[1] and is suffering from an unknown disease (muscle paralysis) and is 
in need of medical care and calm. 
 
The Observatory recalls that Ms. Mohammadi had been sentenced on 
appeal to six years in prison on charges of “assembly and collusion against the 
national security”, “membership of the DHRC” and “propaganda against the Islamic 
Republic” on February 14, 2012. Other DHRC members are subjected to a relentless judicial harassment, 
including Mr. Abdolfattah Soltani, who is still arbitrarily detained despite appealing the first 
instance sentence of 18 years in prison and 20 years ban on professional 
practice, Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, serving a six-year sentence, and Mr. Mohammad Seifzadeh, serving a two-year sentence. Other DHRC members remain free but are at risk of imminent arrest, 
such as Mr. Mohammad Ali Dadkah, who was sentenced by a first instance court to nine years in prison 
and 10 years ban on practice and teaching. Another member, Mr. Abdolreza Tajik, was forced to leave the country recently after his six-year prison 
sentence was upheld on appeal. 
 
“Nargess Mohammadi is arbitrarily detained and harassed because of 
her strong commitment to democracy and basic human rights standards. It is 
obvious that, in the prevailing context of repression in Iran, the authorities 
are doing everything to silence every dissenting voice”, said Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President.
 
“We deeply condemn that, over, over and again, Iranian 
human rights defenders suffer judicial harassment, unfair prison sentences and 
punitive measures aimed at breaking their commitment towards human 
rights”, added Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern about the arrest of Ms. 
Nargess Mohammadi  and the harassment 
faced by the above-mentioned human rights defenders as it seems they are merely 
sanctioned for their human rights activities. 
 
Accordingly, the Observatory calls upon the Iranian authorities to 
provide Ms. Nargess Mohammadi with adequate and proper medical care, and to 
guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all 
human rights defenders in Iran. Furthermore, the Observatory demands the 
immediate and unconditional release of Ms. Nargess Mohammadi, Ms. Nasrin 
Sotudeh, Mr. Abdolfattah Soltani, Mr. Mohammad Seifzadeh, and all others 
defenders detained and an end to all acts of harassment - including at the 
judicial level - against all human rights defenders.
 
For further information, please contact:
·           
FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet : + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
·           OMCT: 
Delphine Reculeau : + 41 22 809 49 39
 



[1]
Furthermore, her husband, Mr. Taqhi Rahmani, a scholar, 
writer, journalist and human rights defender had to leave the country a couple 
of months ago, to avoid imprisonment as a seven-year prison sentence (dating to 
2000-2001) against him had become final. The authorities have effectively 
deprived the two very young children of both their 
parents. 