Azerbaijan:  Joint Open Letter to members of PACE Election Observation Mission: Legislative elections in AZERBAIJAN
October 27, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / OctoberAzerbaijan: Joint Open Letter to members of PACE Election Observation Mission: Legislative elections in AZERBAIJANAzerbaijan_2015.10.27_Joint_Letter_PACE_English2 pages / 335 KB​













Attn. Members of the PACE Election
Observation Mission 
 
Paris-Geneva-Oslo, October 27, 2015
 
Re:
legislative elections in Azerbaijan
 
 
Dear
member of the PACE Election Observation Mission,
 
On
November 1, 2015, roughly five million citizens of Azerbaijan will be called to
vote in the legislative elections in Azerbaijan. FIDH, OMCT and
the Norwegian Helsinki Committee have taken due note of the fact that
PACE will deploy an Election Observation Mission on that occasion, and wish to
extend our deepest concern regarding the conditions in which the polls are
being organised, which, we believe, will not meet the provisions of the
Declaration of Principles for International Election Observation, endorsed by
PACE and a number of other international organisations[1].

 
·       Threats
against opposition candidates
 
Over
the past weeks, local observers have reported cases of intimidation of local
population trying to prevent signature collection for opposition candidates,
and restrictions were also imposed on opposition parties collecting signatures.
It was also highlighted that the situation in the country with respect to
political freedoms, freedom of expression and media, and freedom of assembly
does not provide conditions for holding free and democratic elections, and that
the violations which occurred in the first stage of the elections – in the
process of nomination and registration of candidates – cast doubt on legitimacy
of the process. For example, the Central Election Commission registered the
candidacy of only 25 out of 60 potential contenders from the major opposition
party Musavat, after declaring invalid signatures from 40 of the contenders,
even signatures from the contenders’ own relatives. The Deputy Chairman of
Musavat, Tofiq Yagublu, is serving a five year prison sentence on clearly
politically motivated charges. The leader of the opposition movement REAL, Ilgar Mammadov, has been convicted
to seven years in prison. On May 22, 2014, the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) held Azerbaijan responsible for violating
the European Convention of Human Rights in arresting and sentencing
Mr. Mammadov. The decision of the
ECtHR has remained unimplemented by the authorities. Another major
opposition party, the Popular Front Party, has decided to boycott the election.
 
·       Freedom
of expression
 
Azerbaijan faces significant challenges with respect
to the exercise of fundamental freedoms. Those who express critical views of
the government are being systematically harassed and prosecuted. Pluralistic
views and impartial information is limited, journalists are being judicially
harassed, detained and threatened. The case of investigative journalist Khadija
Ismayilova, sentenced to 7 years in prison on bogus charges, clearly
illustrates the atmosphere of intimidation and threats that independent
journalists face. Several other journalists are serving prison
sentences. Independent media outlets have been forced to close down or leave
the country. In the context of the election campaign, such challenges result in
uneven media access where Azerbaijani opposition candidates are significantly
disadvantaged in electoral campaigning.
 
·      
Imprisonment of
independent human rights defenders
 
Over the past years, opposition candidates, civil
society activists, and human rights defenders have remained subject to
continuous harassment and arbitrary detentions in Azerbaijan. 
 
The Director of the Election Monitoring and Democracy
Studies Centre (EMDS), Mr. Anar Mammadli, was arrested and condemned to
5.5 years' imprisonment, for his election monitoring and other human rights
activities[2].
The main representatives of independent civil society organisations such as Leyla
Yunus, Arif Yunusov, Intigam Aliyev, Rasul Jafarov are
currently serving harsh prison sentences. Many other political prisoners are
detained, and their number is hard to assess as people who were compiling the
list of political prisoners and calling the Azerbaijani government to respect
its international obligations – such as Rasul Jafarov and Leyla Yunus -
languish themselves behind bars.
 
In this context, the Secretary General of the
Council of Europe announced on October 7 that it withdrew the Council’s
participation in the Azerbaijan Joint Working Group on Human Rights, arguing
that the “overall situation of human rights defenders in the country has
deteriorated dramatically”, as "an increasing number of human right
defenders has recently been imprisoned, and that the Council of Europe has
received worrying reports concerning unacceptable detention conditions"[3].
 
·       Electoral
commissions
 
According to the Electoral Code of Azerbaijan, Chairpersons
of all electoral commissions are nominees of the parliamentary majority, which
is currently composed of pro-government political parties, thereby undermining
the impartiality of the whole election administration.
 
·      
Reactions from other international
institutions
 
On
September 11, 2015, the OSCE/ODIHR took the decision not to send an
election observation mission, on the grounds that restrictions imposed by the
Azerbaijani authorities would not allow the Organisation to fulfill its
mandate. In a needs assessment report, OSCE/ODIHR had previously stressed that
the 2013 Presidential elections were undermined by limitations on freedoms of
expression, assembly and association that did not guarantee a level playing
field for candidates. The OSCE/ODIHR had addressed several recommendations to
the authorities on how electoral processes may be improved, which have remained
unaddressed, in particular regarding the composition of election commissions
and the non-transparency of candidate registration procedures. 
 
On
September 10, 2015, the European Parliament decided not to send election
observers to Azerbaijan, highlighting that “the background for holding free and
fair elections does not exist and limitations on the freedoms of expression,
assembly and association in the country make it impossible to create a level
playing field for candidates and to organise a genuinely competitive vote”. 
 
Accordingly,
we believe that the restrictive political environment in Azerbaijan, notably
the unprecedented and ongoing crackdown on civil society, render the upcoming
election inconsistent with the Council of Europe standards of free and fair
elections. 
 
We
are confident that our concerns will be echoed throughout your assessment
within the framework of your mandate, and remain at your disposal to provide
you with further evidence regarding such situation.
 
Thanking
you for the attention,
 
Sincerely,
 
 
Karim LAHIDJI              Gerald STABEROCK                Bjørn Engesland
FIDH
President            OMCT Secretary General         Norwegian Helsinki Committee Secretary General



[1]    The
Declaration is available at: http://www.venice.coe.int/webforms/documents/default.aspx?pdffile=CDL-AD%282005%29036-e or http://eeas.europa.eu/eueom/pdf/declaration-of-principles_en.pdf.


[2]    See
Urgent Appeal AZE 002 / 1213 / OBS 098, issued by the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT).


[3]     See Press Release issued by the Council of
Europe Secretary General, Council of Europe leaves Azerbaijan human rights
working group, October 7, 2015: http://www.coe.int/en/web/portal/-/council-of-europe-leaves-azerbaijan-human-rights-working-group. 