Cambodia:  Violations of the right to freedom of peaceful assembly
July 31, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2012 / JulyCambodia: Violations of the right to freedom of peaceful assembly


URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

 
KHM
003 / 0712 / OBS 073
Violations of the
right to freedom of peaceful assembly/ Threats
Cambodia
July 30, 2012
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Cambodia.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources of the disruption by armed security forces of a
training workshop organised jointly by the Cambodian Human Rights and
Development Association (ADHOC) and the Cambodian Center for Human Rights
(CCHR) on the issue of land rights.
 
According to the
information received, on July 27, 2012, three commune police officers from
Patang, as well as one Rattanakiri provincial police officer, the Patang
Village Chief, the Patang Commune Chief and the Deputy Commune Chief – one of
them carrying an M-16 assault rifle – disrupted a training session on land
rights organised jointly by ADHOC and CCHR in Patang village, Patang commune,
Rattanakiri province. The officials argued that they were acting upon orders
from the provincial authorities, because they had allegedly failed to satisfy
notification requirements. It is to be noted however that under Article 3 of
the Cambodian 2009 Law on Demonstrations, organisers are exempted from
notification requirements for all educational/training activities related to
social interests. Notwithstanding this exemption, the CCHR had sent a letter to
Patang Village Chief in order to notify him of the upcoming training session.
 
In order to ensure the
physical safety of the attendees, ADHOC and CCHR decided to stop the training
session. As the security forces and provincial authorities departed, the Patang
Commune Chief accused ADHOC of engaging in “incitement activities”, and the
police officers told CCHR staff members that their security would not be guaranteed
if they did not leave the area.
 
The Observatory expresses its
deepest concern about the disruption of this training session on the issue of
land rights, as well as about the threats directed against ADHOC and CCHR
representatives, since they seem to merely aim at hindering their human rights
activities. Violations of land and housing rights are widespread and serious in
Cambodia. Government harassment and intimidation of villagers, activists and
organisations defending these rights are also increasing. The Observatory
therefore calls upon the Cambodian authorities to put an end to all acts of
harassment against these organisations and their members.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Cambodian
authorities and ask them to:
 
i.   Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
and psychological integrity of the members of ADHOC and CCHR, as well as all human rights defenders and their organisations in
Cambodia;
 
ii.  Put an end to all acts of harassment against
ADHOC and CCHR members as well as against all human rights defenders and their
organisations in Cambodia;
 
iii.   Conform with the provisions of the Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations
General Assembly, and in particular :
-     
Article 1, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with
others, to promote the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
-   
 and Article 12.2 which provides that “the State
shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.
 
iv. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Cambodia.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister, Office of the
Prime Minister, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: +855 23 36 06 66 / 855 23
88 06 24 (c/o Council of Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh
·    
Mr. H.E. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of
Justice, No 240, Sothearos Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: 023
364119. Email: moj@cambodia.gov.kh

·    
Mr. Sar Kheng, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior, 275 Norodom Blvd, Phnom Penh,
Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: + 855 23 212708. Email: moi@interior.gov.kh

·    
Mr. Hor Nam Hong, Minister of Foreign
Affairs, 161 Preah Sisowath Quay, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: + 855
23 21 61 44 / + 855 23 21 69 39. Email: mfaicasean@bigpond.com.kh

·    
Ambassador Mr. Sun Suon, Permanent Mission
of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva, Chemin de Taverney 3, Case postale
213, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 788 77 74. Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh; cambodge@bluewin.ch 
 
Please also write to the
diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, July 30,
2012
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH
and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and
aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·  
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·     Tel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1
43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80
·  
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29 