Sri Lanka:  Sri Lanka: arrest and risk of torture of pregnant women
July  6, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2001 / JulySri Lanka: Sri Lanka: arrest and risk of torture of pregnant womenCase LKA 060701  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.  Brief description of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the arrest by the Sri Lankan Armed Forces of 29-year old Mrs. Amirthanaayaki Thurairaasaa, who is seven months pregnant, near Madhu, Sri Lanka.  According to the information received, Mrs. Thurairaasaa was arrested while traveling with her husband and children by guards at a checkpoint on the road leading to Madhu. The police have accused her of carrying batteries, which are banned items, to the Liberation Tamil Tiger-held (LTTE) area of the country, although they have not brought any charges against her. Mrs. Thurairaasaa is reportedly being detained at Mannar prison. The batteries were reportedly for her personal use, to power a radio so that she and her family could keep informed about developments in the conflict, so as to not get caught up in it.  According to the information received, given that she is seven months pregnant, there are fears for her and her child’s well being. Furthermore it is thought that she may risk being tortured. Local NGOs are reportedly working to organize a visit to Mrs. Thurairaasaa in prison.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about Mrs. Thurairaasaa and her child’s physical and psychological integrity.  Action requested:  Please write to the authorities of Sri Lanka urging them to:  i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mrs. Thurairaasaa and her unborn child; ii.	order her immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring her before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee her procedural rights at all times; iii.	ensure respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms at all times and in all circumstances in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses:  ·	Her Excellency President Chandrika B. Kumaratunga, Presidential Residence, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka Fax: 94 - 1 - 333 - 703  ·	Mr. Mangala Samaraweera, Minister of Posts, Telecommunications and Media, Old CTO Building Lotus Rd, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka  ·	Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, New Secretariat, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka ·	Hon. Ambassador, Permanent Mission and Consulate General of Sri Lanka, 56, Rue De Moillebeau,  5th Floor, 1 209, Geneva 19, Switzerland, Fax: (41-22) 734 9084, E-mail: mission.srilanka@itu.ch ·	Hon. High-Commissioner, The High Commission of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 13 Hyde Park Gardens London W2 2LU United Kingdom Fax: (0171) 262-7970, E-mail: lancom@easynet.co.uk  The Embassy of Sri Lanka in your respective countries.  Kindly inform the International Secretariat of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  Geneva, July 6th, 2001 