Guatemala:  Civil society organizations condemn ongoing criminalization of human rights defenders Claudia Samayoa and Jose? Marti?nez
April  2, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Guatemala / 2019 / AprilGuatemala: Civil society organizations condemn ongoing criminalization of human rights defenders Claudia Samayoa and José Martínez
April 2nd, 2019.
 
We the undersigned
organizations are gravelly alarmed by the ongoing, targeted criminalization of
human rights defenders in Guatemala including the recent judicial harassment of
defenders Mrs. Claudia Virginia Samayoa Pineda and Mr. José Manuel Martínez
Cabrera. The targeted judicial harassment of Ms. Samayoa Pineda and Mr.
Martinez Cabrera is illustrative of the authorities’ growing intolerance of
independent dissent, including defenders working on land and environmental
defense.
 
Mrs. Samayoa Pineda is
President of the Board of Directors of UDEFEGUA, an organization which works to
support human rights defenders in Central America, and member of the OMCT
Executive Committee; while Mr. José Manuel Martínez Cabrera is a member of the
Justicia Ya Collective, a citizen movement which opposes corruption and
impunity. Both human rights defenders are being subjected to a criminal
complaint by Mr. Nester Mauricio Vásquez Pimentel, in his capacity as President
of the Supreme Court of Justice (CSJ) and representing the CSJ, on spurious
charges of illegally obtaining a court document and influence peddling. It is
broadly acknowledged that civil society groups, including UDEFEGUA and the
Justicia Ya collective, have been instrumental in the fight against impunity
and public corruption in the country.
 
The criminal case against
both defenders is a direct response to a complaint the defenders filed on
January 17, 2019 requesting the withdrawal of the privilege of immunity from 11
judges of the CSJ. The complaint contends that the 11 judges breached the
Constitution of Guatemala and committed judicial prevarication by allowing
criminal proceedings against three judges from the Constitutional Court (CC).
Along with the complaint presented to CSJ on January 17, 2019, Ms. Samayoa
Pineda and Mr. Martínez Cabrera annexed a copy of the CSJ decision which allows
the criminal proceedings against the CC judges to continue. Despite the fact
that this document had been widely circulated in the national press and on social
media, the President of the CSJ is accusing these two human rights defenders of
illegally obtaining it.
 
The criminalization of both
defenders is yet another example of the targeted reprisals leveled against
civil society organisations and human rights defenders that have mobilised
against a series of attacks on Guatemala's democratic institutional framework.
Among other worrying attempts to undermine democratic norms and the rule of law
in Guatemala, the authorities have sought to delegitimize the judges of the
Constitutional Court and unilaterally cancel an agreement with the UN ending
the International Commission Against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG).
 
In the framework of our
commitment to justice and human rights, we make a public call to the Guatemalan
Government to:
 
1) End all acts of
harassment, misuse of criminal law and criminalization against individuals and
communities that defend human rights in Guatemala, including Ms. Claudia
Virginia Samayoa Pineda and Mr. José Manuel Martínez Cabrera. In particular, we
ask the Public Ministry to dismiss the criminal complaint against both human
rights defenders.
 
2) Adopt the most
appropriate measures to guarantee the safety and physical and psychological
integrity of Ms. Claudia Virginia Samayoa Pineda and Mr. José Manuel Martínez
Cabrera and of all human rights defenders in Guatemala.
 
3) Protect, respect and
guarantee the realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms in all
regions of Guatemala, as well as the validity of a democratic State. 
 
 
Signatory organisations:
 
350.org
Action Aid, Guatemala
African Centre for Justice
and Peace Studies (ACJPS), Sudan
Alianza Frente a la
Criminalización (AFC), Guatemala
Asamblea socioambiental
de General Roca. Argentina
Asian Legal Resource
Centre (ALRC)
Asociación Ambiente y
Sociedad - Colombia
Asociación COMUNICARTE,
Guatemala
Asociación de Mujeres
de Guatemala AMG, España
Asociación de
Trabajadoras del Hogar a Domicilio y de Maquila ATRAHDOM
Asociación
Interamericana para la Defensa del Ambiente (AIDA), Colombia
Asociación para una
Ciudadanía Participativa (ACI PARTICIPA) – Honduras
Association for Human
Rights in Ethiopia (AHRE), Ethiopia
AWID (Association for
Women’s Rights in Development)
Banglar Manabadhikar
Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), India
Cambodian Center for Human
Rights (CCHR), Cambodia
Carea e.V., Alemania
Center for Justice and
International Law (CEJIL)
Central General de
Trabajadores de Guatemala
Centro de Incidencia
Ambiental de Panamá (CIAM)
CIVICUS
Civil Society Organizations
Network for Development (RESOCIDE), Burkina Faso
Colectivo CADEHO,
Alemania
Collectif Guatemala,
Francia,
Comité de Familiares de
las Víctimas de los Sucesos de Febrero-Marzo de 1989 (COFAVIC) – Venezuela
Comité de Solidaridad
con los Presos Políticos (CSPP) – Colombia
Comite Noruego de
solidaridad con America Latina, Noruega
Committee Against
Torture, Russian Federation
Comunidades en
Resistencia Pacífica de La Puya, Guatemala
Confederación Unitaria
de Trabajadores de Honduras
Congregation of Our Lady of
Charity of the Good Shepherd, US Provinces
Consorcio para el
diálogo parlamentario y la equidad Oaxaca A.C .- México Coordinadora
Civil-Nicaragua
Coordinadora Nacional
de Derechos Humanos (CNDDHH) - Perú
CUTH
Derecho Ambiente y
Recursos Naturales DAR (Perú)
Dienst fuer Mission,
Oekumene und Entwicklung der Evangelischen Landeskirche Stuttgart, Alemania DKA
Austria
Federación Guatemalteca
de Escuelas Radiofónicas (FGER), Guatemala
Festivales Solidarios,
Guatemala
Foro de Organizaciones
No Gubernamentales Internacionales en Guatemala (FONGI)
Front Line Defenders
Fundación Ambiente y
Recursos Naturales (FARN)
Fundación Ciudadanía
Inteligente
Fundación de Estudios
para la Aplicación del Derecho (FESPAD)
Fundación Karmel
Juyup’, Guatemala
Fundación para el
Debido Proceso (DPLF)
German Zepeda, Solidarity
Center
Global Witness
Guatemala-Netz Zürich
HondurasDelegation,
Alemania
Human Rights Defenders
Network- SL
Iglesia Luterana ILUGUA
de Guatemala, Guatemala
Impunity Watch, Países
Bajos
International Commission of
Jurists (ICJ)-Kenya, Kenya
International Labor Rights
Forum (ILRF)
International Land
Coalition (ILC) - América Latina y el Caribe
International Land
Coalition (ILC) - Secretariat
JASS (Just Associates)
Karapatan Alliance for the
Advancement of People's Rights, Philippines
Kazakhstan International
Bureau for Human Rights and the Rule of Law (KIBHRL), Kazakhstan KM207
Guatemala-Suisse
Latin America Working Group
Ligue Burundaise des droits
de l’homme Iteka, Burundi
Maryknoll Affiliates
Maryknoll Office for Global
Concerns
Metro Center,
Journalists Rights & Advocacy
Movimiento por la Paz
(MPDL)
Mugen Gainetik, del
País Vasco, España
Oekumenische Initiative
Mittelamerika e.V., Alemania
Organización Mundial
Contra la Tortura (OMCT) – Internacional
OXFAM
Oxfam America
Peace Watch Switzerland
(PWS), Suiza
People in Need
Philippine Alliance of
Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), Philippines
Plataforma
Internacional contra la Impunidad
Presbyterian Church
(USA)
Presbyterian Peace
Fellowship
Programme Against Custodial
Torture & Impunity (PACTI), India
Project on Organizing,
Development, Education and Research (PODER)
Protection International
Mesoamérica
Public Association
“Spravedlivost” Jalal-Abad Human Rights Organization, Kyrgyzstan
Public Verdict Foundation,
Russian Federation
Reacción Climática, Bolivia
Red Latinoamericana y
del Caribe por la Democracia
Robert F. Kennedy Human
Rights
Seguridad en Democracia
(SEDEM)
Sindicato de
trabajadoras domésticas de maquila, nexas y conexas SITRADOM
Sisters of Mercy of the
Americas - Institute Justice Team
Solidaridad con Guatemala
de Austria (Guatemala Solidarität Österreich) SOS-Torture/Burundi, Burundi
The Fund for Global Human
Rights
UDEFEGUA, Guatemala
UNSITRAGUA HISTÓRICA
Washington Office on Latin
America (WOLA), United States
West African Human Rights
Defenders Network
World Movement for
Democracy
ZEB / Zentrum fuer
entwicklungspolitische Bildung der Evangelischen Landeskirche Stuttgart,
Alemania Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum
 
Invidividual signatories:
 
Ana Lucía Ixchíu
Hernández, Guatemala
David O., ciudadano de
los E.E.U.U.
Dra. Lisette Aguilar
Prado, Guatemala
Esther Gut de Zurich,
Suiza
Eve Chayes Lyman
Iduvina Hernández
Batres, Guatemala
Karla AVELAR activista
trans refugiada
Maya Alvarado Chávez,
Guatemala
Mirna Ramírez, Guatemala
Padre Cirilo Santamaria
Sáez, Guatemala
Samwel Mohochi, Executive
Director, ICJ Kenya
Tony Smith, ciudadano
de los E.E.U.U.
Victoria Sanford, PhD,
Director, Center for Human Rights & Peace Studies, Lehman College, City
University of New York, United States 