Bahrain:  Ongoing judicial harassment faced by Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer
February  7, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / FebruaryBahrain: Ongoing judicial harassment faced by Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
New Information
BHR 003 / 0411 / OBS 065.3
Continuing judicial harassment
Bahrain
February 7, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New Information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the 
ongoing judicial harassment faced by Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer, a prominent human rights lawyer.
 
According to the information received, while on February 7, 2012, the 
Third Minor Criminal Court was due to resume the trial of Mr. Mohamed Issa Al 
Tajer on charges of “spreading rumours and malicious news” under Article 168, 
“incitement of hatred towards the regime” under Articles 165 and 172 and “taking 
part in a demonstration” under Article 178 of the Criminal Code to hear defence 
witnesses, his lawyers were informed that the trial was postponed due to the 
absence of the judge who would be travelling outside of the country. The trial 
was therefore postponed to March 20, 2012.
 
Additionally, Mr. Al Tajer's telephone communications and circulation 
allegedly remain under close monitoring by the National Security Intelligence, 
pressure would reportedly be put on his clients not to assign him new cases he 
would regularly be denigrated and accused of inciting sectarianism and treason 
in on-line social forums, including Facebook and Twitter.
 
The Observatory firmly denounces the 10-month long continued judicial 
harassment faced by Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer, which seems to merely aim at 
sanctioning his peaceful and legitimate human rights activities as a defence 
lawyer, and moreover condemns the lack of due process in the trial held against 
him over the past months before the Lower National Safety Court (see background 
information). 
 
The Observatory recalls the judicial proceedings launched against Mr. 
Al Tajer took place within the context of an intensified crackdown against 
activists, including human rights defenders, who have supported or are alleged 
to have supported the protest movement which started in Bahrain in February 
2011. Hundreds of individuals are still arbitrarily detained, and access to the 
majority of these detainees, including by their lawyers, is not guaranteed. 
Concern about the physical integrity and life of those arrested are consequently 
high.
 
Background Information:
 
At around 11 pm on April 15, 2011, a group of more than 20 masked and 
armed plain-clothes men, belonging to security forces, entered without any 
warrant the house where Mr. Al Tajer was present with his wife and young 
children. At 00.30 am, after thoroughly searching the house and confiscating 
computers and mobile phones, the men arrested Mr. Al Tajer and took him to an 
unknown destination. After his arrest, Mr. Al Tajer was detained incommunicado 
for five weeks and was then allegedly transferred to the Gurain military prison. 

 
In addition, on June 12, 2011, Mr. Al Tajer was brought before the Lower National 
Safety Court (a military court) on charges of “spreading rumours and malicious 
news” and “incitement of hatred towards the regime” without his lawyer nor his 
family being informed of the court hearing. Several lawyers who were in the 
court on that day requested the judge to represent him. Mr. Al Tajer pleaded not 
guilty.
 
On June 16, he was brought again before the National Safety Court for 
an hearing, for which approximately 50 lawyers attended the 
session.
 
On June 23, 2011, Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer appeared before the Lower 
National Safety Court in Manama on four charges: “inciting others to develop 
hatred or hostility towards the system of Government” pursuant to Article 165 of 
the Bahraini Criminal Code; “deliberately releasing malicious news or rumours 
about (…) the State” pursuant to Article 168; “inciting others (…) to hate or 
show contempt for a certain faction (…) undermining the public peace” pursuant 
to Article 172; and “taking part in a demonstration (…) with the aim of 
committing crimes (…) aimed at undermining public security” pursuant to Article 
178 punishable by a prison sentence of up to three years. Mr. Al Tajer was 
blamed for committing all those crimes because he reportedly made a speech in 
which he addressed the public in the Pearl Roundabout’s last March to denounce 
Bahrain's human rights record. In the charge sheet against him, it was stated by 
the prosecution that by making such speech he jeopardised the country stability 
and security and caused the public to reject the National Dialogue, which was 
then called for by the Government. 
 
The verdict in this trial was to be issued on July 5, 2011, but 
shortly before that date, on June 26, the authorities announced that all 
remaining court cases will be transferred from the special military courts to 
civilian courts. Thus, Mr. Al Tajer's trial was suspended and transferred to 
civil courts.
 
On August 6, 2011, after 114 days of detentions, Mr. Mohamed Issa Al 
Tajer was released on bail. Before his release, he was forced to sign documents 
stating that he would appear before courts and be available for interrogation at 
any time if summoned. He was also required to declare that he would not carry 
out “activities against the country”. 
 
During his detention, Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer was allegedly 
subjected to acts of torture and ill-treatment. He was kept in solitary 
confinement during seven weeks, beaten and kicked, forced to stand for long 
hours with his hands against the wall, prevented from going to the bathroom, sleeping, 
talking with other detainees and having contact with his family during two 
consecutive months.
 
At the time of publication of this appeal, items confiscated items 
during the search which include confidential lawyer client information, as well 
as family pictures and videos have not been returned to 
him.
 
Actions requested: The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 

 
i.         
Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mohamed 
Issa Al Tajer and all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
ii.       
Put an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial 
level, against Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer and against all human rights defenders 
in Bahrain; 
iii.      
Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations 
General Assembly, in particular : its Article 1, which states that “everyone 
has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote the 
protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the 
national and international levels” ;
-          its Article 6 (c) which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others to study, discuss, form and hold 
opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw 
public attention to those matters” ;
-          and its Article 12.2 which states that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.
 
vi.    Ensure in all 
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance 
with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified 
by Bahrain. 
Addresses: 
·         
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 
587
·         
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: 
+973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·         
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic 
Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·         Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 
chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, 
Switzerland. Fax: 
+ 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch

 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your 
respective countries.
 
*** 
Paris-Geneva, February 7, 2012 
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the 
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in 
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29 