Nepal:  Follow-up of case NPL 110311_Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura was released but no investigation has been carried out into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment
March 31, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2011 / MarchNepal: Follow-up of case NPL 110311_Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura was released but no investigation has been carried out into the allegations of torture and ill-treatmentNPL
110311.1
Follow-up
of the case NPL 110311
Release on bail/ No effective investigation/ Risk of
impunity
                                               
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has
received new information on the following situation in Nepal.
New information
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable
source and Antenna International, a member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture
Network, that Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura,19-year-old
and permanent resident of Khajurkhurd VDC-1, Jogambharia, Banke district, who was allegedly tortured and ill-treated with
the purpose of extracting a confession in detention, was released
on a bail amount of RS 15'000 (equivalent to 148.70 Euro), on 18 March 2011.
OMCT
welcomes the fact that Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura was
released but it remains concerned about his health condition. OMCT is also
seriously preoccupied about the fact that no investigation seems to have been
launched into the alleged acts of torture and ill-treatment that Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura suffered in police custody. In
this respect, OMCT recalls to the competent Nepalese authorities that, in line
with their obligations under the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, they have to consider seriously any allegations of
torture and other forms of ill-treatment, and to undertake a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation in this regard,in order to identify all those
responsible, bring them to trial and apply adequate sanctions. 
In
addition, OMCT recalls Article 11 of
the Convention against Torture which stipulates that “Each State Party shall
keep under systematic review interrogation rules, instructions, methods and
practices as well as arrangements for the custody and treatment of persons
subjected to any form of arrest, detention or imprisonment in any territory
under its jurisdiction, with a view to preventing any cases of
torture” and article 15 of the said Convention
which stipulates that, “Each State Party
shall ensure that any statement which is established to have been made as a
result of torture shall not be invoked as evidence in any proceedings (…)”.
Finally, OMCT recalls that the
victims of torture and other forms of ill-treatment must be ensured the right
to an effective remedy for the human rights violations suffered as well as the
right to full redress, including compensation and rehabilitation.
 
Background information
OMCT
had earlier been informed about the alleged torture and ill-treatment with the
purpose of extracting a confession inflicted on Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura in police
custody. OMCT had feared for his safety as he had remained detained under the
same police control until his release. 
According to the information received, on 20 February 2011 at around 10 am, Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura was arrested by
the Banke District Police Office (DPO) under the allegation of donation
extortion[1][1]. He was only given an arrest warrant and a detention
letter on 22 February 2011. The
following day, on 23 February 2011, he was taken to the office of the public prosecutor and remanded for
the first time for ten days under abduction and hostage charges. He was again
remanded for ten days, on 1 March 2011. He was detained in Banke DPO. 
According to the same information received, on 21 February
2011 at around 12 am, several unidentified policemen took Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura to the upper
floor of the DPO, Banke, blindfolded him and started to interrogate him after
he was forced to lie on the floor. During the interrogation, the policemen
allegedly kicked on his chest with their boots. When Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura
replied that he did not extort donation, the policemen reportedly beat with
sticks on the soles of his feet for several times. Due to the alleged acts, he
fell unconscious. The policemen then brought him round by sprinkling water on
his face and made him to jump on the floor for a while before bringing him back
to the cell. 
According to the same information received, the same
day at around 10 pm, several
unidentified policemen took Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura back to the same room on the
upper floor of the DPO in Banke, blindfolded him and forced him to lie on his
back. Six policemen then caught his hands, his legs and his head in order to
restrict his movements while other policemen poured water into his nose and
mouth for about two to three minutes. Once more, Mr. Sahaj Ram Thure denied any
wrongdoing. On the next day, on 22 February 2011, at around 5 pm, the
policemen repeated the same acts but Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura continued to deny the
allegations made against him. It is reported that due the acts of torture and
ill-treatment, he has suffered of chest pain, swollen arms and problems of
respiration. He was reportedly taken to the hospital, on 22 February
2011, where he was examined
and prescribed medicines. 
Action requested
Please
write to the authorities in Nepal
urging them to:
i.           Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Sahaj Rum Thuna; 
ii.          Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned facts, in particular the circumstances of the detention of Mr.
Sahaj Rum Thuna and the allegations of torture and
ill-treatment, in accordance with international
human rights standards, the result of which must be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iii.        Guarantee that no
evidence obtained under torture and other forms of ill-treatment, or threats
thereof, be used in court proceedings against Mr. Sahaj Rum Thuna as stipulated in Article 15 of the UN
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment;
iv.         Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation and rehabilitation is granted to
the victim;
v.          Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, in
particular ensure that all acts of torture, and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment and punishment are clearly defined in law as offences in accordance
with the provisions set out in Articles 1, 4 and 16 of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and that
they be made punishable with appropriate penalties which take into account the
grave nature of the crimes as required.
Addresses
Ø       Ministry of Home Affairs, Singha
Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: +977 1 4211211 / 4211264, Fax: +977 1 42 11 232
Ø      Inspector
General of Police, Ramesh Chand Thakuri, Police Head Quarters, Naxal,
Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407, Fax: +977 1 4 415 593. Email:
info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø      Attorney
General, Mr. Yuv Raj Sangraula, Office of Attorney General Ramshahpath,
Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +977 1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np, info@attorneygeneral@gov.np
Ø      DSP
Bishwa Adhikari, Human Rights Cell, Nepal Police, Kathmandu, Nepal PO. Box.
No.: 407, Fax: +977 1 4415593 E- mail: hrcell@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø      Chairman
of the National Human Rights Commission, Mr. Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck,
Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@nhrcnepal.org and also complaints@nhrcnepal.org,
Fax: +977 1 5547973
Ø      Permanent
Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int

Please
also write to the embassies of Nepal
in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 31 March 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply. 