Egypt:  Ongoing judicial harassment and restrictions to freedom of association against more than 37 human rights defenders and organisations
May 30, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / MayEgypt: Ongoing judicial harassment and restrictions to freedom of association against more than 37 human rights defenders and organisationsNew informationEGY 003 / 0615 / OBS 049.4Judicial harassment /Restrictions to freedom of association /Restrictions to freedom of movementEgyptMay 30, 2016The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of theInternational Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.New information:The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing 
judicial harassment and restrictions to freedom of association faced by 
at least 37 Egyptian human rights defenders and organisations, including
the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS) and the Egyptian 
Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR), two member organisations of FIDH,
the Arab Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI), the Hisham 
Mubarak Law Center (HMLC), the Arab Center for the Independence of the 
Judiciary, Nazra for Feminist Studies, as well as the Legal Profession 
(ACIJLP) and the Land Center for Human Rights (LCHR), two member 
organisations of OMCT.According to the information received, on May 27, 2016, Mr.  Mohamed Zaree,
CIHRS Egypt Director,was informed by the authorities at Cairo 
International Airport that a travel ban had beenimposed on him based on 
an order by an investigative judge. We believe this travel ban was 
ordered within the framework of case No. 173/2011 (known as the “foreign
funding case against NGOs) (see background information).In
all likelihood, Mr. Zaree will be summoned for investigation in the 
coming days and may be added to the asset freeze order for allegedly 
“receiving illegal foreign funding” in order to cause “harm to the 
country”. As has been the case with such investigations in the past, 
such an asset freeze is likely to extend to Mr. Zaree’s family, putting 
their livelihood in jeopardy. If convicted on such charges and others 
related to “harming the national interest”, under the vaguely worded 
counterterrorism legislation, Mr. Zaree faces very heavy penalties 
including a long jail term.The
Observatory would like to recall that a total of sixteen human rights 
defenders, including two other employees of CIHRS and its Director Mr. Bahey eldin Hassan,are currently targeted with similar measures within the framework of the same judicial case (see background information)[1] .These
developments are the latest escalation in a campaign of judicial 
harassment launched by the authorities in 2011 targeting civil society 
organisations and human rights defenders in Egypt[2].The Observatory recalls that a number of other human rights defenders have been recently harassed.The
Observatory strongly condemns the travel ban imposed on Mr. Mohamed 
Zaree as well as the ongoing judicial harassment against him, which only
aim at sanctioning his legitimate human rights activities. Therefore, 
the Observatory calls on the Egyptian authorities to immediately lift 
the travel ban and cease all acts of judicial harassment against Mr 
Mohamed Zaree.More
generally, the Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities to 
immediately put an end to all acts of harassment against human rights 
defenders and their relatives, as well as NGOs, and to comply with its 
Constitution (in particular Article 78 and Article 93, which 
respectively recognise freedom of association and Egypt's compliance 
with ratified international human rights conventions) as well as its 
international legal obligations (in particular Article 22 of the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)) and its 
international commitment to respect freedom of association in the 
framework of its Universal Periodic Review (UPR)[3].The
Observatory reminds in particular the Egyptian authorities of their 
pledges made during the last UPR review, during which they “affirmed 
that civil society is an essential partner to the Government in 
strengthening human rights” [4].Background information:Since
2011, the Egyptian Government has launched a judicial harassment 
campaign against civil society organisations on the pretext that they 
received unauthorised foreign funding under criminal case No. 173/2011, 
known as the “foreign funding case against NGOs”.The
2011 Government Fact-Finding Committee report, which formed the basis 
of the first trial in 2012, listed 37 NGOs who could be targeted under 
this “foreign funding case against NGOs”. That list included ACIJLP, 
CIHRS, LCHR, the Egyptian Democratic Academy (EDA), HMLC, ANHRI, EIPR, 
El Nadim Center for the Management and Rehabilitation of Victims of 
Violence and Torture, the Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights
(ECESR), the Arab Penal Reform Organization, the Egyptian Center for 
the Right to Education, El-Haq, the Egyptian Association for Community 
Participation Enhancement (ACPE), Nazra for Feminist Studies, the 
Appropriate Communications Technologies (ACT), among others.The
first set of investigations targeted international and foreign NGOs. On
June 4, 2013, the North Cairo Criminal Court sentenced 43 Egyptian and 
foreign staff members of five foreign civil society organisations to 
imprisonment ranging from one (suspended) to five years of prison for 
“managing unlicensed branches” of their organisations, “conducting 
research, political training, surveys, and workshops without licenses”, 
“training political parties and groups” and “illegally receiving foreign
funding”. Though none of the defendants were forced to serve their 
sentences either because they were abroad or in the case of the junior 
staff had their sentences suspended, the court ordered the confiscation 
of their funds and the closure of Egypt-based branches of Freedom House,
the International Republican Institute, the National Democratic 
Institute, the International Centre for Journalists (ICFJ), and Konrad 
Adenauer Foundation.The
second case targets Egyptian civil society organisations that have 
received foreign or international funding. It started with the ultimatum
made by the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS)[5]
for Egyptian human rights organisations to register by late 2014 under 
Law 84/2002 or face closure. One month later, a new wave of harassment 
targeting human rights NGOs began.In
September 2014, President Al-Sisi signed into law amendments to Article
78 of the Penal Code. These amendments include the provision that 
receiving foreign funding for the purpose of “harming national security”
is punishable by life imprisonment.In late 2014, the Investigating Judge in charge of the case appointed a technical committee from the MoSS [6]
to determine whether Egyptian organisations under review operate as 
civic associations without being registered as such under Law 84/2002, 
and to examine documents related to their sources of funding. The 
committee first examined the EDA. It is noteworthy to note that despite 
the EDA's registration in compliance with the ultimatum[7], they are still being investigated. In January 2015, the judge issued travel bans against Messrs. Hossam al-Din Ali, Chairman of the EDA, Ahmed Ghoneim, Deputy, as well as Ms. Israa Abdel Fattah and  Bassem Samir, who previously worked in the same organisation.In June 2015, Mr. Negad El Borai, the Director of United Group, was interrogated by the Investigating Judge about its sources of funding and legal status[8].In
March 2016, the United Group was summonsed for the fourth time. On May 
17, 2016, he was summonsed for the fifth hearing session[9], but at the very last minute it was postponed to an undetermined date.On
June 9, 2015, the Investigating Judge mandated the technical committee 
to visit the Cairo office of the CIHRS in order to examine whether the 
CIHRS engages in activities of civic associations under the provisions 
of Law 84/2002. The committee requested the staff present in the office 
to provide documentation relating to the administration of the NGO, such
as its registration, founding contract and statute, as well as the 
budgets, financial accounts, and funding contracts for the past four 
years. One additional demand the staff were instructed to comply with 
was to provide documentation that proved that the CIHRS was not 
conducting NGO work.On
June 16, 2015, the CIHRS was presented with a summons letter to appear 
on June 17, before the Investigating Judge within the framework of the 
case No. 173/2011. However, the CIHRS refused to accept the summons 
letter as it failed to comply with the legal requirements in force and 
subsequently submitted its arguments in writing to the representative of
the Investigating Judge. Since then, CIHRS and its members had not 
received any further summons, until those of March 13 and 14, 2016 (see 
below).In July 2015, the HMLC was also subjected to the same review.In
December 2015, the ANHRI received a phone call from the technical 
committee, which asked to conduct an inspection, but due to the absence 
of ANHRI’s Director, Mr. Gamal Eid, the visit was postponed and eventually did not take place.In December 2015, the Egyptian Center for the Right to Education was summoned by the Investigating Judge for questioning.On February 4, 2016, Mr. Gamal Eid was informed of a travel ban as he was attempting to travel outside Egypt. Mr. Hossam Bahgat, founder of EIPR, was informed of a similar ban on February 23, 2016.On
March 13 and 14, 2016, two staff members of CIHRS and three staff 
members of Nazra for Feminist Studies were notified by telephone of a 
summons to appear on March 16 before the Investigating Judge in Cairo 
within the framework of criminal case No. 173/2011. However, the two 
staff members of CIHRS refused to appear, as they had not been properly 
notified in person in accordance with the law in force[10].
Two former staff members of the Andalus Institute for Tolerance and 
Anti-Violence Studies and one accountant from the United Group were also
summoned within the same context.On
March 17, 2016, Messrs. Hossam Bahgat and Gamal Eid were informed that 
the Investigative Judge had ordered the freezing of their assets and 
that their case would be reviewed by the Cairo Criminal Court in Zeinhom
on March 24, 2016. The case was subsequently adjourned to April 20, 
2016, upon request from the Public Prosecutor.On March 22, 2016, Ms. Mozn Hassan,
Executive Director of Nazra for Feminist Studies, was formally accused 
of receiving foreign funds without authorisation, and throughout the 
month of March 2016, a number of NGO staff members were summoned to 
appear before the Investigating Judge (see background information).On April 19, Mr. Bahey eldin Hassan, CIHRS Director, two staff members of CIHRS, as well as Mr. Moustafa El Hassan,
HMLC Director, were informed at 9pm through a phone call from the 
Egyptian police that they were summoned to appear before the Cairo 
Criminal Court in Zeinhom on April 20, along with Messrs. Bahgat and 
Eid.On
April 20, 2016, the Cairo Criminal Court in Zeinhom added seven 
defendants from three additional NGOs to the “asset freeze order” 
initially targeting Messrs. Hossam Bahgat and Gamal Eid.The additional defendants are Mr. Bahey eldin Hassan, Mr. Moustafa El Hassan, Mr. Abdel Hafiz Tayel,
Executive Director of the Egyptian Center for the Right to Education, 
two staff members of CIHRS, as well as of Mr. Bahey eldin Hassan's wife 
and daughter and Mr. Gamal Eid's wife and daughter [11].The
hearing by the Cairo Criminal Court in Zeinhom regarding the asset 
freeze order was postponed several times by the prosecutors to review 
the evidence and formally summon the new defendants. On May 23, 2016, it
was again adjourned to July 17, 2016.Actions requested:Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:i.
Immediately put an end to investigations and criminal cases targeting 
NGOs as well as human rights defenders and their relatives;ii. Put an end to all forms of harassment against all human rights organisations and defenders in Egypt, including travel bans;iii.
Revise the Law on Associations to comply with international human 
rights standards and the UPR commitments made by Egypt, while ensuring 
that independent civil society organisations are meaningfully consulted 
in the drafting process;iv. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:-
its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive 
for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental 
freedoms at the national and international levels”;-
its Article 5(a): “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human 
rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually 
and in association with others, at the national and international levels
(a) To meet or assemble peacefully”-
its Article 6(a), which foresees that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to participate in peaceful 
activities against violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”;-
its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities
of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any 
violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence
of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the 
present Declaration”;v.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Egypt.Addresses:·       President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Fax: +202 23901998·       Prime Minister of Egypt, Mr. Sherif Ismail, Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg·       Minister of the Interior of Egypt, Mr. Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, E-mail:  moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794 5529·       Minister of Justice of Egypt, Mr. Mohamed Hossam Abdel-Rehim, E-mail:  mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103·       Public Prosecutor, Fax: +202 2577 4716·       President of the National Council For Human Rights, Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email:  nchr@nchr.org.eg·       H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Email:  mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15·       Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email:embassy.egypt@skynet.bePlease also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in your respective country.[1]
           The charges would be under: Article 78 of the Penal Code 
amended by President Sissi in September 2014, which increased the 
penalty to life imprisonment for vaguely phrased charges that include 
receiving money from abroad “with the aim of pursuing acts harmful to 
national interests or destabilizing general peace or the country’s 
independence and its unity”; Article 98(c)(1) of Egypt’s penal code, 
which states: “Anyone who creates or establishes or manages an 
association or organization or institution of any kind of an 
international character or a branch of an international organization 
without a license in the Egyptian Republic shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a period of not more than 6 months or with a fine of 
500 EGP. The maximum penalty shall be multiplied if any of the 
authorisation was based on false information. A punishment of three 
months or 300LE shall be brought against anyone who joins an 
organisation or entity of those mentioned, as well as any Egyptian 
living in Egypt who joins or affiliates himself in any way without 
authorisation from the government to such entities based abroad”; 
Article 98(d) “a punishment of not more than 5 years and a fine of not 
less than 100 and not more than 1000 LE shall be implemented against all
those who receive or accept directly or via an intermediary by any 
means money or benefits of any form a person or entity outside the 
country or inside it when the purpose is to commit a crime listed in 
98(1), 98(1)(bis), 98(b), 98(c), or 174 of this code; and Article 
76(2)(a) of the Associations Law 84/2002, failure to register is 
punishable by imprisonment for up to 6 months.[2]
                The investigation started in September 2011, and the 
raid on NGOs took place in December 2011. As the investigation has been 
ongoing for nearly five years, the scope of the case remains unknown. 
For more information, please see:  http://www.cihrs.org/?p=720&lang=en& http://www.cihrs.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/The-Complaint.pdf[3]
                At the occasion of the UPR of Egypt in November 2014, 
the Egyptian authorities accepted at least five recommendations on the 
protection of human rights defenders, including a commitment to 
reforming the current NGO law with a wide consultation of NGOs, and a 
commitment to guarantee the right to freedom of association in 
accordance with international standards.[4]                 See Oral statement by the Egyptian Delegation,  http://www.upr-info.org/sites/default/files/document/egypt/session_20_-_october_2014/egypt_upr_egy_42.pdf .[5]
                The ultimatum was made public in July 2014, and in 
September 2014, the deadline was pushed back to November 10, 2014.[6]
                The committee is composed of Ministry of Social 
Solidarity officials but they report to the Investigating Judge.[7]                 The EDA has been registered under the Associations Law No. 84/2002 since September 2014.[8]
                The United Group is a law firm established 50 years 
ago, and headed by Mr. Negad El Borai, one of Egypt’s most influential 
human rights defenders and lawyers.[9]            See the Observatory’s Urgent Appeal EGY 002 / 0516 / OBS 042, issued on May 17, 2016.[10]                The three staff members of Nazra will be represented by a lawyer.[11]
               Mr. Bahgat attended the April-20 hearing, while the 
other defendants were represented by their lawyers. No formal charges 
were confirmed on that occasion. 