Bahrain:  Call for the immediate implementation of the United Nations Opinion on Nabeel Rajab's case
January 13, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2014 / JanuaryBahrain: Call for the immediate implementation of the United Nations Opinion on Nabeel Rajab's case​















Attn. H.M. King Hamad bin Issa Al
Khalifa
His Majesty the King of Bahrain
Fax: 00 973 1766 4587
 
H.E Shaikh
Khalid bin Ahmad Al Khalifa
Head
of the Royal Court
Fax: 00 973 17664949
 
Cc: H.R.H Prince Salman bin Hamad Al-Khalifa 
Crown Prince and Deputy Prime Minister
Fax: 00 973 17713630
 
H.E. Shaikh
Rachid bin Abdullah Al Khalifa
Interior
Minister
Fax: 00 973 172326611
 
H.E Shaikh
Khalid bin Ali Al Khalifa
Minister
of Justice and Islamic Affairs
Fax: 00 973 17531284
 
H.E Shaikh Khalid Bin Ahmed Bin Mohamed Al Khalifa
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Fax: 00 973 17225077
 
H.E Navi Pillay
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Fax: 00 41 22 917 9008
Email: npillay@ohchr.org 

 
 
Paris-Geneva,
January 10, 2014
 
 
Re: Call for
the immediate implementation of the United Nations Opinion on Nabeel Rajab's
case.
 
Your Majesty,  
 
FIDH (the International Federation for Human Rights)
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, call upon the highest
authorities of Bahrain to guarantee without any further delay the release of
Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights
(BCHR) and Deputy Secretary General of FIDH. 
 
Mr. Nabeel Rajab has been detained at the central
prison in Jaw since July 9, 2012. Initially sentenced to three-months’
imprisonment for having “insulted statutory bodies” in a Twitter message, he
was later sentenced to three years' imprisonment on August 16, 2012, while
still in detention. Mr. Rajab was sentenced on two others protest-related
charges: participation in “illegal gatherings” and calling for manifestation
without prior notification in Manama, as well as incitement to gatherings and
“illegal marches” through social medias. In December 2012, his sentence was
reduced to two years in appeal. 
 
The detention of Mr. Nabeel Rajab was characterised as
arbitrary by the United Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
(WGAD) at its 66th session. This decision, published on July 25, 2013, follows
a communication addressed by the Observatory on August 31, 2012 to challenge
the legality of Mr. Rajab’s detention. In its Opinion A/HRC/WGAD/2013/12, the
WGAD considered that the detention of Mr. Nabeel Rajab contravenes articles 19,
20 and 21 of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and articles 9,
paragraph 1, 14, 21 and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR). 
 
Bahrain acceded to the ICCPR in 2006; it is thus
legally binding on the country. Article 9 of the ICCPR enshrines the rights not
to be arbitrarily arrested or detained and to be informed of charges. Article
14 guarantees the right to a prompt and fair trial. Article 19 protects the right
to freedom of expression, Article 21 the right to peaceful assembly and Article
22 the right to freedom of association. The peaceful exercise of the rights of
freedom of opinion, expression and association is legitimate and necessary in
any democratic society.   
 
The right to a fair trial, enshrined in Article 14,
includes access to counsel, production of evidence and defence witnesses. Since
Mr. Rajab’s arrest on May 5, 2012, a number of court hearings have taken place
where these rights have been partially respected, including denial of timely
facilitation for foreign witnesses to attend the hearing as well as showing
video evidence in camera. The WGAD added that the courts of Bahrain would have
to “confront and rule on the matter of the legality of the law banning public
demonstrations”, and that “denial of a universally accepted human right to
freedom of opinion and expression cannot be condoned by a domestic court, as
seen in the case of Mr. Rajab”.
 
The Working Group requested the Government of the
Kingdom of Bahrain to take necessary steps to remedy the situation of Mr. Rajab
and bring it into conformity with the standards and principles set forth in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the ICCPR. The adequate remedy would
be to immediately release Mr. Rajab and to accord him an enforceable right to
compensation in accordance with article 9, paragraph 5, of the ICCPR. The WGAD
also encouraged the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain to bring its domestic
laws into conformity with the substantive provisions of the Covenant to which
it is a party.
 
Thereafter, on December 2, 2013, the Bahraini Court of
Appeals examined the request filed by Mr. Nabeel Rajab’s lawyers for an early
release and decided not to grant such release without providing any grounds. A
representative from the United States Embassy was even prevented from observing
this court hearing. Previously, on November 24, a penalty enforcement judge had
issued the same decision. During the session, Mr. Rajab’s lawyers presented their
arguments that Mr. Nabeel Rajab was eligible for early release in pursuance to
the conditions laid under article 349 of the Criminal Procedural Code, which
sets three conditions: that ¾ of the sentence has been served, good behaviour
during detention and not being a threat to public security. 
 
The proceedings failed to comply with the right to a
fair trial as the court failed to properly examine the request for early
release, failed to provide grounds for its decision and did not guarantee the
public nature of the hearing. This decision blatantly contradicts WGAD's
Opinion and suggests that the Bahraini judiciary does not care not only about
conforming to international human rights standards but also about implementing
domestic law in full independence. 
 
Our organisations deeply regret the court’s refusal to
grant an early release to Mr. Rajab, and deplore the judge’s decision that
failed to provide any grounds. We consider this decision as an attempt to
curtail Mr. Rajab’s activities as a human rights defender. 
 
Mr. Rajab’s ongoing detention is arbitrary as it
results from the exercise of his universally recognised human rights and as his
right to a fair trial has not been guaranteed. 
 
Our organisations therefore call upon the Bahraini
authorities to immediately comply with the UN WGAD's decision and release Mr.
Rajab immediately and unconditionally.
 
We more generally urge the Bahraini authorities to
adhere to their international human rights obligations under the ICCPR and
bring domestic law in conformity with international human rights instruments
ratified by the country.
 
We express our sincere hope that you will take these
considerations and requests into account.
 
Sincerely yours,           
 
Karim
Lahidji                                                   Gerald
Staberock
President
of FIDH                                           Secretary
General of OMCT 