Viet Nam:  Blogger Truong Duy Nhat’s two-year prison sentence upheld
June 30, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2014 / JuneViet Nam: Blogger Truong Duy Nhat’s two-year prison sentence upheldParis-Geneva, June 30, 2014. On June 26, the highest
jurisdiction in Vietnam upheld a two-year prison sentence against blogger
Truong Duy Nhat. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,
an FIDH-OMCT joint programme, together with the Vietnam Committee on Human
Rights (VCHR), denounce the Supreme People’s Court’s decision and call on the
Vietnamese Government to release him along with all other human rights
defenders currently detained across the country.
 
On
June 26, 2014, the Supreme People's Court in Danang, Central Vietnam, upheld
a two-year prison sentence against prominent blogger Truong Duy Nhat for
publishing online articles critical of the Government on his blog “A
Different Point of View”. On March 4, 2014, Truong Duy Nhat had been
sentenced by a court in Danang to two years’ imprisonment under Article 258(2)
of the Criminal Code for “abusing democratic freedoms to infringe upon the
interests of the State”. During the appeal hearing, Truong Duy Nhat was not
allowed to defend the content of the 12 online articles that led to his
prosecution. The blogger has been detained since his arrest by the Vietnamese
police on May 26, 2013. 
 
Truong
Duy Nhat is a former journalist with State-run newspapers “Bao Cong An Quang Nam Danang” (Quang Nam Danang Security Police
newspaper) and “Dai Doan Ket” (Great
Solidarity newspaper). In 2011, he quit his work as a reporter to write for
his blog “Mot Goc Nhin Khac” (A
Different Point of View), which became widely known for its criticism of
the Government. In his blog, Truong Duy Nhat frequently criticized the
performance of top Government officials, including the Prime Minister, from the
point of view of the rights enshrined in Vietnam’s legislation and the
international human rights covenants signed by Vietnam.
 
Our
organisations urge the Vietnamese authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release Truong Duy Nhat as well as all human rights defenders who
are currently serving long prison sentences or awaiting trial in Vietnam, as
well as to immediately repeal draconian laws that severely restrict freedom of
opinion and expression.
 
Our organisations reiterate their call on the
Vietnamese authorities to ensure
in all circumstances that human rights defenders are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and
fear of reprisals, in line with
the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 
For more information, please contact:
·    
VCHR: Penelope Faulkner
(Vietnamese/French/English): +33 1 45 98 30 85
·    
FIDH: Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·     OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 