Bahrain:  After 282 days of arbitrary detention, human rights defender Nabeel Rajab’s trial postponed once again
March 23, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / MarchBahrain: After 282 days of arbitrary detention, human rights defender Nabeel Rajab’s trial postponed once againBahrain_Joint Press Release_230317_ARABIC VERSION2 pages / 263 KBJOINT PRESS RELEASE












March
23, 2017 - On March 22, 2017,
Manama’s Fifth High Criminal Court postponed again Bahraini human rights
defender Nabeel Rajab’s trial in the Twitter case, in clear contempt of
international human rights standards. His arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment are only meant to silence one of Bahrain’s most vocal human rights
defenders,
say the Arabic Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI), Front Line
Defenders, the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT).
 
Arbitrarily detained
since June 13, 2016, Nabeel Rajab is facing a series of charges and up to 18 years
in prison. In the “Twitter case”, ongoing since April 2, 2015, Nabeel Rajab is
accused of “deliberately spreading false information and malicious rumours with
the aim of discrediting the State”, “disseminating false rumours in time of
war”, “insulting a statutory body” and “offending a foreign country [Saudi
Arabia]” in relation to Tweets denouncing the torture of detainees in the
Kingdom’s Jaw Prison and human rights violations perpetrated by the
Saudi-Arabia led coalition air strikes in Yemen. The thirteenth hearing is
scheduled on May 17, 2017. In addition, Nabeel Rajab is facing charges of
“spreading false information and malicious rumours about domestic matters with
the aim of discrediting and adversely affecting the State’s prestige” in a
separate case related to three televised interviews made in 2015 and 2016 in
which Nabeel Rajab exposed Bahrain’s poor human rights record. The next hearing
in that case is on May 3, 2017.
 
“Despite a court order to temporarily release
him following a failure to give any sufficient evidence in the Twitter case,
Nabeel Rajab remains arbitrarily detained. Arbitrary and solitary detention,
endless postponements, denial of visa for international human rights NGOs have
been jeopardising the judicial process. Bahrain is failing its international
obligations and makes a mockery of justice,” declared the
organisations.
 
Further investigations are
underway and may lead to additional charges, including “intentionally
broadcasting false news and malicious rumours abroad impairing the prestige of
the state” following the publication on September 5, 2016 of an Op-Ed in The
New York Times with his by-line, which discussed the conditions of his
imprisonment and arrest. In addition, he has been questioned about the
publication on December 19, 2016, of a letter published in his name in the
French newspaper Le Monde which urged Paris and Berlin to “reassess
their relationship with [members of the Gulf Cooperation Council], which
actively work against democracy and human rights and fan the flames of violence
and extremism.”
 
“The public
prosecution has failed to provide any evidence of wrongdoing against Nabeel.
Yet he has been detained for 282 days. There is no presumption of innocence, he
is already serving a sentence without any conviction. Pending charges must be
dropped and he must be immediately and unconditionally released,” added the
organisations. 
 
Nabeel
Rajab, is the co-founder and President of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights
(BCHR), Founding Director of GCHR, Deputy Secretary General of FIDH and a
member of the Middle East advisory committee at Human Rights Watch. 
 
While
in detention he is being held in solitary confinement the vast majority of the
time and denied access to proper care, despite the impact on his health.
International NGOs are not able to gain access to Nabeel Rajab in prison, nor
have they been authorised to visit the country, making it extremely difficult
for them to monitor the trial.
 
For
more details on his case, see statement by ANHRI, Front Line Defenders, GCHR
and the Observatory, please see: http://www.gc4hr.org/news/view/1460 