Vacancy announcement: OMCT Europe - Human Rights Officer / Turkey, Eastern Europe & Central Asia Programme
March 22, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Links / 2019 / MarchVacancy announcement: OMCT Europe - Human Rights Officer / Turkey, Eastern Europe & Central Asia Programme 
OMCT Europe is currently seeking to recruit
a Human Rights Advisor to work on its Europe, Turkey and Central Asia program. 
 
OMCT Europe is an affiliate organisation of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest international
coalition of non-governmental organizations fighting against torture, summary
executions, forced disappearances and all other forms of cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment, supporting its goals and objectives in Europe, Turkey and
Central Asia.
 
Location : OMCT Europe offices (Brussels, Belgium).
 
Conditions: Full-time position is preferred but part-time (minimum 70%) arrangements
will be considered. The position will require international travel.
 
RESPONSIBILITIES
 
The incumbent will work under the
supervision of the Head of OMCT Europe offices and in close partnership with all thematic programs. Responsibilities of the position include:
 Coordinating and implementing OMCT Europe actions on Turkey and certain
sub-regions of Eastern Europe and Central Asia in partnership with
OMCT’s SOS-Torture Network members.Conducting case and thematic advocacy in areas relevant to OMCT Europe’s
mandate, notably towards UN human rights mechanisms and EU institutions but
also towards the Council of Europe and the OSCE.Lead in the development and implementation of sub-regional and country
projects, developing effective protection schemes and anti-torture strategies
with the SOS torture network in the region.Managing the aspects of the project’s resources, budgets including limited
defenders or network support grants.
 
QUALIFICATIONS
Advanced university
degree, preferably a post-graduate degree in human rights or democratization,
political science or international law.Minimum 3-5 years of
experience in the human rights field at the national and international levels,
including with human rights organizations and/or the judicial system. Work
experience on Turkey, Eastern Europe and Central Asia is an asset.
 
COMPETENCIES
 Excellent knowledge of
international human rights law, and demonstrated knowledge of the UN procedures
and regional mechanisms for the protection of human rights;Excellent and practical
experience in human rights advocacy, project management cycles and development.Excellent drafting and
editing skills, past experience working on civil society reports to United
Nations mechanism or other human rights and advocacy reports an asset;Ability to work under
pressure to deadlines and to adapt to multidisciplinary work in the environment
of a multicultural team; Excellent oral and
written language skills in English. Fluency in other languages and particularly
in Turkish and/or Russian would be an asset.
 
APPLICATION PROCEDURE
 
OMCT is an equal opportunities employer.
 
Applications for this position should be
sent (by email only) to OMCT Europe at omcteurope@omct.org by April 5, 2019. For consideration, please send a
cover letter, a résumé and the contact details of two professional references,
indicating “OMCT EUROPE HUMAN RIGHTS OFFICER” as your message subject. Only
shortlisted candidates will be contacted. 