Israel:  Concern about the health of three Palestinian hunger strikers
July 26, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2012 / JulyIsrael: Concern about the health of three Palestinian hunger strikers
Case ISR
260712
Administrative detention/ Hunger strike/
Serious health concerns
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the
following situation in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory. 
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat
of OMCT has been informed by Addameer and Al Haq, two
members of
OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the administrative detention of Mr. Samer Al-Barq,Mr. Hassan Safadi and Mr. Ayman Sharawna, as well as their serious
health condition caused by their hunger strike in protest of their detention. OMCT
also remains concerned about the health condition of Mr. Mr. Akram Rikhawi who has ended his hunger
strike after 102 days. 
According to the information
received, Mr. Samer Al-Barq is currently on the 66th day of his hunger
strike, which he started after a first hunger strike of 30 days. He is staying
at the Ramleh prison medical clinic, as the authorities refuse to release him
to his home in the West Bank. According to his lawyer, who was able to visit
him, his health is rapidly deteriorating. A few weeks ago Mr. Al-Barq’s
heartbeat reportedly dropped to 35 beats per minute, an alarming and
life-threatening situation, after which he was transported to the Assaf Harofeh
Hospital for a night. There, he was shackled to the hospital bed by three
limbs. At the moment he would suffer from vertigo, drastic weight loss and
involuntary shivering and coldness in his legs, symptoms that may indicate
peripheral nerve damage. The Israeli Prison Service has reportedly threatened
to forcibly treat or feed him if he continues his hunger strike. 
Mr. Hassan Safadi is on the 36th
day of his hunger strike, following a previous one of 71-days. He is currently
held at the Ramleh prison medical clinic awaiting a hearing on 6 August 2012
(which should have been held on 25 July but was postponed). This hearing may
determine the upholding of his administrative detention, as Mr. Safadi was
included in an agreement to end the hunger strike of Palestinian prisoners, and
thus should have been released on 21 June 2012. Mr. Safadi’s health reportedly
continues to deteriorate and he remains extremely weak. 
According to the same
information, Mr. Ayman Sharawna is currently on the 26th day of his
hunger strike. According to the prison exchange deal, which included the
release of more than 1’000
Palestinian political prisoners in exchange for captured Israeli soldier Gilad
Shalit,
he was released last October, only to be re-arrested on 31 January 2012. No
charges have been filed against him. 
All of the three hunger
strikers are reportedly being denied access to an independent doctor. 
OMCT has also been informed
that Mr. Akram Rikhawi has ended his hunger strike after 102 days on 22 July
2012. He has reportedly reached an agreement with the Israeli Prison Service,
which includes his release on 25 January 2013 – six months prior to his
original release date, and his return to his home in the Gaza Strip upon his
release. However, he remains detained in Ramleh prison in critical
condition.  
Background
Information
Israel has been holding
hundreds of persons from the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT) in administrative detention. In the occupied Palestinian West Bank, the Israeli army
carries out administrative detention on the basis of Military Order 1651, which
empowers military commanders to detain an individual for up to six months if
they have “reasonable grounds to presume that the security of the area or
public security require the detention.” On or just before the expiry date, the
detention order is also frequently renewed and this process can be continued
indefinitely.
Administrative detention deprives detainees of basic safeguards,
including the right to challenge the evidence on which the detention is based,
warrants are not required, and the detainee may be held in incommunicado
detention for an extended period, subject to renewal.
The United Nations Committee Against Torture has expressed its concern
that administrative detention does not conform with article 16 of the
Convention[1].
This type of indefinite administrative detention, following manifestly unfair
proceedings, can amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. 
OMCT expresses its deep concern about the situation of the three hunger strikers and Mr. Akram
Rikhawi, and urges the competent authorities to
take immediate measures in order to ensure that they receive a proper medical
treatment in an adquate medical facility, and that they are treated humanly
under all circumstances. OMCT is indeed concerned that detainees carrying out a
hunger strike are getting punished, including by being held in solitary
confinement and schackled. 
OMCT is also concerned that the procedure under which their administrative
detention has been ordered do not meet international human rights standards, including their right not to be arbitrarily detained
as well as their absolute right at all times not to be subjected to any cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment. 
Action requested
Please write to the
authorities in Israel urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Akram Rikhawi, Mr. Samer Al-Barq,Mr. Hassan Safadi and Mr. Ayman Sharawna; 
ii.             
Cease the practice of solitary confinement; 
iii.           
Guarantee their unconditional access to independent
physicians;  
iv.           
Order their immediate transfer to a public hospital with
adequate care that does not include being shackled while in the hospital; 
v.             
Guarantee unconditional access to all members of their
families, and guarantee that the family members are provided with all
information concerning their medical condition;
vi.           
Order their immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are consistent with international legal standards, or, if such
charges exist, bring them promptly before an impartial, independent and
competent tribunal that will ensure due process at all times; 
vii.          
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough,
independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned facts, the result of which
must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent,
independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative
sanctions as provided by law;
viii.        
Guarantee that adequate compensation is awarded to them for the violation of their human rights;
ix.           
At all times ensure strict respect for international
human rights and humanitarian law in the exercise of its jurisdiction,
including in connection with military operations in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Addresses
Ø Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister,
Office of the Prime Minister, 3, Kaplan Street, PO Box 187, Kiryat Ben-Gurion,
Jerusalem, Israel, Fax: +972- 2-651
2631, Email: pm_eng@pmo.gov.il 
Ø Brigadier General Danny Efroni, Military Judge
Advocate General, 6 David Elazar Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv, Israel, Fax:  +972 3 608 0366, +972 3 569
4526, Email: arbel@mail.idf.il, avimn@idf.gov.il
Ø Lieutenant
General Aharon Franco, Israel Prison Service
Commissioner, Israel Prison Service, PO Box 81, Ramleh 72100, Israel, Fax: +972
8 919 3800
Ø M. Ehud Barak, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Defense, 37 Kaplan Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv 61909, Fax. + 972 3
691 6940 / 696 2757
Ø Permanent Mission of Israel to the United
Nations Office and Specialized Institutions in Geneva, Avenue de la Paix 1-3,
1202 Geneva, Fax: +41 22 716 05 55,
Email: mission-israel@geneva.mfa.gov.il
Please also write to the
embassies of Israel in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 26 July
2012. 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] CAT/C/ISR/CO/4, para 17. 