Belarus:  Third day of the trial against Ales Bialiatski: clear signs of a politically-motivated trial
November  7, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2011 / NovemberBelarus: Third day of the trial against Ales Bialiatski: clear signs of a politically-motivated trial
PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
BELARUS: Third day of the trial against Ales Bialiatski: clear signs 
of a politically-motivated trial
 
Paris-Geneva, November 7, 2011. November 4, 2011 marked the third day of the trial held in Minsk 
against FIDH Vice-President and "Viasna" President Ales Bialiatski, judicially 
harassed by the authorities of Belarus in relation to his legitimate human 
rights activities.
 
On the second day, Mr. Ales Bialiatski appeared in court behind bars, very pale, but also very clear when 
answering about his professional activities, which he considers as his personal 
"mission". On the first day of his trial, Mr. Ales Bialatski was not allowed to 
have lunch, nor to drink although he was interrogated for more than two hours, 
stood up, with his documents in the hands whereas the interrogators, the 
prosecution and the judge were sat-down.
 
On the first day of this trial, the defendant had submitted two 
requests to waive the pre-trial detention measure against Mr. Bialiatski and to 
enable him to attend his trial freely. The two requests were refused by the 
judge. The Public Prosecutor immediately after indicated that this prevention 
measure was usually not the one chosen for this kind of crime, and that if Mr. 
Bialatski accepted to "cooperate with the court", the prosecution could ask for 
the waiving of the pre-trial detention measure. This clearly demonstrates that 
this pre-trial detention measure is not related to the fact that the latter 
"could escape" ( as motivated by the judge when declining the defence request), 
but that it is in reality a repressive and politically-motivated measure, which 
is contrary to international standards and the Belarusian law itself in this 
regard.
 
A number of politically-motivated questions were made to witnesses of 
the defendant, which were not related whatsoever with the charges of "tax 
evasion" pending against Mr. Bialiatski. Some witnesses were indeed interrogated 
on the legality of the existence, action and functioning of Viasna, and on their 
membership to that organisation. Witnesses invoking their right to keep silent 
were asked the same questions in a row, slightly reformulated by the judge, in 
order to push them to answer. Mr. Bialiatski's lawyer also pointed that the 
police representative of the tax department appearing in court as a witness had 
been unable to provide orally the same elements as those appearing in written in 
the investigation documents. More than this, her answers at the investigation 
stage, as indicated by the law, were equivalent up to the grammatical mistakes 
to the testimonies of her hierarchical superior.
 
A number of witnesses of the prosecution appeared to be technical 
experts - specialists of the banking system and of the tax police - rather than 
witnesses of the case at hand. When asked about the substance of the case, one 
of them replied that he was not at all aware of the case.
 
The November 3 hearing ended by the reading of part of a list of 
written documents related to the case against Mr. Bialiatski, including a note 
prepared by the KGB (which is 28-page long according to the Prosecutor and which 
was not read in its entirety), entitled "about Viasna" leaders, and stating that 
Mr. Bialiatski and Mr. Valentin Stefpanovich had bank accounts abroad to finance their activities of support to 
victims of political repression. This letter in reality is the root of the 
request sent to the authorities of Lithuania and Poland to obtain information 
about bank accounts Mr. Bialiatski opened there in order to finance Viasna's 
activities. This element also shows that the real reason behind such harassment 
is not alleged tax evasion, but clearly Viasna's legitimate human rights 
activities.
 
At the November 4 hearing, the third day of the trial, it was 
mentioned that an anonymous letter allegedly transmitted to the KGB led to the 
opening of the investigation against Mr. Ales Bialiatski. The defendant argued 
that according to the Belarusian Criminal Procedure Code, anonymous documents 
could not lead to the opening of an enquiry. Mr. Bialiatski's lawyer added that 
the documents received from the authorities of Poland and Lithuania were poorly 
translated, unsigned and not certified true copy.
 
The regularity of the getting by the investigators of private 
correspondence between Viasna and their international partners included in the 
case file was also put into question by Mr. Bialiatski's lawyer, as there is no 
evidence that the Deputy Prosecutor of Minsk gave an authorisation to search for 
this type of documents.
 
Mr. Bialiatski's lawyer then highlighted during the hearings that the 
Prosecutor had not stated any amount that he considered as Mr. Bialiatski's 
income, and that during the investigation, the investigators had been explicitly 
requested to meet funding organisations to enquire about the purpose of their 
financial assistance to Viasna. Such request was reportedly not met.
 
Furthermore, an access to the trial was strictly controlled, a list 
of all people present with all their passport details was established for every 
session, participants were searched (including a body search) and filmed. Those 
who had a t-shirt with Mr. Ales Bialiatski’ portrait on it were not allowed 
inside and in one case were forcibly pushed out.
 
The Observatory calls upon the Belarusian authorities to release Mr. 
Ales Bialiatski immediately and drop all charges against him, as his detention 
and judicial harassment seem to merely aim at sanctioning his human rights 
activities, and even the trial clearly orchestrated and set by the authorities 
has clearly demonstrated it.
 
The Observatory urges the authorities to comply with Belarus’ 
commitments under Article 1 of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in 
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and 
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels”. 
 
For day by day up-dated information on this case, please see: 
http://freeales.fidh.net/ as well as the previous Urgent Interventions issued by the 
Observatory.
 
Contacts:
FIDH : Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 
OMCT : Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39 