Greece:  Greece: threat of eviction of a Roma community
May 20, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2003 / MayGreece: Greece: threat of eviction of a Roma communityCase GRE 290403. 1 ESCR Follow-up of Case GRE 290403. ESCR Threat of eviction of a Roma community   Geneva, May 20th, 2003   The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Greece.   New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM), a member of the OMCT network, of a police threat to evict the Roma community living in the Nea Zoi area of Aspropyrgos, located approximately 15 kilometres west of Athens (Attica), Greece.  According to the information received, three Greek police (EL.AS) cars – one jeep and one patrol car, each with 3-4 police officers on board, and a van with about eight police officers in blue military style clothes- visited the Roma settlement on Sunday May 11th, 2003 at around four o’clock in the afternoon.   It is reported that the Roma initially thought that the police officers were merely patrolling the area, looking for illicit transactions. The two police vehicles allegedly entered the settlement and then made a U-turn in order to leave. However, it is reported that shortly before leaving, they stopped and asked the Roma for how long they had been staying there. It is reported that upon receiving the Roma’s answer, the police officers told them to leave as “the mayor has decided that you should leave”. According to the information received, the Roma were not presented with any eviction orders and the police vehicles drove away.   According to the information received, the police orally denied these facts to the Greek Ombudsman, while the municipality of Aspropyrgos denied having taken such action, in an oral communication with GHM. However, as in previous cases, no investigation was carried out to identify the perpetrators, even though the Roma have in every case stated that they can identify them.   Brief reminder of the situation  The Roma of Aspropyrgos are regularly the victims of such eviction threats, coming either from Greek Police officers or the Aspropyrgos Municipal Police force.   No later than April 21st 2003, at around 3.00 p.m., a Greek Police (EL.AS.) patrol car arrived at the Roma settlement located in Aspropyrgos. Two police officers reportedly said that “the plot was bought and the proprietor sent us to tell you to move out because he wants to clean it up and enclose it”. It is reported that the Roma were given two weeks time to gather their belongings and leave. While the police officers reportedly had with them certain documents that they showed to the Roma, they did not give them any official eviction order.   These incidents occur while the Asproprygos Roma community is reportedly awaiting the provision of water and electricity as promised by the Greek authorities. Despite all assurances given by the Greek delegation to the Council of Europe on September 11th 2002 that “all necessary measures have been taken in order that the Roma/Gypsy settlement of Aspropyrgos is provided with all public facilities”, the settlement still does not have any running water and electricity. In an answer to a parliamentary question, the government has laid the blame solely on the mayor of Aspropyrgos who has repeatedly ignored government letters and a grant worth around 30’000 Euro that has been awarded in 1999 to carry out such infrastructure work. However, the government has always refrained from sanctioning the mayor or requesting an explanation as to the use of these funds.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by these attempted forced evictions of the Roma living in Asproprygos, as well as by their alarming frequency. These have all similar characteristics, including the disregard for national and international law, the absence of eviction orders, the lack of alternative housing and compensation to the victims, as well as the absence of prompt and impartial investigation into the actions of the Aspropyros Municipality.    Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Greece urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the Roma community of Aspropyrgos;  ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses:  Mr. Constantine Simitis, Prime Minister, Prime Minister’s Office at the Hellenic Parliament, Greek Parliament Blgd, Constitution Square, Athens / Greece, Fax: ++30 210 724 17 76, Email: Mail@primeminister.gr  Mr. George Papandreou, Foreign Minister Athens, Fax: ++30 210 36 81 433, Email: gpap@mfa.gr  Mr. George Kaminis, Ombudsman, Fax ++30 210 7289643  Mr. Costas Skandalidis, Minister of Interior, Public Administration and Decentralisation Fax ++30 2103233218  Please also write to the embassies of Greece in your respective country.  Geneva, May 20, 2003   Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply 