Bahrain:  Judicial harassment against 47 medical staff and incommunicado detention of Dr. Ahmed Jamal, Dr. Raja Hassa Khadim and Dr. Nidal Khalifa
May  5, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2011 / MayBahrain: Judicial harassment against 47 medical staff and incommunicado detention of Dr. Ahmed Jamal, Dr. Raja Hassa Khadim and Dr. Nidal Khalifa

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
BHR
005 / 0511 / OBS 073
Judicial harassment / Incommunicado detention
Bahrain
May
5, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
Brief description of the situation: 
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the judicial harassment against 47 medical staff and the incommunicado
detention of Dr. Ahmed
Jamal, Dr.
Raja Hassa Khadim and Dr. Nidal Khalifa, three doctors, for treating peaceful demonstrators injured during the
crackdown on demonstrations in Bahrain.
 
According to the information received, on May 3, 2011,
24 doctors and 23 nurses were charged by the Military Public Prosecution of
“refusal to extend assistance to a person in need”, “embezzlement of public
funds”, “assault that resulted in death”, “unauthorized possession of weapons
and ammunition”, “refusal to perform duties and putting people's lives and
health at risk”, “illegal detention”, “abuse of authority to suspend and stall
laws and regulations”, “attempt to occupy buildings by force”, “incitement to
the forceful overthrow of a political regime”, “incitement to the hatred of a
regime”, “incitement to the hatred of a segment of society”, “dissemination of
false news and malicious rumours that could harm public interest” and
“participation in unauthorized rallies and meetings”. They will be tried before
a military court but, as of issuing this Urgent Appeal, no date for an hearing
had been set. No further information could be obtained whether the 47 are
currently in incommunicado detention or in hiding.
 
Furthermore, according to the information received, between May 2 and 4, Dr. Ahmed Jamal, former President of the Bahrain Medical Society (BMS), Dr. Raja Hassa
Khadim, President of the Bahrain Dental Society, and Dr. Nidal Khalifa,
President of the Arab Association for the Skin Diseases and former Head of the
Dermatology Unit in Salmanya Hospital, were arrested by
the security forces and have been held incommunicado since then.
 
Moreover, the Observatory recalls that on April 4, 2011, Ms. Rulla El Saffar, President of the
Bahrain Nursing Society (BNS), was summoned by phone to the Adlia Criminal
Investigation Building and taken away by security forces to an unknown
location. She remains detained incommunicado since then and may be one of the
47 under charges. On April 11, 2011, Dr. Nabeel Tamman,
an Ear/Nose/Throat (ENT) specialist, member of Bahrain Human Rights Society
(BHRS) and the former President of the Medical Committee, was also arrested,
taken by security forces to an unknown location and then released on April 13
reportedly without charge. In addition, on April 6, 2011, the Social Development Minister had
issued an edict suspending the Board of Directors of the Bahrain Medical
Society (BMS), and the Ministry of Health suspended 30 doctors and nurses whose
cases was referred to an “investigation committee” created by the Ministry,
which mandate is to investigate the medical personnel who treated injured
victims of demonstrations[1].
 
The Observatory condemns
the judicial harassment against the medical staff who provided medical
assistance to injured demonstrators, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning
the legitimate exercise of their profession. More generally, the Observatory is
deeply concerned about the arbitrary arrests, incommunicado detentions and acts
of intimidation against all people who provided help to the victims of the
repression of peaceful protest movements in the country.
 
Actions requested:
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
i.        
Guarantee the physical and
psychological integrity of
the above-mentioned human rights defenders, as well as of all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
ii.      
Immediately disclose the whereabouts
of Ms. Rulla El Saffar,
Dr. Ahmad Jamal, Dr. Raja Hassa Kadhim and Dr. Nidal Khalifa and all human
rights defenders in Bahrain, ensure their access to their lawyers and families
and release them immediately and unconditionally as their detention seems at merely sanctioning their
legitimate human rights activities;



iii.     
Put an end to any acts of
harassment, including at the judicial and administrative level, against the above-mentioned human rights
defenders, as well as against all human rights
defenders in Bahrain; 
 
iv.     Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations
General Assembly, in particular :
-
its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in
association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”; 
-
its Article 10, which provides that “No one shall
participate, by act or by failure to act where required, in violating human
rights and fundamental freedoms and no one shall be subjected to punishment or
adverse action of any kind for refusing to do so”;
-
and its Article 12.2, which states that “the State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”. 
 
v.      
Ensure in all circumstances respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international
human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 
 
Addresses: 
 
·        
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA,
King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·        
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032
·        
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31
284 
·        
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the
United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP
39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of
Bahrain in your respective countries. 

*** 
Paris-Geneva, May 5, 2011
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT
venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to
offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT +
     41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] See Observatory Urgent Appeal BHR 002
/ 0411 / OBS 061, issued on April 14, 2011. 