Liberia:  Judicial harassment and threats against Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell, Lead Advocate of Green Advocates
December 13, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Liberia / 2016 / DecemberLiberia: Judicial harassment and threats against Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell, Lead Advocate of Green Advocates


URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

 
LBR 001 / 1216 / OBS 106
Threats /Judicial harassment /
 Arbitrary detention /
Release
Liberia
December 12, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Liberia.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the judicial harassment
and threats against Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell, Lead Advocate of Green
Advocates[1],
and his staff. 
 
According
to the information received, on October 28, 2016, plain clothed police
officers, who allegedly appeared under the influence of alcohol, visited Green
Advocates’ premises in Monrovia and presented staff members with an arrest
warrant issued on October 28, 2016 against Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell and an
unidentified “office assistant” for allegedly failing to respond to a subpoena
enquiry to provide testimony in connection with a war crimes case involving Gus
van Kouwenhoven, a Dutch citizen[2].
At the time of the visit, Mr. Brownell was not present in Green Advocates’
offices.
 
On
November 2, 2016, plain clothed security officers from the Liberia National
Police stormed into Alfred Lahai Brownell’s home in order to arrest him, armed
with a second arrest warrant issued on October 31, 2016. This time, the warrant
mandated the Liberian security and police forces to arrest not only Mr. Alfred
Brownell and an “office assistant”, but also “others to be identified”, which
was apparently interpreted by police to apply to all staff members of Green Advocates. Green Advocates’ Administrative
Officer, Mr. Aaron Abban, was informed by his neighbours that police
officers visited his home and asked about his location. Three other senior
management staff members at Green Advocates – Messrs. Francis Colee, Deputy Director and Head of Programs, Maminah Carr, Head of Secretariat of
the Natural Resources Women Platform, and Paul
Larry George, Chair of the Alliance for Rural Democracy (ARD), also
reported that security personnel visited their homes and communities making
inquiries about their whereabouts and locations. 
 
A
third arrest warrant was issued on November 1, 2016, mandating security
personnel to search for Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell, an office assistant and
“others to be identified charged with criminal contempt of court” at Mr.
Brownell’s home and the office of Green Advocates.
 
On
the morning of November 2, 2016, around 7:30 AM, security agents forcibly entered
Mr. Brownell’s home. As Mr. Brownell was absent, they arrested his uncle, John
Brownell, without providing any legal ground for it. After nine hours in
detention, he was released after paying a fine of 100 USD. Fearing for further
arbitrary arrests and detentions, Green Advocates’ staff could not return to
their offices, and several decided to go into hiding, taking along some of
their family members. 
 
On
November 21, 2016, the arrest warrants and contempt proceedings against Mr.
Alfred Lahai Brownell and his office assistant were officially dropped after a
motion filed by their lawyer to purge the writ. As of writing this appeal,
Green Advocates staff members are hoping to return home and resume their human
rights work, in spite of the precarious safety situation they continue to face.
 
The series of arrest warrants seems to be linked to the community-based
advocacy work carried out by Green Advocates throughout Liberia, especially in
Sinoe County, where the organisation assisted communities to file a complaint
over rights abuses by palm oil company Golden Veroleum, a subsdiary of the
Singapore-listed company Golden Agri Ressources. High-ranking officials of the
Government of Liberia, including the President of Liberia herself, have
publicly condemned Green Advocates for undermining national sovereignty through
the use of the grievance mechanism of the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil
(RSPO)[3].
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the arbitrary and disproportionate nature of the
arrest warrants and the way in which they were executed, which clearly aim at
sanctioning Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell and all of Green Advocates staff for
their legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory is concerned by
potential negative repercussions of this criminalisation campaign on the
security of Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell and all of Green Advocates staff.
 
The
Observatory would like to recall that the Liberian authorities have been
systematically harassing members of Green Advocates since 2014[4].
Highly placed officials in the Government have accused them of fraud,
terrorism, economic sabotage and sedition. The defamation campaign also took
place through press articles in which Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell has been
accused by Salala Rubber Company of trespass and “terrorising” its employees by
organising “mass meetings” on a rubber plantation in the Margibi County. Their
offices have been raided, and their community clients face frivolous criminal
charges, illegal detentions threats of potential judicial harassment. The Observatory
fears this systematic pattern of harassment and threats is linked to Green
Advocates’ work to defend the rights of indigenous communities impacted by
large-scale oil palm and rubber production in the country.
 
The Observatory calls upon the authorities
to immediately cease all forms of harassment, including at judicial level,
against Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell and Green Advocates, their local community
clients, as well as against all human rights defenders in the country. 
 
Moreover, the Observatory urges the
Liberian authorities to conduct a thorough, impartial, and transparent criminal
investigation into the various threats and acts of violence and invasion
against Green Advocates and its community-based allies, and to adopt all the
necessary measures to ensure that Green Advocates can resume their human rights
work, in particular their work in support of rural communities.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Liberia asking them to:
 
i. Put
an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, as well as
surveillance and threats against Mr. Alfred Lahai Brownell, members of his family,
and all Green Advocates’ staff as well as
against all human rights defenders in Liberia;
 
ii. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Alfred
Lahai Brownell, members of his family, all Green Advocates’ staff and all human
rights defenders in Liberia;
 
iii. Conduct a thorough, impartial,
and transparent criminal investigation into the above-mentioned acts in order
to identify those responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial
tribunal, and apply to them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Article 1, 6(a) and 12,2;
 
v. Ensure in
respect in all circumstances for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Liberia.
 
Addresses:
 
·       Mrs. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf,
President of Liberia. Email: info@emansion.gov.lr
·       Cllr.
Fredrick Cherue, Minister of Justice and Attorney General. Email: somahm@moj.gov.lr 
·       Bartholomew
B. Colley, Acting Chairperson, Independent National Commission on Human Rights
Liberia. Email: bbcolley1961@gmail.com 
·       Liberia
Permanent Mission to UNOG. Fax: +41 (0)22 761 5601. Email:
p.mission@liberia-unog.ch
·       Embassy
of Liberia in Brussels. Fax: +32 (0)2 411 09 12. E-mail:
info@embassyofliberia.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions
or embassies of Liberia in your respective country. 