Pakistan:  Open Letter to the Prime Minister of Pakistan on the killing of human rights defender Siddique Eido
May 12, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Pakistan / 2011 / MayPakistan: Open Letter to the Prime Minister of Pakistan on the killing of human rights defender Siddique EidoOpen Letter to the Prime Minister of Pakistan on the killing of human rights defender Siddique Eido3 pages / 115 KBAt least 41 non-governmental organizations send the following Open Letter to the Prime
Minister of Pakistan Syed Yousaf Raza Gilan regarding the killing of Mr. Siddique
Eido, an activist working with the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan
(HRCP). Mr. Eido’s body was found on 28 April 2011 along with that of Mr. Yousef
Nazar, a member of a student organisation. Their bodies bore signs of
torture. Both activists were reported disappeared on 21 December 2010,
reportedly abducted by unidentified men wearing security forces uniforms. Mr.
Eido is the second human rights defender associated with HRCP to be murdered in
2011, after Mr. Naeem Sabir, HRCP Coordinator in Khuzdar district,
was shot dead on 1 March 2011.Open Letter to the Prime Minister of 
Pakistan
on the killing of human rights defender 
Siddique Eido
12 May 2011
His Excellency Syed Yousaf Raza 
Gilani Prime Minister of Pakistan Prime Minister House 
Islamabad, Pakistan Tel no: + 92 519213562 
Dear Rt. Hon’ble Prime 
Minister Prime Minister Gilani,
We, the undersigned non-governmental 
organizations and people’s movements, strongly condemn the disappearance and 
brutal killing of Mr. Siddique Eido. Mr. Eido was a Pakistani journalist 
and an activist of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) in Balochistan 
province. His body was found on 28 April 2011 in Ormara, Balochistan, together 
with the body of Mr. Yousaf Nazar, a member of a student organization. 
Both men were shot in the head and their bodies bore torture marks. 

Mr. Eido and Mr. Nazar had been 
missing since 21 December 2010 after being abducted by men in state security 
forces uniform. According to HRCP, the vehicles used by the abductors were 
similar to those used by state security forces. At the time of their 
disappearance, four policemen accompanied Mr. Eido and Mr. Nazar. HRCP had also 
challenged Mr. Eido’s disappearance in the Supreme Court. Yet no action was 
taken to publicly identify or prosecute the abductors.  

We believe that Mr. Eido’s killing 
is linked to his work as a human rights defender highlighting incidents of 
enforced disappearances and other human rights violations. Mr. Eido is the 
second human rights defender associated with HRCP to be murdered in 2011, after 
Mr. Naeem Sabir, HRCP Coordinator in Khuzdar district, was shot dead on 1 
March 2011. These killings highlight the grave threats that human rights 
defenders face in Pakistan in general, and in Balochistan in 
particular.
We believe that the alleged 
involvement of state agents in disappearances and extra-judicial killings of 
human rights defenders in Balochistan is part of a wider context of violence 
against the citizens of Pakistan. We note with concern that the Government of 
Pakistan does not provide adequate security to the people, particularly those in 
Balochistan, and even fosters a culture of impunity with perpetrators of abuses 
rarely brought to justice. 
We call on the Government of 
Pakistan to demonstrate its commitment to preventing such brutal killings and to 
trace the large number of people reported missing. We recall that, as a State 
Party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and 
the Convention Against Torture (CAT), Pakistan has the obligation to ensure 
right to life, and to eradicate torture, respectively.  

We urge the Government of Pakistan 
to pay serious heed to the rights of human rights defenders under the UN 
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders. Article 12(2) of the Declaration outlines 
the obligation of the State that it must “take all necessary measures to ensure 
the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in 
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or 
de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a 
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the 
present Declaration.”  
FORUM-ASIA, strongly urges the 
Government of Pakistan to: 
 
Conduct a thorough and independent 
investigation into the disappearance and brutal killings of Mr. Siddique Eido 
and Mr. Yousaf Nazar;Address the issue of impunity by 
investigating all cases of threats, disappearances and killings of these 
activist and bringing the perpetrators to justice;Ratify the International Convention for 
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced 
Disappearance;$Accept the longstanding request to visit 
from the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights 
Defenders;Protect human rights defenders across 
Pakistan, in particular in Balochistan, and put an end to the intimidation, 
torture and enforced disappearances so that they may freely and safely continue 
to report on human rights violations. 

Yours Sincerely 

Yap Swee Seng 

Executive Director 

Asian Forum for Human Rights and 
Development (FORUM-ASIA) 
Endorsed by: 

Ain o Salish Kendra (ASK), 
Bangladesh 
All India Network of NGOs and 
Individuals Working with NHRIs (AiNNI), India Alternative ASEAN Network on 
Burma (Altsean Burma), Regional Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and 
Development (APWLD), Regional Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development 
(FORUM-ASIA), Regional  Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), India 
Burma Partnership, Burma/Thailand Cambodian Center for Human Rights 
(CCHR), Cambodia  Cambodian Working Group for an ASEAN Human Rights 
Mechanism (CWG), Cambodia 
Cambodian League for Promotion and 
Protection and Defence of Human Rights (LICADHO), Cambodia 

Centre for Human Rights and Development 
(CHRD), Mongolia  Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI), Regional 
Citizens’ Watch, Sri Lanka Education and Research Association for 
Consumers (Era Consumer), Malaysia Globe International, Mongolia Human 
Rights Defenders Alert - India (HRDA), India Human Rights Working Group 
(HRWG), Indonesia Imparsial, the Indonesia Human Rights Monitor, Indonesia 
Informal Sector Service, (INSEC), Nepal International Campaign for Human 
Rights in Iran, International International NGO Forum on Indonesian 
Development (INFID), Indonesia Judicial System Monitoring Program (JSMP), 
Timor Leste Korean House for International Solidarity (KHIS), Republic of 
Korea Law and Society Trust (LST), Sri Lanka Migrant Forum Asia (MFA), 
Regional Migrant CARE, Indonesia 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 
(OMCT-FIDH), International Odhikar, Bangladesh Pax Romana, International 
People’s Watch (PW), India People’s Vigilance Committee on Human Rights 
(PVCHR), India Program Against Custodial Torture & Impunity (PACTI), 
India Sisters in Islam (SIS), Malaysia Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM), 
Malaysia Sudhanthra, India Task Force Detainees Philippines (TFDP), 
Philippines Think Centre, Singapore Unrepresented Nations and Peoples 
Organisation (UNPO), Netherlands Women’s Rehabilitation Centre (WOREC), 
Nepal Youth Action Nepal, Nepal Ms. Hina Jilani, Pakistan For 
inquiries, please contact: Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development 
(FORUM-ASIA) 246 Times Square Building, 12th Floor, 12-01 Sukhumvit 
Road, Between Soi 12 & 14 Bangkok, Thailand Tel. no. +66 2 653 2940 
(Ext 402) Fax no. +66 2 653 2942 E-mail: hrd@forum-asia.org / sa@forum-asia.orgThis e-mail address is being protected from spam bots, you need 
JavaScript enabled to view it 
 This e-mail address is being 
protected from spam bots, you need JavaScript enabled to view it 
Copy furnished:  Mr. 
Asif Ali Zardari President of Pakistan  
President’s Secretariat Islamabad 

PAKISTAN 


If you want to unsubscribe from this mailing list, 
please reply to this message and add "unsubscribe" in the "subject" line.Si 
vous voulez vous désinscrire de cette liste de diffusion, répondez simplement à 
cet e-mail et ajoutez "désincription" dans la ligne du sujet de l'e-mail.Si 
usted desea que sea anulada su inscripción a esta lista de difusión, por favor 
simplemente responda a este E-mail y agregue la palabra "desinscripción" en el 
espacio del tema (subject) del E-mail. 