Bahrain:  Ongoing incommunicado and arbitrary detention of Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja
May  6, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2011 / MayBahrain: Ongoing incommunicado and arbitrary detention of Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
BHR 004 / 0411 / OBS 070.1
Incommunicado detention / Judicial
harassment / 
Fear of torture and ill-treatment
Bahrain
May 6, 2011
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in
the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources about the ongoing incommunicado and arbitrary
detention of Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja, former MENA Director at Front Line and
former President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR). 
 
According to the
information received, as of May 5, 2011, Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja remained
detained but his whereabouts as well as official charges pending against him
remained unknown. His lawyer is the only person who could have access to him on
April 29 and 30, 2011. These two meetings of several hours were held in the
presence of the Military Prosecutor. In addition, no information could be
obtained regarding Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja’s physical condition, although
witnesses claim to have seen him in a military hospital in a very bad state.
 
The Observatory recalls
that Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja was brutally arrested on April 9, 2011, and
witnesses present during his arrest declared that he was taken unconscious
after having been violently beaten (See background information).
 
The Observatory firmly
denounces the violation of the rights to due process and fair trial by the
Bahraini authorities, the incommunicado and arbitrary detention of Mr.
Abdulhadi Al Khawaja and
as well as the judicial harassment against him, which seem to merely aim at
sanctioning his human rights activities. The Observatory is also deeply
concerned for his physical and psychological integrity as it is feared that he
might be subjected to torture and acts of ill-treatments in the framework of
incommunicado detention, in a context where four people arrested during the
protests have died in custody between April 3 and 12, 2011 and dozens of detained
activists complained of acts of torture and ill-treatment. 
 
Background
information:

 
On April 9, 2011, Mr.
Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, who has been organising peaceful awareness-raising and
human rights education activities for protesters in the recent weeks, was
arrested at his daughter’s house, along with two of his sons-in-law, Messrs.
Wafi Almajid and Hussein Ahmed, by masked policemen who forced entry to the
building. The three men, and Mr. Al-Khawaja in particular, were severely beaten
up before being taken to an unknown destination. Moreover, Mr. Mohammad
Al-Maskati, President of the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights
(BYHRS), who has been monitoring human rights violations committed since the
protest movement began, and who was also present in the house, was severely
beaten during the raid but not arrested. 
 
On April 10, the
Bahraini authorities wrote on twitter: “Al-Khawaja was arrested for charges to
be brought against him legally. He violently resisted the arrest and had to be
subdued” ; the twit then continues as “(Al-Khawaja) is not a reformer (...) He
called for the overthrow of the legitimate regime”. To date, no information has
been given to the family of Messrs. Almajid and Ahmed neither on their
whereabouts nor regarding any charges pending against them.
 
On April 15, 2011, a
group of more than 20 masked and armed plain-clothes men, belonging to security
forces, entered the house where Mr. Al Tajer was present with his wife and
young children. After thoroughly searching the house, the office, and taking
computers and mobile phones, the men arrested Mr. Al Tajer and took him to an
unknown destination. 
 
On April 20, 2011, Mr.
Abdulhadi Al Khawaja was allowed to make a one-minute phone call to his wife.
He informed her that he was supposed to appear on April 21 at 8.00 am before
the Military Court. Before this call, Mr. Alkhawaja's daughter received a call
from the military asking her to bring clothes for him. When his lawyers
presented themselves before the Military Court, they were advised that the
hearing will not take place on that date. They could not get any further
information nor have access to their client. 
 
Furthermore, the Observatory also recalls that since April 16, 2011, no information could be gathered
regarding the whereabouts of Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer, a human rights lawyer who was arrested on that day
in his house. Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer was representing several protesters
before the Lower National Safety Court, charged with murder of two policemen.
On April 28, 2011, four of them were sentenced to death penalty and three to
life imprisonment[1]. 
Actions
requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 

i.                    
Guarantee the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Abdulhadi Al
Khawaja, Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer as well as all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
ii.                  
Immediately disclose the whereabouts
of Messrs. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja, Mohamed Issa Al Tajer, Almajid and Ahmed and ensure their access
to their lawyers and families; 
 
iii.                 
Immediately and
unconditionally released  Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja and Mr. Mohamed
Issa Al Tajer as well as all human rights defenders in Bahrain as their
detention merely seems at sanctioning their human rights activities;
 
iv.                
Put an end to any acts of
harassment, including at the judicial and administrative level, against Mr.
Abdulhadi Al Khawaja and Mr. Mohamed Issa Al Tajer as well as against all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
v.                  Conform in any circumstances with
the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December
9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular : 
-       
its Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote
the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels” ;
-       
its Article 6 (c) which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others to study,
discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice,
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other
appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters” ;
-       
its Article 9.3 which provides that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, inter
alia […] to attend public hearings, proceedings and trials so as to form an
opinion on their compliance with national law and applicable international
obligations and commitments; and to offer and provide professionally qualified
legal assistance or other relevant advice and assistance in defending human
rights and fundamental freedoms” ;
-       
its Article 10 which provides that
“no one shall participate, by act or by failure to act where required, in
violating human rights and fundamental freedoms and no one shall be subjected
to punishment or adverse action of any kind for refusing to do so”;
-       
and its Article 12.2 which states
that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”.
 
vi.        Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Bahrain. 

Addresses: 

● Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587 
● Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973
172 12 6032 
● Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs,
Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
● Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin
Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland.
Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 

Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your respective
countries.

*** 
Paris-Geneva, May 6, 2011

Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.

The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated
to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete
support in their time of need. 

To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail:
     Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·        
Tel and fax FIDH
+ 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] See Observatory Urgent Appeal BHR 003/0411/OBS 065, issued on April 16, 2011. 