Jordan:  Jordan: excessive force against peaceful demonstrators
October  9, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Jordan / 2000 / OctoberJordan: Jordan: excessive force against peaceful demonstratorsCase JOR 091000  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Jordan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by information received from a reliable source concerning the use of excessive force on demonstrators, expressing their support for the Palestinian people, in Jordan. These actions follow a recent statement by the Jordanian Prime Minister to ban all demonstrations held in support of the Palestinian people.    According to information collected by the reliable source, Usama Abdul-Karim Ali Qasem, 18 years old was reported to have been killed on Friday 6th October by a bullet in the chest from the anti riot police, while more than 20 persons were reported injured, many with serious injuries.   Anti riot police heavily used tear gas bombs and rods against demonstrators causing internal bleeding and broken bones among many injured persons who are still in hospitals receiving necessary treatment.   The Arab Center for Heart Surgery Hospital reported that 4 among the five persons admitted in the emergency department were women.  One woman interviewed reported that 5 riot policemen had beaten her on the head and face causing her internal bleeding and broken cheekbones.  The woman added that the police have used insulting language and have irritated peoples' emotions by tearing up the Palestinian flags the demonstrators were carrying.    In addition, riot police have detained many demonstrators throughout the city Amman who have not been released until now.    In a statement issued by the Prime Minister of Jordan, Ali Abu Al-Ragheb, it was stated that all demonstrations and marches in Jordan in support of the Palestinian people were banned.  Furthermore, in the statement the government threatened to take harsh measures against any violation of the decisions and orders taken by security departments and related authorities.  The government claimed that the ban was imposed due to violent actions undertaken by demonstrators.  The government spread tanks and riot police near all the mosques in the capital city Amman as a preventive measure against any attempt by citizens to peaceful expression of solidarity.  On the 7th of October, the government had also banned a children's march to UNICEF in solidarity with Mohammad Al-Durah, (a child shot dead by Israeli forces in recent demonstrations in Palestine) organized by the Children's Committee of the Jordanian Women's Union and children were not allowed to reach the UNICEF premises in Amman.  Again insulting language was used against children and participating women.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Jordan urging them to:  i.	Put an immediate end to the use of excessive force against Jordanian demonstrators and ensure that all law enforcement agencies conform to international human rights standards and a thorough and impartial investigation into all deaths and injuries in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.	order the immediate release of those persons reportedly detained, in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	guarantee compensation to the family of Usama Abdul Karim Ali and to all injured people; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Prime Minister, Ali Abu Al-Ragheb, PO Box 80, 352 Amman, Jordan.  Fax No: 00962 4 642520.    Interior Ministry, Fax No. 00962 5 606908  Geneva, October 9, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 