Sri Lanka:  'Sri Lanka: arrest and disappearance of two children
January 28, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2000 / JanuarySri Lanka: 'Sri Lanka: arrest and disappearance of two childrenCase LKA 280100.CC   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention regarding the following situation in Sri Lanka.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the arrest and disappearance of two children, Priya Sriskantharajah (aged 15) and Vinoth Skriskantharajah (aged 12) along with their mother Mrs. Valarmathy Sriskantharajah (aged 42) (see case LKA 280100) on 25th January 2000, at their home in Urumpirai, by Sri Lankan Police forces who reportedly came with a Militia Group EPDP members (Eelam People’s Democratic Front).  Their father, Mr. Sriskantharajah (aged 45) currently resides in Switzerland having claimed refugee status in 1991.  The reason for their arrest is believed to be that their eldest brother, arrested in Colombo on Saturday 22nd January 2000, is a suspected member of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.    The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for their physical and psychological integrity, particularly as it is reported by the family physician that Vinoth, suffers from fits.  Their current whereabouts is unknown.  Actions requested  Please write to the authorities of Sri Lanka urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Priya Sriskantharajah and Vinoth Sriskantharajah;  ii.	immediately locate their whereabouts and order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights in all times;  iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the arrest and disappearance of these two children in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, particularly the Convention on the Rights of the Child, ratified by Sri Lanka.  Addresses  Her Excellency President Chandrika B. Kumaratunga, Presidential Residence, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka Fax: 94 - 1 - 333 - 703   Mr. Mangala Samaraweera, Minister of Posts, Telecommunications and Media, Old CTO Building Lotus Rd, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka  Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, New Secretariat, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka Hon. Ambassador, Permanent Mission and Consulate General of Sri Lanka, 56, Rue De Moillebeau,  5th Floor, 1 209, Geneva 19, Switzerland, Fax: (41-22) 734 9084, E-mail: mission.srilanka@itu.ch Hon. High-Commissioner, The High Commission of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 13 Hyde Park Gardens London W2 2LU United Kingdom Fax: (0171) 262-7970, E-mail: lancom@easynet.co.uk  Geneva, 28th January 2000  Kindly inform the International Secretariat of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 