Libya:  The New Law Criminalising Torture: A first step, but more is needed
April 25, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Libya / 2013 / AprilLibya: The New Law Criminalising Torture: A first step, but more is neededARABE بيان صحفي2 pages / 233 KBPRESS RELEASE
For
immediate release
April
25, 2013
The New Libyan Law
Criminalising Torture, Enforced Disappearances and Discrimination: A first
step, but more is needed
The
Libyan General National Congress (GNC)
adopted the Law Criminalising Torture, Enforced Disappearances and
Discrimination on 9 April.  Lawyers for
Justice in Libya (LFJL), REDRESS,
DIGNITY – Danish Institute Against Torture (DIGNITY), and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) welcome the GNC’s initiative to
provide a legislative framework for the prohibition and criminalisation of some
of the most serious crimes, including torture and enforced disappearances.
However, the organisations remain concerned that the provisions of the new law
do not fully conform with Libya’s international obligations.LFJL, REDRESS, DIGNITY, and OMCT submitted their preliminary
comments on an earlier draft of this law to
the GNC on 26 March, where they raised detailed concerns with regard to the
torture aspects of the draft legislation (a full version is available here). The organisations recognise that
the draft has since undergone some changes resulting in the enacted version,
without, however, addressing the principal concerns. Whilst the intention of
the draft law to tackle the three categories of human rights violations was
encouraging, their inclusion in the same piece of legislation fails to reflect their
distinct characteristics and risks confusing or oversimplifying the specific
obligations they impose.More
specifically, the organisations are concerned that several aspects of the
definition of torture under Article 2 of the new law are not aligned with the
definition provided for under Article 1 of United Nations Convention Against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (UNCAT), to which Libya is a State
Party. This results in a narrowing of the scope of its application, such as by
restricting torture to acts committed against detainees. It therefore fails to
provide a sound basis on which to build a comprehensive anti-torture framework.
The new law also does not enshrine the prohibition of deporting, extraditing or
otherwise transferring a person to a state where there are substantial grounds
for believing that he or she would be subject to torture.
The
organisations welcome the amendments made to the draft law, particularly the
removal of “collateral sanctions” in the form of “disenfranchisement of his
civil political rights”, but urge Libyan lawmakers to consult further with
relevant stakeholders and to consider comparative worldwide experiences whilst
drafting legislation. 
LFJL
Director Elham Saudi noted, “Whilst the law is a valuable first step, the
complexity, on-going, and endemic nature of these human rights violations means
that there can be no quick fixes to these problems. The adopted legislation may
be ineffective in combating torture and result in uncertainties regarding its
applicability.” She added, “Care must be taken to ensure that such legislation
forms an integral part of existing laws recognising torture as a criminal
offence in the penal code. It should also be unequivocal in stipulating its
legal effect including the repeal of the amnesty granted under Article 4 of Law
38 of 2012.”
LFJL,
REDRESS, DIGNITY, and OMCT urge the GNC to continue its efforts towards
creating a comprehensive anti-torture framework. They recommend that the GNC
addresses the issues detailed in the formerly submitted preliminary comments,
and express their readiness to engage constructively with the GNC in order to
progress these changes. 
Contacts for media queries:
LFJL: Mariam
Elhadri, Coordinating Officer / Phone: +44 (0) 20 7242 5071 
Email: info@libyanjustice.org
/ Languages: Arabic, English
DIGNITY: Anders Bernhoft,
Head of Press / Phone: + 45 2252 8657 
Email: ab@dignityinstitute.dk
/ Languages: English, DanishREDRESS: Eva Sanchis,
Communications Officer / Phone: +44 (0) 20 7793 1777I
Email: eva@redress.org
/ Languages: English, Spanish
OMCT: Currun Singh,
MENA Advisor / Phone: +216 7132 2561 / 
Email: cs@omct.org
/ Languages: English, French, Arabic 