India:   Incommunicado detention and no effective investigation into allegations of torture and other ill-treatment
July 20, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2011 / JulyIndia:  Incommunicado detention and no effective investigation into allegations of torture and other ill-treatment​Case IND 200711Alleged torture and
ill-treatment/ Incommunicado
detention/ Due process violations/ Arbitrary detention/ Lack of a proper
investigation
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requestsyour URGENT intervention
in the following situation in India/ West Bengal.
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat
of OMCT has been informed by Banglar
Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the incommunicado detention and alleged torture
and ill-treatment of Mr. Mijanur Molla and Mr. Jalil Gazi., by members of the Border Security Force
(BSF), in events occurred in District-North 24 Parganas, West Bengal. OMCT is gravely concerned that to date, there has been reportedly no
effective investigation into these allegations.
According to the information
received, on 26 March 2011, at about 11.30
pm, Mr. Mijanur Molla,aged about 25 years,
and Mr. Jalil Gazi Mondal, aged about 33 years, who resided at Sonpur village,
were arrested in their respective homes by around 25 BSF constables from
Kaijuri-Gaborda Border Outpost (BOP), Battalion no. 47 of BSF. The BSF
constable reportedly entered into their respective houses by breaking the front
door and then subjected the abovementioned two men to severe beating, in
presence of their family members. Thereafter, the BSF constables took them to the
nearby BSF Camp, where they were allegedly subjected to torture, including
electric shocks. 
According to the same information,
on 27 March 2011, almost 17 hours
after their arrest, the BSF took Mr. Mijanur Molla and Mr. Jalil Gazi Mondal to
Swarupnagar Police Station, where the BSF filed a written complaint against Mr.
Mijanur Molla and Mr. Jalil Gazi Mondal accusing each of them of carrying more
than 10 kg of Ganja (cannabis). The police subsequently registered a First
Information Report (FIR)[1]
under section 20(b)(ii) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act
and then prepared a seizure list in presence of the BSF constables but without
any independent witness being present, stating that the aforementioned amount
of Ganja was recovered from both Mr. Mijanur Molla and Mr. Jalil Gazi Mondal. The
BSF have also not given any explanation for the delay of almost 17 hours
between the arrest of Mr. Mijanur Molla and Mr. Jalil Gazi Mondal and their transfer
to the nearest police station, namely Swarupnagar Police Station, although Section
52(3) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act requires that a
person arrested under the Act be presented to the officer-in-charge of the nearest
police station without unnecessary delay.
On 23 March 2011, Mr. Mijanur Molla and Mr. Jalil Gazi Mondal were reportedly
produced before the Additional Sessions Judge 6th Court in the city of Barasat. They both remain
detained at Swarupnagar Police Station pending trial, after the bail
applications that had been filed in court were rejected. OMCT has also been
informed that, since the beginning of their detention, Mr. Mijanur Molla and Mr.
Jalil Gazi Mondal have been denied access to their families, a doctor and a
lawyer.
On 26 March 2011, the families of both Mr. Mijanur Molla and Mr. Jalil
Gazi Mondal submitted one written complaint before the Sub-Divisional Police
Officer (SDPO), Basirhat, North 24 Parganas, regarding the arrest of their
relatives from their house by BSF constables without disclosing any reason. On 1 April 2011, Ms. Tajlima Bibi, Mr. Mijanur Molla’s
wife, also submitted one written complaint before the same SDPO, regarding the acts of torture,
including the electric shocks, inflicted by the BSF constables to her husband
in their home and at the BSF camp. There is currently no
information available on the existence of any investigation or progress of
investigation regarding these complaints. 
OMCT is concerned
for the safety of Mr. Mijanur Molla and Mr. Jalil Gazi Mondal and recalls that
the authorities are legally bound to effectively ensure the physical and
psychological integrity of all persons deprived of liberty in accordance with
international human rights law. The authorities must also ensure that Mr. Mijanur
Molla and Mr. Jalil Gazi Mondal are afforded their rights to access to
effective counsel, their families and medical assistance. 
OMCT also calls on the competent
authorities to ensure that the investigation into the allegations of torture
and other ill-treatment of Mr. Mijanur Molla and Mr. Jalil Gazi Mondal is
carried out promptly, effectively, thoroughly, independently and impartially, in
accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must
be made public, in orderto bring
those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and
apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.
Action requested
 
Please
write to the authorities in India/ West Bengal urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee, in all
circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mijanur Molla and Mr.
Jalil Gazi Mondal;
ii.                  
Grant them immediate and full access to a lawyer of their choice and their
families, as well as guarantee that they are promptly examined by independent
doctors and receive adequate and free medical care, in accordance, inter alia,
with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners;
iii.                 
Order their immediate
release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with
international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them promptly
before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee their
procedural rights at all times;
iv.                
Carry out
a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation
into the allegations of torture and other ill-treatment of Mr. Mijanur Molla
and Mr. Jalil Gazi Mondal in accordance with international human rights
standards, the result of which must be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iii.                 
Ensure that an effective
remedy as well as the right to full redress, including compensation, is granted
to the victims;
iv.                
Guarantee the respect of
human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance
with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø     
Mr. Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, Fax:
+ 91 11 2301 6857;
Ø     
Mr. P.
Chidambaram, Union Minister of Home
Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi
110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979;

Ø     
Hon'ble
Mr. Justice S.H. Kapadia, Chief Justice
of India, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi
-1, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in; 
Ø     
Justice K. G. Balakrishnan, Chairperson,
National Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House, Copernicus
Marg, New Delhi 110 001, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: chairnhrc@nic.in; 
Ø     
Jusice N. C. Sil,
Acting Chairman, West Bengal Human Rights
Commission,
Bhabani Bhaban, Alipur, Kolkata -27. Fax +91 33 24799633, Email: wbhrc@cal3.vsnl.net.in; 
Ø      M. K. Narayanan, Governor, West Bengal, Raj Bhaban,
Kolkata – 62, Phone:
+91 33-2200 1641, Fax: +91 33 – 2200 2444 / 2200 1649, secy-gov-wb@nic.in; 
Ø     
Mr. Sri Buddhadeb
Bhattacharjee, Chief Minister, Government of West Bengal, Writers’
Buildings, BBD Bagh, Kolkata – 1, Fax - +91 33 22145480, Email -
cm@wb.gov.in, sechome@wb.gov.in; 
Ø     
Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations (Geneva),Rue du
Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Tel: +41 22 906
86 86, Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of India in your respective
country.
*******
Geneva, 20 July 2011.
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your 



[1] FIR no. 70/2011 dated
27.3.2011. 