UNGA passes resolution on the protection of human rights defenders
November 26, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2015 / NovemberUNGA passes resolution on the protection of human rights defenders UNGA_2015.11.26_PR2 pages / 125 KB

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
Geneva-New-York-Paris,
November 26, 2015. The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint FIDH-OMCT programme) commends
the passing of a United Nations General Assembly resolution on the protection
of human rights defenders in the Third Committee yesterday. At a time when
human rights defenders have come under increasing pressure amidst a growing
crackdown on civil society in many parts of the world, this resolution is more
important than ever.
 
117 Member States voted yes on the resolution, entitled “Recognizing the
role of human rights defenders and the need for their protection,” calls for
accountability for attacks on human rights defenders (including attacks on
their family members) and urges states to release defenders who have been
arbitrarily detained for exercising their fundamental rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and association. Norway, as the main sponsor of
the resolution, faced many challenges in the negotiation phase with some
States, notably members of the African Group, attempting to significantly
weaken the text. Nevertheless, Norway and the co-sponsors of the resolution,
resisted pressure and delivered a strong text.
 
While normally adopted as a consensus resolution, this year China and
Russia asked for the resolution to be put to a vote. Fourteen States voted no
on the resolution (China, Russia, Syria, Burundi, Kenya, Myanmar, Nigeria,
Saudi Arabia, Zimbabwe, North Korea, South Africa, Iran, Pakistan, and Sudan). 
 
“It is no accident that many
of these States have poor records on the their treatment of human rights
defenders, including Burundi which recently suspended 10 NGOs this week and
promotes acts of violence against defenders. It remains however problematic
that some of these opponents include democracies such as South Africa, which
owes its anti-apartheid struggle and its beacon Constitution to a solid civil
society movement”, said Karim Lahidji, FIDH
President.
 
“The fact
that the resolution was not adopted by consensus reinforces our concerns about
the shrinking space for civil society organisations and human rights defenders
across the globe. Now more than ever it’s essential that all of us who are
supportive of independent civil society join our voices to defend not only the
legitimacy of their work but also to reaffirm how essential it is for any
society wanting to advance human rights and the rule of law”,
said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT).
 
Just before the vote, Norway also urged States not to abstain, which
would represent a failure to recognize the role of human rights defenders and
the need for their protection. Overall, 40 States abstained (Algeria, Angola,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belarus, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, CAR,
Comoros, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Fiji, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Qatar,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, Togo, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Vietnam, and Yemen).
 
FIDH and OMCT, as well as their member organisations, will continue to
stand up for human rights defenders across the world who have been unjustly
targeted owing to their human rights work. This resolution will serve as an
important tool for their protection.
 
For more
information, please contact:
• FIDH: Audrey Couprie - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris) / Arthur Manet -
Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)
• OMCT: Delphine Reculeau - Tel: +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva) / Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui - Tel: +32 2 218 37 19 (Brussels) 