Egypt:  Egypt: arbitrary arrest and death in detention of 42-year old Ahmed Taha Mohamed Yousef
March  5, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2002 / MarchEgypt: Egypt: arbitrary arrest and death in detention of 42-year old Ahmed Taha Mohamed YousefCase EGY 050302 Arbitrary arrest/Torture/Death in detention   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Egyptian Organization For Human Rights (EOHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrest and death in detention of 42-year old Ahmed Taha Mohamed Yousef, in El Wayli district, Cairo, Egypt.  According to the information received, Ahmed Taha Mohamed was reportedly arrested by the Egyptian authorities on February 23rd, 2002 and taken to the El Wayli Police Station, where he was beaten, resulting in death from his injuries.  The police were allegedly looking for his brother at his residence in the Albaseya district.  Since they could not find him they arrested Ahmed Taha Mohamed instead, and one officer beat him in the street while he was handcuffed to another officer named Tarek, before being taken to the El Wayli station.  Reports indicate that Ahmed Taha Mohamed Yousef was later severely beaten on the chest, the back of his head and below his neck and chin by one of the security officers during his detention in the police station, which resulted in his immediate death.    According to the information received, the West Prosecution office, which deals with investigating accidents, has reportedly started an investigation (report no. 1217) into misdemeanours concerning the death of Ahmed Taha Mohamed.  The prosecution reportedly heard the accounts of witnesses on February 28th, 2002.  Three security officers, who have been named only as Hamdi, Essam and Hamid, who were allegedly involved in these incidents, have been detained for 4 days pending investigation.  The prosecution has also decided to summon the head of El Wayli police station’s investigation unit and a security officer for interrogation.  While the International Secretariat of OMCT welcomes the investigation being lead into the death in detention of Ahmed Taha Mohamed Yousef, it remains gravely concerned about the police’s use of arbitrary arrests and detentions and torture, especially when relatives of sought persons are arrested and tortured as a means of putting pressure on these persons.  OMCT is also concerned that those responsible will not be brought to justice and that Ahmed Taha Mohamed Yousef’s family will not be awarded adequate reparation.    Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to:  ·	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events  and guarantee that those responsible are brought to trial and that the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions are applied as provided by law; ·	guarantee adequate reparation to the family of Ahmed Taha Mohamed Yousef; ·	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	H.E. President Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax : 202 390 199 98, Email : Webmaster@presidency.gov.eg  ·	H.E. General Habib Ibrahim El Adly, Minister of the Interior, Al – Sheik Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, Fax : 202 579 2031.  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.  Geneva, March 5th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 