Uzbekistan:  Open letter to President of  Kyrgyzstan on Uzbek human rights defender under threat of deportation and torture
September 28, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2012 / SeptemberUzbekistan: Open letter to President of  Kyrgyzstan on Uzbek human rights defender under threat of deportation and torture

 
 
Open
letter to the President of Kyrgyzstan
 
 
 
                                                                                             Paris-Geneva,
September 28, 2012
 
 
Re: Uzbek human rights
defender who seeks protection in Kyrgyzstan under threat of deportation to
torture
 
 
We,
the undersigned, strongly condemn the recent acts of harassment against Mr. Farkhodhon Mukhtarov, a member of the Uzbekistan Human Rights Alliance (Pravozashchitni Alians Uzbekistana –
PAU), who has applied for asylum in Kyrgyzstan. We are concerned that he could
be tortured if he were to be returned to Uzbekistan, and call on the Kyrgyz
authorities to ensure his safety and that of his family.
 
On September 14, 2012, members of the Main
Investigative Branch (MIB) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MIA) conducted
a raid into Mr. Mukhtarov's apartment in Bishkek, broke down his door and
arrested him without warrant. During his arrest, Mr. Mukhtarov was reportedly
beaten by the police and members of his family were verbally abused. During his
custody at the local police station, the police accused Mr. Mukhtarov of being
a fugitive and stated that he would be immediately deported to Uzbekistan. They
reportedly told him that they would transfer him to the pre-trial detention
facility of the MIA Counter Terrorism Section pending his deportation.
The same day, investigators of the MIB of the MIA searched his apartment and
seized documents and electronic devices, including a laptop computer, USB keys
and a video recorder, with no legal authorisation. He was finally released on
the same day, after Ms. Tolekan Ismailova, Director of “Citizens Against
Corruption”, an FIDH member organisation in Kyrgyzstan, intervened in his
favour. The police reportedly tried to extort money from him for his release.
However, Mr. Mukhtarov was not able to return to his home as police officials
had in the meantime changed the locks of his apartment.
 
On September 21, 2012, when Mr. Mukhtarov tried to
retrieve his belongings at the Regional Department of Internal Affairs, he was
told that they had been sent to the State Committee of National Security and
that according to the Department’s information, he was a “terrorist” and an
“extremist”. 
 
In October 2009, Mr. Farkhodhon Mukhtarov was
sentenced to five years’ imprisonment on trumped-up charges of “fraud” and
“bribery”. After 16 months, on the eve of a visit of the U.S. Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton to Uzbekistan, the imprisonment sentence was commuted to
forced labour and he was released on December 1, 2010. Mr. Farkhodhon Mukhtarov
then flew Uzbekistan with his family to seek asylum in Kyrgyzstan.
 
We recall that Mr. Mukhtarov's arrest and detention
are illegal since both he and his family are asylum seekers and have legitimate
grounds to fear persecution in Uzbekistan. Mr. Farhodkhon Mukhtarov and his
family have applied for asylum to both Kyrgyz authorities and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) but no decision has been made,
thus leaving Mr. Mukhtarov and his family in an insecure situation.
 
We express our deepest concern at these acts of
harassment of Mr. Mukhtarov and call upon the Kyrgyz authorities to ensure in
all circumstances his physical and psychological integrity, as well as that of
his family, to allow them immediate access to their home and return all objects
seized during the search of their apartment. We further call on the authorities
not to deport him to Uzbekistan, as his safety would be put at high risk, and
to carry out an immediate, thorough and impartial investigation into his
illegal arrest and alleged ill-treatment during arrest, and to bring to justice
those responsible, in accordance with international standards. More generally,
we urge the Kyrgyz authorities to conform with all international human rights
instruments ratified by Kyrgyzstan. 
 
Our organisations also urge the UNHCR Office in
Kyrgyzstan to intervene with the Kyrgyz authorities regarding these latest incidents
and take action in order to facilitate Mukhtarov family's resettlement to a
third country.
 
In the hope that you will take these elements into
account,
 
We remain,
 
 
Mrs.
Mutabar Tojibaeva, President of the International Human Rights Organization
“Fiery Hearts Club”
Mr.
Talib Yakubov, former President of the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan
(HRSU)
Mr.
Bakhadyr Namazov, Director of the Committee for the Liberation of Prisoners of
Conscience of Uzbekistan
Ms.
Souhayr Belhassen, President, International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH),
on behalf of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Mr.
Gerald Staberock, Secretary General, World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
on behalf of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
 
 
Contacts:
FIDH: Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT: Isabelle Scherer: +41 22 809 49 39
Fiery Hearts Club: Mutabar Tojibaeva (Russian/Uzbek):
+33 6 79 23 39 27 