Sudan:  Sudan: several people have been killed, wounded and arbitrarily arrested in the ongoing conflict between the Four and Massaleet tribes and Arab militia
June 18, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2002 / JuneSudan: Sudan: several people have been killed, wounded and arbitrarily arrested in the ongoing conflict between the Four and Massaleet tribes and Arab militiaCase SDN 180602 / SDN 180602.ESCRC Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Concern  Arbitrary detentions / Killings  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that several people have been killed, wounded and arbitrarily arrested in connection with an ongoing conflict between the Four and Massaleet tribes and Arab militia from Darfour province and neighbouring Chad, in Sudan.   According to the information received, on May 21st, 2002, eight villagers of Shoba who belonged to the Four tribe, were arbitrarily arrested by the Sudanese authorities.  They were reportedly taken to the security forces office in El Fashir, where they still remain in custody.  Their names are:  Hamid Mohamed Hamid, Nour El din Mohamed Abdelrahim, Abdelrahman Adam Yahya, Fadl Adam Shata, Abbas Abu Shouk, Khalil Dean, Hassan Ossuli, Mustafa Nus Rakib.  Little is known of their conditions of detention, but our sources have voiced fears concerning their physical and psychological integrity.  According to the information received, 17 people were killed and 16 injured as armed militia from Arab tribes in Darfour province and Chad attacked the village of Shoba in the region of Kapkabia, Darfour province, on April 28th, 2002.  The following are the names of the people killed during the conflict:  Ishaq Abaker Hamid, Mohamed Abdalla Mohamed Hamid, Musa Ahmed Hassan, Adam Hussein Hamid, Ali Siddiq, Mahir Elfaki Imam, Ahmed Abdelkarim Shogar, Abdelkarim Sharaf Eldin, Fatima Adam Hussien (Female), Mariam, Mohamed Hamid (female), Ahmed Mohamed Abdella Dinar, Rahma Gamaa Abdela (female), Halima Yaagoub Khamis (female), Abdella Yagoub Khamis, Ahmed Ramadan, Haroun Abdel Aziz Abaker, Iessa Adam Yagoub.  During the attack, 604 houses were reportedly burnt and more than 1000 livestock was slaughtered and mutilated.  The Arab militia was reportedly led by members of the Sudanese Government, according to the leaders of the Four and Massaleet tribes, who were able to identify them.  However, to date, there has not been an investigation into these events, and the perpetrators of these attacks continue to enjoy impunity.  Background information  According to the information received, these human rights violations are linked to the worsening of the socio-economic situation in Darfour, and the ongoing conflict taking place in the province between the Four and Massaleet tribes and Arabs from Darfour and Chad.  Confrontations between these two parties have led to the destruction and depopulation of villages, and the displacement of a great number of people, who now suffer from a shortage of food, security and shelter.  As a result crime has reportedly increased, as the displaced are desperate to ensure theirs and their family’s survival.    According to the report, drought has severely worsened the situation in the region, inciting conflict as tribes fight over the little viable land that remains. The whole of Darfour is reportedly affected and almost 1 million people currently risk starvation.  According to the information received, the Government of Sudan claims that the conflict in Darfour is simply the result of inter-tribal disputes centred around the competition for land between pastoralists and crop farmers in the area.  The leaders of the Four tribe, however, insist that the depopulation of villages, displacement of people, and consequently the changes in land ownership are all part of a government strategy to alter the demography of the region.  So far, 56 Four villages in the region have been depopulated following attacks by militia from Arab tribes.     The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the aforementioned detainees.  In addition, OMCT fears that the perpetrators of the attacks will not be brought to justice and that those injured during these events and the families of those who were killed will not received adequate reparation.  Furthermore, OMCT condemns the Sudanese authorities’ alleged use of Arab militias to displace and depopulate villages.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the aforementioned detainees; ii.	order that these persons be released immediately in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events and guarantee that those responsible are brought to trial and that the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions are applied as provided by law; iv.	guarantee adequate reparations to the families of the dead and to those injured during the attacks. v.	put an immediate end to the harassment of members of the Four tribe; vi.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms, including economic, social and cultural rights, throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights laws and standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 787676 / 783223. ·	His Excellency Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 779383. ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the diplomatic representatives of Sudan in your country.  Geneva, 18th June, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 