Malaysia:  Malaysia: release of demonstrators but detention of one
August  7, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2000 / AugustMalaysia: Malaysia: release of demonstrators but detention of oneCase MYS 040800.1 Follow-up to case MYS 040800  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Malaysia.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from a reliable source that Lokman Adam, arrested on 4th August along with 6 others, is still in custody and it seems has not been brought before a court, in violation of the Federal Constitution.  It is reported that the other 6 persons arrested by police on 4th August 2000 have been released.  They are:   N Gopalakrishnan, keADILan youth exco member    Munawar b. Hussein   An activist, Munasufian,   Norazimah Mohd Noor,    Zainab Rahmah, and   Rahimah bt. Awang According to the report, Munawar b. Hussein was admitted to hospital at 5am on 5th August 2000 although the cause is not known.    Brief reminder of the situation  According to information received from Aliran, a member of the OMCT network, 7 persons were arrested by police and one man severely beaten during a demonstration today, 4th August 2000, outside the magistrate court.  The demonstration was to show support for the former deputy prime minister, Anwar Ibrahim, whose verdict on his sodomy trial was supposed to handed down this morning, (although it had been postponed by the judge yesterday), and to show support and follow the trial of about 30 others who had previously been charged for illegal assembly.  During the demonstration of about 200 people, the following persons were arrested:  Lokman Noor Adam, keADILan youth exco member, N Gopalakrishnan, keADILan youth exco member, A young man identified only as Munawar,  an activist, Munasufian, Norazimah Mohd Noor, Zainab Rahmah, and a woman identified only as Rahimah.  The official charges for their detention are reportedly unknown.  According to Aliran, Lokman Noor Adam was beaten and punched by five plainclothes men.  At one point he was reportedly lying in the middle of the road and being kicked amidst a busy flow of traffic.  He was then later detained by police.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Malaysia urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Lokman Adam and order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these alleged arbitrary arrests in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Datuk Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, Home Minister, Jalan Dato Onn, 50502, Kuala Lumpur MALAYSIA  Fax : +603 2301051   Ybhg. Tan Sri Musa Hitam, Chairperson, Malaysian National Human Rights Commission, c/- Kementerian Luar Negeri, Wisma Putra  50602, Kuala Lumpur MALAYSIA Fax: +603 2425043   Tan Sri Norian Mai, Inspector General of Police, Headquarters of Royal Police of Malaysia, Bukit Aman, 50560 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia, Fax: 603-22731326  Geneva, August 7, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 