Bahrain:  Enforced disappearance of Mr. Naji Fateel
March 20, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2015 / MarchBahrain: Enforced disappearance of Mr. Naji FateelNew information
BHR 001 / 0614 / OBS 049.1
Enforced disappearance in detention /
Arbitrary detention
Bahrain
March 20, 2015
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Bahrain.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the enforced disappearance of Mr. Naji Fateel, co-founder
of the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights (BYSHR), blogger, who monitored
human rights violations committed during Bahrain's uprising and who's currently
serving a 15-year prison sentence (see background information).
According to the information received, on
March 10, 2015, Bahraini security forces allegedly beat and attacked more than
100 prisoners at Jaw Prison, where Mr. Naji Fateel is currently detained, using
rubber bullets, tear gas, and shotgun pellets. Several detainees, including Mr.
Naji Fateel, were severely injured. This incident follows an altercation
between the family of a prisoner, who was denied visitation, and security
officers. It is reported that detainees started protesting after hearing the
sound of clashes.
In response to the protest, security
officers ordered a dozen of the detainees to be taken to another building
within the prison, including Mr. Naji Fateel.
Since March 10, Mr. Naji Fateel's family
has been denied visitation rights and have not been able to communicate with
him. In addition, despite several requests, no information on his whereabouts
and situation has been provided either by security officers or by officials.
The Observatory is deeply concerned by Mr.
Naji Fateel's enforced disappearance, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning
once again, his human rights activities. The Observatory also fears he might
not receive proper medical care.
Accordingly, the Observatory calls on
Bahraini authorities to immediately provide information on the situation of Mr.
Naji Fateel, including his whereabouts and current state of health, and to
respect his rights to receive visits from, and communicate with his family.
Background information[1]:
On May 2, 2013, Mr. Naji Fateel was
arrested at dawn without warrant by security men in civilian clothes at his
home in the village of Bani-Jamra and held incommunicado for three days, during
which time it is reported that he was severely tortured. He was allegedly
subjected to severe torture at the Criminal Investigation Directorate. Reports
allege that he was subjected to electrical shocks to his genitals, left foot
and back in addition to simulated drowning, severe beatings, threats to publish
his wife’s photographs (taken from a camera confiscated by the security forces
when his house was raided), insults, hanging by his hands from the ceiling,
sexual harassment and threats of rape, standing for hours, and sleep
deprivation. He was taken to the Ministry of Interior hospital twice for
treatment due to the torture. Mr. Naji Fateel was detained in Dry Dock
Detention Centre.
On May 22, 2013, Mr. Naji Fateel was
sentenced by the Manama Criminal Court to six months of imprisonment on charges
of “attending illegal gatherings” in relation to a gathering organised on
January 24, 2012 in Bani-Jamra in which he did not participate. He was charged
in another case with the establishment of a group for the purpose of disabling
the Constitution.
On September
29, 2013, Mr. Naji Fateel was sentenced by the Fourth Criminal Court to 15
years in prison for “the establishment of a group for the purpose of disabling
the constitution” under Article 6 of Law No. 58 of 2006 on Terrorism[2].
Mr. Naji Fateel was then moved to the Central Prison “Jaw”. The charges relate
to the alleged terrorist group known as the “February 14 Youth Coalition”,
which organised demonstrations and protests during Bahrain's uprising.
On November 18, 2013, when the appeal
trial against Mr. Naji Fateel started, the authorities of Bahrain denied entry
to a lawyer who was mandated by a coalition of NGOs, including the Observatory,
to observe the appeal trial.
In February 2014, one of the lawyers in
the case said that 90% of their questions to the prosecution witnesses were
rejected by the judge, and a policeman forcefully silenced a lawyer during his
pleadings. Another lawyer was thrown out of the court room although he
represented five of the defendants in the case.
On May 29, 2014, the Court of Appeal
headed by Judge Isa Al-Kaabi upheld the 15-year imprisonment sentence against
Mr. Naji Fateel. No evidence against Mr. Fateel was provided during the trial.
The sentence was solely based on coerced confessions made under torture and
without thoroughly and impartially investigating the allegations of torture
which the defender was subjected to during his detention. During a hearing, Mr.
Naji Fateel removed his shirt and showed the torture marks on his back;
however, it was totally ignored by the court.
Mr. Naji Fateel indicated that he intended
to appeal the decision to the Court of Cassation. His lawyer also filed a
complaint before the Supreme Judicial Council
arguing that the trial proceedings fell short of the minimum standards of fair
trial.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Bahrain
urging them to: 
i.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Naji Fateel, his co-detainees, as well as all
human rights defenders in Bahrain;
ii.     Take prompt action in order to disclose the
whereabouts of Mr. Naji Fateel;
iii.    Release Mr. Naji Fateel immediately and
unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since it only aims at sanctioning
his human rights activities;
iv.    Order an immediate, thorough, transparent
investigation into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment against Mr.
Naji Fateel, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
v.     Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the
judicial level - against Mr. Naji Fateel, as well as all human rights defenders
in Bahrain;
vi.    Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations
on December 9, 1998, in particular its :
Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
Article 11, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to the lawful exercise of his or her occupation or profession”, 
Article 12(1) that
provides “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,
to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”, 
as well as Article
12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually or
in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration”; 
vii.   Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain.
Addresses: 
·        
Cheikh
Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·        
Cheikh
Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555;
fax: +973 172 12 6032
·        
Cheikh
Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973
175 31 333; fax: +973 175 31 284
·        
Permanent
Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin
Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland.
Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
***
Paris-Geneva, March 20, 2015
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated
to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete
support in their time of need.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:

E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org

·        
Tel and
fax FIDH: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 

Tel
and fax OMCT: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29




[1]              
See Joint Press Releases, June 21 and November 15,
2013.


[2]              
Article 6 provides that “life imprisonment shall be
the penalty for everyone who forms, establishes, organizes or operates,
contrary to the provisions of the law, a society, association, organization,
group, gang or a branch of any of the above or undertakes the leadership or
command thereof for the purpose of calling for obstructing the enforcement of
the provisions of the Construction or the laws or preventing any of the
government organizations or public authorities from carrying out their
activities or infringes upon the citizen’s personal freedom or other freedoms
or public rights secured by the Constitution, the law or undermines national
unity if terrorism is one of the methods used in the realization or
implementation of the purposes called for by the society, association,
organization, group or gang or any of their branches”. 