Tajikistan:  A coalition of non-governmental organizations is calling on the government to end torture and fulfil its international obligations
June 26, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Tajikistan / 2011 / JuneTajikistan: A coalition of non-governmental organizations is calling on the government to end torture and fulfil its international obligationsTajikistan: A coalition of non-governmental 
organizations is calling on the government to end torture and fulfil its 
international obligations
 
On 26 June, the International Day in Support of 
Victims of Torture, a coalition of Tajikistani and international human rights 
organizations is urging the authorities to make the eradication of torture a top 
priority on the government’s agenda and to bring justice to victims of torture 
across the country. 
 
In December 1997, the United Nations (UN) General 
Assembly proclaimed 26 June the International Day in Support of Victims of 
Torture, a day to speak out against the crime of torture, and to honour and 
support victims and survivors around the world. The date was chosen to 
commemorate the day the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture) entered into 
force in 1987.
 
In November 2006, when the UN Committee against Torture reviewed 
Tajikistan’s compliance with its Convention obligations, it expressed concern at “numerous allegations concerning the 
widespread routine use of torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement and 
investigative personnel”. The authorities have since taken some measures in the 
right direction. For example, the 
adoption of the new Criminal Procedure Code that came into force in April 2010 
strengthened some safeguards against torture. Government officials have on 
several occasions reiterated their commitment to human rights. For example, in 
his speech in Parliament on 20 April 2011 President Emomali Rahmon stressed the 
government’s commitment to “protect human rights, the rule of law and order.” 
However, much remains to be done as evidenced by the fact that in 2010 the European Court of Human Rights ruled in several cases of 
Tajik citizens that they must not be extradited to Tajikistan citing the 
“widespread” nature of torture in the country. In 2011 the Court issued 
emergency measures to prevent the extradition of another man to 
Tajikistan.
 
Case examples
When Abdumuqit Vohidov’s 
and Ruhniddin Sharopov’s returned to 
Tajikistan from US detention at Guantanamo Bay in March 2007, they were arrested 
and reportedly held without access to a lawyer until their trial in August that 
year. Their families say they were notified only at the end of April 2007. 
Reportedly, both men were tortured and beaten by law enforcement officers in 
Tajikistan to extract confessions and incriminating evidence. Abdumuqit 
Vohidov’s fingers were allegedly either electrocuted or burnt with a flame. On 
17 August the Supreme Court of Tajikistan sentenced both men to 17 years’ 
imprisonment for illegal border crossing into Afghanistan in 2001 and fighting 
for the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) as mercenaries. Their lawyer stated in the appeal document that the 
men were not aware that they were being hired by the IMU and that no evidence 
was presented in court to prove that they actually participated in combat. The 
appeal was turned down at the end of October 2007 and no independent and 
impartial investigation is known to have been opened into the allegations of 
torture or ill-treatment.
 
Ilhom Ismonov was reportedly tortured by police at the Department for the Fight against Organized Crime (UBOP) of the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs in Khujand in Soghd region, including by having 
electric shocks and hot and cold water poured over his body, in November 2010. 
His lawyer was able to see him for the first time at the remand hearing on 12 
November, nine days after he had been arrested. Although the young man told the 
judge that he was tortured and offered to show him evidence of torture on his 
body, the judge did not address the allegations and told his lawyer to take them 
up with the police investigator. In letters to Ilhom Ismonov’s wife and lawyer 
the Prosecutor of Soghd Region said no torture had taken place but did not 
explain how he had reached that conclusion. The organizations publishing this 
statement are concerned that evidence extracted under torture may be used in his 
upcoming trial, where he will be accused of IMU membership and tried alongside 
with 52 other alleged IMU members. The organizations are calling on the 
authorities to ensure that the trial will be open to the public and independent 
observers.[1]

 
Safarali Sangov died on 5 March 2011, four days after his arrest on 1 March by officers of 
Sino District police in Dushanbe. During the arrest police reportedly beat him 
and other family members, including children and a woman who was four months’ 
pregnant. To date no investigation has been carried out into the alleged 
beatings of his family members. Following a public outcry and allegations that 
Safarali Sangov may have died as a result of torture at Sino District police 
station, in March three policemen were charged with “negligence”, one of them 
additionally with “exceeding official authority”. However, the prosecution subsequently 
dropped the latter charge stating that testimonies of Safarali Sangov’s 
relatives were not acceptable as evidence. According to the prosecution, 
Safarali Sangov fell off the stairs at the police station and then – after being 
taken to an office – threw himself against a safe and a wall. Reportedly, no 
charge was brought against another policeman on the grounds that he was 
hospitalized for “severe antritis” (inflammation of the sinuses) and allegedly 
unable to participate in the investigation for health reasons. Safarali Sangov’s lawyer believes that 
the investigation into Safarali Sangov’s death by the prosecution was biased. 
For example, in April the lawyer petitioned the Prosecutor’s Office of Dushanbe 
to question in each other’s presence the accused and the witnesses, whose 
testimonies had been contradictory. However, the Prosecutor’s Officer never 
responded to the petition and no questioning was carried out. The Prosecutor’s 
Office also failed to give equal access to case materials to the prosecution and 
the defense. For example, an employee of the prosecutor’s office was reportedly 
given access to the full report of the forensic medical examination on 25 March 
while the lawyer was given such permission only on 17 May. The trial against the 
three policemen opened on 2 June.[2] 
 
In 
Tajikistan police have in many cases been accused of torturing or beating 
detainees to extract money, confessions or other information incriminating the 
victim or others. This abuse has mostly taken place in the early stages of 
detention; in many cases victims are initially detained without contact with the 
outside world. Lawyers and human rights defenders in Tajikistan who have worked 
on cases of detainees held in facilities run by the State Committee for National 
Security reported that detainees in these facilities were at particular risk of 
torture or other ill-treatment. Lawyers and human rights activists also reported 
about torture and ill-treatment in pre-trial detention facilities under the 
jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice, as well as in Ministry facilities for 
prisoners serving sentences in the penitentiary system. 

 
Torture practices reported in Tajikistan include 
the use of electric shocks; attaching plastic bottles filled with water or sand 
to the detainee’s genitals; rape; burning with cigarettes. Beating with batons, 
truncheons and sticks, kicking and punching are also believed to be 
common.
 
The 
organizations signing this statement are concerned that safeguards against 
torture enshrined in domestic law are not always adhered to. For example, while 
the new Criminal Procedure Code stipulates that detainees are entitled to a lawyer from the moment of 
their arrest, in practice lawyers are at the mercy of investigators who can deny 
them access for many days. During this period of incommunicado detention, the 
risk of torture or other ill-treatment is particularly high. The new 
Criminal Procedure Code also introduced remand hearings within 72 hours of a 
suspect’s arrest. However, they often take place with a delay and judges in many 
cases ignore torture allegations and the injuries presented to them in the court 
room. Usually they rely on the version of events given by the people accused of 
the torture. 
 
There are no routine medical examinations when detainees are 
admitted to police stations and temporary detention facilities. Upon transfer to 
pre-trial detention facilities under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice 
they undergo a medical examination. However, when medical personnel suspect that 
a detainee underwent torture or other ill-treatment they are usually return them 
to the temporary detention facility until the signs of injury have 
faded.
 
Victims rarely lodge complaints when they are abused by law 
enforcement officers for fear of repercussions, and impunity for abusive 
officers is the norm. Often relatives and lawyers are reluctant to file 
complaints so as not to worsen the situation for the detainee. 

 
Prosecutor’s offices are tasked with investigating allegations of 
torture. Sometimes close personal and structural links between prosecutor’s 
offices and police undermine the impartiality of prosecutors. The authorities have not published comprehensive statistics on 
prosecutions of law enforcement officers relating specifically to torture or 
other ill-treatment rather than broader charges such as “abuse of power“ or 
“exceeding official authority“.
 
Judges recurrently base verdicts on evidence allegedly extracted 
under duress.
 
The definition of torture in domestic law is not fully in line with 
the definition contained in the Convention against Torture. 

 
Tajikistan has not given the International Committee of the Red Cross 
access to detention facilities to carry out monitoring since 2004. It has not 
ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which 
provides for a system of regular visits to places of detention carried out by 
independent international and national bodies.
 
The organizations signing this statement are calling on the 
authorities of Tajikistan to implement the following recommendations as a matter 
of priority: 
·         
Ensure that detainees have the right to a lawyer 
of choice and to unlimited and confidential access starting immediately after 
the arrest is adhered to in all cases. 
·         
Ensure that judges ruling on authorizing pre-trial 
detention also inquire into the treatment of detainees while in custody, in line 
with Principle 37 of the Body of Principles on Detention or Imprisonment. If the 
inquiry, or the detainee’s own statement, gives reason to believe that torture 
or ill-treatment was committed, the judge should issue instructions that an 
effective investigation be carried out.
·         
Ensure that suspects are examined by an 
independent doctor immediately after their detention and when they are admitted 
to a temporary detention facility.
·         
Promptly open thorough, independent and impartial 
investigations into all allegations of torture or other ill-treatment and bring 
responsible to justice. 
·         
Legislate to the effect that no statement or 
confession made by a person deprived of liberty, other than one made in the 
presence of a judge or a lawyer, should have a probative value in court, except 
as evidence against those who are accused of having obtained the confession by 
unlawful means.
·         
Include a definition of torture in domestic law 
that is in full conformity with the definition contained in the Convention 
against Torture.
·         
Ratify 
the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
·         
Grant access to detention facilities to the International Committee of 
the Red Cross.
 
Organizations signing this 
statement:
 
Amnesty International
 
Bureau of Human Rights and Rule of Law, Tajikistan
 
Centre for Children’s Rights, 
Tajikistan
 
Collegium of Advocates of Soghd region, 
Tajikistan
 
Collegium of Advocates of the Republic "Sipar", Tajikistan 
 
Equal 
Opportunity, Tajikistan
 
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
 
League of Women Lawyers of the Republic of 
Tajikistan, Tajikistan 
 
Penal 
Reform International (PRI)
 
Public Charitable Association “Avesto”, Tajikistan 

 
World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)  
 
Young Lawyers Association “Amparo”, 
Tajikistan




[1] For further information about the case, refer to Amnesty 
International’s Urgent Actions (UA: 238/10), AI Index: EUR 60/002/2010, 15 November 2010 and EUR 60/003/2010, 25 November 2010, November 2010.

[2] For further information about the case, refer to the 17 March 2011 
joint public statement by Amnesty International and the Bureau of Human Rights 
and Rule of Law, entitled Tajikistan: 
Detained, then dead. Authorities must promptly conduct an effective 
investigation into Safarali Sangov’s death (AI Index: EUR 
60/002/2011). 