Greece:  Open Letter to the Prosecutor for the Supreme Court: Impunity following threats and abusive and racist messages against Messrs. Thanassis Tartis and Panayote Dimitras
May  7, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2012 / MayGreece: Open Letter to the Prosecutor for the Supreme Court: Impunity following threats and abusive and racist messages against Messrs. Thanassis Tartis and Panayote Dimitras
OPEN LETTER - THE 
OBSERVATORY
GREECE: Open Letter to Mr. 
Ioannis-Spyridon Tentes, Prosecutor for the Supreme Court
 
Geneva-Paris, May 7, 2012
 
Re: Impunity following threats and 
abusive and racist messages against Messrs. Thanassis Tartis and Panayote 
DimitrasDear Prosecutor,The Observatory for the 
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human 
Rights (FIDH), is writing to urge you to order a thorough and impartial 
investigation into threats and abusive and racist messages made against Messrs. 
Thanassis Tartis, attorney and legal counsel working for the 
Greek Helsinki Monitor (GHM), and Panayote Dimitras, GHM 
Spokesperson and a member of OMCT General Assembly.The Observatory 
recalls that on September 20, 2011, a hearing in the trial against 
coastguardsmen was held before the Naval Court of Piraneus for violation of 
Article 2 of the Antiracism Law 927/79 following two complaints filed by GHM and 
the Group of Lawyers for the Rights of Migrants and Refugees in relation to 
racist statements expressed publicly by 39 members of the Hellenic Coast Guard 
during their participation in the 2010 Greek Independence Day Parade, on March 
25, 2010. Following the hearing, Mr. Thanassis Tartis, attorney for civil 
claimants, was pursued by supporters of the coastguardsmen who were shouting 
outside the courthouse racist slogans, to express their support with the 
coastguardsmen under trial and managed to escape. The police, which was 
witnessing the incident, failed to react to protect those 
threatened[1].Subsequently, hundreds of abusive and racist messages 
appeared on the Internet directed at Messrs. Thanassis Tartis, Panayote 
Dimitras, the initial plaintiff and prosecution witness who submitted one of the 
two original complaints and testified during the preliminary examination, and 
Pavlos Voskopoulos, a representative of the Macedonian minority in Greece, whose 
claims for racism were rejected by the court. Many of these messages contained 
direct threats against their physical integrity and even their lives, as well as 
incitements to commit violence against them, including killing them. On 
September 29, 2011, the three men decided to file a complaint for the 
threatening messages. At a hearing held on December 16, 2011 in the same 
trial, verbal insults and threats were again directed against Messrs. Thanassis 
Tartis and Panayote Dimitras by unknown persons both outside and inside the 
courtroom. These verbal assaults culminated in a violent physical attack against 
them during Mr. Dimitras’ testimony before the bench, in an area of the 
courtroom that is normally inaccessible to the public. Mr. Dimitras was punched 
in the head and knocked off balance. Mr. Tartis narrowly avoided the assailant’s 
fist. This caused the interruption of Mr. Dimitras’ testimony and the trial 
itself. Surprisingly, no sanctions were however imposed against the perpetrators 
of these incidents. This was followed by hundreds of posts on the 
Internet in praise of the incidents, and of the physical attack in particular. 
There were also threats of new attacks, not only against Messrs. Thanassis 
Tartis and Panayote Dimitras but also against the Naval Court of Piraeus, in the 
event of a conviction.The Observatory expresses its concern about the 
fact that, as of today, no sanctions have been imposed on the perpetrators of 
these threats and acts of harassment against Messrs. Thanassis Tartis and 
Panayote Dimitras. This failure to investigate properly and sanction offenders 
and protect GHM members seem to merely aim at intimidating and sanctioning their 
human rights activities in defence of minorities subjected to racism. 
Accordingly, the Observatory strongly urges you, Mr. Prosecutor, to put 
an end to this climate of impunity by ordering a thorough and impartial 
investigation into the above-mentioned acts in order to identify all those 
responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial tribunal and apply to 
them the penal sanctions provided by the law.We express our sincere hope 
that you will take these considerations and requests into account.Yours 
sincerely,
 
Gerald STABEROCKOMCT Secretary 
General Souhayr BelhassenFIDH President [1] See 
Observatory Urgent Appeal GRE 001/1011/OBS 120, issued on October 26, 
2011. 