OMCT statement to the Open ended Working Group on the Draft Optional Protocol to the ICESCR
March  3, 2006
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Statements / 2006 / MarchOMCT statement to the Open ended Working Group on the Draft Optional Protocol to the ICESCRMme Chair,  The World Organisation Against Torture would like to renew its support for the joint submissions and statements made by the NGO coalition for an Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and joins in urging the Working Group to begin drafting the optional protocol.   For over 20 years, OMCT has fought to eliminate torture and we have learned that, for the effective elimination of torture, it is essential to effectively protect economic, social and cultural rights. And the Optional Protocol is a very important step in that direction.   Guaranteeing economic, social and cultural rights can eliminate powerful root causes of violence. This was demonstrated in a recent study carried out by OMCT and in the conclusions of an international conference called to consider that study.  The study, entitled “Poverty, inequality and violence: the economic, social and cultural root causes of violence, including torture, a human rights perspective”, contains an extensive academic analysis of the correlations between violence and socio-economic inequalities based on ILO data, a chapter on access to resources and domestic violence in South Africa and one examining the relationship between economic recession and violence in the developed economy of Sweden.  It also contains in-depth analyses of the situation in five countries (Argentina, Egypt, Nepal, South Africa and Uzbekistan) along with case studies examining specific instances in those countries prepared in collaboration with national human rights partners. These country and case studies showed the intimate relationship between violations of economic, social and cultural rights and torture and other forms of violence. The study is available, here, on the OMCT website.  The study was considered by the International Conference “Poverty, Inequality and Violence: Is there a human rights response?” organized by OMCT in Geneva last October. Among the participants were human rights defenders from over 40 countries. Ms. Louise Arbour, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, delivered the Conference’s keynote address. Participants in the conference underlined the importance of the justiciability of economic, social and cultural rights to their protection.  The study concluded, and the conference agreed, that there is a clear link between economic, social and cultural factors and violence. This gives us a solid foundation for actions aimed at preventing violence by acting on the root causes found in failures to respect economic, social and cultural rights. The question is no longer, “is there a link?”, but “how do we address that link to prevent violence?”  An important way to address the link, and reduce violence, is the adoption and implementation of a comprehensive Optional Protocol and we encourage the Working Group to take up the task of drafting the protocol.  Finally, OMCT wishes to thank the members of the Working Group for their attention.     -------------------------- 