Kyrgyzstan:  Confirmation of the sentencing of Mr. Azimjan Askarov to life imprisonment
December 22, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2011 / DecemberKyrgyzstan: Confirmation of the sentencing of Mr. Azimjan Askarov to life imprisonment
PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
KYRGYZSTAN: Confirmation of the sentencing of Mr. Azimjan 
Askarov 
to life imprisonment
 
Geneva-Paris, December 22, 2011. The Observatory for the 
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human 
Rights (FIDH), condemns the confirmation of the sentencing 
of human 
rights defender
Azimjan Askarov 
to life imprisonment.
 
On December 20, 
2011, the Kyrgyz Supreme Court upheld the sentence to life imprisonment of 
Mr. Azimjan Askarov, a well-known ethnic Uzbek defender and 
Director of the human rights organisation “Vozdukh” (Air), which has been 
documenting police ill-treatment of detainees and monitoring the human rights 
situation in the province of Jalal-Abad, in particular the violent events in 
Bazar Korgon in June 2010. Mr. Askarov was found guilty of killing a policeman 
during violent clashes between Kyrgyz and Uzbeks in the south of Kyrgyzstan, 
following an unfair and politically motivated trial.
 
On December 21, 2011, Mr. Askarov, who remains 
arbitrarily detained in prison colony 47 in Bishkek, announced in a letter to the international community and international 
NGOs that he would start a hunger strike if a new investigation was not opened 
before January 9, 2012.
 
The Observatory recalls that on September 15, 2010, Mr. Azimjan 
Askarov was sentenced to life imprisonment after he was found guilty of killing 
a policeman. Other ethnic Uzbeks were also sentenced to long-term imprisonment. 
On November 10, 2010, the court of appeal upheld Mr. Askarov’s life 
sentence following a trial marked by irregularities.
 
The Observatory considers that the whole judicial case against Mr. 
Azimjan Askarov merely aims at sanctioning his human rights activities, and 
remains deeply concerned with the continuing arbitrary detention of Mr. Azimjan 
Askarov as well as with alleged acts of torture and ill-treatments he was 
subjected to while in custody.
 
Accordingly, the Observatory calls upon the authorities of Kyrgyzstan 
to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of 
Mr. Azimjan Askarov and to ensure his immediate and unconditional release since 
his detention is arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning his human rights 
activities.
 
More generally, the Observatory reiterates its call for the full 
respect of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 
accordance with the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, and 
urges the Kyrgyz authorities to conform with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, and to ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Kyrgyzstan.
 
For more information, please contact:
·    OMCT: Delphine 
Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39
·    FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 