Occupied Palestinian Territory :  Palestine Autonomous Areas : release and forthcoming trial of lawyer Nasir al Rafa'ee
November 13, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Occupied Palestinian Territory  / 2001 / NovemberOccupied Palestinian Territory : Palestine Autonomous Areas : release and forthcoming trial of lawyer Nasir al Rafa'eeCase PAL 050401.1 Follow-up of case PAL 050401 Release   Geneva, November 13, 2001  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Palestine Autonomous Areas.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), a member of the OMCT network, of the release and forthcoming trial of lawyer Nasir al Rafa'ee in the Palestine Autonomous Areas.  According to the information received, Nasir al Rafa’ee was charged of “forging documents” and a first hearing has been scheduled for January 4th, 2002 before the Ramallah’s Magistrate’s Court.  Mr. Al Rafa’ee was released on October 8th, 2001, after his lawyer submitted a petition to the Ramallah Palestinian High Court on June 11th, 2001, in which he asked the Court to check the legality of his client’s detention. It is believed that the Magistrate’s Court in Ramallah had already ordered the release of Mr. Al Rafa’ee, but that the order had not been implemented, therefore forcing Mr. Rafa’ee’s lawyer to go to the Palestinian High Court to request the release.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, the Palestinian Military Intelligence arrested Nasir Al Rafa'ee at a court in the West Bank town of Ramallah on March 24th, 2001. Following his arrest, he was kept in detention incommunicado at the Ramallah Military Intelligence headquarters. Mr. Al Rifa'ee was refused access to legal counsel, his family and medical care during the first days of his detention. He had an history of stomach ulcers and spinal problems.  Remarks  OMCT wishes to thank all those institutions, organisations and individuals who intervened on the detainees’ behalf.      Action requested   Please write to the authorities in Palestine Autonomous Areas urging them to:  i.	ensure that Mr. Rafa’ee is provided with a fair trial and that his procedural rights are guaranteed at all time; ii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses   ·	President Yasser Arafat, Palestinian Authority, Al-Muntada, Gaza, Fax: 00 972 7 282 2365  ·	Mr. Freih Abu Meddein, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, Abu Khadra Building, Omar El Mukhtar Street, Gaza, Fax: 00 972 7 286 7109  ·	Mr. Khaled Al-Qidreh, Attorney General for the State Security Courts, Police Headquarters, Gaza, Fax: 00 972 7 282 4253  Please also write to the representations of the Palestine Autonomous Areas in your respective country.  Geneva, November 13, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 