Uzbekistan:  Uzbekistan: Arbitrary arrests of 20 women demonstrator
January  4, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2002 / JanuaryUzbekistan: Uzbekistan: Arbitrary arrests of 20 women demonstratorVIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN Case UZB 040102.VAW Arbitrary Arrests  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights, a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrest and detention of more than 20 women.   According to the information received, on December 26th, 2001, more than 20 women were protesting against the use of torture and ill-treatment of their relatives, who are convicted for their participation in “Hizb ut-Tahrir” party, in Tashkent, near the “Detskii mir” shop in the market on Chorsu Square. They also demanded their release in view of the fact that they were innocent. According to the information received, many of the protesting women referred to their difficult situation since the arrest and conviction of their husbands. They have no money to feed their children, as they are unemployed.  After two hours of demonstrating, members of the militia forced the women into a bus and took them to an unknown destination. According to a relative of one of the protesting women they were taken to the Shaihantahur regional Department of Internal Affairs of Tashkent. The women’s demonstration on December 26th is the second one that has been held over the last month. The current situation of the women detained by the members of the militia officers is unknown.      Action requested  Please write to the Uzbek authorities urging them to:  i.	Immediately disclose the whereabouts of the over 20 women that have been arrested and detained, and guarantee their physical and psychological integrity at all times; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	guarantee all human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with to the international human rights standards.   Addresses ·	President of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Islam Abduganievich KARIMOV, Respublika Uzbekistan, 700000 g. Tashkent, pr. Uzbekistansky, Rezidentsia prezidenta, Prezidentu Respubliki Uzbekistan, KARIMOVU I.A. Fax: ( 998 71) 139 53 15 ·	Minister of Justice of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Siradzhuddin MIRSAFAYEV, Respublika Uzbekistan,700047 g. Tashkent. ul. Sayilgokh, 5 Ministerstvo yustitsii Respubliki Uzbekistan Ministru MIRSAFAYEVU S. Fax: (998 71) 133 51 76 ·	Oliy Majlis Commissioner for Human Rights, Sayora RASHIDOVA (Ms), Respublika Uzbekistan, 700008 g. Tashkent, pl. Mustakillik, 2 Oliy Majlis Respubliki Uzbekistan, Upolnomochennoy po pravam, cheloveka pri Oliy Majlis, RASHIDOVOY S. Fax: (998 71) 139 85 55 Please also write to the embassies of Uzbekistan your respective country.  Geneva, 4 January 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply 