Saudi Arabia:  Saudi Arabia: release of a mother and her three children
December  4, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2001 / DecemberSaudi Arabia: Saudi Arabia: release of a mother and her three childrenCase SAU 060598.1 / SAU 060598.1.CC Release   Geneva, December 4th, 2001  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Saudi Arabia.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by REDRESS of the release of a mother and her three children following 10 months of detention in Saudi Arabia and of their subsequent arrival in the United Kingdom, in late-October 2001.  According to the information received, on July 27th, 1998, Farsana Kausar (33) and her three children, Mohammed Ijaz (9), Fakeyha Ijaz (7) and Mohammed Assad Ijaz (3) were released from an undisclosed detention centre in of Saudi Arabia.  They had been arrested at their home, reportedly by General Directorate of Investigation officials, on October 8th, 1997.  Following their release they returned to Pakistan on July 27th, 1998, but in late-October 2001, they arrived in the United Kingdom, where they rejoined Ahmed Mohammed Ajaz, the husband of Farsana Kausar and the children’s father.  Remarks  OMCT welcomes the release of Mrs. Farsana Kausar, Mohammed Ijaz, Fakeyha Ijaz and Mohammed Assad Ijaz, and wishes to thank all those institutions, organisations and individuals who intervened on their behalf.  Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, on 8th October 1997, the Saudi authorities entered the home of Farsana Kausar (33) and her three children, Mohammed Ijaz (9) Fakeyha Ijaz (7) female and Mohammed Assad Ijaz (3). They were taken from their home and detained in an unknown location in the Eastern Province.  The Saudi authorities, allegedly the General Directorate of Investigation, apparently continued to interrogate the mother although no charges were ever proffered. The children were all detained in a separate cell from their  mother and the youngest child apparently become ill as a result of the food provided and was hospitalised for a number of days. Following this, they were briefly returned to their house where they were effectively placed under house arrest. After 10 days they were transferred to an undisclosed detention centre.   It has been alleged that the reason for the detention was an attempt, by the authorities, to force the father of the family, Ahmed Mohammed Ajaz, who was at the time of the detention visiting his family in Pakistan, to return to Saudi Arabia. The authorities had allegedly connected Ahmed Mohammed Ajaz with the financial mis-dealings of his employer who was formally closely connected to the ruling family.  In connection with this, it is believed that his employer has escaped the authorities and is now in residence in Pakistan.  Geneva, December 4th, 2001 