Tunisia:  Counter-terrorism law to protect from torture and ill-treatment
May 31, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Tunisia / 2013 / MayTunisia: Counter-terrorism law to protect from torture and ill-treatment

Counter-terrorism law to protect from torture and ill-treatment
Tunis, 30 May 2013
Today, the
OMCT called for any new counter-terrorism law and policy to effectively prevent
torture, cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment. 
‘The debate on a new counter-terrorism law in
Tunisia provides the opportunity to mark a clear departure from the past, to comply
with human rights and provide effective safeguards against torture and other
forms of ill-treatment’, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General,
addressing a consultation hosted by the Tunisian Minister for Human Rights and
Transitional Justice.  Access to a lawyer
from the moment of arrest (garde à vue) and judicial oversight over detention
are but two of the fundamental safeguards to prevent abuse. ‘The adoption of a national preventive mechanism (NPM) on torture presently
under consideration would be another important step securing unhindered access
to any place of detention, including national security detention’, stated
Gerald Staberock. 
The OMCT
recalled the legacy of the 2003 counter-terrorism law, which resulted in systematic
and widespread torture, enforced disappearances and other serious human rights
violations. The OMCT reiterated some lessons learnt from global counter-terrorism:
to clearly separate law enforcement and intelligence powers, to proceed with
security sector reform and to ensure full legal and democratic accountability
of any element of the security infrastructure. 
‘Acts of terrorism attack the very values that
human rights law seeks to protect. Threats of terrorist acts need to be taken
seriously. One of the best protection measures against such threats is the
protection and empowerment of actors striving for an open and tolerant democratic
society,’ he noted. 
Any new
counter-terrorism law needs to clearly prescribe criminal offences (which the
2003 law failed to do) and treat them within the ordinary criminal justice
system. From OMCT’s global experience,
it is vital to align law enforcement with the rule of law to enable
investigations into complex criminality. Equally critical is reinforcing the
independence of the judiciary, which would enable the justice system to address
acts of terrorism in the future with full respect for the right to a fair trial.
The OMCT welcomes
the commitment articulated by the Ministry of Human Rights and Transitional
Justice to address terrorist acts with full respect for human rights and for the
absolute prohibition of torture, cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment. The
OMCT considers of great importance the continuous engagement of civil society
in the elaboration of a new counter-terrorism law.
 For further information, please contact us at +216 71 322 561 (Tunis) or
+41 22 809 4923 (Geneva). 