Sudan: Minor girl raped during attack on passenger bus by men in military uniform
July  6, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2005 / JulySudan: Sudan: Minor girl raped during attack on passenger bus by men in military uniformCase SDN 060705.VAW.CCViolence Against Women / Child Concern Attack / Ill-treatment / Rape   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention concerning the following situation in Sudan. Brief description of the situationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that on 14 June 2005, six armed men in military uniform attacked a passenger bus that was travelling between Mahagriya to Nyala town. The men robbed and beat the passengers, including two elderly women and a female child. Two of the armed men raped a 16 year old girl (name withheld) from the Zaghawa tribe who was traveling with her brother.  According to the information received, after the attack the passengers continued their journey to Nyala. In Nyala, the 16 year old girl reported the rape to the police who sent her to the Police hospital for a medical examination. The examining doctor concluded that no rape had occurred under Form 8.  Following the police refusal to file a case, the victim’s brother took her to receive medical treatment at SOAT’s partner organisation in Nyala, the Amel Centre for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Victims. As part of its rape documentation, the Amel Centre referred the victim to a gynecologist for a medical examination. The medical report confirmed that he girl had been raped and sustained physical injuries. The victim is currently receiving medical treatment at the Centre.    OMCT recalls that the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, in article 4(c), states that States should "exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and, in accordance with national legislation, punish acts of violence against women, whether those acts are perpetrated by the State or by private persons." Requested Action:Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	launch prompt, thorough and impartial investigations into the attack of these passengers and the rape of the 16 year old girl, in order to find those responsible for any violations of human rights and to bring them to justice and apply the penal and/or adminstrive sanctions as provided by law; ii.	ensure women and girls the right to be free from discrimination, including violence, in line with the international laws and standards; iii.	ratify the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against Women as well as the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; iv.	guarantee the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards. Addresses:His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 783223 Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 788941 Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affair, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779383  Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 770883 His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mohamed Al- Hassan Ahmed Al-Haj, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 47, 1207 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail: mission.sudan@bluewin.ch  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, 6 July 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 