Israel:  Death in custody must be immediately investigated
February 28, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2013 / FebruaryIsrael: Death in custody must be immediately investigatedIsrael: Death in custody must be investigated1 page / 97 KB
PRESS RELEASE
ISRAEL: Death in custody must be immediately investigated
Geneva, 28 February 2013. The World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its grave concerns about the allegations of
torture and the subsequent death in custody on 23 February 2013 of Mr. Arafat
Jaradat, a 30-year-old Palestinian student, who was detained in Megiddo Prison.
OMCT urges the competent Israeli authorities to immediately carry out a prompt,
independent and impartial investigation into the circumstances of his death
according to the Investigation into Circumstances of Death Law. 
On 18 February 2013, the Israeli Occupying Forces
(IOF) and General Security Service (GSS) reportedly arrested Mr. Arafat Jaradat
from his home in the town of Sa’eer, near Al-Khalil (Hebron) alleging that he
had thrown stones at cars from a nearby settlement. He was allegedly severely
beaten by the IOF during his arrest. He was then taken to Jalameh Interrogation
Centre in the northern West Bank before being transferred to Megiddo Prison. 
According to his lawyer, Mr. Arafat Jaradat was
tortured during his interrogation, including being forced to sit for long hours
in stress positions with his hands shackled behind his back. During a court
hearing on 21 February 2013, his lawyer requested that Mr. Jaradat be given a
medical examination, including because he was suffering from pain in his back.
However, the judge reportedly ruled to extend his detention for a further
twelve days and ordered that the medical officials in the interrogation centre
examine his health conditions and report the results to the GSS and the court.
Mr. Jaradat reportedly died two days later, on 23 February 2013, in Megiddo
Prison, under conditions that remain unclear. 
Mr. Jaradat’s death is the latest example of the
ongoing human rights violations committed by the Israeli security forces on Palestinian
detainees and prisoners. OMCT has been informed that, since 2003, there have
been several hundreds complaints of torture in the Israeli Prisons, none of
which have been investigated. On 21 January 2013, another Palestinian prisoner
Mr. Ashraf Abu Dra died from a fatal coma shortly after his release due to a
medical negligence during his detention. 
“The structural impunity of the intelligence service
and the persistence of any legal accountability for acts of torture and other
human rights violations must end” said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of
OMCT. 
OMCT supports the call of its member organisations, notably The Public
Committee Against Torture (PCATI) and Addameer, to immediately open an independent
and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the death of Mr. Arafat
Jaradat.  
“The Israeli investigative authorities must refrain from resorting to
unlawful means of interrogation and must respect fundamental safeguards against
torture and ill-treatment” added Gerald Staberock. 
OMCT recalls to the Israeli authorities that the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment requires that each State Party shall take effective legislative,
administrative, judicial or other measures to prevent acts of torture in any
territory under its jurisdiction (Article 2 a)) and that each State Party shall
keep under systematic review interrogation rules, instructions, methods and
practices as well as arrangements for the custody and treatment of persons
subjected to any form of arrest, detention or imprisonment in any territory
under its jurisdiction, with a view to preventing any cases of torture (Article
11). 
OMCT also calls on the Israeli authorities to
immediately release all administrative detainees detained without charges or
trial and to take immediate measures in order to ensure that the
hunger-striking prisoners receive proper medical treatment in an adequate
medical facility, and that they are treated humanely under all circumstances. 
Contact: 
Alexandra Kossin,
Tel. +41 22 809 49 39 