Thailand:  Release of six of the seven Neo Democracy Movement activists
July  6, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / JulyThailand: Release of six of the seven Neo Democracy Movement activists
New information
THA 002 / 0716 / OBS 053.1
Release /

Arbitrary detention/

Judicial harassment

Thailand
July 6, 2016

 

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, 
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in Thailand.

 

New information:

 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the release of 
six of the seven Neo Democracy Movement (NDM)[1]activists who had been detained at the 
Bangkok Remand Prison since June 23, 2016, namely Messrs. Rangsiman 
Rome, Thirayut Napnaram, Somsakol Thongsuksai, Yuttana 
Dasri, Nantapong Panmat, and Anan Loket(see 
background information).

 

According to the information received, on July 6 at around 8.30 am, the 
Department of Corrections released six of the seven democracy activists, 
after on July 5, 2016, at approximately 3.15pm, the Bangkok Military Court 
rejected apolice request to extend the detention of the seven activists for 
another 12 days.

 

Mr. Korakoch Saengyenpan was not released and was 
transported to the Thonburi Police Station because of previous charges he 
faced in connection with another case against 11 pro-democracy activists who 
undertook an “advocacy trip” to demand the opening of an 
investigation into alleged corruption in the construction of 
the military-sponsored Rajabhakti Park in Prachuab Kirikhan province in 
December 2015[2].

 

It has been reported that the majority of the detainees lost weight during 
the span of their custody. Most notably, Mr. Rangsiman Rome is said to have 
lost at least 10 kg during his 12-day detention.


The Observatory welcomes the decision of the Bangkok Military Court 
and the imminent release of the six above-mentioned activists but condemns 
the ongoing detention of Mr. Korakoch Saengyenpan.The Observatory calls upon 
the Thai authorities to drop all charges against the 13 NDM activists (see 
background information) and to put an end to all acts of harassment, 
including at the judicial level, against them and all human right defenders 
in Thailand.

 

Until all charges are dropped, the Observatory urges the Thai authorities 
to ensure all judicial proceedings against the activistsare carried out in 
full compliance with their right to a fair trial, as protected under 
international law. Furthermore, the Observatory urges the Thai authorities 
to grant adequate reparations to human right defenders who have been 
arbitrarily detained.

 

Background Information: 

 

On June 23, 2016, at around 5.30 pm, 13 activists from the Neo Democracy 
Movement (NDM), namely Messrs. Rangsiman Rome[3],Korakoch Saengyenpan, Anan Loket, 
Thirayut Napnaram, Rackchart Wong-arthichart,  
Yuttana Dasri,Worawut Butmat, Somsakol 
Thongsuksai,Nantapong Panmatand MissesTueanjai Waengkham, Pimai 
Ratwongsa, Konchanok Tanakhun and Phanthip Saengathit, were 
arrested by military personnel at the market of Kan Keha Bang Pli Community 
on the eastern outskirts of Bangkok in Samut Prakan province, while handing 
out leaflets that urged voters to reject the draft constitution in a 
referendum to be held on August 7, 2016.

 

All the activists were apprehended and taken to the Bang Sao Thong Police 
Station and their campaign material was confiscated. They were held in 
police custody overnight and were all charged with violating the Head of the 
National Council for Peace and Order (NCPO) Order no. 3/2558[4], which bans gatherings of five or more 
people, and Article 61 of the 2016 Constitutional Referendum Act[5], which bans the dissemination 
of “false information” about the draft charter with the aim of 
influencing voters. If found guilty, all 13 could face up to 10 years’ 
imprisonment, a fine of up to 200,000 Baht (approx. 5,125 Euro), and have 
their right to vote revoked by court for up to 10 years under the Referendum 
Act.

 

On June 24, 2016, the 13 activists were brought to their pre-trial remand 
hearing at the Bangkok Military Court, where the police asked the court to 
have them remanded for 12 days in order to provide sufficient time to 
conduct the investigation, as well as for fear of repetition of the crime. 
The court dismissed the motion filed by the defendants’ attorney to 
object to the police request and approved the pre-trial remand.

 

Six of the activists were released on a bail of 50,000 Baht (approx. 1,280 
Euro) each, under the condition that they do “not get involved with 
any act aimed to instigate, disrupt public order, persuade, compel people to 
rise up by any means possible in order to make possible any public assembly 
which may bring about public disorder or cause any harm or infringement on 
peace, order or the moral high ground of the people or any act which may 
induce people to commit a legal offence”.

 

The other seven activists did not submit bail requests, arguing that they 
had done nothing wrong and that they would not accept conditions for their 
release. They were remanded in custody at the Bangkok Remand Prison until 
July 5, 2016, when the defendants’ attorney is expected to file 
another motion to object to a further remand.

 

Actions requested:

 

Please write to the authorities of Thailand asking them to:

 

i.Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Korakoch Saengyenpan, since 
his detention is arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning his legitimate 
human rights activities;

 

ii. Immediately and unconditionally drop all charges against the 13 
activists, putting an end to all acts of judicial harassment against 
them and all human rights defenders in Thailand;

 

iii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of the 13 activists;

 

iv. Repeal the Head of the NCPO Order no. 3/2015 banning gatherings of 
more than five people;

 

v. Guarantee that the exercise of freedom of expression and assembly are 
not prosecuted under Article 116 of the Thai Criminal Code;

 

vi. Put an end to the prosecution of civilians in military courts in 
accordance with international human rights law that prohibits governments 
from using military courts to try civilians when civilian courts are 
functioning;

 

vii. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 
9, 1998, especially its Article 1 which states that “everyone has 
the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and 
to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights 
and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels”, and Article 12.2, which provides that 
“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the 
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually 
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, 
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or 
her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present 
Declaration”;

 

viii. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Thailand.

 

Addresses:

 

·     Gen Prayuth Chan-ocha, Prime Minister of 
Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131

·     Don Pramudwinai, Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th

·     Gen Paiboon Khumchaya, Minister of 
Justice, Fax: +66 (0) 2 953 0503

·     Pol Gen Somyot Poompanmoung, 
Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai Police, Fax: +66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 
(0) 2 251 8702

·     Mr. Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of the 
National Human Rights Commission of Thailand; Email: help@nhrc.or.th

·     H.E. Mr. Thani Thongphakdi, 
Ambassador,Permanent Mission of Thailand to the United Nations in Geneva, 
Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 715 10 00 / 10 02; Email:  
mission.thailand@ties.itu.int

·     H.E. Ms. Busaya Mathelin, Ambassador, 
Embassy of Thailand in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 648 30 66; 
Email:  
thaibxl@thaiembassy.be

 

Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Thailand in your 
respective country. 