Cameroon:  Ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Célestin Yandal, President of the Touboro Youth Collective
June 26, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2014 / JuneCameroon: Ongoing arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Célestin Yandal, President of the Touboro Youth CollectiveNew informationCMR 001 / 0314 / OBS 018.1Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassmentCameroonJune 26, 2014 The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and 
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new 
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following 
situation in Cameroon.
New information :
The Observatory was 
informed by reliable sources  of the continuing arbitrary detention and 
judicial harassment of Mr. Célestin Yandal, President of the Touboro 
Youth Collective (Collectif des jeunes de Touboro), an organisation defending the rights of young people 
in the Adamaoua region.

According to the information received, on 19 June 2014, for the 
fifth time in a row, Mr Célestin was not able to appear before the Prosecutor of Tcholliré in the context of his trial. The hearings were 
regularly sent back, in the absence of a mandate allowing the human 
rights defender to leave the Garoua prison grounds, where he has been 
detained since 5 December 2013.

Mr Célestin Yandal is kept in preventive detention since his arrest 
on 23 November 2013, and is being prosecuted for 5 different charges. 
Three fall within the competence of the prosecutor, namely « destruction
 of the Head of state’s effigys during the 30 September 2013 legislative
 and municipal elections », « destruction of the Lamido1 de Rey-Bouba 
barrier », and « simple threats and violation of a Djavor official’s 
home » ; and two within the competence of the investigating judge, 
namely « murder attempt on a so-called Abdou, one of Lamido’s 
supporters », and « aggravated theft at a Dogari’s house (Lamido 
soldier), who declares that Mr Yandal and his colleagues have assaulted 
him and stole 92 000 FCFA from him » ( 140 euros).

The Observatory is concerned by the continuing arbitrary detention 
and judicial harassment of Mr Yandal, which are based on false 
accusations aiming solely at punishing activities supporting of human 
rights.

Background information: 

On 23 November 2013, Mr Yandal was placed in detention at the 
Ngaoundéré police station, where he was expecting to meet privately with
 one of his relative working at the police station, on the advice of a 
policeman who was not wearing a uniform he met a few hours earlier. 
Mr Yandal was on his way back from a journey to Douala where he talked 
with members of the Central African Human rights defenders Network (REDHAC) on 19 November regarding the violations suffered by several 
young persons from Touboro and conducted by the Rey Bouba Lamido, second
 vice-President of the cameroonese senate. The latter had indeed ordered
 the local authorities, and in particular the prosecutor of the 
Tcholliré Republic, to arrest fourteen young people from this community 
on charges of having caused public unrest during altercations with the 
Lamido supporters who had come to steal from the people of the 
community.

Detained at the Ngaoundéré police station from 23 November to 5 
December 2013, he was transferred in the night of the 5 December at 2 o’
 clock in the morning from Ngaoundéré to Tcholliré, without specific 
reasons , in order to appear before the Tcholliré Prosecutor, who first 
informed him of his liberation, before arresting him again as he was 
leaving the court, informing him of his detention warrant at the 
Tcholliré prison.

Following his appearance before the Tcholliré prosecutor, Mr Yandal 
was transferred on 5 December 2013 to the central prison of Garoua, 
officially to ensure « his security ». He then appeared for the first 
time on 16 January 2014 before the Northern Court of Appeal, a hearing 
during which his lawyer requested his pre-trial release, presenting all 
the guarantees required by the law. The Court has however rejected this 
release request, and sent back the hearing, on the grounds that « the 
Tcholliré prosecutor had not sent his conclusions ».

On 26 February, in the framework of a rogatory commission put in 
place by the public prosecutor’s office, Mr Yandal was heared by the 
investigating judge, who informed him of his next appearance before the 
Tcholliré Prosecutor on 20 March 2014. His lawyer immediately took the 
matter to the supreme court to ask that his client be judged at Garoua 
or in any jurisdiction other than Tcholliré, arguing that the Tcholliré 
prosecutor could not be impartial in this case, and that his client 
would hence not benefit of a fair trial within this jurisdiction. Since 
then, the hearings are regularly sent back.

Actions requested: 

The Observatory urges you to write to the cameroonese authorities asking them to :

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Mr Célestin Yandal and of all human rights defenders in 
Cameroon ;

ii. Release Mr Yandal immediately and unconditionnally since his 
detention is arbitrary and only aims at sanctioning his human rights 
activities ;
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment against Mr Yandal as well as all human rights defenders in Cameroon ; 
iv. Comply with the provisions of the Declaration on human rights 
defenders, adopted by the United Nations general assembly on 9 December 
1998, and more specifically 

- its article 1 which states that Everyone has the right, individually
 and in association with others, to promote the protection and 
realisation of all human rights and of all fundamental liberties at the 
national at international level »

- its article 9 stipulating that « everyone has the right, individually and in association with others : a) to know, seek, obtain, receive and hold information about all human 
rights and all fundamental freedoms, including having access to 
information as to how those rights and freedoms are given effect in 
legislative, judicial or administrative systems ; b) in accordance with 
international instruments concerning human rights and other relevant 
international instruments, to publish, communicate to others or share 
freely ideas, information and knowledge on all human rights and all 
fundamental freedoms c) to study, discuss, appreciate and evaluate the 
respect, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and of all 
fundamental freedoms and, by these means and other appropriate means, to
 draw public attention to those matters ;

- and its article 12.2 stipulating that « the state takes all 
necessary measures to ensure that the competent authorities protect all 
persons, individually and in association with others, from all violence,
 threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure discrimination, pressure and 
all other arbitrary action in the framework of the lawful exercise of 
the rights aimed in the present Declaration » ;

v. more generally, comply with the provisions of the universal 
declaration on human rights and international and regional instruments 
concerning human rights ratified by Cameroon.

Addresses : 

Mr. Paul Biya, President of the Republic, Palais de l’Unité, 1000 Yaoundé, Cameroun, Fax +237 222 08 70

Mr. Philémon Yang, Prime minister and Head of Government, Primature 
du Cameroun, Fax : +237 22 23 57 35 et courriel : spm@spm.gov.cm

Mr. Laurent Esso, Minister of Justice, Garde des Sceaux, Ministry of Justice, 1000 Yaoundé‚ Cameroun, Fax : + 237 223 00 05

Mr. Alain Edgard Mebe Ngo’o, Deputy Minister to the Presidency of 
the Republic in charge of Defense B.P1000 Yaoundé‚ Cameroun, Fax +237 
223 59 71

Mr. SADI René Emmanuel, Territorial Administration Decentralisation Minister Fax : + 237 222 37 35

President of the National Commission on Human Rights and Liberties 
(CNDHL), Tel : +237 222 61 17, Fax : +237 222 60 82, E-mail : 
cndhl@iccnet.cm

Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cameroon to the United Nations 
office in Geneva, rue du Nant 6, 1207 Genève, Suisse, Fax : + 41 22 736 
21 65, Email : mission.cameroun@bluewin.ch

Republic of Cameroon ambassy in Brussels, 131 av. Brugmann, 1190 
Forest, Belgium, Tel : + 32 2 345 18 70 ; Fax : + 32 2 344 57 35 ; 
Email : ambassade.cameroun@skynet.be

Please also write to the diplomatic representations of the Republic of Cameroon in your respective countries.

***

Paris-Geneva, 26 June 2014

Please inform the Observatory of all actions undertaken by indicating the code of the Appeal. 