Myanmar (ex-Burma):  It is time to free all human rights defenders and stop ongoing arbitrary arrests and imprisonment
December 17, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2013 / DecemberMyanmar (ex-Burma): It is time to free all human rights defenders and stop ongoing arbitrary arrests and imprisonment

Paris-Geneva, December 17, 2013. The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of FIDH and
OMCT, welcomes the latest release of prisoners of opinion in Burma/Myanmar but
deplores the re-arrests of human rights defenders Ko Htin Kyaw and Aye Thein
within hours of their “release”.
 
On
December 11, 2013, Burma’s President Thein Sein ordered the release of 41
additional political prisoners in his latest amnesty. Among those freed were
human rights defenders Ko Htin Kyaw, leader of the Movement for
Democracy Current Force (MDCF), a community-based organisation that represents
grass-roots communities and struggles against land-grabbing and other human
rights violations, and Mr. Moe Thway, leader of the Generation Wave, a
network of human rights defenders that campaigns for civil and political
rights, including the signature of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights by Burma. Mr Moe Thway was within ten days of completing his
full prison term at the time of the presidential pardon. 
 
However,
it was reported that Ko Htin Kyaw was re-arrested on the same day on a sedition
charge. Another human rights defender, Aye Thein, was also re-arrested
on more charges, including one of sedition. Labour activist Aye Thein had been
jailed for protesting against the relocation of a street vendors’ market in
Mandalay. Meanwhile, recently released human rights defender Naw Ohn Hla, leading member of the Democracy and
Peace Women Network, also found herself back behind bars on “religious
offences”.
 
In
addition, approximately 40 political prisoners remain behind bars and at least
200 people, including farmers who protested against land confiscation, are
awaiting trial. Many are facing charges under the Peaceful Gathering and
Demonstration Law, which prescribes up to one year in prison for those who
demonstrate without obtaining the authorities’ prior permission.
 
“The amnesty also failed to address the dire
situation of Rohingya in Arakan State as the government failed to release
Messrs. Tun Aung and Kyaw Hla Aung, two defenders of the rights
of the Rohingyas in Arakan/Rakhine State who remain
detained along with hundreds of Rohingya following sectarian violence in 2012”,
FIDH President Karim Lahidji deplored. In August and
October 2013, various courts in Northern Arakan State sentenced a total of 115
Rohingya to lengthy prison terms for their alleged involvement in last year’s
communal unrest.
 
FIDH
Secretary General and Coordinator of Altsean-Burma, Debbie Stothard, described
the situation as a “recycling” of political prisoners: “The release and re-arrest of human
rights defenders is a traditional tactic of the authorities. As long as
repressive laws are maintained, all those released will be under constant
threat of being thrown back into jail for their human rights work”,
she said.
 
As
with previous releases of political prisoners, the December-11 amnesty was
strategically timed to coincide with an important international event. In this
instance, it was the opening ceremony of the 27th Southeast Asia
Games, which are hosted by Burma.
 
“We
call for the immediate and unconditional release of Ko Htin Kyaw, Aye Thein,
Naw Ohn Hla, Tun Aung and Kyaw Hla Aung, as well as all human rights defenders
who remain detained. The release
and re-arrest tactics is one of dictatorships and not of States in a supposed
democratic transition. Such sarcastic games at the detriment of human beings
must become the past. There is only way forward to a free society: a commitment
to create an environment in which society can flourish in its diversity, and
human rights defenders are a torch of freedom protecting the rights”, concluded OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
For
more information, please contact:
FIDH: Audrey
     Couprie/Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
     +41 22 809 49 39 