Nepal:  Nepal: Arbitrary arrest of Mrs. Nisha Neupane
April  6, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2005 / AprilNepal: Nepal: Arbitrary arrest of Mrs. Nisha NeupaneCase NPL 060405 Arbitrary arrest  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Nepal.    Brief Description of the Situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Informal Sector Service Center  (INSEC), a member of the OMCT network, that Mrs. Nisha Neupane, 24, of Geeta Nagar-3, Prithvi Nagar, Chitwan, was arrested by Security Forces on 31st March 2005 in Suryanagar Chok (Shivanagar VDC) in the Chitwan District in Nepal.  According to the information received, around ten armed security personnel in civilian dress arrested her at around 1pm as she was going to her sister’s house. There was reportedly no arrest warrant for her and no legal action has been taken against her. Until today, she has not communicated with her family. Her family believes that she is being detained in either “Kasara Barrack” in Royal Chitwan National Park or in “Bharatpur Barrack” in Chitwan. According to the information received, her husband is a Maoist and is living underground and it is believed that her arrest is in connection with her husband’s activities.  OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mrs. Neupane as she suffers from a kidney problem which requires medical treatment. She is also in the early stages of pregnancy.   Action Requested: Please write a letter to the authorities in India urging them to:  i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mrs. Nisha Neupane;  ii.	order the immediate release of Mrs. Nisha Neupane in the absence of valid legal charges, and if such charges exist, to ensure that he is given a prompt and fair trial, in which his procedural rights are guaranteed at all times;  iii.	guarantee that she is provided with the medical treatment she requires;  iv.	ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses:  His Majesty King Gyanendra, Narayanhity Royal Palace, Durbar Marg, Kathmandu, Nepal  c/o Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Nepal to the United Nations, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 733 27 22; E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int  Mr. Nain Bahadur Khatri, Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@ntc.net.np   Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.  Geneva, April 6th, 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 