OMCT Regional Training in Asia: call for applications
February  6, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Events / 2013 / FebruaryOMCT Regional Training in Asia: call for applications
 


OMCT COMPLAINTS
TRAINING 
Call
for applications
 
                                                                        
PLACE: Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
8 to 12 April  2013
 
 
 
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) cordially invites you to apply to its
upcoming regional complaints training, which will be held in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, from to 8 to 12 April 2013. 
 
The
purpose of the workshop is to train jurists and lawyers working for or with
human rights organisations in the Asia-Pacific region on how to prepare
and effectively litigate individual complaints involving violations of
the prohibition of torture and other forms of ill-treatment before the United
Nations Treaty Bodies. 
 
The
Workshop will gather 15 participants for an inter-active 5-day litigation
training session. Below follows some preliminary information on the training.
Participants selected will receive a detailed programme in due course. 
 
Aims
of the training
The
aim of the complaints training is primarily practical, namely to equip participants with the knowledge, skills
and understanding that will enable them to prepare and successfully litigate
cases involving violations of the prohibition of torture and other forms of
ill-treatment before the Human Rights Committee and the Committee against Torture.
To achieve this aim, the 5-day training will focus on a select number of issues
which, in the OMCT's experience, pose particular challenges in the context of
torture and ill-treatment, including: 1) admissibility rules and their
application; 2) evidence and the "establishment of facts" and 3) the
writing of effective pleadings. Recent trends in relevant international and
regional jurisprudence will also be addressed.
 
Methodology
of the training
The 5-day
programme will involve presentations by experienced practitioners and OMCT
staff members. The programme will also include interactive group discussions,
case studies and skills-development exercises. The latter will focus primarily
on the drafting of legal pleadings. 
 
Training
Materials
The
trainings will primarily be based on Volume 4 of the OMCT Handbook Series: Seeking
Remedies for Torture Victims: a Handbook for Victims and Their Advocates[1].
The book is a practical guide covering most of the topics, which will be
addressed during the training. Specifically, it provides a step-by-step
description of the practice, procedure and jurisprudence of the HCR, CAT and
CEDAW. Participants will be expected to be familiar with the book.  
 
Selection
of Participants
The training
is intended for lawyers and jurists members or working for NGOs that have
limited experience with the individual complaints procedures and who wish to
add this type of action to their regular advocacy strategies. 
Preference
will be given to participants coming from countries that have accepted the
competence of the Committee against Torture and/or the Human Rights Committee
to receive individual communications through the ratification of the Optional
Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights[2] or
the declaration pursuant to article 22 of the Convention against Torture.[3] These
countries notably include Cambodia, Republic of Korea, the Maldives, Nepal, the
Philippines and Sri Lanka. 
OMCT
will also seek the participation of jurists and lawyers working with or for NGOs
who would be interested in jointly filing complaints with the OMCT
Secretariat as a follow-up to the training. The number of participants is
limited and OMCT will consider the registrations in the order they are
received.
 
 Practical
Information
OMCT
will cover participants' travel expenses (return air fare to Kuala Lumpur), accommodation
and daily subsistence during the training. OMCT will facilitate the obtaining
of a visa for Malaysia through issuance of an official letter of invitation.
The language of the training will be English. Participants are required to have
a good knowledge of English, since there will be no interpretation.
 
To
Register
 
Please
send your curriculum vitae, a cover
letter, a reference letter from the Head of the human rights organisation you
represent/support and the attached registration form no later than 28
February 2013 to trainings@omct.org
 
The cover
and reference letters should clearly demonstrate the commitment of the human rights
organisation you support /represent to submit complaints to the Committee against Torture
and/or the Human Rights Committee.
 
The
application can also be sent by fax to
+41 (0) 22 809 49 29 but must be received no
later than February 28, 2013.
 
All
documents must be attached ideally in PDF format. You
are also required to send your
application in a single message.
Application sent in different messages will not be considered.This training is being held with the financial assistance of the European Union and the Oak Foundation. Its content is of the
sole responsibility of OMCT and cannot be considered as
reflecting the position of its supporting
institutions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



[1] This volume
is available on the OMCT website at http://bit.ly/MNrOlv. 


[2] Cf. http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr-one.htm.


[3] Cf. http://bit.ly/4mwIA 