Azerbaijan:  Prosecutor requests outrageous jail sentences for Leyla and Arif Yunus
August  7, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / AugustAzerbaijan: Prosecutor requests outrageous jail sentences for Leyla and Arif YunusAzerbaijan PR1 page / 137 KB
AZERBAIJAN: Prosecutor requests outrageous jail sentences for Leyla and
Arif Yunus
Paris-Geneva,
August 7, 2015 – Yesterday the fourth hearing in the case against Leyla Yunus
and Arif Yunusov took place, and it proved to be yet another example of how the
Azeri regime makes a mockery of justice, the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders said today.
On
August 6, the Prosecutor asked the Baku Grave Crimes Court to sentence Leyla Yunus,
Director of the Institute for Peace and Democracy (IPD) and a member of OMCT
General Assembly, to 11 years in jail, while 9 years were requested for her
husband Arif Yunusov, Head of the Conflictology Department of IPD.
The next hearing is scheduled for August 10, when defence lawyers are expected
to make their final plea.
Ms. Yunus is wrongfully
accused of large scale fraud (Article 178.3.2 of the Azerbaijan Criminal Code),
fake manufacturing or selling of official documents (Articles 320.1 and 320.2),
large scale tax evasion (Article 213.2.2) and illegal business with extraction
of income in large size (Article 192.2.1). Mr. Yunusov is accused of
large-scale fraud (Article 178.3.2). 
“Since the end of the Baku Games, the repression
against critic voices amongst the Azeri civil society has intensified.
Authorities have recently confirmed harsh jail sentences for human rights
defenders such as Rasul Jafarov and Intigam Aliyev, in speedy appeal hearings.
We fear that Leyla and Arif will face the same fate”. FIDH Honorary President Souhayr
Belhassen said today. “Shamelessly, Azerbaijan is fast moving towards a
full-blown dictatorship”.
On July 27, around 25 local
and international observers and journalists were prevented from entering the
courtroom, including the Observatory's judicial observer, a number of
diplomats, as well as journalists from the BBC, to mention a few. The hearing
was held in the smallest courtroom in the Courthouse, although some of the
larger ones were available at the time. The same happened in the hearing of
August 3. 
“We
are dismayed about this new trend which is extremely evident in the hearings
following the European Games, namely denying international observers access to
the courtroom or undermining their effective independent monitoring presence by
not allowing in their interpreters, which amounts to a serious violation of the
principles of transparency and publicity of judicial debates”,
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock added. 
Similar limitations have
recently taken place in the trials against other emblematic human rights
defenders, such as the first hearing in the case of investigative journalist Khadija
Ismayilova, as well as the appeal hearings in the case against Rasul
Jafarov.
Our
organisations call on the Azerbaijan authorities to put an end to
this crackdown on civil society and to release all human rights defenders
detained in the country, including Leyla and Arif.
For more information, please
contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur Manet / Lucie Kroening:
+33143 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui : +41
22 809 49 24 