Azerbaijan:  Joint Statement: Anniversary of journalist Khadija Ismayilova’s arrest highlights Azerbaijani regime’s unprecedented repression in 2015
December  4, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2015 / DecemberAzerbaijan: Joint Statement: Anniversary of journalist Khadija Ismayilova’s arrest highlights Azerbaijani regime’s unprecedented repression in 2015
​Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. On the eve of the anniversary of the
arrest of journalist Khadija Ismayilova, members of the Sport for Rights coalition
and the Civic Solidarity Platform underscore the unprecedented nature of the
repression that has taken place in Azerbaijan in the year that has passed. The
groups reiterate their call for the immediate and unconditional release of
Ismayilova and Azerbaijan’s other political prisoners, and for the
international community to take steps to hold the Azerbaijani government
accountable for its human rights obligations as matter of urgent priority. 
"Ismayilova's arrest a year ago signalled
an escalation of repression in Azerbaijan", noted Karin
Deutsch Karlekar, Director of Free Expression Programs at PEN American Center. "Independent voices are being silenced
at an unprecedented rate, and we urge the authorities to cease the legal and
extra-legal harassment of journalists and media outlets immediately”.
 
On 5 December 2014, prominent
investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova was arrested on charges of inciting
a local man, Tural Mustafayev, to attempt suicide. Two months later,
authorities slammed her with additional politicised charges of embezzlement,
illegal business, tax evasion, and abuse of power. After eight months in
pre-trial detention, Ismayilova’s trial started on 7 August at the Baku Court
of Grave Crimes. 
 
Ismayilova referred to the proceedings
as an “express trial”, and observers noted it was rife with due process
violations, with the judges rarely granting any motions made by the defence.
During the trial, Mustafayev publicly told the court that prosecutors forced
him to make a statement against Ismayilova, and withdrew his accusations.
Additionally, Ismayilova’s lawyer told the court that her employer did not
report any funds missing, that she was not authorised to hire or dismiss other
journalists, and that she was not engaged in any commercial enterprise.
 
On 1 September, the court convicted
Ismayilova of the charges of embezzlement, illegal entrepreneurship, tax
evasion, and abuse of office, and sentenced her to 7.5 years’ imprisonment. She was acquitted of the charge of inciting Mustafayev
to attempt suicide. On 25 November, the Baku Court of Appeals upheld this conviction,
and Ismayilova was transferred to Prison Number 4 on 27 November.
 
Sport for Rights considers the charges against
Ismayilova to be politically motivated and connected to her work as an
investigative journalist, particularly her exposure of corruption among the
ruling elite. Sport for Rights believes that in jailing Ismayilova, the
Azerbaijani authorities sought to silence her critical voice before the country
faced increased international media attention during the inaugural European Games, which took place
in Baku in June. For this reason, Sport for Rights has referred to Ismayilova
as a “Prisoner of the Games”.
 
“Ismayilova’s imprisonment is emblematic of
the Azerbaijani authorities’ repression of independent journalists and human
rights defenders”, said Melody Patry, Senior Advocacy Officer at Index
on Censorship. “Every day Ismayilova and
the other political prisoners spend in jail is another reminder to the world
that the Azerbaijani government fails to respect and protect the democratic
principles and fundamental rights it has committed to upholding”.
 
Ismayilova is one of dozens of
political prisoners in Azerbaijan. Other prominent cases include journalists Nijat Aliyev, Araz Guliyev, Parviz Hashimli, Seymur Hezi,
Hilal Mammadov, Rauf Mirkadirov, and Tofig Yagublu; bloggers Abdul Abilov,
Faraj Karimli, Omar Mammadov, Rashad Ramazanov, and Ilkin Rustamzade; human
rights defenders Intigam Aliyev, Rasul Jafarov, Taleh Khasmammadov, Anar
Mammadli, Arif Yunus, and Leyla Yunus; NIDA civic movement activists Rashadat
Akundov, Mammad Azizov, and Rashad Hasanov; opposition activist Yadigar
Sadikhov; and opposition REAL movement chairman Ilgar Mammadov.
 
Besides politically motivated
arrests and imprisonment, the Azerbaijani authorities continue to employ a wide
range of tactics as part of an aggressive crackdown to silence the country’s
few remaining critical voices. Independent online television station Meydan TV
has been a particular target, with its staff and their relatives threatened,
detained, and otherwise pressured in connection with Meydan TV’s critical news
coverage of Azerbaijan. Other independent NGOs and media including the
Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety and its online television project
Obyektiv TV, as well as Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty’s Baku office, have
also been aggressively targeted over the past year.
 
In addition to the post-European
Games crackdown, the Azerbaijani authorities also worked to silence criticism
ahead of the 1 November parliamentary elections. For the first time, the
elections took place with almost no credible international observers, and with
the majority of the traditional opposition boycotting. Independent domestic
observers reported widespread fraud, such as carousel voting and irregularities
in the vote counting and tabulation process. Now, in the run-up to the Formula
One European Grand Prix, which will take place in Baku in June 2016, the
crackdown shows no signs of relenting.
 
These issues and more are detailed
in a new Sport for Rights report, No Holds Barred: Azerbaijan’s Human Rights Crackdown in Aliyev’s Third
Term, which also contains specific recommendations to the Azerbaijani authorities
and the international community on urgent measures needed to improve the dire
human rights situation in the country. Sport for Rights and the Civic
Solidarity Platform particularly urge the international community to sustain
focus on Azerbaijan over the coming months, when critical voices will need
concrete support more than ever before.
 
Supporting organisations:
 
ARTICLE 19
Association of Ukrainian Human Rights Monitors on Law Enforcement
Canadian Journalists for Free
Expression
Center for Civil Liberties
(Ukraine)
Centre for the Development of
Democracy and Human Rights (Russia)
Civil Rights Defenders
Committee to Protect Journalists
Crude Accountability
Freedom Now
Front Line Defenders
Georgian Young Lawyers’ Association
Golos Svobody Public Foundation
(Kyrgyzstan)
Human Rights House Foundation
Human Rights Movement
"Bir Duino-Kyrgyzstan"
Index on CensorshipInternational Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
International Partnership for Human
Rights
Kazakhstan International
Bureau for Human Rights and Rule of Law
Kharkiv
Regional Foundation
- Public Alternative
(Ukraine) 
Kosova Rehabilitation Centre for
Torture Victims
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
PEN American Center
People In Need
Platform
Promo-LEX (Moldova)
Public Verdict Foundation
(Russia)
Reporters Without Borders
Sova Center for Information
and Analysis (Russia)
World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders 