India:  Henri Tiphagne: Engage youth to combat injustice and discrimination
December 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / India / 2016 / DecemberIndia: Henri Tiphagne: Engage youth to combat injustice and discrimination
 
Geneva, 20 December 2016 (OMCT) -
Henri Tiphagne’s commitment to human rights
originates from his mother’s work with the poorest of the poor and the most
excluded, at that time leprosy patients. His fight against injustice has since
remained unwavering despite challenging times for human rights and their
defenders. As the founder and Executive Director of People’s Watch, the first organization dedicated to
monitoring human rights violations by the State in India, Henri Tiphagne has
been supporting victims of State violence and advocating relentlessly against
torture and discrimination in India for more than 20 years. The world’s largest democracy? One of the greatest difficulties activists
face in the world’s largest democracy “lies in the fact that State institutions
that should be protecting human rights refuse to perform, particularly when it
comes to the rights of the poor”, Mr. Tiphagne said. A fervent advocate of the rule of law and
democracy, he still believes in the key role of State institutions as the
bulwark against violence that could be seen by some as the only way forward to
achieve human rights. “State institutions must be strengthened and made to
work”, Mr. Tiphagne stated. “Our work is to protect justice institutions, to
protect the core of the Constitution and to protect the existence of national
and State institutions”, with the hope they become more independent and
accountable. Stifling critical voices In the past year, he and his organization
have in turn come under increased pressure for holding the Government to
account. Like many other human rights organizations
in India, People’s Watch can no longer receive
foreign funding after the Ministry of Home Affairs decided in October
2016 not to renew its license under the Foreign Contributions (Regulations) Act
(FCRA). Such a move seriously undermines the work of the organization on behalf of victims of State violence. Inspired by others to keep up the fight Despite challenges, Mr. Tiphagne remains optimistic. “My strength is drawn
from successes I have seen across the world”, he said. “Fifteen years ago,
poverty was not seen as a human rights violation, the right to development was
not recognized as a right; ten years ago, the rights of LGBT people were not
spoken of.” He sees these as good reasons for all human rights defenders across
the world to keep hope for the future and stay strong. Seeing that there are many others who
dedicate their lives to human rights in all parts of the world, and too often
giving them to the cause, inspires him to continue his work. “Their unfailing
commitment has sown the seeds for a new generation of rights to grow”, Mr.
Tiphagne said. Mr. Tiphagne also draws inspiration, and
pride in his work, from his engagement with the youth of his country so that
they in turn stand up to uphold the rights of others. His organization actively
supports human rights education with the aim to build a society free from human
rights violations and discrimination. “The greatest legacy that a human rights
defender can, and should, leave behind is the education of a new generation,”
he said. “I think the most precious thing that we can do as a human rights
defender is to engage with and create a vanguard within the younger
generation.” This article is part of a series of 10
profiles to commemorate International Human Rights Day, 10 December, and to
recognize the vital role of human rights defenders worldwide. To see the campaign video, please
click here.   OMCT
wishes to thank the Republic and Canton of Geneva and the OAK Foundation for
their support. Its content is the sole responsibility of OMCT and should in no
way be interpreted as reflecting the view(s) of the supporting institutions. 