Angola:  Rafael Marques de Morais sentenced to a six-month suspended jail term
June 18, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Angola / 2015 / JuneAngola: Rafael Marques de Morais sentenced to a six-month suspended jail termAngola_2015.06.18_PR_English2 pages / 166 KBParis-Geneva, June 18, 2015 – The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights defenders strongly condemns the sentencing of journalist Rafael
Marques de Morais to a six month suspended jail term, despite an out of court
settlement previously announced.
 
Following the backtracking in Rafael Marques de Morais' defamation case
and the announcement of the public prosecutor's intention to move forward with
a sentencing in spite of an out of court settlement reached between parties,
the Luanda Provincial Tribunal sentenced Mr. Marques de Morais to a six months
jail term on defamation charges.
 
The sentence, which can be served at any time for two years if Mr.
Marques de Morais is found guilty of any crime, was handed down on May 28,
2015, only three days after the announcement of the public prosecutor. 
 
“The sentencing of Rafael Marques de Morais is yet
another step in the uninterrupted judicial harassment that he has been the target of for more than two years and which
aims at sanctioning his outstanding human rights work”, said Karim Lahidji, FIDH President.
 
Mr. Marques de Morais is a well-known Angolan journalist who has been
facing continuous judicial harassment since the publication in 2011, of his
book, “Blood Diamonds: Corruption and Torture in Angola”, in which he
documents and denounces the corruption, allegations of homicides, torture,
forced displacement of civilian settlements and intimidation of inhabitants of
the diamond-mining areas of Angola’s Lundas region by some state agents and
business entrepreneurs.
 
“Authorities in Angola must immediately and
unconditionally overturn Rafael Marques de Morais' sentence and stop harassing
human rights defenders. This
situation must come to an end and dissenting voices must be accepted”, concluded
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
Originally facing nine charges for defamation, Mr. Marques de Morais was
informed of fifteen additional charges being brought against him, shortly
before the opening of his trial on March 24, 2015. Furthermore, several
procedural irregularities were observed since Mr. Marques de Morais was
indicted in January 2013.
 
The harassment against Mr. Marques de Morais has also taken the form of
cyber-attacks and cyber-espionage. His blog, Maka Angola, has been
blocked on several occasions and his personal laptop has been attacked with
malware programs.
 
More generally, the Observatory calls upon authorities in Angola to
ensure the respect of the rights of civil society actors in the country, where,
as documented in a recent Observatory report[1], human rights defenders and journalists, remain
subjected to judicial harassment, acts of intimidation, threats and other forms
of restrictions to their freedom of association and expression.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy to situations of repression against human rights
defenders.
 
For more information, please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur Manet/Lucie Kroening: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24



[1]      The report is
available for download here: Publication of a Mission Report: “They want to keep us vulnerable”: Human Rights Defenders Under Pressure 