India:  Kashmiri human rights defender Khurram Parvez arbitrarily arrested and denied due process rights
September 16, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / SeptemberIndia: Kashmiri human rights defender Khurram Parvez arbitrarily arrested and denied due process rights
Bangkok-Dhaka-Geneva-Madurai-Paris-Quezon
City, September 16, 2016 - Our
organisations strongly condemn today’s arbitrary arrest of Kashmiri human
rights defender Mr. Khurram Parvez, and call for his immediate and
unconditional release. 

 
On September
16 at 12:30 am, police officers came to Khurram
Parvez’s home in Srinagar in Indian-administered Kashmir, arrested him
without presenting a warrant, and took him to the Kothi Bagh police station,
where he remains in arbitrary detention. He has not been allowed access to a
lawyer, and the police have provided no formal document of arrest or reason for
his detention. 
 
The evening
prior his arrest, a group of police personnel headed by the Kothi Bagh Station
House Officer came to Mr. Parvez’s home and asked for him. Mr. Parvez was not
at home at the time, but spoke to the Officer by telephone and was informed
that the Superintendent of Police, Sheikh Faisal, wished to meet him. Mr.
Parvez agreed to meet with the Superintendent the following day. He was
nevertheless arrested without explanation several hours later after arriving at
his home.
 
Mr. Parvez’s
arrest comes two days after he was stopped at the
New Delhi airport by immigration authorities and prevented from travelling to
Geneva to attend the ongoing session of the United Nations Human Rights
Council.[1]
The travel ban and arbitrary detention of Mr. Parvez are the latest examples of
the Indian government’s attempts to silence human rights defenders and prevent
the spread of information on the extremely concerning human rights violations
taking place in Jammu and Kashmir. Numerous lawyers and human rights defenders
have been arbitrarily detained[2], and the authorities
continue to impose a curfew and deny access to United Nations observers.[3]
Given this ongoing repression and crackdown in Jammu and Kashmir, obtaining
information on Mr. Parvez’s current situation is proving very difficult, and
there is good reason for concern regarding his well-being in police custody.
 
Mr. Parvez is the Chairperson of the
Asian Federation Against Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD) and Program
Coordinator of the Jammu Kashmir Coalition of Civil Society (JKCCS). Mr. Parvez
has consistently highlighted violations of human rights taking place in India,
notably in Jammu and Kashmir, and was part of the research group that published
a report in December 2009 on the discovery of thousands of unmarked graves in
Kashmir.
 
Our organisations strongly condemn the
escalating repression of Mr. Parvez, and call on the Indian authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release him, and to allow him to continue to
conduct his legitimate human rights work without hindrance or reprisal. 
 
We demand an end to the harassment
against all human rights defenders in India, and call on the international
community, notably the other States sitting alongside India as members of the
UN Human Rights Council, to insist that India comply with its human rights
obligations, notably the provisions of the 1998 UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, which underscores the right of human rights defenders to freely and
peacefully engage in their work and be protected from reprisals for having
exercised this right.  
 
***
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (The Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is
to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human
Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
The Asian Federation Against Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD) is a federation of
human rights organizations working directly on the issue of involuntary
disappearances in Asia. Envisioning a world without desaparecidos, AFAD was
founded on June 4, 1998 in Manila, Philippines.
 
The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) works towards the radical rethinking and fundamental redesigning of
justice institutions in order to protect and promote human rights in Asia.
Established in 1984, the Hong Kong based organisation is a Laureate of the
Right Livelihood Award 2014.
 
FORUM-ASIA is a regional human
rights group with 58 member organisations in 19 countries across Asia.
FORUM-ASIA addresses key areas of human rights violations in the region,
including freedoms of expression, assembly and association, human rights
defenders, and democratisation. FORUM-ASIA operates through its offices in
Bangkok, Jakarta, Geneva and Kathmandu. 
 
Human Rights Defenders Alert - India (HRDA) is a national network of human rights defenders for human rights
defenders.  HRDA intervenes in the cases
of threats/harassment/attack on HRDs and curbing of freedom of expression,
assembly and association.
 
The International Coalition Against Enforced Disappearances
(ICAED) is a network of 42 member organisations concerned with the issue
of human rights and the struggle against enforced disappearances. The principal
objective of ICAED is maximising impact of the activities carried out by its
members in favour of an early ratification and effective implementation of the
Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearances. 
 
Odhikar, a human rights
organisation based in Dhaka, Bangladesh, was founded in 1994 with the aim to
create a wider monitoring and awareness raising system on the abuse of civil
and political rights. 
 
For more information, please contact:
·      
AFAD: Mary Aileen D.
Bacalso: +63 2 456 6434 
·      
AHRC: Md. Ashrafuzzaman:
+41 766 382 659 / +852 607 32 807
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet /
Audrey Couprie: + 33143552518
·      
FORUM-ASIA: Anjuman Ara
Begum: +977 982 381 5517
·      
HRDA: Mathew Jacob:  +91 886 011 0520
·      
ICAED: Mary Aileen D.
Bacalso: +63 917 792 4058
·      
Odhikar: Adilur Rahman
Khan: + 880 29 88 85 87
·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
+41 22 809 49 34



[1]                See
Joint Press Release, Indian
authorities prevent Kashmiri human rights defender Khurram Parvez from travelling
to Geneva for U.N. Human Rights Council session, 15 September
2016 : https://www.fidh.org/en/region/asia/india/indian-authorities-prevent-kashmiri-human-rights-defender-khurram
/ http://www.omct.org/human-rights-defenders/urgent-interventions/india/2016/09/d23942/



[2]       For
more information on the repression of lawyers and activists in Kashmir, see
IAPL press release from 2 September 2016: https://www.facebook.com/IAPLIndia/photos/pcb.1598105833823822/1598105710490501/?type=3&theater



[3]       For
more information on recent violence in Kashmir and the denial of UN access, see
People’s Watch and FIDH joint press release from 18 August 2016 :
https://www.fidh.org/en/region/asia/india/kashmir-un-observers-denied-access-to-investigate-ongoing-human 