The ASEAN Human Rights Declaration: Drafts must be published and subject to meaningful consultations with local, national and regional civil society and human rights defenders
May  2, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / 2012 / MayThe ASEAN Human Rights Declaration: Drafts must be published and subject to meaningful consultations with local, national and regional civil society and human rights defendersJoint Statement7 pages / 735 KB
Amnesty 
International - Asian Legal Resource Centre - Association for the Prevention of 
Torture (APT) - Christian Solidarity Worldwide - Civil Rights Defenders - 
Freedom House - Human Rights Now - Human Rights Watch - International Commission 
of Jurists - International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) - International 
Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (IGLHRC) -               Protection International - 
Reporters Without Borders - World Organisation Against Torture 
(OMCT)
Joint 
Statement
The ASEAN Human 
Rights Declaration: Drafts must be published and subject to meaningful 
consultations with local, national and regional civil society and human rights 
defenders
May 2nd, 2012
We, the undersigned international human 
rights organizations, are concerned that the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission 
on Human Rights (AICHR) has yet to take the necessary steps to ensure that the 
process of drafting the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration (AHRD) is transparent and 
fully consultative with civil society organizations in the ASEAN region. 

In a joint statement released on 
April 8th (full text below), over 130 local, national and 
regional civil society organizations across the ASEAN region called on AICHR to 
implement the following steps:
1)      
To immediately publicize the draft 
AHRD so that the public can meaningfully participate in the drafting process. 
Consultations will remain meaningless if the draft declaration is kept 
confidential and out of reach of the 
peoples.
2)      
AICHR representatives who are already 
conducting national consultations in their respective countries must continue to 
do so, and ensure that these consultations are held nation-wide and in an 
inclusive and more regular manner. They should further encourage other AICHR 
representatives that have not taken such initiatives to do the same. The AICHR 
should also conduct consultations both at national and regional levels, 
especially if national consultations are not applicable yet in particular 
places.
3)      
To translate the draft AHRD into 
national languages and other local languages of the ASEAN countries in order to 
encourage broader public participation in the 
region.
4)      
To ensure that consultation meetings of the 
AICHR will be inclusive of all stakeholders, especially civil society 
organizations and national human rights institutions.*
On 12 April, AICHR announced that it 
would finalize the draft of the AHRD by July 2012 and hold one consultation with 
civil society organizations in late June 2012. A single consultation, conducted 
not at the outset but rather towards the very end of the drafting process, 
cannot be considered consultative and transparent.  In addition to being non-transparent and 
non-consultative, this process has been clearly rushed with little thought 
provided on some of the key elements that have been articulated by ASEAN civil 
society for decades. An instrument of this importance and magnitude needs more 
time for adequate deliberation and discussion.  

We fully endorse the April 
8th statement made by national and regional civil society 
organizations and strongly urge all representatives of the AICHR to fully and 
immediately implement these recommendations. This would ensure that the AHRD reflects the legitimate 
concerns of civil society and human rights defenders in ASEAN and reflects 
existing international human rights 
standards.
The drafting of the AHRD is a litmus test of 
AICHR’s willingness to constitute a credible, respected, and effective regional 
human rights body.  Principles of transparency, accountability, and consultation are 
applied by the United Nations and all other regional bodies when they engage in 
human rights standard-setting and the ASEAN must not fall below well established 
international standards and practice. 
This joint statement is endorsed by (in alphabetical 
order):
1.      Amnesty 
International
2.      Asian Legal 
Resource Centre
3.      Association 
for the Prevention of Torture (APT)
4.      Christian 
Solidarity Worldwide
5.      Civil Rights 
Defenders
6.      Freedom 
House
7.      Human Rights 
Now
8.      Human Rights 
Watch
9.      International 
Commission of Jurists
10.   International 
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
11.   International 
Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission 
(IGLHRC)
12.   Protection 
International
13.   Reporters 
Without Borders 
14.   World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Statement 
released on 8 April by national and regional 
NGOs:
Joint Statement on Calling AICHR to release ASEAN 
Human Rights Declaration
8th April 2012
We, the undersigned civil society 
organizations and networks from Southeast 
Asia, express our grave concern and 
disappointment over the continuing secrecy in the drafting process of the ASEAN 
Human Rights Declaration (AHRD).
The ASEAN Intergovernmental 
Commission on Human Rights (AICHR) is mandated under Article 4.2 of its Terms of 
Reference to develop an ASEAN Human Right Declaration with a view to 
establishing a framework for human rights cooperation through various ASEAN 
conventions and other instruments dealing with human rights. At the 6th meeting 
of the AICHR in Vientiane on 28 June – 
2 July 
2011, a Drafting Group was officially 
established by the AICHR to prepare a draft of the ASEAN Human Rights 
Declaration. In January 2012, the Drafting Group submitted to the ASEAN 
Inter-governmental Commission on Human Rights (AICHR) a draft AHRD for 
deliberation and debate.
To this date, the draft AHRD remains 
confidential while the public has been excluded from any meaningful 
participation in the drafting process. There has not been any substantive and 
broad-based regional consultation with the peoples in the region on the draft 
AHRD. 
While we commend the representatives 
of the AICHR from Thailand, 
Indonesia, 
Malaysia and 
the Philippines 
for holding consultation with their civil society at national level, we are 
disturbed that no such initiative has taken place in the rest of the ASEAN 
countries.
If ASEAN’s aspiration to be 
“People-Oriented” is to be achieved, the AICHR that is tasked to defend the 
fundamental freedoms of the peoples in the region must set a good example in 
ensuring meaningful and substantive consultation and people’s participation in 
the drafting of the historic AHRD.
We therefore strongly urge the AICHR 
to heed the recommendation of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights, Navi Pillay, that “no discussion of human rights can be complete or 
credible without significant input from civil society and national human rights 
institutions”  and immediately begin 
dialogues and consultations with civil society organizations on the 
AHRD.
We further call upon AICHR to 
implement the following steps to ensure that the drafting process of the ASEAN 
Human Rights Declaration will be credible, inclusive, transparent, reflective 
and consistent with universal human rights 
standards:
1) To immediately publicize the draft 
AHRD so that the public can meaningfully participate in the drafting process. 
Consultations will remain meaningless if the draft declaration is kept 
confidential and out of reach of the peoples. 

 2) AICHR representatives who are already 
conducting national consultations in their respective countries must continue to 
do so, and ensure that these consultations are held nation-wide and in an 
inclusive and more regular manner. They should further encourage other AICHR 
representatives that have not taken such initiatives to do the same. The AICHR 
should also conduct consultations both at national and regional levels, 
especially if national consultations are not applicable yet in particular 
places. 
3) To translate the draft AHRD into 
national languages and other local languages of the ASEAN countries in order to 
encourage broader public participation in the 
region.
4) To ensure that consultation 
meetings of the AICHR will be inclusive of all stakeholders, especially civil 
society organizations and national human rights institutions. 

Until and unless the AICHR consults 
and engages with all stakeholders in a transparent, meaningful and substantive 
manner, the AICHR should postpone its submission of the final draft of AHRD to 
the AESAN Ministerial Meeting (AMM), which is scheduled to take place in July 
2012. 
This call is made to public as wide 
as possible in the ten countries of ASEAN and is endorsed by different sectors 
of civil society organizations such as youth organizations, women’s 
organizations, child rights organizations, LGBT organizations, migrant workers 
network organizations, labour unions, farmers organzitions, environmental 
organizations, human rights organizations, development organizations and some 
academic institutions. The joint statement is also translated into ASEAN major 
languages, Burmese, Bahasa-Indonesian, Bahasa-Malay, Khmer, Lao, Thai and 
Vietnamese to indicate our commitment to promote the basic human rights of the 
people that they are entitled to receive information and awareness about ASEAN 
and its works.  

Media contacts: 
Yap Swee Seng , Executive Director, 
Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (Forum-Asia), +66 (0) 818689178 

Aung Myo Min, Director and Founder, 
Human Rights Education Institute of Burma 
(HREIB), + 66 (0) 819925293
Ms. Pung Chhiv Kek, President, 
Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO), + 885 
(0) 12589091 
Mr. Haris Azhar, Coordinator, 
KontraS, Indonesia, + 
62 (0) 815-13302342
List of endorsers:
1.                  Aceh Human Rights Coalition of NGO, 
Indonesia
2.                  Action for Environment and Community 
(AEC), Cambodia
3.                  All Arakan Students and Youth 
Congress (AASYC), Burma 

4.                  All 
Burma 
Students Democratic Front (ABSDF), Burma 

5.                  All 
Burma 
Students League (ABSL), Burma 

6.                  All Kachin Students and Youth 
Union 
(AKSYU), Burma 

7.                  All Women’s Action Society (AWAM), 
Malaysia 

8.                  Alternative ASEAN Network on 
Burma 
(Altsean Burma) 

9.                  Arakan League for Democracy (Exile) 
Youth (ALD-Youth), Burma 

10.               ASEAN WATCH, 
Thailand
11.               Asian Forum for Human Rights and 
Development
12.               Asian Indigenous People’s 
Pact
13.               Assistance Association for Political 
Prisoners - Burma 

14.               Back Pack Health Worker Team 

15.               Banteay 
Srei, Cambodia
16.               Boat People SOS 

17.               Building Community Voice (BCV), 
Cambodia
18.               Burma 
Issues, Burma 

19.               Burma 
Medical Association, Burma 

20.               Burma 
Partnership, Burma 

21.               Burmese Women 
Union, Burma
22.               Cambodia 
Indigenous Youth Association (CIYA), Cambodia
23.               Cambodian Centre for Human Rights 
(CCHR), Cambodia
24.               Cambodian Confederation of Unions 
(CCU), Cambodia
25.               Cambodian Food Service Workers 
Federation (CFSWF), Cambodia
26.               Cambodian Independent Teachers' 
Association (CITA), Cambodia
27.               Cambodian League for the promotion 
and defense of Human Rights (LICADHO), 
Cambodia 

28.               Cambodian Watchdog Council (CWC), 
Cambodia
29.               Cambodian Youth Network (CYN), 
Cambodia
30.               Center for Migrant Advocacy 
Philippines
31.               Child Rights Coalition-Asia 

32.               Chin Human Rights Organization 
(CHRO), Burma 

33.               Chin Students Union (CSU), 
Burma
34.               Christians for Social Justice (CJS), 
Cambodia 

35.               Coalition of Cambodian Farmer 
Community (CCFC), Cambodia
36.               Commission for Disappeared and 
Victims of Violence (Kontras), Indonesia 

37.               Community Action 
Network, Malaysia 

38.               Community Resource Centre 
(CRC), Thailand 
39.               Democratic Party for a New Society 
(DPNS), Burma 
40.               Dignity International, 
Malaysia 

41.               EarthRights International, 
Burma
42.               Ecological Alert and Recovery 
Thailand 
(EARTH), Thailand
43.               Education and Research Association 
for Consumers (ERA Consumer), Malaysia
44.               EMPOWER 
Foundation, Thailand
45.               Empowering Youth in 
Cambodia 
(EYC), Cambodia         

46.               Ethnic Community Development Forum 
(ECDF-Burma) 
47.               FOKER LSM, 
Papua
48.               Foundation for Consumers (FFC), 
Thailand 

49.               Foundation for Ecological 
Recovery, Thailand
50.               Foundation for Sustainable 
Development, Thailand
51.               Foundation for Women, Law and Rural 
Development (FORWARD), Thailand
52.               Foundation for Women, 
Thailand
53.               EMPOWER 
Foundation, Thailand
54.               Highland Peoples Task force (HPT), 
Thailand
55.               Homenet, 
Thailand
56.               Housing Rights 
Task Force, Cambodia 

57.               Human Rights Documentation 
Unit, Burma 

58.               Human Rights Education Institute of 
Burma
59.               Human Rights Foundation of 
Monland, Burma 

60.               Human Rights Lawyers Association, 
Thailand 

61.               Humanum, 
Indonesia
62.               Independent Democracy of Informal 
Economic Association (IDEA), Cambodia
63.               Indigenous People Task Force on 
ASEAN
64.               Institute for Policy Research and 
Advocacy (ELSAM), Indonesia 
65.               International Gay and Lesbian Human 
Rights Commission (IGLHRC)
66.               JATAM, 
Indonesia 

67.               Kachin Women’s Association – Thailand 
(KWAT), Burma 

68.               Karen Youth Organization (KYO), 
Burma 

69.               Kayan New Generation Youth (KNGY), 
Burma 

70.               Khmer Ahimsa Organisation, 
Cambodia
71.               KIARA, 
Indonesia
72.               KontraS (National Office, 
Jakarta, Indonesia)
73.               Kuki Students Democratic Front 
(KSDF), Burma 

74.               Lahu Women’s Organization, 
Burma 

75.               Lao Movement for Human Rights 
(MLDH)
76.               LPSHAM, 
Indonesia
77.               M Plus 
Foundation, 
Thailand
78.               Messenger Band (MB), 
Cambodia
79.               Migrant Forum in 
Asia 

80.               Migrante International, 
Philippines 

81.               Mon Youth Progressive Organization 
(MYPO), Burma 

82.               My Village Organization (MVi), 
Cambodia 

83.               Naga Youth Organization (NYO), 
Burma 

84.               National League for 
Democracy-Liberated Area (Youth), Burma 

85.               Network for Democracy and Development 
(NDD), Burma 

86.               Network for Human Rights 
Documentation in Burma 

87.               Network of Eastern Democracy, 
Thailand
88.               NGO Coordinating Committee on 
Development (NGO-COD), Thailand
89.               Northern Development 
Foundation, Thailand
90.               One-2-One, 
Cambodia
91.               Pa O Youth Organization (PYO), 
Burma
92.               Palang 
Thai, Thailand 

93.               Palaung Women's Organization, 
Burma 

94.               People’s Action for Change (PAC), 
Cambodia
95.               People’s Defense Force 
(Burma) 

96.               People’s Empowerment Foundation 

97.               Persatuan Masyarakat Selangor & 
Wilayah Persekutuan (PERMAS), Malaysia
98.               Pokja 30, 
Indonesia
99.               Project for Ecological 
Awareness 
Building (EAB), 
Thailand
100.           Pro Rights 
Foundation, 
Thailand
101.           Pusat Komunikasi Masyarakat (PUSAT 
KOMAS), Malaysia
102.           Quê Me: Action for Democracy in 
Vietnam
103.           Rainbow Community 
Kampuchea 
(RoCK), Cambodia
104.           Sahakum Teang Tnaut (STT), 
Cambodia
105.           Sex Workers Organization, 
Thailand
106.           Shwe Gas movement 

107.           SILAKA, 
Cambodia 

108.           Social Action for Change (SAC), 
Cambodia
109.           Social Agenda Working Group, Social 
Research Institute, Chulalongkorn 
University, Thailand                                                   

110.           Society of Transsexual Women of the 
Philippines 
(STRAP), Philippines
111.           South East Asia Working Group/ 
Asia-Pacific Refugee Rights Network 
112.           South East Asian Committee for 
Advocacy (SEACA)
113.           Southeast Asia Coalition to stop 
Child Soldiers
114.           Southeast 
Asia Popular Communications Programme 
(SEAPCP)
115.           Students and Youth Congress of 
Burma 

116.           Suara Rakyat 
Malaysia 
(SUARAM), Malaysia 

117.           Sustainable Agriculture 
Foundation, Thailand
118.           Sustainable Development 
Foundation, Thailand
119.           Ta'ang Students and Youth 
Organization (TSYO), Burma 

120.           Tavoy Youth Organization (TYO), 
Burma 

121.           Thai Committee for Refugees 
Foundation, Thailand 

122.           Thai Working Group for Climate 
Justice (TCJ), Thailand
123.           The 
Cambodian 
Center for Human 
Rights, Cambodia
124.           The Cambodian Human Rights and 
Development Association (ADHOC), Cambodian 
125.           The Northeastern Women’s 
Network, Thailand
126.           Think 
Centre, Singapore 

127.           Union for Civil Liberty (UCL), 
Thailand 

128.           United Lahu Youth Organization, 
Burma
129.           Vietnam 
Committee on Human Rights
130.           Volunteers for Sustainable 
Development (VSD), Cambodia
131.           Women and Children Protection 
Foundation, Thailand
132.           Women’s Global Network for 
Reproductive Rights (WGNRR) 
133.           YLBHI, 
Indonesia 

134.           Yoma3 News 
Service, Burma 

135.           Youth for Social 
Change, Myanmar
136.           Zomi Students and Youth Organization 
(ZSYO), Burma




* These four demands are as 
they appear in the 8 April 
2012 statement of national and 
regional NGOs, “Joint Statement Calling 
AICHR to Release ASEAN Human Rights 
Declaration” 