Sudan:  38 organisations request UN attention on the on-going criminalisation of 10 defenders who may face death penalty
December 13, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2016 / DecemberSudan: 38 organisations request UN attention on the on-going criminalisation of 10 defenders who may face death penalty


PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
SUDAN:
38 organisations request UN attention on the on-going criminalisation of 10
defenders who may face death penalty
 
Paris-Geneva, 13 December 2016: 38 organisations co-signed a letter
yesterday addressed to several United Nations (UN) Special Procedures regarding
10 staff members and affiliates of the Centre for Training and Human
Development (TRACKs) in Sudan, who are accused, among other charges, of crimes
against the State, which carry the death penalty, in two overlapping cases.
 
Among the human rights defenders accused, TRACKs
Director Khalafalla al Afif Mukhtar,
trainer Midhat Afif al-Deen Hamdan,
and the director of Alzarqa Organisation for Rural Development, Mustafa Adam, have been arbitrarily
detained for over six months. The letter calls upon the UN to urge the
Government of Sudan to immediately and unconditionally release the three human
rights defenders and drop all charges against them.
 
«The charges against TRACKs staff and affiliates
are spurious and based solely on the peaceful exercise of their work in favour
of human rights, democratic principles, and peace and security in Sudan»
said our organisations. «The evidence presented is unconvincing as to how
the human rights work of TRACKs staff and affiliates constitute crimes against
the state».
 
In one of the cases, the
defendants have been accused of being responsible for the International
Criminal Court’s indictment against Sudanese President Omar al Bashir and the
application of US sanctions against Sudan, despite both events took place years
before the establishment of TRACKs in 2013. It has also been declared that
TRACKs has been conducting work on behalf of, and has a fiscal relationship
with, Al-Khatim Adlan Centre for Enlightenment & Human Development (KACE),
a pro-democracy organisation that also works to promote multiculturalism in
Sudan, which was closed down by the Sudanese authorities in 2012 and
subsequently registered in Kampala, Uganda. 
 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
For more
information, please contact:
• FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Arthur
Manet: + 33 143552518
• OMCT: Chiara Cosentino: +41 228094937 