Thailand:  Free Somyot, expedite his appeal trial
April 30, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Thailand / 2015 / AprilThailand: Free Somyot, expedite his appeal trialThailand PR1 page / 46 KB
Thailand:
Free Somyot, expedite his appeal trial
Paris-Geneva, April 30, 2015 - Thailand’s Supreme
Court must immediately release on bail human rights defender Somyot
Phrueksakasemsuk and expedite his appeal trial, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT joint programme, said today.
The Observatory reiterated its call on the fourth
anniversary of Somyot’s detention on lèse-majesté charges (Article 112 of the
Thai Criminal Code). Article 112 imposes jail terms ranging from three to 15
years for persons found guilty of defaming, insulting, or threatening the King,
the Queen, the Heir to the throne, or the Regent.
“The protracted arbitrary detention of Somyot exudes a
profound lack of fairness that is a typical characteristic of lèse-majesté
prosecutions. The Supreme Court must reverse this trend by ordering Somyot’s
immediate release on bail and expediting his appeal trial”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji.
Somyot, 53, is Thailand’s fourth longest serving
lèse-majesté detainee. A former labor activist and editor of the now-defunct
magazine Voice of Taksin, Somyot was arrested on April 30, 2011 - five
days after he launched a petition campaign to collect 10,000 signatures required
for a parliamentary review of Article 112. On January 23, 2013, the Bangkok
Criminal Court sentenced Somyot to 10 years in prison on two counts of
lèse-majesté. Somyot was convicted for allowing the publication of two
satirical articles in the Voice of Taksin that were written by someone
else and deemed to have insulted the monarchy.
On September 19, 2014, the Court of Appeals upheld the
Bangkok Criminal Court’s lèse-majesté conviction of Somyot. The court failed to
inform Somyot, his lawyer, and his family members that the hearing would take
place on that day.
On November 19, 2014, Somyot filed an appeal to the
Supreme Court against his conviction. He remains
incarcerated in Bangkok Remand Prison pending his appeal. Court officials have
denied Somyot’s requests for bail 16 times - the last time on November 18,
2014.
“Thailand must put an immediate end to the deplorable
judicial harassment of Somyot. The continued denial of his right to bail - a
right that Thai courts frequently grant to individuals accused of serious
crimes - contravenes Thailand’s obligations under international law and
reflects the unfair treatment reserved to lèse-majesté detainees”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
In an opinion issued on August 30, 2012, the UN Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention (UNWGAD) ruled that Somyot’s detention was
arbitrary. The UNWGAD called on the authorities to release Somyot and award him
compensation.
Nineteen individuals, including Somyot, are currently
serving prison terms after being found guilty of violating Article 112 of the
Criminal Code. In addition, at least another 16 remain detained awaiting trial
on lèse-majesté charges.
For more information, please contact:
·        
FIDH: Lucie Kroening: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·        
OMCT: Miguel Martin Zumalacarregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24 