Iran:  Sentencing of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, prominent human rights lawyer
January 10, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2011 / JanuaryIran: Sentencing of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, prominent human rights lawyerSentencing of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh3 pages / 53 KB

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
IRN 006 / 0910 / OBS 108.3
Arbitrary detention / Sentence to prison
Iran
January
10, 2011
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Iran.
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by the Iranian League for the Defense of Human
Rights of the sentencing of Ms.
Nasrin Sotoudeh,
prominent human rights lawyer, known for defending juveniles facing death
penalty, prisoners of conscience, human rights activists and children victims
of abuse. 
 
On
January 9, 2010, Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh was sentenced by the Tehran Revolutionary Tribunal to
11 years of imprisonement, and banned from practicing law and traveling for 20
years on charge of “acting against national security,” of “not wearing hijab
during a videotaped message” and of "propaganda against the regime.” 
 
Background information:
 
On
August, 28, 2010, Ms. Sotoudeh's office and home were searched by members of
the services of intelligence and her assets frozen.
 
On
September 4, 2010, Ms. Sotoudeh went to Evin prison court, where she had been
summoned by the Revolutionary Prosecutor's Office on allegations of
"propaganda against the State" and "collusion and gathering with
the aim of acting against national security" following interviews given to
international media as well as for belonging to the Defenders of Human Rights
Centre (DHRC). After her questioning by a magistrate, Ms. Sotoudeh was
arrested. Her lawyer was not permitted to be present during the questioning.
 
A
few days before her arrest, she had reported to the International Campaign for
Human Rights in Iran as to how the authorities were using tax harassment
against human rights lawyers in order to limit their working conditions. She
gave the example of Ms. Shirin Ebadi who was subjected to the payment of a tax bill
of hundreds of thousands of dollars on the money she had been granted for her
Nobel Peace Prize.
 
During her detention she was held for long periods in
solitary confinement and denied contact with her family and lawyer. She came
close to death after three dry hunger strikes to protest her prison conditions
and violations of due process. She has reportedly been tortured in prison in
order to force her to confess. 
 
On
November 28, 2010, Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh appeared before the Tehran Revolutionary
Tribunal. At the hearing, her lawyers requested her release on bail, which was
denied by the Tribunal.
 
The
Observatory expresses its deep concern about the sentence and the judicial
harassment against her and denounces her arbitrary detention, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning her human rights activities.
 
The
Observatory more generally points out that this case is part of a wave of
arrests and harassment against a number of Iranian human rights lawyers, some
of whom remain detained.
 
The
Observatory therefore demands the immediate and unconditional release of all
human rights lawyers and defenders currently detained in Iran in relation to
their human rights activities.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
 
i.                    
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh as well as all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
ii.                  
Release her immediately
and unconditionally, since her detention is arbitrary as it only aims at
sanctioning their human rights activities;
 
iii.                 
In the meantime, provide
her with all the medical treatment she would require during her detention;
 
iv.                
Put an end to acts of
harassment - including at the judicial level - against her as well as against
all human rights defenders in Iran;
 
v.                  
Conform in any
circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in
particular:
-                   
article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to
promote the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms
at the national and international levels”, 
-                   
article 5(c), which
reads that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, at the national and international levels, [...] to communicate with
non-governmental or intergovernmental organizations”, 
-                   
article 9 which notably
states that  “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, inter alia […] to offer and provide
professionally qualified legal assistance or other relevant advice and
assistance in defending human rights and fundamental freedoms,
-                   
and article 12.2 which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”;
 
vi.                
Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights instruments ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:
 
·        
Leader of the Islamic
Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of the
Supreme Leader, Shoahada Street, Qom, Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21
649 5880 / 21 774 2228, Email: info@leader.ir / istiftaa@wilayah.org / webmaster@wilayah.org 
·        
President Mr. Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 649 5880. Email:
dr-ahmadinejad@president.ir
·        
Head of the Judiciary,
His Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Ministry of Justice, Park-e Shahr,
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567,
Email: Irjpr@iranjudiciary.com / bia.judi@yahoo.com
·        
Minister of Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Manouchehr Mottaki, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh
Abdolmajid Keshk-e Mesri Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 390
1999, Email: matbuat@mfa.gov
·        
Permanent Mission of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
·        
Embassy of Iran in
Brussels, 15 a avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com
 
Please
also write to diplomatic representations of the Islamic Republic of Iran in
your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
January 10, 2011
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43
     55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809
     49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29 