Brazil:  15 year-old is killed in Socioeducative Unit in Rio de Janeiro
March 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Statements / Brazil / 2015 / MarchBrazil: 15 year-old is killed in Socioeducative Unit in Rio de JaneiroDownload full article1.92 MB




PARA VERSÃO EM PORTUGUÊS VEJA O DOCUMENTO ANEXO.JOINT PRESS RELEASE
Rio de Janeiro, 7 March 2015. The  World Organization Against Torture
(OMCT) and Justiça Global (JG) express deep concern over the death of a 15 year
old child at the Escola João Luiz
Alves in the city of Rio de Janeiro on March 6, 2015.
 
According to the information
received, the 15 year old was beaten to death by 4 other juveniles in the same
cell at the Escola João Luiz Alves. Only two days before the killing the OMCT
and JG, together with the Local Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture, the
Public Defender’s office, and a member of the United Nations Subcommittee for
the Prevention of Torture (SPT), visited detention units for juveniles of the
Department of Socioeducative Actions (DEGASE) at Rio de Janeiro and manifested their
concerns to the authorities about the precarious conditions of detention and
the action taken by the authorities to tackle the climate of violence.
“This
tragic death does not come at a surprise. There have been no improvements after
the SPT visit in 2011. On the contrary, the conditions have been aggravated due
to the overpopulation and the abuse of detention without adequate guarantees
and subsequent judicial control “ .Said Emio Gines, member of the SPT
invited by OMCT for this mission.
During the visits in the juvenile
detention centres serious problems were noted, including overpopulation;
allegations of institutional violence; lack of female staff; the abuse of
deprivation of liberty for not violent crimes; and children being in preventive
detention for longer periods than prescribed by law.
“The
deaths in the socio-educative centres in Rio are inadmissible within the
framework of rule of law, but unfortunately they do not come as a surprise to
us. Everything that we saw and heard this week reflects a Socio-educative
System that only exists in paper. The reality that we saw are filthy and
overcrowded centers, with insufficiently trained staff operating under
precarious work conditions; paving the way for generalized practices of
violence. There is little possibility of reintegration within such conditions.” Said
Carolina Bárbara, coordinator of child rights activities at the OMCT. 
The OMCT mission in Brazil assessed
the implementation of the 2011 recommendations of the UN Subcommittee for the
Prevention of Torture for the Juvenile Justice System or Socioeducative System,
as it is called in Brazil. During the visit to the country OMCT representatives
met with judges, public prosecutors, public defenders, State representatives; a
group of mothers of children that have been deprived of liberty within the
centers of DEGASE; the DEGASE syndicate, councils of the rights of the child,
and the social work and psychology council.
“Unfortunately
this is not an isolated case. The situation of the socio-educative system in
Rio is of extreme seriousness and demands articulate actions of the public
power when facing the massive and indiscriminate use of deprivation of liberty
and the inhumane conditions in which we find the children
at the ‘internment units’. Said Isabel Lima, from Justica Global.
The OMCT and JG urge Brazil, and
especially the government of the state of Rio, to adopt with urgency, according
with its international obligation concrete actions to protect the life and
physical integrity of all the children under its custody, including through
diligent investigations to verify possible action or omission of the state in
the present case.
 
Contact
Information:
In
Switzerland- OMCT, Carolina Barbara, Tel. +41 (0) 22 809 49 39, E-mail: cb@omct.org
 
In
Rio de Janeiro- Justiça Global, Isabel Lima, Tel. +552125442320, E-mail: isabel.lima@global.org.br 
.
+552125442320, E-mail: isabel.lima@global.org.br 