Kenya:  Last warning from the court to implement the PBO Act 2013 within 30 days
May 18, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2017 / MayKenya: Last warning from the court to implement the PBO Act 2013 within 30 daysKenya_1805172 pages / 183 KB

THE
OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE
Geneva-Paris,
May 18, 2017
– “The latest High Court ruling on the commencement
of the 2013 Public Benefit Organisations Act (PBO Act), eagerly awaited by
Kenyan civil society for more than
four years, is a welcome sign from the judiciary, two weeks after the
publication of our report”, said the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders today.
On May 13, 2017, Nairobi High Court judge Mativo
ordered the Interior Cabinet Secretary, Mr. Joseph Nkaissery, to publish in the
Gazette within the next 30 days, the commencement date of the Public Benefit
Organisation (PBO) Act 2013[1].
The judge declared that the Kenyan government was clearly in contempt of court over
its failure to comply with a similar ruling eight months ago. However, the judge
decided to give it a last chance to the government to implement the before
taking legal measures.
Last week’s court order was not the first. It followed
a similar ruling issued on October 31, 2016, by another High Court judge, Louis
Onguto, which gave 14 days to the Cabinet Secretary for Devolution and
Planning, Mr. Mwangi Kiunjuri, at that time in charge of the regulation of the
civil society sector, to commence the PBO Act[2].
On September 9, 2016, Mr. Kiunjuri had already given notice of commencement of
the PBO Act, putting the hopes of Kenyan civil society high again after years
of waiting. However, after the ruling, no further development followed, and
instead, the control of the non-governmental sector was moved under the
portfolio of the Ministry of Interior, rendering the Court order inapplicable.
“Such
a manœuvre clearly aims at escaping the High Court order and at neutralising
the goodwill expressed by the Cabinet Secretary for Devolution and Planning.
This is very worrying, particularly in a democratic State claiming to uphold
the rule of law” declared Mr. Gerald Staberock, OMCT
Secretary General. “It shows the level
of arbitrariness exercised by the Kenyan government to control civil
society and the blatant disrespect of the Executive for the judiciary”,he added.
This second High Court ruling, which was, as the
previous one, triggered by civil society legal action trying to hold the Kenyan
government accountable for its inaction, was originally scheduled on March 15,
2017. However, the several failures by the three respondents, the Cabinet
Secretary for Devolution and Planning, the Ministry of Interior and the
Attorney General, to file their response, forced Justice Mativo to postpone the
case until May 23, 2017. Finally, to avoid further delays and not wait until
the physical hearing at the end of May, counsel for the applicants and the
respondents were asked to make written submissions since, according to the
judge, the matter was quite straight forward.
“After
more than four years of inaction the Kenyan authorities should operationalise
without any further delay the PBO Act 2013, and put an end to any form of
arbitrariness and abuses against Kenyan civil society”, said FIDH Vice-President, Ms. Sheila Nabashwa.
The PBO Act 2013 is a law
seeking to provide a more enabling environment for NGOs, with clear criteria regarding NGOs’ registration,
enhanced accountability, set timelines for processing applications, as well as
tax incentives and benefits for organisations conducting “public benefit
activities”. It was passed by the Parliament in 2012 and signed into law by the
then President Mwai Kibaki on January 14, 2013, but has not
been operationalised yet under the Kenyatta administration, while several
attempts have been made to introduce new restrictive amendments prior to its
official commencement. 
On May 3, 2017, the Observatory published an
international fact-finding mission report entitled “Kenya: 2017 elections:
broken promises put human rights defenders at risk”, which provides a
series of recommendations addressed to the authorities to improve the space for
civil society engaged in the promotion and protection of human rights, among
which the call for the immediate operationalization of the PBO Act 2013[3].
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT.
The objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of
ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society. 
For more
information, please contact:
• OMCT: Chiara Cosentino: +41 228 09 49 37
• FIDH:
Samuel Hanryon: +33 6 72 28 42 94 / Audrey Couprie: +33 6 48 05 91 57





[1]            The PBO Act is available on: http://pboact.or.ke/resources/documents/category/3-legislation.


[2]            See the Observatory Press Release issued on November
4, 2016.


[3]       See the Observatory Press Release
issued on May 3, 2017. 