Egypt:  Arrest and subsequent release of a human rights defender monitoring the referendum on constitutional amendments
March 28, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Egypt / 2011 / MarchEgypt: Arrest and subsequent release of a human rights defender monitoring the referendum on constitutional amendmentsArrest_ Ragia Omran 2 pages / 82 KB
PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
 
EGYPT: Arrest and subsequent release of a 
human rights defender monitoring the referendum on constitutional 
amendments
Geneva-Paris, 
March 28, 2011. 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme 
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International 
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), expresses its deepest concern about the 
arbitrary arrest of Ms. Ragia Omran, lawyer, while she was monitoring the 
referendum on the constitutional amendments in the South Cairo Primary Court in 
the district of Bab 
El Khaleq, together with 
her sister Ms. Dana Omran who was accompanying 
her.
On 
March 
19, 2011, 
Ms. Ragia Omran monitored the 
referendum at several polling stations in Cairo, accompanied by her sister Ms. Dana Omran, 
and an American journalist. 
She had received an 
official monitoring permit from the 
Supreme Judicial 
Committee in charge of supervising the 
referendum.
At 3:00 p.m., the three women went to a polling station located into the 
South Cairo Primary Court, where members of the army were present at the 
entrance. They checked their personal identity documents. When they entered the 
polling station, the Judge in charge of supervising the polling station, Mr. 
Mohamed Abdel Hamid Noweir, welcomed their presence and cooperated in answering 
questions.
At 3:15 p.m., Lieutenant Mohsen Mohamed Heikal entered the polling 
station, in violation of the Supreme Judicial Committee's instructions and rules 
related to the process of voting, stating that the presence of members of the 
army is only allowed to maintain order, on the request of the Head of the 
Sub-Committee[1]. Those conditions were 
reportedly not met.
Another senior army officer walked in and asked both Omran sisters to 
show their identity documents. He then reportedly told them to leave the polling 
station immediately. Ms. Ragia Omran showed him her permit from the Supreme 
Judicial Committee, and said that she was allowed to be present at the polling 
station, unlike the army. However, the judge came to tell her that she should 
leave the place, and Lieutenant Heikal threatened to hand her over to the 
Military Intelligence if she did not obey. 
They all 
walked out of the Primary Court, and one of the army officers started to insult 
the sisters and to accuse them of being traitors acting against national 
interest, in front of the crowd of voters queuing outside the polling station. 
Then, a group of at least six army members reportedly violently assaulted the 
sisters, arrested them and brought them to the Cairo Security Directorate. They 
allegedly confiscated their identity documents and all their personal 
belongings, which were not returned until their release. They interrogated them 
about their involvement in the Egyptian revolution movement and their potential 
connections with the United States, checked personal pictures and information on 
their phones and in their notebooks, and accused Ms. Ragia Omran of being at 
polling stations without a permit to monitor, in order to influence voters 
taking part in the referendum. A woman strip-searched them in underwear and 
inspected their hair in a room adjoining the Lieutenant’s 
office.
After a while, 
army officers brought in the American journalist who was waiting outside with 
the taxi driver who had accompanied the group all day. They confiscated her 
personal belongings and camera equipment. They also strip-searched 
her.
At around 
8:30 p.m., the journalist was taken into the Lieutenant's office where she was 
briefly questioned. She was released from custody at 9:30 
p.m. At 11:00 
p.m., the Omran sisters were brought to the Military Prosecution building in 
Madinet Nasr on the grounds that Ms. Ragia Omran had allegedly insulted a public 
official on duty. They were finally released at 1:00 a.m. on March 20, 2011, as 
no tangible evidence was provided to prove that Ms. Omran and her sister had 
been committing any offence.
According to the information received, Ms. Ragia Omran 
is still trying to find out if charges of insult to army officer on duty have 
been dropped or not.
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern about the 
harassment faced by Ms. Ragia Omran on the part of the authorities, which seems 
to merely aim at sanctioning her human rights activities in the context of the 
democratic transition process.
The 
Observatory calls on the Egyptian authorities to put 
an end to any acts of judicial harassment against Ms. Ragia Omran, and more 
generally against all human rights defenders in Egypt, and to comply in all 
circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, 
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998.
For further information, please 
contact:
·         
OMCT: 
Seynabou Benga / Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 
39
·         
FIDH: 
Karine Appy / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
  





[1]              The Supreme Judicial Committee's 
instructions and rules related to the process of voting and votes sorting states 
that: «The President of the Sub-Committee determines the scope of the Assembly 
of the referendum before the start of voting process, and the assembly includes 
the Hall, where there are ballot boxes, and the space around it, for the 
president of each sub-committee will be responsible for maintaining order in the 
Assembly of the referendum. In addition, he has the right to ask for help from 
the police and the armed forces, where necessary. Yet, neither the police 
members nor the armed forces have the right, other than maintaining order, to 
enter the Hall of the referendum, but at the request of the head of the 
sub-Committee». 