Greece:  Smear Campaigns and new threats against Advocates Abroad and its Executive Director Ariel Ricker
November 29, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2018 / NovemberGreece: Smear Campaigns and new threats against Advocates Abroad and its Executive Director Ariel Ricker
CASE GRE 220518.1
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
 
Death
and rape threats / Smear Campaign
 
November
29, 2018
 
The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Greece. 
 
New information:
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Greek
Helsinki Monitor (GHM) about new threats against the volunteers of Advocates
Abroad and particularly against its Executive Director, Ms. Ariel Ricker, in the context of a smear campaign against the
organisation. Advocates Abroad is a legal aid civil society organisation which
aims to inform refugees of their rights in Greece. 
 
According to the information received, Ms. Ricker and the volunteers of
Advocates Abroad have received more than 37,000 death and rape threats,
particularly over social media channels following a smear campaign initiated
with the publication of a video distributed by a far-right group. The video
distorted the work of Advocates Abroad upholding migrants' rights by presenting
out of context excerpts of a conversation held with Ms. Ariel Ricker recorded
with a hidden camera. The video misrepresented the work of the organisation and
tried to make it appear as if Advocates Abroad were instructing asylum-seekers
to lie and misrepresent their stories so as to be granted refugee statute in
Europe.
 
OMCT recalls that this is not the first attack against Ms. Ariel Ricker
and Advocates Abroad and highlights that the situation of human rights
defenders and solidarity actors in Greece has been critical for years. Human
rights defenders working on migrants' and minority rights are consistently
targeted for their legitimate work and face different types of attacks,
including surveillance, arbitrary arrests, detentions, ill-treatment, entry
bans and expulsion[1].
Moreover, several complaints related to racism and minority’s rights have not
been investigated and/or have been sent to the “archive of unknown
perpetrators”[2].
OMCT is particularly concerned by the continued increasing of violent attacks
and threats against minority rights defenders in Greece[3].
 
OMCT condemns the smear and threats campaign against Advocates Abroad
and recalls the essential role that organisations like Advocates Abroad are
carrying out to defend the human rights of people in the move in a context of
systematic violations of international human rights standards by the European
Union and its member states. We urge the Greek authorities to ensure the
physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Ricker and all the members of
Advocates Abroad and to establish guarantees for the right to defend human
rights in Greece.
 
Background information:

 
On April 22, 2018, at around midnight, Ms. Ariel Ricker was attacked and
hit by a brick thrown at her head while she was standing guard in a solidarity
circle to protect women and children refuges gathered for several days in
Sappho Square, Lesvos, to protest against the conditions in Moria camp, from a
group of rioters. The brick broke the safety helmet Ms. Ariel Ricker was
wearing and was concussed and felt to the ground. Another solidarity actor was
roughly hit with a brick 20 minutes later. Hours later, after being able to
reach the hospital, Ms. Ricker was examined briefly by one nurse, then given
one X-Ray and one MRI, and sent home without medication or prescription for medication.

 
These attacks took place in the context of a broader assault against the
refugees gathered in Sappho Square, that began around 20:00, by a group of
rioters. Firecrackers, bottles of water, stunners, flares, glasses from the
cafes, and bricks were continuously thrown all night by the rioters at the
refugees and the solidarity circle.
 
The police had formed four lines but failed to adequately defend the
refugees and the solidarity actors and human rights defenders who were
accompanying them. They even threatened multiple times to beat refugees and
solidarity actors, including Ms. Ricker if they did not stay within the
solidarity circle and put away their cameras. Additionally, although the
attacks happened before their eyes, the police did not arrest the perpetrators
of the attacks against Ms. Ricker and other defenders, while they arrested over
100 protesting refugees for illegal camping[4].
 
Actions
requested: 
 
Please write to the authorities in Greece, urging them to:
 
i.               
Put in place all
necessary measures to guarantee the security and the physical and psychological
integrity of Ms. Ariel Ricker and all other members of Advocates Abroad, as
well as of all minority rights defenders in Greece;
 
ii.             
Put an end to all acts
of harassment against Ms. Ariel Ricker, as well as all minority rights
defenders in Greece, so that they are able to carry out their work without
hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
iii.            
Comply with all the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular with its
Articles 1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
iv.            
Ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international human rights instruments ratified by Greece.
 
Addresses:
 
Prime Minister of
     Greece, Mr. Alexis Tsipras, Email: mail@primeminister.grMinister of
     Justice Mr. Stavros Kontonis Email: grammateia@justice.gov.grAlternate Minister
     for Citizens Protection of Greece, Mr. Nikolaos Toskas, Fax: +30 210 692
     9764, Email: minister@mopocp.gov.grGeneral Secretary
     for Transparency and Human Rights, Ms. Maria Yannakaki, Fax: Email: ggdad@justice.gov.grDeputy Permanent
     Representative of Greece, Mr. Ioannis Tsaousis, First Counsellor,
     Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland,
     Fax: +41 22 732 21 50; Email: grdel.gva@mfa.grAmbassador of
     Greece, H.E. Eleftheria Galathianaki, Embassy of Greece in Brussels,
     Belgium, Fax: (+32) 2 545 5585, Email: gremb.bru@mfa.grPermanent
     Representative of Greece, H.E. Papastavrou Andreas, Permanent
     Representation to the European Union (EU), Fax: +32 2 5515651, 5127912
     Email: mea.bruxelles@rp-greece.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Greece in your
respective countries.
 
***
 
Geneva-Brussels, November 29, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
Created in 1985, the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) works for, with and through an
international coalition of over 200 non-governmental organisations - the
SOS-Torture Network - fighting torture, summary executions, enforced
disappearances, arbitrary detentions, and all other cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment in the world. OMCT and its SOS-Torture
Network are today one of the leading networks working for the protection of
human rights defenders at the international level.



[1]           See OMCT’s Written Submission
to the 35th Session of the United Nations Human Rights Council on the against minority human rights
defenders”, issued on February 21, 2018.


[2]           See OMCT’s Urgent appeal “Greece: Impunity regarding the
attacks perpetrated in December 2016 against minority rights defenders“, issued
on February 21, 2018


[3]           See the Observatory
(OMCT-FIDH), Urgent Appeal on the break-in and arson attack of the Afghan Community
Centre’s premises
in Athens and the threats targeting the Hellenic League for Human Rights
(HLHR), GRE 001 / 0318 / OBS 036,
published on March 30, 2018. 


[4]           See https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-04-23/greece-police-disperse-migrant-protest-on-lesbos-island) 