India:  Acts of harassment and ill-treatment against the nephew of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, District Human Rights Monitor of MASUM in Murshidabad district
May 15, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2014 / MayIndia: Acts of harassment and ill-treatment against the nephew of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, District Human Rights Monitor of MASUM in Murshidabad district​













IND 001 /
0514 / OBS 041
Police
harassment / 
Torture and
ill-treatments /
Threats
India
May 15, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in India. 
 
Brief
description of the information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM)
about acts of harassment and ill-treatment against the nephew of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, District Human Rights
Monitor of MASUM in Murshidabad district, West Bengal, India, in retaliation
against his uncle’s human rights activities.
 
According
to the information received, on April 14, 2014, at about 11 pm, Messrs. Biplab
Karmakar, Goutam Dutta and Sirajul Sahehin, respectively Officer-in-Charge,
Sub-Inspector and Sub-Inspector of Raninagar police station, along with ten or
twelve other police officers, came to the sawmill where Mr. Ripon Seikh, the
nephew of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, was on duty at the time. The policemen then
started to chase him from their cars, without disclosing any reason and
shouting that they were to kill him. Seeing the police personnel, Mr. Seikh
panicked and tried to take shelter in a hut. But the police surrounded the hut
and arrested him.
 
The
police then started to beat him black and blue and dragged him near the police
vehicles. The police personnel reportedly threatened to break his legs and
hands with the intention to permanently disable him physically. They also
verbally abused him with filthy languages and said that they would teach him a
lesson as his uncle Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar denounced the alleged police
atrocities in the district and they would illegally detain him for indefinite
period. Accordingly, the police personnel continuously threatened him that they
would teach everybody who would try to raise their voice against the police and
they would now show the power of police to his uncle Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar. The
police personnel later put Mr. Ripon Seikh into their car while continuing to
subject him to acts of ill-treatment and verbal abuses.
 
When
Mr. Ripon Seikh’s brother and father subsequently went to Raninagar police
station, the Officer-in-Charge did not allow them to meet with him. As they
asked him to disclose reasons for this refusal, the Officer replied that they
could meet him if Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar would come to the police station and
request them to release Mr. Ripon Seikh. He also threatened them that he would
be implicated falsely with severe criminal charges “to teach a lesson to Mr.
Ajimuddin Sarkar”.
 
On April 14, 2014, at about 11.45
pm, MASUM fact-finding team called Mr. Biplab Karmakar and asked him whether
the police had arrested Mr. Ripon Seikh. The Officer confirmed his arrest,
adding that Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar made a mistake by raising his voice against
the police and that he would face dire consequences. He also said that the
police had enough power to eliminate the name of MASUM from Murshidabad
district and would torture all those persons who are attached with MASUM. He
allegedly said that they would permanently disable Mr. Ripon Seikh by breaking
his legs and hands and that MASUM could not do anything if they were to kill
him.
 
On
the same day, the police also arrested Mr. Safikul Islam, a neighbour of Mr.
Ripon Seikh, in order to obtain a false
statement over the incident of a bomb attack upon the house of Mr.
Ajimuddin Sarkar's elder brother in October 2012, in which the police wanted Mr. Islam to negate the actual happenings of the
attack. After Mr. Safikul Islam refused to deliver
this false statement, the police brutally assaulted him. The next day, Mr.
Islam was brought to the court where he was suddenly shown as co accused with Mr. Ripon Sheikh in the same fabricated case
(see below).
 
While in custody, Mr. Ripon Seikh
and Mr. Safikul Islam were repeatedly tortured by the police personnel during
the whole night. They were not provided with any medical assistance while they
were undergoing with severe pain and the police personnel did not provide any
water or food to them while in detention.
 
On
April 15, 2014, Mr. Ripon Seikh and Mr. Safikul Islam were charged under
Sections 3/4/5/6 of the Explosive Substances Act, the police alleging that both
men were apprehended with two plastic bags containing 1,200 grams of explosive
substances. They were then produced in handcuffing before the Additional Chief
Judicial Magistrate Court, Lalbagh. Mr. Seikh’s lawyer then filed a written
application in the court denouncing that he was subjected to custodial torture
in the police station. The Court observed several hematomas and bruises over
the body of both Mr. Ripon Seikh and Mr. Safikul Islam and passed order upon
Lalbagh Sub-Correctional Home to provide proper treatment but rejected their
bail application. On May 8, 2014, the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate
Court of Lalbagh finally granted them bail, and the two men were subsequently
released from Lalbagh Sub-Correctional Home.

On April 15 and 16, 2014, Mr. Ripon
Seikh’s father and Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar respectively lodged written complaints
before the Superintendent of Police of Murshidabad, informing the whole
incident of police torture, false implication and illegal detention of Mr.
Ripon Seikh. Yet as of today no action has been taken in response to the said
complaints.
 
The Observatory is
greatly concerned by the acts of torture and ill-treatments of Mr. Ripon
Seikh while in police custody and by his ongoing prosecution, which seems to
merely aim at sanctioning the human rights activities of his uncle, Mr. Ajimuddin
Sarkar. Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar has on several occasions denounced human rights
abuses committed by the police. In addition, he was already subjected to
various acts of harassment in the past because of his activities. 
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in India, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances
the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ripon
Seikh and Mr. Safikul Islam, all relatives of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, as well as
of all MASUM members and human rights defenders
in India;
 
ii. Order an
immediate, thorough, transparent, effective and impartial investigation
into the above-mentioned events, including the acts of torture and
ill-treatments against Mr. Ripon Seikh and Mr.
Safikul Islam, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them
before an independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by
the law;
 
iii. Provide
adequate reparation and compensation to Mr.
Ripon Seikh and Mr. Safikul Islam;
 
iv. Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against Mr. Ripon Seikh and Mr. Safikul Islam, all relatives of Mr.
Ajimuddin Sarkar, as well as all MASUM members, and
more generally against all human rights defenders in India to ensure that in all circumstances they carry out their activities
without any hindrances;
 
v. Conform with the provisions of
the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly
of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially: 
-     
Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels” 
-     
Article 12.2, which provides that
“"the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de
jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”;
 
vi. More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and with international human rights instruments
ratified by India.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime
Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, India. Fax: + 91 11
2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·    
Mr. Sushil Kumar Shinde, Union Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry of
Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309
2979
·    
Justice Rajendra Mal
Lodha, Chief Justice of India,
Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi -1, India. Fax: +91 11 233 83792,
Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·    
Justice K. G. Balakrishnan,
Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of India, Manav Adhikar Bhawan Block-C, GPO Complex, INA, New Delhi – 110023,
India. Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email:
covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.in
·    
Mr. Naparajit Mukherjee, Acting
Chairperson, West Bengal Human Rights
Commission, Bhabani Bhaban, Alipur, Kolkata - 27, India. Fax +91 33 2337 7259 /
2479 7750, Email: wbhrc8@bsnl.in
·    
Governor Mayankote Kelath Narayanan,
West Bengal, Raj Bhavan, Kolkata - 62,
India. Fax: +91 33 2479 9633 / 2479 7750, Email: secy-gov-wb@nic.in
·     Miss
Mamata Banerjee, Chief Minister, Government of West Bengal, Writers’ Buildings,
BBD Bagh, Kolkata - 1, India. Fax - +91 33 22145480, Email: cm@wb.gov.in,
sechome@wb.gov.in,
chiefsec@wb.gov.in
·    
Mr. A. K. Parashar, Focal Point
on Human Rights Defenders, National Human Rights Commission, Faridkot House,
Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001, India. Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·       H.E.
Mr. Dilip Sinha, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the United
Nations (Geneva), Rue du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 906 86
96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·       Embassy of India in Brussels, 217 Chaussée de Vleurgat, 1050 Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of India in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
May 15, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 20 11
/ +33 1 43 55 18 80 