Russian Federation:  A sombre horizon for civil society organisations as the new Law on Non-Commercial Organisations has come into force
November 29, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2012 / NovemberRussian Federation: A sombre horizon for civil society organisations as the new Law on Non-Commercial Organisations has come into force


PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
RUSSIAN
FEDERATION: A sombre horizon for civil society organisations as the new Law on
Non-Commercial Organisations (NCOs) has come into force
 
Paris-Geneva, November 29, 2012. The
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, is gravely concerned about the
consequences on human rights work in the Russian Federation of the law that
seeks to require non-governmental organisations to register as “foreign agents”.
 
On November 21, 2012, the new law entitled “Introducing Amendments to
Legislative Acts of the Russian Federation in Part Regulating Activities of
Non-commercial Organisations, which Carry Functions of Foreign Agents” entered
into force in Russia[1].
 
The same day, offices of several NGOs were targeted by spray painted
inscriptions in Moscow. Human Rights Centre “Memorial” had its front wall
painted with the words “Foreign Agent (loves) USA”, while the Moscow
Helsinki Group and the All Russia Public Movement For Human Rights were also
targeted. On November 21, Young Guard, the ruling United Russia Party's youth
group, held an openly hostile protest near the offices of Transparency International,
demanding that the anti-corruption watchdog “come out of the shadows” and
officially register as a foreign agent.
 
The Observatory recalls that the new law requires NCOs receiving funds
from foreign sources in order to carry out so called “political activities”, to
register as “foreign agents” with a special governmental agency. Furthermore,
all information published on their behalf using any means should include a
notice that the author is a “foreign agent”. The law also introduces into the
Criminal Code an offence for failing to comply with this obligation, punished
by up to two years of imprisonment or up to 480 hours of corrective work. 
 
Since the bill was submitted to the State Duma (Lower House of the
Federal Assembly of Russia), on June 29, civil society voices and human
rights organisations, including FIDH and OMCT, as well as the international
community at large, have relentlessly denounced it as a major additional
setback to the enjoyment of human rights in the country, in violation of most
basic international human rights standards on freedoms of association and
expression. Despite this, the bill was adopted by the State Duma on July 13 and
the Federation Council of Russia (Upper House) on July 18, and finally signed
by President Vladimir Putin on July 21.
 
In addition, a series of amendments to the Code of Administrative
Offences were approved by the State Duma on October 26 and by the Federation
Council of Russia on October 31. These amendments provide that, in the event of
failure to comply with requirements regarding “foreign agents”, NCOs themselves
will face an administrative fine reaching up to 500,000 Rubles (approximately
12,500 Euros), while their legal representatives, members and participants,
will face an administrative fine up to 30,000 Rubles (approximately 250 – 750
Euros). 
 
The Observatory recalls that these new provisions add to a wide-catching
series of restrictive laws that have been adopted one after the other over the
past months, considerably undermining the capacity of human rights
organisations to operate in the country[2].
The Observatory therefore reiterates its deepest concern over the entering into
force of this new law, which does not only mark a legislative setback for
freedoms of association and expression, but also sends a biased and highly
negative message about the nature of the activities carried out by human rights
organisations in the country, and put all their members at a high risk of
judicial harassment s well as attacks as attested by the recent events.
 
In this context, the Observatory therefore expresses its firm intention
to keep a watchful eye on the implementation of this law and urges the Russian
authorities to immediately undertake its review in order to bring it into
conformity with international and regional human rights standards. Meanwhile,
the Observatory insists that these restrictive provisions must not be used in
order to silence voices of the civil society, and calls on the international
community to monitor it closely and condemn any potential repressive impact.
 
“Labelling
NGOs that receive foreign funds as “foreign agents” is unacceptable”, declared Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President. “We seriously fear that
this stigmatisation is only the first step before the new law is used to prevent
human rights defenders from carrying out their legitimate activities, and even
to criminalise their leaders”, she added.
 
“Protecting the rights of Russian citizens is neither political nor foreign
activity. It is undertaken for and not against Russia”, said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of OMCT. “Human rights organisations in Russia are
highly regarded for the quality and professionalism of their work. Rather
than immunizing the country to the universal human rights discourse the
authorities should protect defenders and provide its citizens with the rights
that it has pledged itself to ensure”.
 
For more information, please contact:
·     FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: +33 1 43 55 25 18
·     OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39



[1] See Observatory Press Release, Russian
Federation: Utmost concern over new bill on Non-Commercial Organisations
(NCOs), July 6, 2012.


[2] See Observatory Press Release, An
umpteenth law in blatant violation of the most basic international human rights
standards, October 29, 2012. 