Kyrgyzstan:  At a Crossroads: Shrink or Widen the Scene for Human Rights Defenders
June  8, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Kyrgyzstan / 2016 / JuneKyrgyzstan: At a Crossroads: Shrink or Widen the Scene for Human Rights DefendersKyrgyzstan Mission Report English48 pages / 581 KB
Publication of an international mission report
 
Bishkek-Geneva-Paris,
June 8, 2016 - Kyrgyz authorities must
reject all bills that could shrink the space for human rights in the country
and should create a safe and favourable environment for human rights defenders,
declared the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint
FIDH-OMCT partnership) today in Bishkek while presenting its latest report on
Kyrgyzstan. 
 
The report, entitled “Kyrgyzstan
at a crossroads: shrink or widen the scene for human rights defenders”,
follows an international fact-finding mission carried out in September 2015 on
the situation of human rights defenders in the country. It presents concrete
examples of increasing pressure faced by human rights defenders over the past
few years, from both State officials and nationalist
groups. The
forms of harassment they are subjected to include illegal searches of their
offices, surveillance and intimidation by intelligence services, threat to
(mis)use criminal provisions on fighting extremism, physical attacks and smear
campaigns in the media. 
 
The report analyses the
ambivalent context for the defence of human rights in Kyrgyzstan. Indeed,
several State representatives met during the mission have acknowledged the legitimate, necessary and positive
role of human rights defenders in society and affirmed their clear
willingness to improve the human rights situation in the country, but some
recent official statements and legislative initiatives seem rather
contradictory.
 
While it salutes the
Parliament's recent decision to reject a discriminatory bill targeting NGOs,
drafted in conformity with the infamous Russian “foreign agents” law, the
Observatory regrets that it has created an atmosphere of distrust and animosity towards civil society,
in particular human rights defenders. 
 
The report further
denounces, amongst others, the draft law banning the so-called “promotion of
non-traditional sexual relationships”, which is still under discussion in the
Kyrgyz Parliament. If adopted, it would penalise by up to one year in prison
any public statement, assembly or public action in favour of equality and the
rights of sexual minorities, thus severely restricting freedoms of association,
expression and peaceful assembly. Given its vague wording, the bill would
affect groups working in the fields of sexual health and sexual and gender
minorities. Several existing laws also have a restrictive impact on the working
environment of civil society, such as the Law on Combating Extremist Activity
and the False Accusation Law criminalizing libel. 
 
The Observatory is also
concerned by statements made on the occasion of Mothers' Day by Kyrgyz
President Almazbek Atambayev. On May 14, 2016, President Atambayev named the
heads of human rights organisations “Bir Duino Kyrgyzstan” and “Kylym Shamy”, Tolekan
Ismailova and Aziza Abdirasulova, when speaking about the organisers
of an alleged upheaval against his government, and accused them of undermining
State stability with the support of foreign funds. 
 
“Today,
the civil society is at its wits’ end. You don’t know what tomorrow will
bring. Time has come for the authorities to choose what they really want
for the country: a genuine democracy, based on the respect of human rights, or
a return to the dark years of its history”, declared Aliaksandr Bialiatski,
FIDH Vice-President and President of Human Rights Centre “Viasna”, who is part
of the Observatory delegation that is currently in Kyrgyzstan to present the
conclusions and recommendations of the mission report.
 
The Observatory urges
the Kyrgyz authorities to ensure in all circumstances that they are able to
carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance or fear of
reprisals.
 
The report also
underlines the situation of human rights defender Azimjan Askarov, Head
of the NGO “Vozduh” known for his documentation of police violence and
detention conditions in South Kyrgyzstan prior to his detention during the 2010
ethnic clashes. He was abusively sentenced to life imprisonment in a
trial that fell short of international standards, as confirmed by the UN Human
Rights Committee (CCPR) in April 2016. The situation of Azimjan Askarov is particularly
serious compared to the general situation of human rights defenders in the
country, but it is emblematic of the repression that people who tackle issues
viewed as too sensitive may face. During the mission, the Observatory
delegation was denied the right to visit Azimjan Askarov in prison. 
 
“Kyrgyzstan has a legal
obligation to implement UN Human Rights Committee’s decisions. It should
release immediately human rights defender Azimjan Askarov and quash his
conviction. Failure to respect its international obligations would bring
Kyrgyzstan into disrepute”, said Souhayr
Belhassen, FIDH Honorary President who is heading the Observatory delegation.
 
Under the pretext of
fighting “ethnic hatred” and “extremism”, several NGOs and their staff have been
subjected to abusive police raids and prosecution. As Azimjan Askarov, all of
them were conducting human rights work related to the situation of ethnic
minorities in the South of Kyrgyzstan. The persecution of
lawyers protecting the rights of ethnic Uzbeks in Kyrgyzstan is not limited to
searches and the confiscation of documents. In some cases, as documented in the
report, lawyers were assaulted in court buildings and even in the middle of
courtrooms.
 
Kyrgyzstan has ratified
the key UN human rights instruments. The authorities must now implement them
and, in particular, guarantee a safe and conducive environment for all human rights defenders. 
 
The
report is available in English and in Russian.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders.
 
For more
information, please contact:
FIDH:
Audrey Couprie: + 33143552518OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau / Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui:
+41228094939 