Philippines:  Extra-judicial killing of land and housing rights activist Mr. Sixto V. Bagasala Jr.
February 21, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2014 / FebruaryPhilippines: Extra-judicial killing of land and housing rights activist Mr. Sixto V. Bagasala Jr.​













PHL 002 / 0214 / OBS 012
Extra-judicial killing
Philippines
February 21, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Philippines.
 
Description of the information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by Task Force
Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) about the killing of Mr. Sixto V. Bagasala Jr., a community
leader and land and housing rights activist in
Malabon city, after he attended a meeting on low-income housing for informal
settlers. Mr. Sixto V. Bagasala Jr., also
known as Ka Jun, was notably the President of the Local Association of Urban
Poor Communities in Malabon.
 
According to
the information received, on February 15, 2014 at around 5:15pm, Mr. Sixto V.
Bagasala Jr. was shot dead by two men, who were identified by witnesses as
Reynaldo Suela alias ‘Ipot’ and one Allan, in a flea market located in a
crowded informal settlement between Barangay Catmon and Barangay Tonsuya,
Malabon City, north of Manila. Mr. Bagasala was on his way home from a meeting
held with leaders of informal settlers’ associations in Barangay Tonsuya.
 
Mr. Bagasala suffered gunshot wounds on his
right leg, shoulder, chest and head. He then tried to get away from his
attackers but the assassins pursued him and fired more shots. When they stopped,
witnesses heard one of the men saying, “there will be more after you”. Mr.
Bagasala succumbed from his injuries shortly after.
 
Before the incident, witnesses reportedly
noticed two men who they identified as “Jasper” and “Babyface” roaming around
the vicinity apparently waiting for someone. Moments later Jasper and Babyface
vanished when Mr. Bagasala appeared at the scene. At that time they saw the two
other men Reynaldo Suela and Allan. 
 
According to the information received, Mr.
Bagasala had received numerous death threats in the past in relation to his campaigns for informal settlers’
housing rights.
 
Mr. Bagasala and members of local
organizations were at the forefront of a campaign to promote the construction
of medium-rise buildings to be financed through the High Density Housing (HDH)
Program of the Social Housing Finance Corporation. The project is part of the
50-billion Peso (around 82-million Euro) shelter fund of the national
government for informal settlers living along waterways and other “danger
zones”. Mr. Bagasala believed that the program could disrupt the interests of
others who profit from informal settlers and from the anomalous implementation
of several low-income housing projects.
 
The Observatory firmly condemns the
extra-judicial killing of Mr. Sixto V. Bagasala Jr. and urges the Philippine
authorities to conduct an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial
investigation in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent and impartial tribunal and apply the sanctions provided by the law. 
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Philippines, urging them
to:
 
i.       
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all human rights defenders
in the Philippines;
 
ii.     
Order
an immediate, thorough, transparent, effective and impartial investigation into
the murder of Mr. Sixto V. Bagasala in order to identify all those responsible,
bring them before an independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions
provided by the law;
 
iii.    
Provide
adequate reparation and compensation to Mr. Sexto V. Bagasala’s relatives;
 
iv.    
Put
an end to any kind of harassment against all human rights defenders in the
Philippines and ensure
in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate
activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
v.      
Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially
regarding the following Articles:
- Article
1: everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels; 
- Article
12.2: the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights [...]; 
 
vi.     
Ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Philippines.
 
Addresses:
Hon. Benigno Simeon Aquino
III, President, Republic of the Philippines, Malacanang Palace, JP Laurel
Street, San Miguel, Manila 1005, Philippines; Fax: +63 2 736 1010;
E-mail: corres@op.gov.ph / opnet@ops.gov.phVice President Jejomar C. Binay, Chairperson Housing
and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC), BDO
Plaza, 8737 Paseo De Roxas St, Makati City, Philippines. Fax: +63 2 811 4158 Email:
info@hudcc.gov.phAtty. Chito M. Cruz, General Manager National
Housing Authority (NHA), Elliptical Road,
Diliman, 1100, Quezon City. Fax: +63 2 921
2530Chairperson Loretta Ann P.
Rosales, Commission on Human Rights (CHR), SAAC Bldg., Commonwealth
Avenue, U.P. Complex, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines; Fax: +63 2929 0102;
E-mail: rosales.chr@gmail.comPolice Director General
Alan LA Madrid Purisima, Chief, Philippine National Police, Camp General Rafael
Crame, Quezon City, Philippines; Fax: (+63) 2 724 8763/ (+63) 2 723 0401;
E-mail: feedback@pnp.gov.phH.E. Ms.
Cecilia B. Rebong, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
Philippines to the United Nations. 47, Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva 19.
Switzerland. Fax: (+41) (0) 22 716 19 32. E-mail: geneva.pm@dfa.gov.ph
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or
embassies of Philippines in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, February
21, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code
of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to
the protection of human rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete
support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax OMCT +41 22
809 49 39 / +41 22 809 49 29Tel and fax FIDH (+33)
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / (+33) 1 43 55 18 80 