Philippines:  Alleged torture and ill-treatment of Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman to extract a confesssion
June 17, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2011 / JunePhilippines: Alleged torture and ill-treatment of Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman to extract a confesssion​Case PHL 170611Alleged acts of torture and ill-treatment to extract a
confession/ Risk of impunity
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in the Philippines.
Brief description of
the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by the Alliance for the
Advancement of People’s Rights (KARAPATAN), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the
alleged torture and ill-treatment to extract a confession of Mr. Malik
Daggung Abdurahman, 27-years old, Moro belonging to the Sama tribe, native
of Zamboanga city and resident of Manila city.
According to the information received, on 8 May
2011, at around 11:00 a.m., Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman was at the
Robinson's Place Mall in Ermita, in Manila city, on his day off, when he received a text message
on his mobile phone from an unknown person asking to meet him. The texting
person reportedly asked for Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman's whereabouts and he
told him/her his location. At around 11:45 a.m., four men in plain clothes reportedly
approached Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurhaman, handcuffed him without giving any reason or presenting an arrest warrant and covered his eyes with
a towel. He was then taken to a house in an unknown location where he was
interrogated. He was reportedly asked if his name was "Sahirun". Mr.
Malik Daggung Abdurahman answered in the negative and informed them that his
name was Malik Daggung Abdurahman. 
According to the same information, the same day, at
around 6:00 p.m.,
Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman was transferred to the National Capital Region
Police Office - Regional Police Intelligence Operation Unit (NCRPO-RPIOU)
detention centre in Bicutan, Taguig city, where he was asked once again if his
name was "Sahirun". He was taken a picture tagged with the name
"Sahirun", although he reportedly repeated that he was not that
person. After the picture was taken, he was allegedly blindfolded, beaten and
tortured, including by pouring water in his nose, which caused him breathing
difficulties. The officers also threw stones at his head. The interrogation
reportedly lasted until around 4:00 a.m. on the 9 May 2011. Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman's two cell
phones, silver necklace, wallet containing his company ID, driver license, cash
of Php 1000 and wrist watch were also seized. 
Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman’s older brother
reportedly found his brother at the NCRPO-RPIOU in Beicutan, Taguig city, on 12 May
2011, three days
after the family was informed about his arrest by a neighbour. At the
NCRPO-RPIOU, Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman was only allowed limited visits by
his family and lawyer. On 16 May 2011, he was examined by the Commission of
Human Rights (CHR) Forensic Centre which recommended that further investigation
be undertaken on the alleged torture. On 20 May 2011, he was transferred to the Basilan
Provincial Jail, in Basilan Island, where he is currently detained with
access to his family and lawyer. 
Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman was reportedly arrested
on the basis of on an arrest warrant (which was only later provided to Mr.
Malik Daggung Abdurahman’s legal counsel and his relatives upon their request)
for a person named “Kirih Hamid Sahirun” (a.k.a. Asdatul Sahirun and Abu Nawas),
accused of being a member of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF)
responsible for the attack against the Philippine Marines in Basilan, on 10
July 2007, which lead to the death of around 14 individuals. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the circumstances surrounding the arrest, detention and alleged
torture and ill-treatment of Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman to force him to admit
the identity of someone accused of having committed a crime. OMCT calls
on the competent authorities to guarantee, in all circumstances, his
physical and psychological integrity. OMCT recalls that the authorities have to
fulfil their obligations under international human rights law to protect the
right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment and to bringing to justice those responsible for
violating this right. 
OMCT urges the
competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough,
independent and impartial investigation into the circumstances
surrounding the arrest and the allegations of
torture and ill-treatment of Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman, in accordance with international human rights
standards, such as the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the result of which must be made public,
in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as
provided by law. 
Actions Requested
Please write to the
authorities in the Philippines urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Malik
Daggung Abdurahman; 
ii.                  
Guarantee Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman full access to his lawyer, his family as well as guarantee that he
is examined by independent doctors and receives adequate medical care, in
accordance, inter alia, with the
recommendations of the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iii.                 
Order his immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if
such charges exist, bring him before an impartial, independent, competent and fair tribunal and
guarantee his procedural rights at all times; 
iv.                
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the detention and
alleged torture and ill-treatment of Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman, in
accordance with international human rights standards, inter alia, the UN
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, the
result of which must be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law;
v.                  
Guarantee that no evidence obtained under torture
and other forms of ill-treatment, or threats thereof, be used in court
proceedings against Mr.
Malik Daggung Abdurahman as stipulated in Article 15 of the UN Convention
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
vi.                
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to Mr. Malik Daggung Abdurahman;
vii.               
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      H.E. Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Republic of the Philippines,
Malacaang Palace, JP Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, Philippines, Fax: (+632) 742-1641 / 929-3968, E-mail: corres@op.gov.ph / opnet@ops.gov.ph
Ø      Sec. Teresita Quintos-Deles, Presidential Adviser on the
Peace Process, Office of the Presidential
Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP), 7th
Floor Agustin Building I, Emerald Avenue,
Pasig City 1605, Fax:+63 (2) 638 2216, E-Mail Address: osec@opapp.gov.ph
Ø      Ret. Lt. Gen. Voltaire T. Gazmin, Secretary,
Department of National Defense, Room 301 DND
Building, Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, E. de los
Santos Avenue, Quezon City, Fax:+63(2) 911 6213, Email:
osnd@philonline.com
Ø      Atty. Leila M. De Lima, Secretary, Department of
Justice, Padre Faura St., Manila, Direct Line 521-8344; 5213721, Trunkline 523-84-81 loc.214, Fax: (+632) 521-1614, Email: doj.delima@gmail.com
Ø      Hon. Loretta Ann P. Rosales, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC
Bldg., UP Complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman,
Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: (+632) 929 0102, Email:
chair.rosales.chr@gmail.com 
Ø      Permanent Mission
of the Philippines to the United Nations in Geneva, 47 Avenue Blanc, 1202
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19
32, Email: mission.philippines@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 17 June 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply. 