OMCT Newsletter - June 2014 International Day in Support of Victims of Torture
July  7, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionAssistance to victims  / Statements / 2014 / JulyOMCT Newsletter - June 2014 International Day in Support of Victims of TortureOMCT_Newsletter_26June20143 pages / 536 KB 



 





OMCT Newsletter -
  June 2014
International Day in Support of Victims of Torture




 
On June 26,
  1987 the Convention against torture came into force. A decade later, to
  eradicate torture worldwide and assure the effective implementation of the Convention,
  the UN General Assembly officially proclaimed June 26 as the International
  Day in Support of Victims of Torture. On this day dedicated to the victims of
  torture and ill-treatment, OMCT as the leading civil society movement against
  torture together with members of SOS-Torture Network organised
  events all around the world to mobilize support to victims of torture, to
  call on governments to take concrete steps to eradicate torture and to reaffirm
  that respect for human dignity must be respected under any circumstances.
 




OMCT




 
Global anti-torture coalition: Torture victims need
  to be given their rights with real remedies

The UN
  International Day in Support of Victims of Torture is reminding us year after
  year of the same sad story. Despite the universal consensus under
  international law persons from all strands of society and in all regions of
  the world continue to suffer from torture and other forms of cruel and
  inhuman treatment or punishment. In order to raise awareness and mobilise public opinion all over the
  world against such practices, members of the SOS-Torture Network organised
  specific activities on the 26th. Several events are carried out in
  Bangladesh, Colombia, Ivory Cost, Mexico, Pakistan and Togo targeting public
  support for reforms implementing the UN Convention Against Torture. Read OMCT’s press release
 
Switzerland
#TortureFreeWorld Campaign
On the
  occasion of the UN Day in Support of Victims of Torture, the Special
  Rapporteur on torture and Anti-Torture Initiative organised a campaign
  entitled #TortureFreeWorld, which intended to generate
  discussion by disseminating positive messages about a future without torture
  on social media. The campaign
  culminated with a live Q&A on Twitter with the Special Rapporteur on
  torture, Mr Juan Mendez.
 
Solitary confinement and high security
  detention, Roundtable, Bern 
OMCT
  supported a roundtable organised by Amnesty International and APT on solitary
  confinement in Switzerland. The participants were representatives from civil
  society, academia, the cantonal and federal government, prison authorities,
  as well as the national preventive mechanism. The main outcome of the
  discussion was the need for more specialized psychiatric facilities, as most
  of the long-term solitary confined prisoners suffer from severe psychological
  disorders. Several participants also demanded independent and mandatory
  representation of those detainees, because they are usually unable to
  exercise their rights. The roundtable attracted a lot of interest. Among the
  public were not only representatives of civil society but also government
  officials and prison directors.
 
Tunisia

OMCT together with 22 other Civil Society
  Organisations carried out a series of events all day long. The
  day started with a march between the Courthouse and the former “9 Avril”
  prison. A tent was also installed on Avenue Bourguiba and materials (flyer,
  stickers, balloon) have been distributed to raise awareness among the public.
  Then, the film "L'affaire Barraket Essahel" by Ghassen Amami was
  shown. To conclude this day and pay tribute to all victims of torture,
  candles was distributed and put in front of the Grand Theatre.
 




Colombia – Call for solidarity with victims of torture
  whose cases remain widely unpunished 




 
La
  Coalición Colombiana contra la Tortura together with OMCT organised several
  cultural events, including theatre plays, live music, an exhibition entitled
  “Memory Gallery” and spaces of dialogue with victims. Approximately 1’000
  persons attended the events.Read our Joint Press Release (only in Spanish)
 




Côte d’Ivoire –
  Victims of torture have to obtain justice and reparation




 
On this
  day dedicated to the victims of torture, Le Mouvement Ivoirien des Droits
  Humains (MIDH), OMCT together with other Civil Society Organisations
  organised debate on “Mechanism protection for victims of torture” and
  “Contribution of civil society for the restoration of the victims’ rights”, calling
  for a number of reforms to ensure that the rights of victims are recognized
  presented in widely covered press briefing.
Read our Joint Press Release (only in French)
 




Togo –
  State has to criminalise torture and protect the victims




 
On 26 June,
  CACIT, ACAT-Togo and OMCT organised a series of events in Lomé, including:
-       
  A workshop with health professional mobilizing and empowering them to
  provide assistance to victims of torture and other forms of ill-treatment
-       
  Radio and TV shows across the country highlighting the need to fight
  torture
-       
  The launch of a petition and a campaign on Internet to push for the
  adoption of the new Criminal Code and Penal Procedure Code and the organic
  law on the National Human Rights Commission (CNDH) as part of an agenda to
  implement the Convention Against Torture.
-       
  The participation of our partners at the “Night Vigil”, event
  organised by all the ACAT around the world
-       
  The provision of medical assistance to 5 victims of torture
  representative of the need to reinforce direct assistance and support to
  victims 
Read our Joint Press Release (only in French)
 




Bangladesh – Call for
  ending torture and systemic impunity




 
To mark
  the UN International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, Odhikar organised
  a discussion meeting in Dhaka and human rights defenders associated with
  Odhikar also organised rallies and human chains in 39 districts across the
  country on this occasion. The rallies across the country called for an end to
  torture and systemic impunity in the country and accountability. It also
  called the government to ratify the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention
  Against Torture. Read our Joint Press Release
 




Pakistan – Need for an
  effective implementation of the Convention against torture




On 26
  June, the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) and OMCT organised
  rallies and walks in Lahore to remind Pakistani authorities of their promise
  to eradicate torture. As the government is about to adopt security
  legislation that lowers safeguards against torture both organisations called
  for a series of measures to translate the Convention Against Torture into
  domestic law and reality.Read more our Joint Press Release

 
OMCT wishes to thank the European Commission for their financial
  support to OMCTs global June 26 activities. The views expressed in the document
  are solely those of OMCT and do not represent those of the European
  Commission. 