Switzerland:  Visit of ex-President Bush to Geneva: Which obligations for Switzerland?
February  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionAssistance to victims  / Statements / Switzerland / 2011 / FebruarySwitzerland: Visit of ex-President Bush to Geneva: Which obligations for Switzerland?Geneva, 
3 
February 2011. 

 
The 
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) - the principle coalition of 
anti-torture organizations – recalled in an open letter to the Swiss authorities 
made public today its legal obligations under domestic law and the UN Convention 
Against Torture (UNCAT) regarding a visit of former US President George W Bush 
to Geneva.  The letter comes in response 
to media reports about his visit to Geneva 
on February 
12, 2011.
 
For 
Eric Sottas, Secretary General of the OMCT ‘there is not the slightest doubt 
that Switzerland is obliged under both international law and its domestic law to 
initiate an investigation for acts of torture against any individual present on 
its territory that has committed, authorized, participated in or was otherwise 
complicit in acts of torture’, said the OMCT. ‘There are no laws that provide an 
exception for former head of states’.
 
The 
letter recalls that there is a compelling body of evidence about the 
US 
policy of torture and ill-treatment under the Bush administration. These 
policies are well documented and to a large extent publicly acknowledged, 
including by the former President’s own admissions of having authorized 
interrogations practices that constitute torture. 
 
‘This 
is not about targeting a former US 
President. It is about the respect for the rule of law’, added Eric Sottas. He 
recalls that in February 2001 the OMCT had mandated Mr Francois Membrez to bring 
a criminal complaint for torture against the former Interior Minister of Tunisia 
Abdallah Kallel on behalf of a victim. The General Prosecutor of 
Geneva 
swiftly initiated - on the basis of the same principles as those at stake today 
– an arrest warrant which could only not be executed because the Minister had 
left the country in record speed. Ten years later he was prevented from leaving 
Tunisia 
in order to be brought to justice, a development seen by Tunisian and European 
commentators to be influenced by the case opened at the time in 
Geneva.
 
Torture 
is a crime under international law wherever and by whoever it is committed and 
for the OMCT it is central that the law must not distinguish on the basis of the 
status or origin of the offender.  The 
OMCT also recalls that the United 
States 
has so far not taken any steps to assume its responsibility to undertake 
comprehensive independent investigations with the aim of bringing those 
responsible to justice for torture, enforced disappearances and other crimes 
under international law. Nor have they provided any remedies or reparations for 
the victims of such practices even in the case of well documented abuse.  
 
Governments 
should not believe that the question of legal accountability will just go away. 
To the contrary it needs to be addressed now and states, and especially the 
political allies of the United 
States, 
should start exercising their influence to bring the impunity for 
US 
torture, secret detention and extraordinary renditions to an end.  
 
Link 
to the OMCT 
letter to the Swiss President
 
For 
further information please contact:
 
Mr 
Eric Sottas, Secretary General, OMCT, + 41 22 809 49 39
Mr 
Gerald Staberock, Deputy Secretary General, OMCT, + 41 22 809 49 
39 