Mexico:  Illegal surveillance against various human rights defenders, journalists and anti-corruption activists
June 28, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Mexico / 2017 / JuneMexico: Illegal surveillance against various human rights defenders, journalists and anti-corruption activists​















URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY


MEX 005 / 0617 / OBS 071
Illegal surveillance
Mexico
June 28,
2017
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Mexico. 
 
Brief description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by the Miguel Agustín Pro Juárez Human Rights
Center (Centro Prodh) and by other reliable sources about the illegal
surveillance carried out against several human rights defenders, journalists
and anti-corruption activists, including Mr. Mario Patrón and Mr.
Santiago Aguirre, the Director and Deputy Director of Centro Prodh,
respectively, Ms. Stephanie Brewer,
Coordinator of the International Department of Centro Prodh and member of the
General Assembly of OMCT, the journalists of Aristegui Noticias[1]
Ms. Carmen Aristegui[2], Mr. Rafael Cabrera and Mr.
Sebastián Barragán, the radio, TV
and print journalist Mr. Carlos Loret de Mola, Mr. Salvador Camarena
and Mr. Daniel Lizárraga, the Director General for Investigative
Journalism and the Head of Information of Mexicanos Contra la Corrupción y la
Impunidad (MCCI, Mexicans Against Corruption and Impunity), respectively, as
well as Mr. Juan Pardinas and Ms. Alexandra Zapata, Director and
Investigator of the Mexican Institute for Competitiveness (IMCO), respectively.
Likewise, some family members of these individuals have also been under
surveillance. 
                     
According to
the information received, a new[3]
investigation recently published by several organisations[4]
has proven the use of spyware, allegedly by the Mexican authorities. The
Israeli company NSO Group sells this spyware, known as Pegasus, exclusively to government authorities for approximately
USD 77,000 (EUR 68,000) per surveillance target. This surveillance would have
targeted the mobile phones of human rights defenders, journalists and
anti-corruption activists. The spyware sends text messages containing
infectious links that allow Pegasus
to access any information stored in the device as well as to undetectably
activate the microphone and the camera. 
 
The
investigation indicates that the attempts to infect the devices were carried
out on key dates for the human rights work of those under surveillance. For
example, between April and June 2016, key dates for the work carried out by
Centro Prodh in the case of the forced disappearance of the 43 Ayotzinapa
students, in the case of the Tlatlaya massacre and in the case of sexual
torture in Atenco; and during August and September 2015, when Mr. Carlos Loret
de Mola was developing his journalistic work on the extrajudicial killings in
Tanhuato, Michoacán, by the Federal Police.
 
The
Observatory reports that this new investigation seems to prove the existence of
a systematic harassment policy against human rights defenders, journalists and
anti-corruption activists, in violation of many regulations inherent in the
Rule of Law. 
 
Moreover,
we would like to express our deep concern regarding the initial statement made
by President Enrique Peña Nieto, who at first denied the possible involvement
of the Government in these surveillance actions, with no investigation to back
such assertion. He also expressed that he expected the law to be enforced
against those having wrongfully pointed at the government (that is, against the
activists and journalists who had reported the surveillance)[5].

 
The
Observatory would like to remind that, as stated by Mr. Michel Forst, UN
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, the situation of
human rights defenders in Mexico is determined by the criminalisation of their
work through the deliberate misuse of criminal law and the manipulation of the
state’s punitive power to hinder and even prevent the legitimate right to
promote and protect human rights[6].
 
Finally, the
Observatory condemns this illegal surveillance and demands the end of this
policy and an effective, independent, and impartial in-depth investigation on
the aforementioned facts, with the goal of bringing those responsible before a
competent court and enforcing the criminal, civil and/or administrative
sanctions provided for by the law.
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please
write to the authorities in Mexico urging them to:
 
i.    Carry
out an effective, independent, and impartial in-depth investigation on the
aforementioned facts, with the goal of bringing those responsible before a
competent court and enforcing the criminal, civil and/or administrative
sanctions provided for by the law; 
 
ii.   Guarantee
the immediate termination of any kind of surveillance against human rights
defenders, journalists and anti-corruption activists in Mexico; 
 
iii. Immediately take all the appropriate measures to ensure the safety and
the physical and psychological integrity of all individuals affected and of all
human rights defenders in Mexico in general.
 
iv.  Implement
recognition policies, including the public acknowledgement by the President of
the Republic and by other senior officials of the importance of the legitimate
work carried out by human rights defenders;
 
v.   Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998;
 
vi.  Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Mexico.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Enrique Peña Nieto, President of
the United Mexican States. E-mail: enrique.penanieto@presidencia.gob.mx
·    
Mr. Miguel Ángel Osorio Chong, Minister
of Interior. E-mail: secretario@segob.gob.mx
·    
Dr. Raúl Cervantes Andrade, General
Prosecutor of the Republic. E-mail: raul.cervantes@pgr.gob.mx 
·    
Mr. Roberto Campa Cifrián, Deputy-Minister
on Legal and Human Rights Affairs, Ministry of Interior. E-mail: rcampa@segob.gob.mx
·    
Dr. Luis Raúl González Pérez,
President of the National Commission for Human Rights (CNDH). E-mail: correo@cndh.org.mx  
·    
Mr. Ambassador Jorge Lomónaco, Permanent
Mission of Mexico to the United Nations in Geneva. E-mail: mission.mexico@ties.itu.int
·    
Mr. Ambassador Eloy Cantú Segovia, Mission
of Mexico to the European Union and Mexican Embassy to the Kingdom of Belgium
and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. E-mail: embamex@embamex.eu / pavila@embamex.eu
·    
Ambassador Dr. Luis Alfonso de Alba,
Permanente Mission of Mexico to the Organisation of American States (OAS).
E-mail: mexico.oea@sre.gob.mx 
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Mexico in your respective
country

***

Geneva-Paris, June 28, 2017

Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal
in your reply. 

The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997
by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of
this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.

To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809
49 29
Tel and fax FIDH: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55
18 80
 



[1]                During the last few years, the
journalistic work of Aristegui Noticias has uncovered corruption cases and has
covered stories on serious violations of human rights in Mexico, which has led
to repeated harassment actions against the media outlet, including the forceful
entry in their office.


[2]                Her underage son, Emilio Aristegui, has also been the target of
surveillance attempts.


[3]                The use of this surveillance
method against several supporters of a sugary drink tax was discovered in
February 2017.


[4]                Citizen Lab, ARTICLE19 Mexico and Central
America Office, R3D: Red en Defensa de los Derechos Digitales and SocialTIC.


[5]                See press release “With his
statements, Enrique Peña Nieto condemns the #GobiernoEspía investigation to
failure and threatens those who denounced being spied on”, June 22, 2017.
Available here:
http://centroprodh.org.mx/en/?p=764


[6]                End of mission statement by the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders,
Michel Forst on his visit to Mexico from January 16 to January 24, 2017. Available here:
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=21111&LangID=E 