Djibouti:  Djibouti: sexual abuse and appalling conditions of detention in Gabode Prison
April 28, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Djibouti / 2000 / AprilDjibouti: Djibouti: sexual abuse and appalling conditions of detention in Gabode PrisonDjibouti: sexual abuse and appalling conditions in Gabode Prison  Case DJI 280400  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Djibouti.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of sexual abuse and appalling conditions of detention in Gabode Prison of three young men, Abdi Robleh, 22 years, Mohamed Ibrahim Abdi, 20 years, and Moussa Houssein Farah, 18 years in Djibouti.    According to the information received, they are part of a number of Oromos (Ethiopian citizens) boys and young men are allegedly  being detained and subjected to sexual abuse in Gabode prison in Djibouti. (see also cases DJI 190400.CC and DJI 190400.1.CC)  It is reported that these young men were arrested in the street following their arrival in Djibouti from Ethiopia as refugees from the regional conflict and are allegedly being detained and subjected to sexual abuse by fellow adult inmates and prison guards in ‘Prison de Gabode’ in Djibouti for the last 6 months.  Furthermore, according to the information received, the conditions inside the prison are described as suffocating and dirty.  The detainees are only allowed two hours of “exercise” in an open air corridor, or in the corridor that is described as detention in an "oven".  It should be noted that this is the only time that the detainees are supervised by guards.  The temperature of the prison in the summer is often 45º C and does not descend below 35º C.  The hot summer begins in May, although this year due to a particularly dry season, it is already extremely hot already.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Djibouti urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at  all times; iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Gabode Prison Monsieur le directeur, prison civile de Djibouti BP 12  Son Excellence Monsieur - Ismail Omar Guelle, Président de la République, La Présidence, BP 6, Djibouti, République de Djibouti.    Fax (+ 253) 35 50 49  //  350174					  Monsieur  - Ibrahim Idriss Djibril, Ministre de la Justice, Ministère de la Justice, B.P. 12, Djibouti, République de Djibouti.  Fax (+ 253) 35 40 12  //  35 54 20  Monsieur Ali Abdi Farah, Ministre des affaires étrangères, Ministère des affaires étrangères, BP 1863, Djibouti, République de Djibouti. Fax: (+ 253) 353840  Monsieur Ali Dini, Batonnier de l'Ordre des Avocats de Djibouti, Barreau de Djibouti, B.P. 2461, Djibouti, République de Djibouti.  Geneva, April 28, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 