Sudan:  Sudan: arbitrary arrest and torture of Mr. Faisal Dawood Abd Alrahman and Mr. Abd Alrahman Mohamed Abd Alrahman
October  5, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2004 / OctoberSudan: Sudan: arbitrary arrest and torture of Mr. Faisal Dawood Abd Alrahman and Mr. Abd Alrahman Mohamed Abd AlrahmanCase SDN 051004 Arbitrary arrest / Alleged torture / Incommunicado detention / Risk of torture   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in SUDAN.     Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organization Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrest and torture of Mr. Faisal Dawood Abd Alrahman and Mr. Abd Alrahman Mohamed Abd Alrahman on 23 September 2004.   According to the information received, on Thursday 23 September 2004 at 11 am, eight officers from National Security Agency (NSA) arrested Mr. Faisal Dawood Abd Alrahman (26 years old, fourth year Economics student, Secretary-General of the Darfur Student Association at the University of Khartoum) and Mr. Abd Alrahman Mohamed Abd Alrahman (27 years old, second year Arts Faculty student, Chairperson of the Darfur Student Association at the University of Khartoum) at the University of Khartoum premises while they were on their way to the Student Union building.  They were taken to the NSA political section offices at Khartoum North. While detained there, they were allegedly beaten and punched all over their bodies for an hour. They were questioned about the activities of the Darfur Student Organization. Mr. Abd Alrahman Mohamed Abd Alrahman was released on 24 September 2004 at 4 pm. Mr. Faisal Dawood Abd Alrahman is still in detention and his whereabouts remain unknown, giving rise to fears about his being subjected to torture or ill-treatment.    Action requested Please write to the authorities in Sudan and urge them to:   i. immediately locate the whereabouts of Mr. Faisal Dawood Abd Alrahman;  ii. take all necessary measures to ensure his physical and psychological integrity;  iii. order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges, or, if such charges exist, bring him before a competent and impartial tribunal while ensuring the respect of his procedural rights including his right to legal advice at all times;   iv. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the arrest and alleged torture of Mr. Faisal Dawood Abd Alrahman and Mr. Abd Alrahman Mohamed Abd Alrahman in order to identify the perpetrators, bring them to justice and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  v. guarantee adequate reparation to the victims of these abuses;  vi. guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including freedom of association, throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 783223  Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 788941  Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affair, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779383   Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 770883  His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mohamed Al- Hassan Ahmed Al-Haj, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.   Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, October 5, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 