China:  Very concerning health condition and allegations of torture and ill-treatment of Guo Feixiong
August  3, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2016 / AugustChina: Very concerning health condition and allegations of torture and ill-treatment of Guo Feixiong
New information

CHN 002 / 0716 / OBS 060.1

Torture / Ill-treatment /

Critical health condition /

Arbitrary detention /

Judicial harassment

People’s Republic of China

August 3, 2016

 

 

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a 
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has 
received new information and requests your urgent intervention on the 
following situation in the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC).

 

New information:

 

The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the very 
concerning health condition and allegations of torture and ill-treatment of 
human rights defender Mr. Yang Maodong, more commonly known 
by his pen-name Guo Feixiong.

 

According to the information received, Guo Feixiong’s health is in 
critical condition after 86 days on hunger strike, as he continues to be 
subjected to torture and ill-treatment at the hands of prison officials at 
Yangchun Prison. Despite numerous requests by Guo Feixiong, his family and 
lawyers, the authorities refuse to transfer him from the prison where he is 
being ill-treatedto another facility where he can receive appropriate 
medical treatment.

 

On July 28, 2016, Guo Feixiong’s lawyers Mr. Zhang Lei and Mr. Li 
Jinxing were allowed to meet with him for about 40 minutes. His lawyers 
expressed grave concern for his health, noting he is extremely frail. Their 
conversation was closely monitored by prison guards, but Guo Feixiong was 
able to communicate to them about his ongoing ill-treatment in prison.

 

Previously, on July 21, 2016, Guo Feixiong’s sister was also 
allowed to speak with him, after having been repeatedly denied visitation 
rights since June 2016 (see background information). During this visit, Guo 
Feixiong and his sister were taken to a visitation room away from other 
inmates and again under strict supervision by prison guards. They were 
separated by a soundproof wall and window, and were allowed to speak via 
telephones. Their conversation was censored by the prison guards, who 
aggressively cut off the phones and silenced Guo Feixiong when he uttered 
the words “ill-treatment by the prison”.

 

While talking to his sister, Guo Feixiong reiterated his request for a 
transfer to another prison, and that he would continue his hunger strike 
until this demand had been met. He also informed her that prison officials 
had taken away all his books, and instructed inmates to harass and insult 
him, including shaking his bed to prevent him from sleeping and harassing 
him when he uses the restroom. According to his sister, Guo Feixiong's 
health appeared very critical. His face was ashen and gaunt, he had trouble 
walking, and he appeared to have lost even more weight since June, when he 
weighted 52 kg. He was also visibly emotionally distraught and seemed out of 
character and very tense.

 

Prison officials have in the past repeatedly attempted to stop Guo 
Feixiong from sharing information on his detention and the treatment he is 
subjected to in prison. On May 7, 2016 a meeting between Guo Feixiong and 
his lawyers was abruptly ended after only one minute after Guo Feixiong 
mentioned the use of electric shocks on inmates as a common means of 
punishment. Moreover, letters written by Guo Feixiong over the past few 
months addressed to Mr. Li Jingyan, Director of the Guangdon Prison 
Administration Bureau, and to the Director of the Yangchun prison informing 
them of his ill-treatment have apparently not been delivered. Guo 
Feixiong’s lawyers and family have also repeatedly brought up the 
allegations of torture and ill-treatment of Guo Feixiong to prison officials 
and the Director of the Guangdon Prison Administration Bureau, but the 
latter have refused to investigate these complaints. They have either 
accused Guo Feixiong of lying, or insisted that his treatment is normal 
since “such punishments are permitted by the prisoners' 
code”[1]when guards deem 
that inmates are being disobedient.

 

The Observatory is deeply concerned about the allegations of ongoing 
torture and ill-treatment of Guo Feixiong in detention, as well as about his 
current critical health condition. His situation is especially worrying 
given the fact that there are  renown cases of critics of the 
government dying in police custody after having been denied medical care by 
prison authorities[2].

 

The Observatory calls upon the Chinese authorities to immediately provide 
Guo Feixiong with appropriate medical treatment and to fully investigate the 
allegations of torture and ill-treatment by the prison authorities against 
him.

 

The Observatory also strongly condemns the judicial harassment and 
ongoing arbitrary detention of Guo Feixiong, which seem aimed at punishing 
him for his legitimate human rights work, and calls for his immediate and 
unconditional release and for dropping all charges against him.

 

Background information:

 

Guo Feixiong has continuously been subjected to extreme judicial 
harassment and arbitrary detention since 2005[3].

 

In November 2007 he was sentenced to five years in prison and fined RMB 
40,000 for “illegal business activity” in connection with his 
2001 publication of a book about a political scandal in Shenyang, Liaoning 
Province. Guo Feixiong was released in September 2011, but has since been 
subjected to heavy surveillance and regular questioning about his 
activities[4].

 

On August 8, 2013 he was re-arrested on charges of “assembling a 
crowd to disrupt order in a public place” after he was spotted at a 
public protest in January 2013, in support of a Guangzhou newspaper that was 
battling government censorship at the time. Guo Feixiong was subsequently 
placed in police custody, and was denied access to legal counsel until 
November 14, 2013, after eight failed attempts made by lawyers to visit 
him.

 

On June 24, 2014, after ten months in police custody, Guo Feixiong was 
formally charged with “gathering crowds to disrupt public 
order”. Because they had been denied access to Guo Feixiong’s 
case file, his lawyers boycotted his initial hearing scheduled for September 
12, 2014, which resulted in a postponement. On November 27, 2015, Guo 
Feixiong was finally sentenced to six years in prison by the Tianhe District 
People’s Court in Guangzhou on charges of “gathering crowds to 
disrupt social order” and “picking quarrels and provoking 
trouble”. The latter charge was added by the judge at the time of 
sentencing.

 

Guo Feixiong was then transferred to Yangchun Prison in late 2015 to 
serve out his sentence, where he has since been subject to multiple 
degrading acts and ill-treatment. For example, on May 9, 2016, prison 
officials video-recorded Guo Feixiong undergoing a humiliating medical 
examination against his will, and threatened to upload the video online. 
This prompted Guo Feixiong to declare a hunger strike the same day to 
protest against the continuous harassment and ill-treatment he has suffered 
while in detention. His weight subsequently dropped from 75 kg to 52 kg in 
one month.

 

According to the director of the prison hospital at Yangchun, Guo 
Feixiong has been force-fed twice every other day since May 14, 2016 and is 
being given intravenous supplements every other day against his will. 
Previous reports of force feeding in prisons in China have indicated that 
prisoners are tied to a bed while tubes are forcibly inserted into their 
nose, resulting in injuries to their nose, mouth, and stomach and subsequent 
bleeding, which could be fatal considering Guo Feixiong’s already 
fragile health condition.

 

In June 2016 Guo Feixiong had also informed his family that he was 
suffering from internal bleeding and continued bleeding in his mouth and 
throat that had begun when he was first transferred to Yangchun Prison, but 
was still being denied access to proper medical treatment. In view of this, 
Guo Feixiong’s family requested that he be transferred to a facility 
where he can receive medical treatment, but the authorities reportedly 
responded that he would only be moved to a hospital “in the event that 
he loses consciousness”.

 

On June 11, 2016, Guo Feixiong’s sister attempted to visit him, but 
prison officials refused the visit and only allowed her to exchange written 
notes with him. In these notes, Guo wrote that he would not stop his hunger 
strike because his demands had not been met and the prison authorities were 
continuing to subject him to humiliation and ill-treatment.

 

On the same day, his sister was also informed by prison officials that 
she could only visit her brother once a month. She therefore went to 
Yangshun Prison on July 12, 2016 but was again denied the right to visit 
with her brother.

 

Actions requested:

 

Please write to the authorities in the People’s Republic of China, 
urging them to:

 



i.              
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of 
Guo Feixiong, including by providing him with adequate medical treatment, as 
well as of all human rights defenders in the People’s Republic of 
China;



 



ii.             
Release Guo Feixiong immediately and unconditionally since his detention is 
arbitrary, and drop all charges against him;



 



iii.           Carry 
out an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the 
allegations of torture and ill-treatment against Guo Feixiong, in order to 
identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, 
and sanction them as provided by the law;



 



iv.            Put 
an end to the harassment - including at the judicial level - against Guo 
Feixiong, as well as against all human rights defenders in the 
People’s Republic of China;



 



v.             
Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, 
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, 
especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;



 



vi.            
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by the People’s Republic of 
China.



 

Addresses: 

 



·       Mr. LI Keqiang, Prime 
Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State 
Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, 
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs)

·       Ms. WU Aiying, Minister of 
Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 
Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic 
of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345,  
minister@legalinfo.gov.cn/  
pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn

·       Mr. WANG Yi, Minister of 
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Waijiaobu, 
2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of China, 
Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email:  
ipc@fmprc.gov.cn;

·       Mr. GUO Shengkun, Minister 
of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang, 
Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, 
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216

·       H.E. Mr. WU Hailong, 
Ambassador,Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Chemin 
de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: 
+41 22 7937014, E-mail:  
chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn

·       Embassy of the 
People’s Republic of China in Brussels, Avenue de Tervuren, 1150 
Woluwe Saint-Pierre, Belgium,Tel: +32-2-7711497, 7711495; Fax: 
+32-2-7792895; Email:  
chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn.



 

Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the 
People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
 


 




[1] 
          According to 
statements made by prison officials to Guo’s family.





[2] 
          For instance, in 
March 2014, activist Cao Shunli died in police custody after having been 
repeatedly denied medical care in detention. She was transferred to a 
hospital only after having fallen into a coma, where she eventually 
died.





[3] 
          For more details, see 
Observatory Urgent Appeal CHN 001 / 0206 / OBS 018.4 of November 5, 
2008.





[4] 
          For more information 
on Guo Feixiong, the ill-treatment he has faced, and the campaigns for his 
release, see Human Rights in China (HRIC)’s summary of his case at 
http://www.hrichina.org/en/citizens-square/case-guo-feixiong-guo-fei-xiong-penname-yang-maodong-yang-mao-dong
- and all of HRIC’s publications on Guo Feixiong’s situation at 
http://www.hrichina.org/en/defenders/guo-feixiong. 