Syrian Arab Republic:  Accountability for human rights violations and international crimes paramount, Security Council must act
August 23, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2011 / AugustSyrian Arab Republic: Accountability for human rights violations and international crimes paramount, Security Council must act PRESS
RELEASE
For
immediate release                                             Geneva,
23 August 2011
Syria: Accountability
for human rights violations and international crimes paramount, Security
Council must act
The International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) welcomed the resolution adopted today
by the United Nations Human Rights Council, strongly condemning the continued
grave and systematic human rights violations committed by the Syrian
authorities and establishing an independent Commission of Inquiry to
investigate the human rights situation in the country.
The Human Rights Council, the UN’s principal body
charged with the promotion and protection of human rights, adopted the
resolution at this second special session on the situation of human rights in
Syria by affirmative vote of 33 of the 47 members of the Council.
A Fact Finding Mission on Syria, dispatched by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights following the Council’s first
special session on Syria in April 2011, reported on 17 August 2011 its findings
of widespread and systematic human rights violations, including enforced
disappearances, arbitrary and extrajudicial executions, torture and
ill-treatment. Today’s Council resolution expressed profound concern at the
Mission’s findings, including that the patterns of human rights violations may
amount to crimes against humanity, as provided for in article 7 of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC). 
“What matters
now is action”, said Alex Conte, ICJ Representative to the United Nations. “The new Commission of Inquiry must be
afforded the greatest support possible and as wide a mandate as possible to
enable it to establish the facts and circumstances necessary to ensure a
comprehensive consideration of accountability issues”, he added.
The ICJ and OMCT stressed that accountability for
human rights violations and alleged crimes is paramount, including for all
those responsible those in command
and under the command of the Syrian
authorities. Such individuals include members of the Presidential Guard, the
Fourth Division of the Army and the Shabbiha
“civilian militia” forces. The ICJ and OMCT have repeatedly urged all relevant
UN institutions to consider all options at their disposal to ensure accountability
for perpetrators of human rights and international crimes, and justice for all.

“In the face of
the overwhelming and compelling evidence presented, amongst others by the
report of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, the situation must now
urgently be referred by the Security Council to the International Criminal
Court”, said Gerald Staberock, Deputy Secretary General of OMCT. Such
action would be taken under article 13 of the Rome Statute, which allows
referral of a matter to the jurisdiction of the Court where a situation appears
to involve the commission of a crime under the Statute.
For more
information, please contact Alex Conte, ICJ Representative to the United
Nations, at +41-79-957-2733, or Saïd Benarbia, ICJ Middle East & North Africa
Legal Adviser, at +41-22-979-3817, or Gerald Staberock, Deputy Secretary
General, OMCT, at +41 22 809 4939 or +41 79 377 5446. 