Kyrgyzstan:  Press Release: The Human Rights Committee of the Kyrgyz Parliament decides not to give its opinion on the highly controversial "foreign agents" law
May 21, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Kyrgyzstan / 2015 / MayKyrgyzstan: Press Release: The Human Rights Committee of the Kyrgyz Parliament decides not to give its opinion on the highly controversial "foreign agents" lawParis-Geneva, May 21, 2015. The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), expresses its deep preoccupation following the decision of the Human
Rights Committee of the Kyrgyz Parliament not to comment on the "foreign
agents" bill, paving the way for its forthcoming adoption in second
reading in the Parliament. If adopted in three readings, the bill would
severely restrict the freedom of association of human rights defenders,
contravening the Kyrgyz Constitution and international human rights instruments.
 
In early March 2015, the law was approved by the Parliament’s Committee
on Law, Order and Crime Prevention but a coalition of Kyrgyz NGOs filed a
complaint denouncing procedural violations during the session of the Committee.
In the case of, the Human Rights Committee of the Kyrgyz Parliament, the
Committee was due to release its conclusions regarding the amendments to the
laws “On non-profit organisations” and “On state registration of legal entities
and branches” on May 19, 2015. 
 
Such amendments are inspired on the Russian legislation on “foreign
agents” which led to the closure of more than 40 NGOs in the Russian
Federation. In a very concerning move, the Human Rights Committee did not take
any position on the bill even though it contradicts the Constitution of the
Kyrgyz Republic (Art. 4.2, Art. 52) and undermines the right to freedom of
association, including the right to access funding laid out in Art. 22 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which the Republic of
Kyrgyzstan is a party. 
 
The provisions of the bill could be used to force virtually any NGO that
receives foreign funding to either adopt the stigmatising label of “foreign
agents” or otherwise put an end to its activities. 
 
Stigmatisation arising from labelling human rights defenders and their
organisations as “foreign agents” would have serious negative impacts on Kyrgyz
civil society which plays a key role in improving the country’s human rights
record. Moreover, the practically inevitable failure of NGOs to comply with the
said provisions will trigger disproportionate administrative and criminal
sanctions - ranging from the suspension to the close down an association -
creating an atmosphere of fear, uncertainty and possible termination of
programs viewed as sensitive - including those financed by international
organisations to which the Kyrgyz Republic is a member, such as the UN.
 
Moreover, if the amendments were to be adopted, tougher financial reporting
requirements would be established not only violating the constitutional right
to equal treatment but also discriminating against civil society organisations
receiving grants from foreign foundations, donor countries and other
organisations that equally support the Kyrgyz government’s reform programmes
financially.
 
The Observatory urges the Kyrgyz Parliament not to adopt these
amendments as they would significantly restrict the space of NGOs. In a context
of globally shrinking civic freedoms, the Observatory urges the members of the
Kyrgyz Parliament not to follow the example of neighbouring countries who
passed restrictive legislative measures restricting the space of civil society,
in particular human rights defenders and to be firm in upholding international
human rights standers. The negative impact of the bill on the country's
reputation and rule of law are both indisputable. 
 
For more information,
please contact:
·    
OMCT: Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui: +41 22 809 49 24
·    
FIDH: Lucie Kroening /
Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 