Turkey:  Provisional release of 22 trade unionists and human rights defenders
April 12, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2013 / AprilTurkey: Provisional release of 22 trade unionists and human rights defenders


PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
TURKEY: Provisional release of trade unionists and human rights defenders
 
Paris-Geneva,
April 12, 2013. The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), welcomes the release of 22
Turkish trade unionists and human rights defenders accused of membership with
an illegal organisation.
 
On April 10, 2013, 22 trade unionists
were provisionally released. However, charges are still pending
against them and the next hearing in their trial is scheduled for July 8, 2013.
 


The 22 trade unionists released were
among the 28 who had been arrested and subsequently placed on pre-trial
detention[1] in June 2012 on charges of
“being a member of an illegal organisation” under Article 314 of Turkish Penal
Code (TPC), in the framework of an anti-terrorist operation intended to
dismantle the alleged terrorist network KCK[2].
The remaining 6 out of the 28 had already been released on February 15, 2013[3].
“We are
relieved that all the pre-trial detainees are now out of jail in that
particular case, but we are concerned about the persistence of charges against
them. We also deplore more generally that several leading human rights
activists, including prominent lawyers and members of FIDH member organisation
IHD remain detained, and we urge the Turkish authorities to have them all
released and to drop all the charges against them” FIDH
President Souhayr Belhassen said today.
 
“Although we welcome the release of those 28 human rights defenders, we
remain deeply concerned that
justice continues to be used in Turkey as
a weapon to repress, intimidate and punish human rights defenders. We also
deplore that the
vague definition of terrorism and its interpretation by the courts has made it
possible for prosecutors and judges to consider that the mere critic of the
authorities for their human rights record may in itself be construed as a form
of support to terrorist groups or evidence of membership in terrorist groups”,
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock added.
 
Since 2009, several operations
of this kind were launched targeting mostly peaceful Kurdish and pro-Kurdish
activists. This last operation targeted members of trade unions affiliated to
the KESK: the Egitim-Sen, SES (The Trade Union of Public Employees in Health
and Social Services), BTS (United Trade Union of Transport Employees) in
Ankara, Diyarbakır, İstanbul, Ağrı, Bitlis, Siirt, Adana, Eskişehir Provinces.
 
For further information, please
contact:
• FIDH:
Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
• OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39



[1] These were: Yunus Akıl -
Former President of BTS / Council Member of KESK, Belgizar Sazak -
Council Member of BES, Mehmet Arda - Member of Eğitim Sen, Mehmet
Sıddık Akın - Secretary General of SES, İzzettin Alpergin -
Secretary General of Tüm Bel Sen, Yılmaz Yıldırımcı - Executive of Tüm
Bel Sen Ankara Second Branch, Sakine Esen Yılmaz -  Executive of 
Eğitim Sen, Nihat Kılınçalp - Executive of Eğitim Sen Ankara
First Branch, Metin Vuranok - General President of Tarım Orkam-Sen, Erdal
Turan - Executive of SES Ankara Branch, Ferruh Çelik -  Executive of Tüm Bel Sen Ankara Second
Branch, Hanım Koçyiğit -  Member
of Eğitim Sen, Seyran Şık - Haber-Sen Women Secretary General, Mehmet
Sezgin İbin -  Executive of  Tarım Orkam Sen Ankara Branch, Mustafa
Bozan - Ankara Branch Chairperson of Yapı Yol Sen, Aykut Erhan Turgut
-  Executive of Eğitim Sen Ankara Second
Branch, Deniz Bozbey - Member of Eğitim Sen, Sibel Anıl -  Member of 
Haber-Sen, Erdal Yılmaz - 
Member of SES, Bekir Gürbüz - 
Member of Eğitim Sen, Tarık Kaya -  Member of 
Eğitim Sen, Osman İşçi - 
Member of  Eğitim Sen and
Researcher in Hacettepe University, Çerkez Aydın, Veysel Özhekdi,
Hasan Örgün, Şerif İldoğan, Mehmet Bozgeyik and Fikret
Çalağan.


[2] 
KCK (Kurdish Communities Union) is an organisation said by the
authorities to be the “urban branch” of the armed Kurdistan Workers Party
(PKK).


[3] Namely: SES General Secretary Sıddık
Akın, Eğitim-Sen Tunceli Branch Chairperson Hasan Ölgün, Eğitim-Sen Adıyaman
Branch executive Erdal Yılmaz, Eğitim-Sen member Hanım Koçyiğit, BTS Diyarbakır
Branch Secretary Veysel Özhekti and Haber-Sen member Sibel Anıl. 