Azerbaijan:  Joint Open letter to His Holiness Pope Francis on political prisoners in Azerbaijan
July 12, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Azerbaijan / 2016 / JulyAzerbaijan: Joint Open letter to His Holiness Pope Francis on political prisoners in Azerbaijan

12 July 2016
 
Open letter by the Civic
Solidarity Platform, NGOs from Sport for Rights coalition and other NGOs to His
Holiness Pope Francis on political prisoners in Azerbaijan
Dear Holy Father,
This autumn you will be visiting Azerbaijan. The
citizens and the authorities in this country, as well as others, will be
listening carefully to the message you deliver in public and in private. Similarly
to the words addressed in Armenia in June, your speech in Azerbaijan will carry
a special weight as they will come at a time when the threat of a return to war
hangs over Armenia and Azerbaijan and the resulting destabilisation could
affect the entire Caucasus.
We, the undersigned NGOs, members of the Civic
Solidarity Platform and Sport for Rights coalition, as well as other NGOs, kindly
entreat Your Holiness to help bring lasting peace and respect for human rights in
the region and particularly in Azerbaijan. We kindly ask that you call for the
release of those political prisoners still remaining in prison. One of them,
Ilgar Mammadov, an opposition politician, remains in prison despite a European
Court of Human Rights judgment delivered more than two years ago, stating that he
was convicted without any evidence, with the aim of silencing his criticism of
the government.[1]

 
Your predecessor, Pope John Paul II, said to
politicians on his visit to Baku in 2002 that, “your specific activity is the service of the common good, the promotion
of legality and justice, the guarantee of freedom and prosperity for all…Politics
requires honesty and accountability. The people should be able to feel
understood and protected…Those who accept responsibility for administering
public affairs cannot deceive themselves: people do not forget! Just as they remember
with gratitude those who have laboured honestly in the service of the common
good, so they pass on to their children and grandchildren bitter criticism of
those who abused power to enrich themselves”[2].
Unfortunately, this message remains valid today in Azerbaijan
where political and economic corruption is rampant and human rights are not
respected. This message remains especially pertinent in Azerbaijan where dozens
of political prisoners continue to languish in detention. On their behalf, we
respectfully ask you to raise this issue with Azerbaijan’s authorities and call
for the unconditional release of all imprisoned on false charges.
Peace and respect for human rights are inextricably
connected. Peace must come to the Caucasus and with it freedom, for both of which
Pope John Paul II called. We hope that your words will encourage the leaders
with whom you meet to choose a political path that embodies the spirit of freedom
and respect for human rights.
With every best wish. Yours sincerely, 
 
On behalf of the Helsinki Foundation
for Human Rights, Poland, 

Danuta Przywara
President of the Board 
 
Supported by NGOs members of
the Civic Solidarity Platform and other NGOs:
 
Article 19
Center for the Development of Democracy and Human
Rights
Freedom House
Freedom Now
Human  Rights Mouvment "Bir
Duino-Kyrgyzstan"
Human Rights Center of Azerbaijan
humanrights.ch
Index on Censorship
Kazakhstan International Bureau for Human Rights and
Rule of Law
People in Need
Polish Green Network
Promo LEX Association
Public Association "Dignity"
Public Verdict
Reporters Without Borders
The Norwegian Helsinki Committee
World Organization Against Torture (OMCT)



[1] I. Mammadov v.
Azerbaijan, judgment of 22 May 2014, application no. 15172/13.


[2] Address of the Holy Father at a meeting
with religious, political, cultural and arts representatives, Baku Presidential
Palace, Wednesday, 22 May 2002. 