Congo, Democratic Republic:  Free Rights Activists
September 26, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2017 / SeptemberCongo, Democratic Republic: Free Rights Activists​Halt Crackdown on Peaceful Assembly, Freedom of Expression

(Kinshasa, September 26, 2017) – Democratic Republic
of Congo authorities should immediately and unconditionally release nine Congolese
human rights and pro-democracy activists wrongfully detained for their
participation in peaceful activities, 45 Congolese and international human
rights organizations said today. Four activists were arrested on July 14 and
15, 2017 in Mbuji-Mayi and five others on July 31 in Lubumbashi.

“The Congolese authorities have thrown activists in jail for joining peaceful
protests calling for elections and for Congo’s constitution to be respected,” said
Ida Sawyer, Central Africa director at Human Rights Watch. “The government should
release them immediately and ensure that all Congolese have the right to
peacefully demonstrate and express their political views.” 

The nine activists are among hundreds arrested since 2015 as part of the Congolese
government’s widespread crackdown on people who have opposed President Joseph
Kabila’s effort to remain in power beyond his constitutionally mandated
two-term limit, which ended in December 2016. In addition to human rights defenders
and pro-democracy activists, the government has targeted political opposition
leaders and supporters, journalists, and people suspected of having links to the
political opposition. Many have been held for weeks or months in secret
detention, without charge and without access to families or lawyers. Some
allege that they were mistreated or tortured and some are suffering serious
health complications. Many were put on trial on trumped-up charges.

The four activists detained in Lubumbashi had participated in a peaceful
protest on July 31 against the national electoral commission’s failure to
publish an electoral calendar, what many considered to be a critical step to
ensuring that elections will be held by the end of 2017, as called for in a
power-sharing agreement mediated by the Catholic Church in late 2016. Authorities
arrested at least 128 people in nine cities during protests across the country that
day, including 11 journalists.

Authorities released several of those arrested in Lubumbashi after a few
hours, but five were transferred to the prosecutor’s office and accused of “provocation”
and “inciting disrespect for public authorities”: Timothée Mbuya, president of
Justicia, one of Lubumbashi’s main human rights organizations; Jean Mulenda,
activist from the citizens’ movement Struggle for Change (LUCHA); Jean-Pierre
Tshibitshabu, an activist and journalist at Radio Télé Kabekas (RTKA); Patrick
Mbuya, a human rights activist and a member of l’Amicale des Jeunes Congolais
Bomoko (AJC BOMOKO); and Erick Omari, who said he was a bystander.

They were transferred to Kasapa, Lubumbashi’s central prison, the same day.
All except Timothée Mbuya were convicted on August 29 and sentenced to eight
months in prison. As a lawyer, Mbuya was first heard by two courts with higher
jurisdiction; he is now being prosecuted by the same court that convicted the
four others. His trial is ongoing.

“Peacefully demonstrating to call for the publication of an electoral
calendar is part of the exercise of rights and freedoms guaranteed by the
Congolese constitution,” said Patrick Ilunga, public relations director at
Justicia. “The Congolese judiciary should not serve as instruments of
repression, but instead uphold the constitution and end any politically
motivated prosecutions.”

The LUCHA activists arrested in Mbuji-Mayi, in southern Congo, on July 14
and 15 are: Nicolas Mbiya Kabeya, Josué Cibuabua Kalonda, Kabongo Kadima, and
Mamie Ndaya. They were first held by the National Intelligence Agency (ANR),
without access to families or lawyers, then transferred on July 20 to
Mbuji-Mayi’s prosecutor’s office, and later to Mbuji-Mayi’s central prison,
where they are still detained. 

These pro-democracy activists had been investigating transparency in the
voter registration process in Kasaï Oriental province. They were accused of disclosing
personal information people provided to the national electoral commission
during voter registration, charges that appear to be politically motivated, the
organizations said. On September 15, the prosecutor’s office sought five-month
prison terms for the four. The Mbuji-Mayi High Court will deliver its judgment on
September 26.

“Congolese authorities should immediately put an end to their crackdown on the
rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression,” said Evie Francq, Congo
researcher at Amnesty International. “They should immediately and unconditionally
release all the human rights defenders and activists wrongfully detained in Mbuji-Mayi
and Lubumbashi.”
Signatories

International organizations:
1.     Amnesty
International
2.     FIDH,
within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders
3.     Human Rights
Watch
4.     Never
Again Coalition
5.     World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
 
Congolese
organizations :
1.    
Les Amis de Nelson MANDELA pour la
défense des Droits Humains (ANMDH)
2.    
Action contre l’impunité pour les
droits humains (ACIDH)
3.    
Association congolaise pour l’accès à
la justice (ACAJ)
4.    
Association des femmes pour le
développement communautaire (AFEMDECO)
5.    
Action chrétienne contre la torture et la peine de mort,
section du Haut-Lomami (ACAT/Haut-Lomami)
6.    
Action pour la justice et le développement (AJD)
7.    
Action rapide de développement (ARD)
8.    
Alliance pour la révolution de la conscience (ARPC)
9.    
Association africaine de défense des droits de l’homme,
section du Katanga (ASADHO/Kat)
10.  Comité de suivi pour la
contribution des communautés et églises à la transformation humaine (COSCET)
11.  Congrès pour le renouveau
syndical (CORES)
12.  Centre pour les droits
humains et le droit humanitaire (CDH)
13.  Centre international de
promotion et développement et des droits humains (CEIPEDHO)
14.  Centre pour la justice et
la réconciliation (CJR)
15.  Débout jeunesse congolaise (DJEC)
16.  Femme d’action pour le
réveil (FAR)
17.  Fédération des droits de
l’homme (FDH)
18.  Filimbi
19.  Institut africain de
formation en droits humains (INAFDH)
20.  Human rescue (HR)
21.  Héritiers d’Afrique (HA)
22.  Humanisme et droits
humains (HDH)
23.  Génération déterminée
(GD)
24.  Groupe d’action non
violente évangélique (GANVE)
25.  Justicia asbl
26.  Libertas
27.  Ligue contre la fraude et
la corruption (LICOF)
28.  Ligue internationale des
conseillers (LIC)
29.  Ligue des droits des
malades (LIDDM)
30.  Ligue nationale paysanne
des droits de l’homme (LINAPEDHO)
31.  Ligue pour la zone
Afrique des droits des élèves (LEZADEL)
32.  Lutte pour le changement (LUCHA)
33.  Mama ni mama (MM)
34.  Mobilisation,
encadrement, écologie et défense des droits humains par les amis des familles
démunies (MEEDAF)
35.  Nouvelle Dynamique
Syndicale (NDS)
36.  Nouvelle dynamique de la
société civile (NDSCI)
37.  Œuvre chrétienne pour la
femme (OCF)
38.  Réseau des communicateurs
humanitaires (RCH)
39. 
La Voix des Sans Voix pour les Droits
de l’Homme (VSV)
40. 
Voix du savoir (VS) 