Azerbaijan:  New developments in the first trial against Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov
July 31, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JulyAzerbaijan: New developments in the first trial against Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif YunusovAzerbaijan PR 0 KBNew informationAZE 002 / 0414 / OBS 031.7Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment /Deterioration of
health while in detentionAzerbaijanJuly 31, 2015
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Azerbaijan.
New information:
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about the new developments in the first trial
against Ms. Leyla Yunus, Director of
the Institute for Peace and Democracy (IPD) and a member of OMCT General
Assembly, and Mr. Arif Yunusov, husband of Ms. Yunus and Head of the
Conflictology Department of IPD.
 On July 27 and
28, 2015, the trial on the merits started at the Baku Grave Crimes Court,
presided by judge Mr. Afgan Hajiyev. The Obervatory mandated an observer to both hearings. The pre-trial hearing had been held on July 15. Ms.
Yunus is accused of large scale fraud (Article 178.3.2), fake manufacturing or
selling of official documents (Articles 320.1 and 320.2), large scale tax
evasion (Article 213.2.2) and illegal business with extraction of income in
large size (Article 192.2.1), while Mr. Yunusov is accused of large-scale fraud
(Article 178.3.2). 
On July 27, around 25
local and international observers and journalists were not allowed into the
courtroom, including the observer of the Observatory, a number of diplomats, as
well as journalists from the BBC just to mention some, because by the time the
main entrance was opened, the room was already almost full of persons whom some
local activists and journalists identified as court staff and staff from the
Ministry of National Security. Moreover, the trial was held in the smallest
courtroom, although some of the larger ones were empty at the time. The
Observatory is extremely concerned by this manoeuvres that only aim at limiting
the due transparency and publicity of judicial examination, in a case that is
at the spotlight of the international community. The Observatory recalls that
similar limitations have recently taken place in the trials against other
emblematic human rights defenders, such as the first hearing in the case of
investigative journalist Ms. Khadija Ismayilova, as well as the appeal
hearings against Mr. Rasul Jafarov.
At the start of the
July-27 hearing, the defence drew the judge's attention to the fact that
journalists, activists and diplomats were not let into the room. Moreover,
lawyer Afghan Mammadov petitioned to change the measure of restraint for Mr.
Arif Yunusov, but the prosecutor, Mr. Farid Naghiyev, opposed.
Subsequently, the
indictment was read, and both Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov pleaded not guilty. Ms.
Yunus stated that the indictment is completely falsified and criticised the
despotism and repression in Azerbaijan.
Then the witnesses
testified. The head of a department in the City Hall, Mr. Zulfali Ismayilov
alleged that the house of the Yunus couple down the Sh. Badalbeyli street was
legally demolished in 2011, and that they carried away documents and computers.
In response, Ms. Yunus pointed to a decision of the Supreme Court that
indicated that property had been destroyed in the course of the demolition,
which was also confirmed by one of the witnesses to the hearing. Moreover, Mr.
Yunusov pointed out that on August 25, 2011, the Mayor's office sent a warning
to demolish the house, but the house had already been demolished on August 11.
Mr. Yunusov added that he was only able to save one computer and two books
because a bulldozer began the demolition and did not allow him to save other
documents. 
Subsequently, witness
Tahmasib Novruzov said that since 1988, he suspected Ms. Leyla Yunus of having
links with Armenians, and that he was later informed that she was working for
the intelligence of Armenia. When the defence asked about the source of that
information, the witness replied that he knew that from the press. When asked
who had called him to the court as a witness, Mr. Novruzov could not answer the
question.
On July 28, 2015,
similar restrictions to international observers took place and again only four
of them were allowed into the courtroom. At around 10.20 am Ms. Leyla Yunus and
Mr. Arif Yunusov were placed together in a glass courtroom cage and the
interpreter they needed sat near the cage.
During the July-28
hearing, various witnesses testified and declared that they had neither
suffered any violation of their rights nor any loss because of the activities
of Ms. Yunus. The prosecution asked various questions about Ms. Leyla Yunus's
work with Armenian organisations, which seems to illustrate the political
motivations around the case. The prosecutor also accused, without evidence, Ms.
Yunus of receiving a grant of 700,000 manat (approximately 610,000 euros) and
only transferring 76,000 (approximately 61,000 euros) to the account of the NGO
"Society of Women of the Caucasus for Peace and Democracy". Finally,
the defence asked for the ex-wife of journalist Mr. Rauf Mirqadirov to be excluded from the list of witnesses, since
her testimony had no relation with the merits of the charges being pressed, but
the court did not consider the petition.
The following hearing
was scheduled for August 3, 2015.
The Observatory calls
upon the authorities in Azerbaijan to immediately drop all charges against Ms.
Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov as their detention seems to only aim at
sanctioning their activities amidst a wave of ongoing repression against civil
society organisations and representatives in Azerbaijan. In the meantime, the
Azeri authorities should urgently put an end to their pre-trial detention and
change it into house arrest, taking into account the critical health condition
of both human rights defenders.
Finally, the
Observatory calls on the international community to strongly condemn the
serious violations of the principles of transparency and publicity of court
hearings, and to urge the Azeri authorities to facilitate the observation of
the trial by journalists as well as by local and international trial observers.
Background information:
Ms. Leyla
Yunus has long fought for human rights and the rights of ethnic minorities in
her country. She has been heading the IPD since 1995. In October 2014, Ms.
Leyla Yunus was awarded the Polish Prize of Sérgio Vieira de Mello, and was
among the three finalists for the Sakharov Prize. She also received the
distinction of “Chevalier de l’Ordre National de la Légion d’Honneur” from the
French government in 2013. She has worked on numerous projects relating to
human rights, political persecution, corruption, human trafficking,
gender-based issues and violations of the right to property. Ms. Yunus and
Messrs. Intigam Aliyev and Rasul
Jafarov were all members of a group compiling a list of political prisoners in
Azerbaijan.
With her
husband, Ms. Yunus has also worked towards reconciliation between Azerbaijan
and Armenia, two countries divided on the conflict in the Nagorno-Karabakh
region. Ms. Leyla Yunus has been involved since 2005 in the “Track II
Diplomacy” Initiative, and initiated the project of a dialogue between Azeri
and Armenians, developed jointly with a regional research centre in Armenia.
Ms. Yunus is detained since July 30, 2014. Mr. Yunusov is in prison since
August 5, 2014.
On April
28, 2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus was reportedly invited as a witness on the
criminal case against journalist Rauf Mirqadirov, columnist and
press correspondent in Turkey for the independent newspaper Zerkalo, to the
Investigation Department of Serious Crimes of the Office of
Prosecutor General of Azerbaijan. In the evening, however, Ms. Yunus and
Mr. Yunusov were detained at the Baku Heydar Aliyev airports. The authorities
seized their luggages, conducted a search without presenting them any
court order, confiscated their passports and seized a laptop, a video
camera, USB flash drives and paper records, while denying Ms. Yunus
and Mr. Yunusov the right to see their lawyer. Mr. Yunusov was hospitalised
for a pre-stroke condition.
On April
29, 2014, after being kept awake the whole night and denied access
to toilets, Ms. Yunus was interrogated in relation to
the case against journalist Rauf Mirqadirov[1].

Ms.
Yunus’ questioning lasted nine hours, and questions all focused on joint
projects between the IPD and Armenian NGOs, as well as on her relations with
journalist Rauf Mirqadirov. Following this questioning, IPD’s premises were
searched and authorities seized all the computers and books belonging to Mr.
Yunusov, along with printed documents, including the business card of an
Armenian historian. Shortly after, IPD’s bank accounts were frozen. Ms. Yunus
and Mr. Yunusov were released.
On July 30, 2014, Ms. Yunus was arrested
again by the the Prosecutor’s office employees on charges of “treason” (Article
274 of the Criminal Code), “large-scale fraud” (Article (178.3.2), “forgery”
(Article 320), “tax evasion” (Article 213), and “illegal business” (Article
192) and brought to the department of grave crimes of the General Prosecutor’s
Office, where she had to undergo a six-hour questioning. Informed by telephone,
her husband joined her at the department of grave crimes of the General
Prosecutor’s Office, where he was also questioned. Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov
were both charged, and then placed in pre-trial detention. Mr. Yunusov was
later placed under house arrest, and arrested again on August 5, for violation
of his conditional sentence. Since that date, Mr. Arif Yunusov has been held at
the Investigative Prison of the Ministry of National
Security, the only remaining prison in Azerbaijan which is not subordinated to
the Ministry of Justice. This situation puts him at a high risk of facing
torture and ill treatment and the absence of a proper medical unit in this
prison has been denounced by various international human rights bodies such as
the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) or the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture (CPT).
Following international criticism over the
conditions of detentions, the Azeri authorities agreed for Ms. Yunus to be
examined on various occasions since December 2014 by a German doctor, Christian
Witt, whose official results have not been made public so far. Ms. Yunus’
lawyer, who visited her on February 8, reported that she was preoccupied over
the lack of information about the doctor’s diagnosis, that she was suffering
from sight problems, and that she was continuing to lose weight. Ms. Yunus, who
was previously denied access to medication by the prison authorities, allegedly
lost 16 kilograms since her arrest. 
On October 18, 2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus
was transferred to the Investigative Prison of the Ministry of National
Security. Ms. Yunus was held there until October 24, date on which she was
transferred to Kurdakhani prison.
On
September 6, 2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus's cell-mate who had previously verbally
harassed her and thrown plates and dishes at her, assaulted Ms. Leyla Yunus.
Ms. Leyla Yunus called for help and when the staff from the prison arrived she
reported the attack and asked to see the prison administration. She wrote three
pages explaining the event and the previous acts of harassment conducted by her
cell-mate. Moreover, she also asked for medicine since she was feeling unwell
after the attack but her demand was unattended. On September 7, 2014, she was
brought before Major Yagubov who announced her that a reprimand had been issued
against her for knocking at the door without any reason and creating unrest
inside the cell. No measure has been taken to either punish the cell-mate nor
to ensure the protection of Ms. Leyla Yunus.
Ms. Leyla Yunus was later deprived of
her lawyer, Mr. Javad Javadov, following his criticism of the judicial
process against Ms. Leyla Yunus at an hearing on October 24, 2014.
A few days later, her second lawyer, Mr. Khalid Bagirov, was also
removed from the case. Moreover, her third lawyer, Mr.
Alaif Hasanov, has been subjected to a lawsuit by Ms.
Nuriya Huseynova - cellmate of Leyla Yunus – who accused him of passing
information to the media. Mr. Alaif Hasanov was the first one to speak
out about the condition and physical pressure against Ms. Leyla Yunus
via her cell-mate.
On
January 5, 2015 and February 2, 2015, the ECtHR communicated on two
applications filed for violations of the rights of Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif
Yunusov .
On
February 18, 2015, the pre-trial detention of Ms.Yunus was extended until July
28, 2015, and on February 23, 2015, the
pre-trial detention of Mr. Yunusov was extended to August 5, 2015.
On July 15, 2015, a
pre-trial hearing was held at the Baku Grave Crimes Court. The hearing was
scheduled for July 13 but it was cancelled without any official explanation
just as it was supposed to get starting. Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov were placed
in a glass courtroom cage and the interpreter they needed (they are
Russian-speaking persons and the hearing was held in Azeri) sat near the cage.
The lawyer of Ms.
Leyla Yunus filed three petitions. Firstly, the lawyer asked the judge to
authorise the accused to sit beside her lawyer so as to ensure the right to be
presumed innocent until proven guilty and to fully guarantee the right to be
assisted by a lawyer. Secondly, the lawyer requested permission to videotape
and/or record all the hearings following the principle of publicity of debates.
Thirdly, because of the worrying health condition of Ms. Yunus, the lawyer
requested to change the current measure of imprisonment for a house arrest, as
provided by Article 9.3 of the United Nations
International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights. 
During the hearing,
the lawyers of Ms. Yunus argued that her continued detention was life
threatening. Ms. Yunus, who suffers from diabetes and hepatitis C,
is in a critical condition and suffers from a medical condition
known as hepatomegaly - a liver enlargement and deterioration. In order to stop the process of degradation of the liver she is under
heavy medication. The Observatory reiterated that its medical condition is not
compatible with prison conditions and urged the authorities to opt for
alternatives to pre-trial detention.
During the
court hearing pause, Ms. Yunus denounced to the international observers present
in the court room that she had been subjected to ill-treatment on four
occasions during her detention. More particularly, she complained that, on June
20, 2015, she had been hit in the left eye area.
In addition, the
lawyer of Mr. Arif Yunusov filed a petition requesting the authorisation for
the accused to sit beside his lawyer and for all charges against him to be dropped
in the absence of evidence of guilt. The lawyer denounced the poor
conditions of imprisonment at the Investigative prison of the Ministry of
National Security, whereMr. Arif Yunusov, who suffers from insomnia high blood pressure, is being detained.
The prosecutor asked
the court to reject all five petitions, and the judges did so after short
deliberation. 
Action requested:
Please write to the
authorities in Azerbaijan, urging them to:
i. Immediately
release Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov on humanitarian grounds as a first
step to their unconditional release, since their detention is arbitrary and
only aim at sanctioning their human rights activities
ii. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Leyla Yunus, Mr.
Arif Yunusov and all the human rights defenders in Azerbaijan;
iii. Guarantee the
principles of transparency and publicity of court proceedings by taking all
appropriate measures to ensure that all journalists and local and international
observers are able to monitor the trial of Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov
as well as the trials of all human rights defenders in the country;
iv. Put an end to all
forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Leyla Yunus
and Mr. Arif Yunusov as well as of all human rights defenders in the country;
v. Carry out a
prompt, effective and independent investigations into the allegations of
ill-treatment against Ms. Leyla Yunus;
vi. Conform with the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
- Article 1, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
- Article 5, which
underscores the right of every individual to form, join, and participate in
non-governmental organizations; and
- Article 12.2, which
provides that the State shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”;
vii. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Azerbaijan.
Addresses:
• Mr. Ilham Aliyev, President of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, Office of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, 19
Istiqlaliyyat St., Baku AZ1066, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 492 06 25, (+994)
412 92 28 68, E-mail: office@pa.gov.az, office@apparat.gov.az
• Mr. Zakir Garalov, Prosecutor General of the Republic
of Azerbaijan, Prosecutor’s Office, 7 Nigar Rafibeyli St., Baku, Azerbaijan,
Fax: (+994) 12 492 06 82, (+994) 12 492 26 63, E-mail: z.qaralov@prosecutor.gov.az,
info@prosecutor.gov.az
• Mr. Eldar Mahmudov, Minister of National Security,
Ministry of National Security of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Parliament Avenue
14, Baku AZ1006, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 493-76-22, E-mail: cpr@mns.gov.az
• Mr. Ramil Usubov, Minister of Internal Affairs,
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Azerbaijani Republic, Fax: (+994) 12 492 45
90
• Mr. Elmar Mammadyarov, Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan, E-mail:
katiblik@mfa.gov.az
• Mr. Fikrat F. Mammadov, Minister of Justice in
Azerbaijan, Inshaatchilar Prospekti, 1 Baku, Azerbaijan, e-mail:
contact@justice.gov.az; Fax (+994) 12 430 09 81
• H.E. Mr. Murad N. Najafbayli, Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations in Geneva, Route des Fayards 237,
CH-1290 Versoix, Switzerland, Fax: (+41) 22 901 18 44, E-mail:
geneva@mission.mfa.gov.az
• Embassy of Azerbaijan in Brussels, Avenue Moliere 464,
1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 2 345 91 85
Please also write to
the diplomatic missions or embassies of Azerbaijan in your respective country
as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in Azerbaijan.


[1]                Mr. Mirqadirov, whose press
accreditation was withdrawn with no official reason, had been extradited the
day before from Turkey to Azerbaijan and arrested upon his arrival in Baku. He
was then placed in detention on charges of spying for Armenia. 