Egypt:  Release of Mahienour El-Massry and Youssef Shaban
September  8, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / SeptemberEgypt: Release of Mahienour El-Massry and Youssef Shaban
 New
information
EGY
001 / 0514 / OBS 045.9
Release / 
Arbitrary detention
Egypt
September 8, 2016
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in
the following situation in Egypt.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the release of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, a human rights lawyer known for her activism in favour of
judicial independence and prisoners' rights by organising peaceful protests,
support activities for political prisoners and using social media to denounce
human rights violations, and Mr. Youssef Shaban, a journalist and
defender of workers' rights. Both had been sentenced on May 31, 2015 to one
year and three months’ imprisonment (see background information).
According to the information received, on August 13, 2016, Ms. Mahienour
El-Massry and Mr. Youssef
Shaban were transferred to National Security Agency facilities. They were held
in police trucks during a few hours before being able to finalise their release
procedures before the Alexandria prosecution. They were transferred back to the
police station before their release in the evening. The two had been sentenced in
2015 within the framework of the “Raml police
station” case (see background
information).
The Observatory welcomes the release of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry and Mr. Youssef Shaban but
condemns the judicial harassment they have been subjected to for more than two
years as it was clearly aimed at hindering their peaceful human rights
activities.
Moreover, the Observatory recalls Ms. Mahienour El-Massry still faces
other charges in the “Khaled Saeed Demonstration Case”, as she awaits a Court
of Cassation decision following her acquittal (see background information). The
Observatory also deplores the ongoing detention of Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel
Rahman, an independent youth activist, in relation with the same case.
The Observatory has no information regarding possible travel bans
imposed on Ms. Mahienour El-Massry and Mr. Youssef Shaban, as in most cases,
human rights defenders are not informed in advance until they attempt to travel
abroad.
Accordingly,
the Observatory calls upon the Egyptian authorities to put an end to the
harassment against Ms. Mahienour El-Massry and Mr.
Youssef Shaban as well as against all human rights defenders in Egypt, and to
release Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman immediately and unconditionally since his
detention is arbitrary as it merely aims at sanctioning his human rights
activities. The Observatory reminds in particular
that the restrictive Protest Law, which bans gatherings of ten or more people
without a permit issued by the authorities, has been repeatedly used by the
authorities as a tool to harass and imprison human rights defenders.
Background
information: 
On May 8, 2014, Ms. Mahienour El-Massry was referred to court on charges
of “assaulting security forces” after she, other lawyers and human rights
activists including Messrs. Youssef Shabaan and Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman, went
to Raml police station in March 2013 to provide legal assistance to three
lawyers who were arrested and sent to the police by supporters of the Muslim
Brotherhood (the “Raml police station” case). The lawyers were attacked by the
police in the police station, and Ms. El-Massry was detained briefly before the
Prosecution decided to release her and the others. The trial was then postponed
several times following the resignation of the appointed judge from the bench.
On February 9, 2015, El Raml Misdemeanour Court
in Alexandria sentenced Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, Messrs. Youssef Shabaan and
Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman as well as seven other activists[1]
to two years in jail. The sentence was suspended upon payment of a 5,000
Egyptian Pounds bail (approximately 580 euros) per person. Ms. Mahienour
El-Massry filed a demurrer to challenge the abovementioned sentence. 
On May 11, 2015, El Raml Misdemeanour Court
of Appeal in Alexandria heard the appeal of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, Mr. Youssef Shaban and Mr. Loay
Mohamed Abdel Rahman, along with seven other activists. On that occasion, the
court ordered the remand in custody of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry and Mr. Youssef
Shaban. As for Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman, he was already arbitrarily
imprisoned for another case.
On May 31, 2015, El Raml Misdemeanour Court
of Appeal in Alexandria sentenced Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, Mr. Youssef Shaban and Mr. Loay
Mohamed Abdel Rahman, along with seven other activists, to one year and three
months’ imprisonment. The defendants were accused of storming El Raml police
station in Alexandria and assaulting police officers as well as torching the
Freedom and Justice Party headquarters, political arm of the Muslim
Brotherhood, “protesting without authorization”, “disrupting traffic”,
“damaging content of the Police Station”, “attacking security forces”,
“spreading fear and terror among citizens” and “attempt to smuggle prisoners”. 
From Qanater women’s prison, Ms. Mahienour
El-Massry started an hunger strike with six other detainees on July 28,
2016, to protest against the denial of family visits in prison. 
Moreover,
Ms. El-Massry is still facing separate charges. On January 2, 2014, Alexandria
Manshiya Misdemeanour Court sentenced in absentia Ms. Mahienour
El-Massry and seven members of the political group “Revolutionary Socialists”[2],
including Mr.
Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman to two years’
imprisonment and a fine of EGP 50,000 (approximately EUR 5,140) for “protesting
without a permit” and “assaulting security forces” following their
participation in a peaceful protest on December 2, 2013 to denounce police
violence and in particular the impunity of Khaled Saeed murder[3].
Ms. Mahienour El-Massry had failed to appear as she had not been informed in
advance of the date of the hearing. 
On
May 20, 2014, the Sidi Gaber Misdemeanour Court in Alexandria rejected the
demurrer filed by Ms. Mahienour El-Massryregardingthe sentence
issued against her in absentia. Ms. Mahienour El-Massry was immediately
detained following the hearing. 
On
July 20, 2014, after successive adjournments, the Sidi Gaber Appeal
Misdemeanour Court in Alexandria sentenced Ms. Mahienour El-Massry to six
months of prison and a fine of EGP 50,000 for “protesting without a permit” and
“assaulting security forces”. Ms. El-Massry's lawyers appealed the sentence
before the Court of Cassation. 
On September 21, 2014, Al Mansheya Misdemeanour Appeals Court decided to
suspend the execution of Ms. El-Massry's six-month prison sentence, pending the
appeal lodged before the Court of Cassation. This decision followed a demurrer
filed by Ms. El-Massry's lawyers challenging the execution of her sentence pending
a final outcome. 
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:
i.   
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Mahienour
El-Massry, Mr. Youssef Shaban and Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman, as well as all
human rights defenders in Egypt;
ii.  
Release
Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman immediately and unconditionally since his
detention is arbitrary as it merely aims at sanctioning his human rights
activities;
iii. Put an end to all acts of
harassment, including at the judicial and administrative level, against Ms.
Mahienour El-Massry, Mr. Youssef Shaban and Mr. Loay Mohamed Abdel Rahman, and
more generally against all human rights defenders, as they are clearly aimed at
hindering their peaceful human rights activities;
iv. Guarantee the right to freedom of
movement of Ms. Mahienour El-Massry, Mr. Youssef Shaban and Mr. Loay Mohamed
Abdel Rahman;
v.  
Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders adopted on December 9, 1998 by the UN General Assembly, in particular
with its Articles 1, 5(a), 6(a), and its Article 12.2;
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international
human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Egypt.
Addresses:
·       President of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Fax: +202 23901998
·       Prime Minister of Egypt, Mr.
Ibrahim Mehleb, Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·       Minister of the Interior of
Egypt, General Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
·       Minister of Justice of Egypt,
Mr. Ezzat Khamis, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·       Public Prosecutor, Counsellor
Hisham Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Fax: +202 2577 4716
·       Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of
the National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·       H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·       Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: egyptembassy@embassyofegypt.be
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.



[1]                 These seven individuals include
Messrs. Mohamed Ramadan, lawyer, Sherif El Gamal, activist, and Noha Kamal, activist.


[2]                
The Revolutionary Socialists joined with other
movements in rejecting, opposing, and protesting against an anti-protest law
passed by the Egyptian transitional government in 2013.


[3]                
Mr. Khaled Saeed was killed by police forces
on June 6, 2010 and subsequently became a symbol of police repression during
the 2011 Egyptian Revolution 