Sri Lanka:  Harassment and intimidation suffered by a group of women protesters, including Ms. Nimalka Fernando
December  6, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2013 / DecemberSri Lanka: Harassment and intimidation suffered by a group of women protesters, including Ms. Nimalka Fernando




New informationLKA 002 / 1113 / OBS 089.1Harassment /Obstacles to
freedoms of expressionand peaceful assemblySri LankaDecember
6, 2013The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.New information: The
Observatory has received with concern information from reliable sources about
the harassment and intimidation suffered by a group of women protesters,
including Ms. Nimalka
Fernando, attorney-at-law, women’s rights activist and
President of the International Movement Against All Forms of Discrimination and
Racism (IMADR) in Sri Lanka, who were peacefully demonstrating to denounce the
recent smear campaign against Ms. Fernando.According
to the information received, on December 2, 2013, a peaceful protest organised
by women's groups to denounce the recent hate speech and smear campaign
promoted by the State-owned radio station, the Sri Lanka Broadcasting
Corporation (SLBC), against Ms. Nimalka Fernando, was disrupted, hooted and
intimidated by a pro-government group of men for an hour. Some witnesses
reported that the pro-government supporters - some of whom were believed to be
staff members of the SLBC - had gathered bottles and stones with the alleged
intention of attacking the peaceful demonstrators. On December 3, 2013, Ms.
Fernando was outrageously referred to as a “well known dollar vulture” on the
Sri Lankan Government's official news portal.The
police, instead of protecting the demonstrators, cornered the peaceful protestors to
a small space, showed their support to the
group of men and set the placards carried by the women on fire. Senior Superintendent of Police
Premalal Ranagala himself was seen intimidating and threatening the
peaceful protestors.The
Observatory is deeply concerned by the above-mentioned obstacles to freedom of
peaceful assembly and recalls the responsibility that Sri Lankan authorities
have to ensure the protection of human rights in general and of rights related
to freedoms of expression, association and peaceful assembly, in particular.Background information:On
November 4, 2013, Ms. Nimalka Fernando was threatened and defamed on the radio programme Rata Yana Atha (“the
way the country is forging ahead”) on the commercial channel of
the SLBC, following comments she had previously made on the legalization of sex
work. The death threats against Ms. Fernando also took place in
the context of her public opposition as one of
the Conveners of the Alternative People’s Forum, which had decided to boycott
all official event related to the Commonwealth Heads of
Government Meeting (CHOGM) in November.The
aforesaid radio broadcast, entitled “Stoning the Sinner Woman”, was presented
by Mr. Hudson Samarasinghe, Chairman of the Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation,
who took fragments of the interview Ms. Fernando had previously granted to HIRU
TV on November 3. Ms. Fernando was described as
a 59-year old divorced woman who had served 30 different organisations, and
“since 1989 carried tales”.Listeners had the opportunity to call to the radio
programme to give their opinion and some threatened
Ms. Nimalka Fernando in those terms: “We cannot allow persons like
Nimalka Fernando to live in this society”; “If we do something to them
the government will be blamed by the human rights people. We should use a lorry
and cause an accident”, “There is something call
cleaning in the army. [...] We should hand her over to the cleaning system”
or “We
use insecticides to eliminate the spread of mosquitoes. Some mosquitoes develop
a resistance to such spray. These people are like that. We have to find a
method to destroy them”. Ms.
Fernando was also called a prostitute. Reportedly, most of the callers
were men, and some of them identified themselves as having served the armed
forces and retired. Mr. Samarasinghe did not stop the callers in their
offensive and violent statement against Ms. Fernando,
and even seemed to encourage
them.Subsequently, Ms. Nimalka
Fernando lodged a complaint to the Human
Rights Commission of Sri Lanka (HRC-SL) and the Inspector General of Police
(IGP), requesting an investigation for criminal
offence and violation of her fundamental rights, and also demanding that the
tapes be secured for proof together with information of the callers and their
telephone numbers.This
was not the first time that Ms. Nimalka Fernando has been subjected to a smear
campaign in a State media. For instance, in March 2012, Ms. Fernando, along
with three other human rights defenders, was accused of being a traitor and
working against the interests of the country to obtain “dollars”. In addition,
the Minister of Public Relations threatened Ms Fernando and the other defenders
involved to “break their limbs” in public if they were to dare to set foot in
the country[1]. Action requested: Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka, urging them to:i.       
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Nimalka Fernando as well as of all human rights defenders in Sri Lanka;ii.     
Ensure
the respect of the rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly in Sri
Lanka, as a fundamental means to ensure the work of human rights defenders and
activists.iii.    
Order
an immediate, thorough, transparent investigation into the above-mentioned
facts in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent
tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;iv.    
Put
an end to any kind of harassment against Ms. Nimalka Fernando and more
generally against all human rights defenders in Sri Lanka and ensure that they
are able to carry out their peaceful and legitimate activities without any
hindrance and fear of reprisals;v.      
Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially
regarding the following Articles:-       
Article
1: everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels; -       
Article
5 (a): For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,
at the national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully;-       
Article
12.2: the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights [...];vi.    
Ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Sri Lanka.Addresses:·      
President Mahinda Rajapakse,
Presidential Secretariat, C/ Office of the President, Temple Trees 150, Galle
Road, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka, Fax: (+94) 11 472100 / (+94) 11 2446657 / (+94) 11
243 0590, Email: lalith@icta.lk / priu@presidentsoffice.lk ·       D.M.
Jayaratne, Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, No. 58, Sir Ernest De Silva Mawatha,
Colombo 07, Sri Lanka. Fax no: (+94) 112 575454. Email: slpm@pmoffice.gov.lk ·       Mr. Keheliya Rambukwella, Minister
of Mass Media and Information, 63, Kirulappona Mawatha, Polhengoda, Colombo 05,
Sri Lanka. Fax no: +94 11
251 4352. Email: govds@nationalsecurity.lk  ·      
Mr. Sarath Palitha Fernando, Attorney General,
Attorney General's Department. Colombo 12, Sri Lanka. Fax: (+94) 11 2 436421. ·      
Justice Priyantha R.P. Perera, Chairman, Human
Rights Commission of Sri Lanka. No: 165 Kynsey Road, Borella, Colombo 8, Sri
Lanka. Tel.: (+94) 11 2 696470 Fax: (+94) 11 2 694924. Email: sechrc@sltnet.lk·       H.E. Mr. Ravinatha P. Aryasinha, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the United
Nations. 56, rue de Moillebeau, PO Box 436,1211 Geneva 19. Switzerland. Tel.:
(+41) (0) 22 91 91 251, (0) 22 91 91 250. Fax: (+41) (0) 2273 49 084. E-mail: consulate@lankamission.org   Please
also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Sri Lanka in your
respective country.***Geneva-Paris, December 6, 2013Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.The
Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0)
22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80 