China:  WHRDIC condemns closure of women’s legal aid center in China
February  9, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2016 / FebruaryChina: WHRDIC condemns closure of women’s legal aid center in ChinaChina_2016.02.09_WHRDIC_Statement2 pages / 755 KB
The Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC), of
 which OMCT is a member, is a resource and advocacy network supporting
women human rights defenders worldwide.WHRDIC condemns closure of women’s legal aid center in China

 
On 29 January, the Chinese government
targeted for closure a renowned women’s legal aid center in Beijing. Not only does this action undermine the
government’s own efforts to advance women’s rights and gender equality, it runs
in direct opposition to the government’s stated priorities and its
international obligations. The Women Human Rights Defenders International
Coalition (WHRDIC) denounces these efforts to curb space for civil society, and
urges respect for those who do the critical work of defending human rights and
accountability when they face reprisals.
 
The Beijing Zhongze Women’s Legal Counseling
and Service Centre (the Centre) was a widely acclaimed civil society
organization, both nationally and internationally, which made significant
contributions to the promotion and advancecement of women’s rights. Its staff
and researchers conducted important work to improve rural women’s access to
justice, to fight domestic violence and sexual harassment in the workplace, and
remedy to women victims. 
 
In 2007, the media outlet of the Chinese
Ministry of Justice voted the Centre’s director, Guo Jianmei, one of the ‘top
ten Annual Legal Persons of Note’ and in 2011, popular press outlet Nanfang
Daily called the Centre one of China’s ‘top public service organizations’. In 2014, it collaborated with Chinese Women’s
University and other established organizations to submit reports ahead of the
periodic review of China by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW). 
 
The WHRDIC is concerned at escalating
threats for women human rights defenders, and the wider civil society in China.
The forced closure of the Centre comes at a time of unprecedented hardship for
those calling for more respect for human rights in the country, whether lawyers,
bloggers, NGO workers, religious practitioners, or even ordinary citizens. 
 
The Centre – which is in its second
iteration, after the shutdown of its predecessor at Peking University – is also
a direct legacy of the 1995 UN World Conference on Women. Attacking that legacy
seems a counter-narrative to the Chinese government’s celebrations in September
2015 of the 20th anniversary of the conference. Co-hosted by UN
Women, these festivities included an opening statement by President Xi Jinping
where he urged the international community to make ‘greater efforts to promote
gender equality’ and pledged that China would ‘enhance gender equality as basic
state policy’. 
 
By shutting down the Zhongze Centre the
Chinese government, rather than promoting the status of women, implementing the
Beijing Platform of Action, or even meeting minimum obligations to implement
recommendations from UN experts on women’s rights, has acted in contradiction
to its own laws and policies, and its international human rights obligations. 

The other issue we would suggest mentioning is
the policy environment. The recent national security law and the draft charity
and foreign NGO management laws (under review) have deeply affected the way
civil society operates because of the restrictions they impose, their vague
definitions, and the questions linked to their implementation. This is
concerning to the human rights movement (and other sectors) and is part of the
government's attempt to provide more obstacles to curtail activities among civil
society actors. 
 
The WHRDIC reiterates its call for the
government to halt its harassment of human rights defenders and to facilitate
an enabling environment for women defenders and civil society. The WHRDIC also
urges the government of China to fully respect the right of individuals and
organizations to engage with the UN mechanisms, and to refrain from and
promptly investigate any reprisals against those who do. As the WHRDIC, we recognize the committed
work of inspiring Chinese WHRDs, and are in solidarity with them at a time
arbitrary restrictions are put forward by the Chinese government to curb their
legitimate human rights work. 