Sudan:  Sudan: Arbitrary arrest and detention
November 14, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2005 / NovemberSudan: Sudan: Arbitrary arrest and detentionCase SDN 141105Arbitrary arrest and detention  / Torture   The International Secretariat of OMCT has reqests your URGENT intervention in the  following situation in Sudan. Brief description of the situationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that on 23rd October 2005, two prominent IDP leaders, Soulieman Abaker Taha, (56 yrs), Fur tribe, leader of the Sheikhs (Omda) and Tigani Ahmed, (37 yrs), Fur tribe, Sheikh, from Kalma Internally Displaced Persons camp were arbitrarily arrested. Mr. Soulieman Abaker Taha was also reportedly subjected to torture.  According to the information received, on 26th October, following an application submitted to the Attorney General by SOAT’s partner organisation in Nyala, the Amel Medical Centre for the Treatment and Rehabilitation of Torture Victims, Soulieman Abaker Taha was released on bail after he was officially charged under Article 162 (Kidnapping) of the 1991 Penal Code.   While in detention at the security offices in Nyala, Mr. Taha was allegedly subjected to torture.  Security officers reportedly beat him on his body and on his head with their hands and with the butts of their guns.  On 31 October 2005 at 13.30pm, security officers entered Kalma camp and rearrested Mr. Taha. No reason was given for the revocation of Mr. Taha’s bail.   Following appeals by United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) and the African Union (AU), police officers at Nyala stated that Mr. Taha was being detained as part of police investigations into the kidnapping of eighteen employees of WES who were taken hostage by IDPs inside Kalma following Mr. Taha’s initial arrest on 23 October and who are all now released.   Mr. Tigani Ahmed remains in detention at the security forces custody centre in Nyala and is facing no charges. Requested Action:Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Soulieman Abaker Taha and Mr. Tigani Ahmed; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events and in particular the alleged torture of Mr. Soulieman Abaker Taha, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards. Addresses:His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 783223 Mr. Lam Akol Ajawin, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affair, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779383  Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 770883 His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mohamed Al- Hassan Ahmed Al-Haj, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, +41 22 716 19 70, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, 14th November 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 