Philippines:  Philippines:repression of the Muslim population in Mindinao
June  9, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2000 / JunePhilippines: Philippines:repression of the Muslim population in MindinaoPhilippines: repression of Muslims  Case PHL 090600  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Philippines.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines, a member of the OMCT network, and other sources regarding the repression of the Muslim population in Mindinao, as part of an ongoing conflict in Mindanao between the government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), a Muslim group calling for an independent state.  According to the information received, on May 27, 2000, the police, wearing ski masks,  entered Maharlika village in Taguig, a predominantly Muslim community, forced people out of their homes and took 25 men away in a van, without any arrest warrants.  It is reported that the police claimed that this raid was part of an effort to arrest the suspects of a recent bombing in Manila.  However, the police did not explain how these particular men came to be suspects in the investigation, nor did they offer evidence that the bombers were even Muslim.  The suspects are reportedly being detained incommunicado.  Furthermore, it was also reported that on May 30, 2000, investigators from the Philippines Commission on Human Rights went to the Detention Center in Camp Crane, which is run by the Philippine Anti-Organised Crime Task Force (PAOCTF), in order to meet with detainees concerning reports of ill-treatment in the camp.  Specifically, the investigators were examining allegations that the Muslims in the camp were being forced to eat pork, against the traditional customs of Islam.  However, it was reported that the guards would not allow the investigators to enter the camp.    It should be noted that, according to the information received, Muslim residents in Pasig, Quiapo and Taguig, cities in the Philippines, are required by the government to carry identification with them at all times, allegedly to identify which organization they belong to.  Additionally, it is alleged that surveillance has been set up by the government in Muslim communities and that the authorities have conducted spot checks on various Muslim houses.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Philippines urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of these persons and order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at  all times; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these allegations of ill-treatment and arbitrary arrests in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  His Excellency, Joseph Ejercito Estrada, President, Republic of the Philippines, Malacanang Palace, Manila, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 735 8006, Email: erap@ops.gov.ph Secretary Artemio Toquero, Department of Justice, Padre Faura, Manila, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 521 1614 Commissioner Aurora Recina Commission on Human Rights, SAAC Bldg., UP Complex, Commonwealth Ave., Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 929 0102 Secretary Orlando Mercado, Department of National Defense, 3rd floor DND Bldg., Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City, Philippines Gen. Angelo Reyes, Chief-of-Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines, Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City, Philippines Hon. Mamintal Adiong, House Committee on Justice and Human Rights, House of Representatives, Batasan Hills, Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: +63 2 818 7391  Diplomatic representatives in your country.  Geneva, June 9, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 