Egypt:  Court confirms asset freeze against 5 human rights defenders and 3 NGOs
September 19, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / SeptemberEgypt: Court confirms asset freeze against 5 human rights defenders and 3 NGOsNew information
EGY 004 / 0615 / OBS 049.7
Sentencing /
Judicial harassment /
Restrictions to freedom of association
Egypt
September 19, 2016
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the sentencing against five leading human rights
defenders and three non-governmental organisations in the framework of the
ongoing judicial harassment and the restrictions to freedom of association
faced by at least 37 Egyptian human rights defenders and organisations, including
the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS) and the Egyptian
Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR), two member organisations of FIDH, the
Arab Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI), the Hisham Mubarak Law
Center (HMLC), Nazra for Feminist Studies, the Egyptian Centre for the Right to
Education (CRE), as well as the Arab Center for the Independence of the
Judiciary and the Legal Profession (ACIJLP) and the Land Center for Human
Rights (LCHR), two member organisations of OMCT.
According to the information received, on
September 17, 2016, the Cairo Criminal Court ordered the freezing of the assets
of Messrs. Gamal Eid, Director of
ANHRI, Hossam Bahgat, founder of
EIPR, Abdel Hafiz Tayel, Executive
Director of CRE, Moustafa El Hassan,
Director of HMLC, and Bahey Eldin Hassan,
Director of the CIHRS, as well as those of three human rights NGOs, the CRE, the CIHRS and the HMLC[1].
This decision by the Cairo Criminal Court
was handed out within the framework of criminal case No. 173/2011, known as
“the civil society case” (see background information)[2].
The Observatory firmly condemns the
above-mentioned Court decision, which is the latest evidence of an increasing
pattern of judicial harassment launched by the authorities in 2011 targeting
civil society organisations and human rights defenders in Egypt[3].
The
Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities to immediately cease all acts of
harassment against human rights organisations in Egypt, and to comply with its
Constitution (in particular Article 78 and Article 93 which respectively
recognise freedom of association and Egypt's compliance with international human rights
conventions ratified by Egypt) as well as its international legal
obligations (in particular Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR)) and its international commitment to respect
freedom of association in the framework of its Universal Periodic Review (UPR)[4].

Background Information:
Since 2011, the Egyptian Government has
launched a judicial harassment campaign against civil society organisations on
the pretext that they received unauthorised foreign funding under criminal case
No. 173/2011, known as the “civil society case”.
The 2011 Government Fact-Finding Committee
report, which formed the basis of the first trial in 2012, listed 37 NGOs who
could be targeted under this “civil society case”. That list included ACIJLP,
CIHRS, LCHR, the Egyptian Democratic Academy (EDA), HMLC, ANHRI, EIPR, El Nadim
Center for the Management and Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and
Torture, the Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights (ECESR), the Arab
Penal Reform Organization, the Egyptian Center for the Right to Education,
El-Haq, the Egyptian Association for Community Participation Enhancement (ACPE),
Nazra for Feminist Studies, the Appropriate Communications Technologies (ACT),
among others.
The first set of investigations targeted
international and foreign NGOs. On June 4, 2013, the North Cairo Criminal Court
sentenced 43 Egyptian and foreign staff members of five foreign civil society
organisations to imprisonment ranging from one (suspended) to five years of
prison for “managing unlicensed branches” of their organisations, “conducting
research, political training, surveys, and workshops without licenses”,
“training political parties and groups” and “illegally receiving foreign
funding”. Though none of the defendants were forced to serve their sentences
either because they were abroad or in the case of the junior staff had their
sentences suspended, the court ordered the confiscation of their funds and the
closure of Egypt-based branches of Freedom House, the International Republican
Institute, the National Democratic Institute, the International Centre for
Journalists (ICFJ), and Konrad Adenauer Foundation. 
The second part of the case targets Egyptian civil
society organisations that have received foreign or international funding. In
July 2014, the Ministry of Social Solidarity (MoSS) issued an ultimatum for
Egyptian human rights organisations to register by late 2014 under Law 84/2002
or face closure[5].
In September 2014, President Al-Sisi signed into law
amendments to Article 78 of the Penal Code. These amendments include the
provision that receiving foreign funding for the purpose of “harming national
security” is punishable by life imprisonment.
In late 2014, the Investigating Judge in charge of the
case appointed a technical committee from the MoSS[6] to determine
whether Egyptian organisations under review operate as civic associations without
being registered as such under Law 84/2002, and to examine documents related to
their sources of funding. The committee first examined the EDA. It is noteworthy to note that despite the EDA's
registration in compliance with the ultimatum[7], they are still being
investigated. In January 2015, the judge issued travel bans against
Messrs. Hossam al-Din Ali, Chairman of the EDA, Ahmed Ghoneim,
Deputy, as well as Ms. Israa Abdel Fattah and Bassem Samir, who
previously worked in the same organisation.
On June 9, 2015, the Investigating Judge mandated the
technical committee to visit the Cairo office of the CIHRS in order to examine
whether the CIHRS engages in activities of civic associations under the
provisions of Law 84/2002. The committee requested the staff present in the
office to provide documentation relating to the administration of the NGO, such
as its registration, founding contract and statute, as well as the budgets,
financial accounts, and funding contracts for the past four years. One
additional demand the staff were instructed to comply with was to provide
documentation that proved that the CIHRS was not conducting NGO work. 
In July 2015, the HMLC was also
subjected to the same review.
In December 2015, the ANHRI received a
phone call from the technical committee, which asked to conduct an inspection,
but due to the absence of Mr. Gamal Eid, the visit was postponed and eventually
did not take place. 
In December 2015, the Egyptian Center
for the Right to Education was summoned by the Investigating Judge for
questioning.
On February 4, 2016, Mr. Gamal Eid was informed of a travel ban
as he was attempting to travel outside Egypt. Mr. Hossam
Bahgat was informed of a similar ban on February 23, 2016; Mr. Mohamed
Zaree, CIHRS Egypt Director, on May 27, 2016; Ms. Hoda Abdel Wahab, ACIJLP
Executive Director, and Mr. Nasser Amin, ACIJLP President, on
June 20, 2016 and July 14, 2016 respectively; and Ms. Mozn Hassan, Founder and Executive Director of Nazra for Feminist
Studies, on June 27, 2016.
On March 13 and 14, 2016, two staff
members of CIHRS and three staff members of Nazra for Feminist Studies were
notified by telephone of a summons to appear on March 16 before the
Investigating Judge in Cairo within the framework of criminal case No.
173/2011. However, the two staff members of CIHRS refused to appear, as they
had not been properly notified in person in accordance with the law in force.
Two former staff members of the Andalus Institute for Tolerance and
Anti-Violence Studies and one accountant from the United Group were also
summoned within the same context.
On March 17, Messrs. Hossam Bahgat and
Gamal Eid were informed that the Investigative Judge had ordered the freezing
of their assets and that their case would be reviewed by the Cairo Criminal Court
in Zeinhom on March 24, 2016. The case was subsequently adjourned to April 20,
2016, upon request from the Public Prosecutor. 
On April 19, Mr. Bahey eldin Hassan, two
staff members of CIHRS, as well as Mr. Moustafa
El Hassan, HMLC Director, were informed at 9pm through a phone call from
the Egyptian police that they were summoned to appear before the Cairo Criminal
Court in Zeinhom on April 20, along with Messrs. Bahgat and Eid.
On April 20, the Cairo Criminal Court in
Zeinhom added seven defendants from three additional NGOs to the “asset freeze
order” initially targeting Messrs. Hossam Bahgat and Gamal Eid. The additional defendants are Mr. Bahey
eldin Hassan, Mr. Moustafa El Hassan, Mr. Abdel Hafiz Tayel, two staff members of CIHRS, as well as of Mr.
Bahey eldin Hassan's wife and daughter and Mr. Gamal Eid's wife and daughter[8]. 
The hearing by the Cairo Criminal Court in
Zeinhom regarding the asset freeze order was postponed several times by the
prosecutors to review the evidence and formally summon the new defendants. On
May 23, 2016, it was again adjourned to July 17, 2016, and then to August 15.
On August 15, 2016, the Cairo Criminal
Court in Zeinhom decided to postpone to September 17 the ruling on the
asset-freeze order targeting 11 human rights defenders and family members. The
defendants included seven human rights defenders: Mr. Hossam Bahgat, founder of EIPR, Mr. Gamal Eid, Director of ANHRI, Mr. Moustafa El Hassan, Director of HMLC, Mr. Abdel Hafiz Tayel, Executive Director of CRE, Mr. Bahey Eldin Hassan, Director of CIHRS,
two other CIHRS employees, as well as Mr. Bahey Eldin Hassan and Mr. Gamal
Eid’s respective wives and daughters. 
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Egypt
asking them to:
i. Overturn the decision issued by the
Cairo Criminal Court on September 17, 2016, within the framework of a judicial
process in appeal which shall conform with fair trial standards and other
international human rights norms;
ii. Immediately put an end to
investigations and criminal cases targeting NGOs as well as human rights
defenders and their relatives;
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment
against all human rights organisations and defenders in Egypt, including travel
bans;
iv. Revise the Law on Associations to
comply with international human rights standards and the UPR commitments made
by Egypt, while ensuring that independent civil society organisations are
meaningfully consulted in the drafting process;
v. Comply with all
the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular with its
Articles 1, 5(a), 6(a), and 12.2;
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international
human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Egypt.
Addresses:
·       President of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Fax: +202 23901998
·       Prime Minister of Egypt, Mr.
Sherif Ismail, Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·       Minister of the Interior of
Egypt, Mr. Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794 5529
·       Minister of Justice of Egypt,
Mr. Mohamed Hossam Abdel-Rehim, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·       Public Prosecutor, Fax: +202
2577 4716
·       President of the National
Council For Human Rights, Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670.
Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·       H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·      
Embassy of Egypt
in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.



[1]            The Court however
refused to freeze the assets of some relatives of the accused.


[2]                 For more information on that
case, see also EIPR, “Further background on Case No. 173 – the case against
human rights NGOs”, available at: http://eipr.org/en/pressrelease/2016/09/15/2661.


[3]                 The investigation started in
September 2011, and the raid on NGOs took place in December 2011. As the
investigation has been ongoing for nearly five years, the scope of the case
remains unknown. For more information, please see: http://www.cihrs.org/?p=720&lang=en
                  &
http://www.cihrs.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/The-Complaint.pdf


[4]                 At the occasion of the UPR of
Egypt in November 2014, the Egyptian authorities accepted at least five
recommendations on the protection of human rights defenders, including a
commitment to reforming the current NGO law with a wide consultation of NGOs,
and a commitment to guarantee the right to freedom of association in accordance
with international standards.


[5]                 The ultimatum was made public
in July 2014, and in September 2014, the deadline was pushed back to November
10, 2014.


[6]                 The committee is composed of
Ministry of Social Solidarity officials but they report to the Investigating
Judge. 


[7]                 The EDA has been registered
under the Associations Law No. 84/2002 since
September 2014.


[8]                 Mr. Bahgat attended the
April-20 hearing, while the other defendants were represented by their lawyers.
No formal charges were confirmed on that occasion. 