Moldova, Republic of:  Denial of adequate medical care of Mr. Serghei Cosovan while in detention
May 18, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Moldova, Republic of / 2018 / MayMoldova, Republic of: Denial of adequate medical care of Mr. Serghei Cosovan while in detention




Case MDA 180518
 
Denial of adequate medical care / Critical
health conditions

The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following
situation in the Republic of Moldova.
 
Brief Description of the Situation
 
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by
reliable sources about the denial of adequate medical care of Mr. Serghei
Cosovan, a 46-year-old Moldovan citizen, held in custody pending trial in
Prison No.16-Pruncul, Chisinau, Moldova.
 
According to the information received, Mr. Serghei Cosovan, who is in the
end-stage of liver cirrhosis, has been detained pending trial since 28
September 2017 without adequate medical treatment. Since his arrest, Mr.
Cosovan’s health condition has become dramatically worse and is in urgent need
of a liver transplant. He has undertaken several surgeries while detained to
stop the bleeding of his esophageal varices that occurs periodically. The last
one was performed in February 2018. 

Mr. Cosovan‘s case has been brought to the attention of the Moldovan Ombudsman.
On 12 April 2018, experts of the Ombudsman’s Office visited Mr. Cosovan and
found that his state of health is constantly aggravated and that he needs a
consultation of a hepatologist in order to initiate a liver transplant
procedure. The experts have stated that the delay of this process could lead to
an aggravation of his state of health and even his death. The liver
transplantation is not possible to do since the Penitentiary No. 16 Pruncul and
the Department of Penitentiary Institutions have no health care contracts
signed with medical institutions that are specialized in the field of liver
transplantology. 
 
The OMCT is gravely concerned about the critical health
condition of Mr. Serghei Cosovan and the vital threat that the constant
denial of adequate medical care represents. The OMCT calls on the Moldovan authorities to urgently
guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Serghei Cosovan
and immediately secure that he receives adequate medical care through transferring him to an accredited medical public institution
specializing
in severe hepatic disease and liver transplantation.

The OMCT recalls the Moldovan
administration its responsibility to effectively ensure the physical and
psychological integrity of all persons deprived of liberty in accordance
with regional and international human rights law, and in particular the
European Convention on Human Rights, the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment, and the UN
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.

Actions requested

Please write to the authorities of the Republic of Moldova urging them to:

i.     Guarantee, in
all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Serghei
Cosovan;

ii.    Order the immediate transfer
of Mr. Serghei Cosovan to an accredited medical public institution specializing
in severe hepatic disease and liver transplantation where he can receive
adequate medical examination and adequate medical treatment for his
disease; 

iii.   Ensure that
adequate conditions of detention and medical services are guaranteed to
all persons that have been deprived of liberty and detained in Moldova,
according notably to the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners;

v.    Guarantee the respect of human
rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with
national laws and international human rights standards.

Addresses:



·       
Ministry of Justice of Moldova - Victoria Iftodi, Fax:
(+373 22) 23 47 97, E-mail: secretariat@justice.gov.md
·       
National
Administration of Penitentiaries (former Department of Penitentiary Institutions) – Director Aureliu SUHAN, Fax: (+373 22) 409-788;
409-717, E-mail: dip@penitenciar.gov.md 
·       
Penitentiary No.16-Pruncul - Igor PATRASCU (Chief of
the Penitentiary 16), E-mail: p16secretariat@penitenciar.gov.md

·       
People's Advocate
Office of Moldova – Cotorobai Mihail, Fax: (+373 22) 22 54 42; E-mail: ombudsman@ombudsman.md 
·       
The Governmental
Agent’s Office of Moldova - Oleg ROTARI,
Fax:
(+373 22) 23 47 97, E-mail: oleg.rotari@justice.gov.md 
·       
Prime
Minister of the Republic of Moldova - Pavel Filip, E-mail petitii@gov.md 
·       
Office
of the Prosecutor General of Moldova – Eduard Harunjen, Fax: (+373 22) 21 20 32

·       
Anticorruption
Prosecutor's Office – Morari Viorel, E-mail: proc-ant@procuratura.md   
·       
Superior
Council of Magistracy of Moldova – Victor Micu (The president of the CSM), E-mail:
 aparatul@csm.md
·       
H.E. Mr. Tudor Ulianovschi, Ambassador of the
Permanent Mission of the Republic of Moldova to the UN in Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax +4122 733-91-04, E-mail: mission.moldova@ties.itu.int
 


Please
also write to the embassies of the Republic of Moldova in your respective
country.
 
Please copy also the Office of the UN Resident Coordinator in Moldova, the OSCE Mission to
Moldova, the EU Delegation to Moldova and the Council of Europe Office of
Moldova:
 
·     Ms. Dafina Gercheva, UN Resident Coordinator, United Nations House, Fax: (+373 22) 220
041 moldova@one.un.org
·     Ambassador Micheal
Scanlan, Head of Mission, OSCE Mission to Moldova, Fax: +373 22
22 34 96. Email : moldova@osce.org
·     Ambassador Peter Michalko, Head of Delegation, Delegation of the
European Union to Moldova, Fax: (+373 22) 27 26 22, Email: delegation-Moldova@eeas.europa.eu
·     José Luis Herrero, Head of Office, Council
of Europe Office in Moldova,  Fax
: +373 22 202 305, Email : fieldchisinau@coe.int

****
Geneva, 18 May 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 