Malaysia:  No U-turn on repeal on Internal Security Law
November 21, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2011 / NovemberMalaysia: No U-turn on repeal on Internal Security Law​MALAYSIA: No U-turn on repeal on
Internal Security LawGeneva, 21 November 2011. The World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) today called on the Malaysian authorities
to follow through on its commitment to revoke one of the regions’ most notorious
security laws and to end detention without trial.
‘The continuous and again increased
use of arrests under the Internal Security Act (ISA) in Malaysia is at odds to the
Governments’ plans to end detention without trial’, said Gerald Staberock,
Secretary General of the OMCT. Since its enactment in 1960, the colonial style
security legislation is used to detain persons without trial or charge. 
According to
the information received, 13 individuals were arrested under the ISA in Tawau, in
Sabah state. OMCT’s
member organisation Suaram identified the following 11 individuals: Mohd Nazri Bin Dollah (religious teacher at SMK
Kinabutan), Yusof Bin Saripuddin
(poultry dealer), Muhd Adnan Bin Umar
(teacher at MJU Tuition Centre), Muhd
Abduh Bin Umar (lorry driver), Adwan,
Faizal Bin Hamma (newspapers
distributor), Joni Muadz (newspapers
distributor), Azmi, Suriadi, Darto Bin Bandu (teacher at MJU Tuition Centre) and Bakar Bin Baba (teacher at SMK
Umas-umas). They were reportedly arrested by police officers of the Department
of Special Task Force, Bukit Aman, between the 14 and 15 November 2011 and are currently being held under
police custody in Kota Kinabalu, in Sabah. No further information
on their fate is currently available. The reasons for their arrest remain
unclear but it is believed to be associated with allegations of terrorism. 
Prime Minister Najib Razak had
announced two months ago in a widely regarded speech his governments’ intention
to revoke the ISA. However, no timetable has been set on the end to the
practice of detention without trial or charge. Repealing the ISA is an
important and much needed step that should be accompanied with an immediate
moratorium on its application.
The ISA carries an extraordinary
legacy of arbitrary detention, political abuse and has created an environment facilitating
torture and ill-treatment as documented by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention in 2010 and by civil society organisations in Malaysia, including OMCT’s member
Suaram[1].
Recent reports also suggest that the ISA may be replaced by a modified and marginally
improved regime of administrative detention under new counter-terrorism
legislation. 
‘Replacing it with a
counter-terrorism regime of detention without trial will only entrench arbitrary
detention and risks being not much more than window dressing’, said Gerald
Staberock. ‘Rather than side-lining the cause of justice there is need to
strengthen the ordinary civilian justice system to respond adequately to security
threats.’
OMCT also calls on the
government to immediately release all remaining individuals
detained under the ISA, including the aforementioned individuals, and other
detention-without-trial laws in the absence of valid legal charges and judicial
process consistent with international legal standards. If such charges exist, the authorities should bring them
before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural
rights at all times. 
Finally,
OMCT also calls on the government of Malaysia to take the necessary
steps to sign and ratify without delay, and thereafter effectively implement the
United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment as well as the Optional Protocol to this Convention.



[1] Already in 2003, the
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention considered that administrative detention
on such grounds, even when in conformity with a domestic law, constitutes a
violation of the right to a fair trial by an independent and impartial judicial
authority. It consequently considered that the detention under such
conditions was arbitrary. See Opinion No. 10/2004 (MALAYSIA). 