Iran:  Sentencing of journalist Issa Saharkhiz
September 28, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2016 / SeptemberIran: Sentencing of journalist Issa Saharkhiz
IRN
001 / 0916 / OBS 082
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment /
Health concern
Iran
September 28, 2016
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your
urgent intervention in thefollowing situation in the Iran.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has been
informed by the Iranian League for the Defense of Human Rights (LDDHI) about the
sentencing of journalist and founding member of the Iranian Association for the
Defence of Freedom of Press, Mr. Issa Saharkhiz.
According to the
information received, on September 17, 2016, Branch 28 of the Islamic
Revolution Court notified Mr. Issa Saharkhiz’s lawyer of a reduction in his
sentence to 21 months of imprisonment. On August 8, 2016, Judge Mohammad
Moghisseh of Branch 28 had sentenced Mr. Saharkhiz to three years in prison on
charges of “insulting the Leader” for having used the term “Casino Seyyed Ali”[1]
to describe a room in prison in his memoirs; and for “spreading propaganda
against the State”. The Islamic Penal Code provides for a maximum of two years’
imprisonment for insulting the leader and a maximum penalty of one year for the
second charge.
Mr. Saharkhiz was arrested
on November 2, 2015 by the Islamic Revolution Guards Corps’ intelligence unit
during a wave of arrests, was accused of allegedly
being a “member of a network of infiltrators within the country’s cyberspace
and media who cooperate with hostile Western governments”, and was kept in
pre-trial detention, mostly in solitary confinement, for several months.
Mr. Saharkhiz is facing
charges and potential prison sentences in two other cases. One case has already
been examined by the courts, and he was charged with “spreading false
information.” The outcome of the trial is not clear yet, but if convicted he
could face up to two additional years in prison. In the other case, which has
not yet gone to court, he is charged with “insulting the head of the Judiciary
and former President”. 
The Observatory expresses
concern regarding Mr. Saharkhiz’s health condition, as he notably suffers from
a cancerous tumour in his adrenal glands, as well as heart problems. He has
previously been deprived medical treatment in jail and was hospitalised in
March 2016 after suffering a heart attack and going on hunger strike to protest
against his prison conditions.
The Observatory recalls
that Mr. Issa Saharkhiz has been continuously harassed by the authorities for
several years[2].
On July 3, 2009, he was arrested and subsequently sentenced to three
years’ imprisonment on charges of “insulting the leader” and “propaganda
against the State” for publishing political commentaries critical
of the widely disputed results of Iran’s 2009 presidential election. In a 2010 opinion,
the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention found that he had been
arbitrarily deprived of his liberty and asked the Iranian government to take
appropriate steps to remedy the situation. In August 2011, while serving his
sentence, he was tried on “press-related charges” dating back to 11 years
before, and sentenced to 1.5 additional years in prison. He was finally
released on October 3, 2013, after spending more than four years in prison. 
The Observatory firmly
condemns the new sentence and ongoing persecution and judicial harassment
against Mr. Issa Saharkhiz, as it is clearly aimed at sanctioning his
legitimate human rights activities.
The Observatory urges the
Iranian authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Issa Saharkhizand put an end to all acts of harassment against him. 
Finally,
until all charges are dropped against him, the Observatory urges the Iranian
authorities to ensure that his conditions of detention are humane and that all
judicial proceedings against him are carried out in full compliance with his
right to a fair trial, as protected under international law.
Actions requested:
Please
write to the Iranian authorities and ask them to:
i. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Issa Saharkhiz as well as of all other human rights defenders in
Iran;
ii. Release immediately and unconditionally Mr. Issa Saharkhiz and all other human rights
defenders who are detained in Iran merely as an attempt to sanction their human
rights activities;
iii. Put an end to any
kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr. Issa Saharkhiz and all other human rights defenders in Iran and ensure in
all circumstances that they can carry out their activities without
interference;
iv.Conform
in all circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular its Articles 1 and 12.2; 
v. Ensure in all circumstances
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by
Iran. 
Addresses:
· Leader of the
Islamic Republic, H.E. Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, Fax: + 98 21 441 2030,
Email: info_leader@leader.ir; Twitter:
@khamenei_ir
· President Hassan
Rouhani, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 644 54811; Email: media@rouhani.ir; Twitter:
@HassanRouhani (English) and @Rouhani_ir (Persian). 
· Head of the
Judiciary, H.E. Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: +98 21
879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: info@dadiran.ir / info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
· Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad Zarif, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax:
+98-21-66743149; matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
· Secretary
General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad Larijani, Islamic
Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
· H.E.
Mr. Mohsen Naziri Asl, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
· H.E. Mr. Mahmoud Barimani, Ambassador, Embassy of Iran in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: secreteriat@iranembassy.be 
Please also write to
diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective countries.



[1]
The judge’s interpretation seems to be that the Supreme Leader Ayatollah Seyyed Ali
Khamenei has been insulted by the implication that he runs a “casino.”


[2]
For more information see Observatory Press Release of September 11, 2012. 