Internship announcement: Global CAT Civil Society Programme
January  5, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Links / 2016 / JanuaryInternship announcement: Global CAT Civil Society ProgrammeInternship announcement CAT programme2 pages / 301 KB
INTERNSHIP ANNOUNCEMENT
GLOBAL
CAT CIVIL SOCIETY PROGRAMME
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest international
coalition of nongovernmental organisations fighting against torture, summary
executions, forced disappearances and all other forms of cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment, is currently seeking to recruit an INTERN for its Committee against Torture related activities.
Location: International Secretariat of the OMCT, Geneva,
Switzerland.
Dates and duration: The internship will start on 4 April 2016 for a
minimum of 3 months. 
Application date: until 8 February 2016.
RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Committee against Torture will be holding its 57th
session from 18 April to 13 May 2016. The OMCT is facilitating the coordination
of civil society activities during the session and is supporting the access of
Civil Society Organisations to the Committee against Torture in person. It is
also expanding the Committee’s reach through participating in the webcasting of
the Committee sessions, sharing experiences through live tweets and a blog, and
is issuing E-bulletins on the Committee’s sessions. 
The intern will work under the supervision of the Programme Director of the
OMCT Global CAT Civil Society Programme and his/her activities will include:
·     
To assist in the coordination of Civil Society
Organisations’ engagement with the Committee against Torture; 
·     
To follow the country reviews during the 57th
session of the Committee and other meetings in relation to the session;  
·     
To draft the E-bulletin;  
·     
To carry out research on torture related issues.
PROFILE:
·      Attained
or concluding a University degree in law, international relations, social
sciences or related field; 
·      Good
knowledge of the UN procedures and regional mechanisms for the protection of  human
rights; 
·      Excellent
drafting and editing skills; 
·      Ability
to work under pressure to deadlines and to adapt to multidisciplinary work in
the  environment of a multicultural team; 
·      Good
interpersonal and communication skills; 
·      Fluency
in oral and written French and English. Knowledge of Spanish will be
appreciated.  
Applications for this position should be sent (by
email only) to Carin Benninger-Budel at cbb@omct.org. For
consideration, please send a cover letter and a CV indicating “INTERNSHIP “ as
your message Subject. Only preselected candidates will be considered. 
For more information
about the OMCT, please visit our website: www.omct.org 