Oman:  Joint letter to the Sultan of Oman on the right of press freedom and the targeting of journalists and human rights defenders
October 18, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Oman / 2016 / OctoberOman: Joint letter to the Sultan of Oman on the right of press freedom and the targeting of journalists and human rights defenders  

Your Majesty Sultan Qaboos bin Said,

 
We, the undersigned organisations
write to you regarding the systematic targeting of journalists, human rights
defenders and online activists by the Internal Security Service (ISS) in Oman. 
 
We believe that these recent arrests
and prosecutions are part of an ongoing attempt to silence and curtail the
right to press freedom as well as freedom of expression.
 
Since October 10, 2016, the three Azamn journalists sentenced to years in
prison by the Court of First Instance in Muscat are free, pending the outcome
of the appeal which is expected on November 7.  
 
Ibrahim
Al-Maamari,
the editor-in-chief of the Omani independent newspaper Azamn, and managing editor Youssef
Al-Haj were freed after the appeal court, at their lawyers’ request,
reduced the amount of bail to 2,000 rials (4,000 euros) from the 50,000 rials (110,000 euros) set by the
court that convicted them. The third defendant in this case, Azamn local news editor Zaher Al-Abri, was already released
conditionally on August 22.
 
On September 26, 2016, the Court of First Instance had
imposed harsh jail sentences on these three journalists and ordered the
permanent closure of the Azamn
newspaper. 
 
The arrests of the journalists and
the closure of the newspaper came after a report, published in July 2016, which
accused unnamed officials of influencing the Chief Magistrate of the Supreme
Court, to intervene in judicial proceedings. The Vice-President of the
Supreme Court thanked the newspaper for the report and for dissemination of
"facts without a slur on anybody".
 
More precisely, Ibrahim Al-Maamari
and Yousef Al-Haj were convicted of four common charges – “disturbing public
order, misuse of the Internet, publishing details of a civil case, and
undermining the prestige of the state.” They were sentenced to three years’
imprisonment, in addition to a fine of 3,000 rials and a ban on working as a
journalist for a period of one year. Two additional charges were brought
against Yousef Al-Haj: “publishing about a case for which a decree had been
issued to ban news about it, and slander.”
 
Journalist Zaher Al-Abri was sentenced
to one-year imprisonment and fined 1,000 rials after being found guilty of
using “an information network [the Internet] for the dissemination of material
that might be prejudicial to public order.” 
 
These harsh sentences are a clear
attempt to hinder the work of journalists and to curtail the right to freedom
of expression and opinion in Oman.  The
imprisonment of journalists whose only crime was to exercise their profession
in a legitimate manner and the censorship of this story do not bode well for
the future of journalism and civil liberties in the Sultanate, which is ranked
125th out of 180 countries in the 2016 World Press Freedom Index compiled by
Reporters Without Borders.
 
In relation with the Azamn case, many online activists
showing support with the journalists were targeted by the authorities. Saqr Al-Balushi, and writer Hamood Al-Shukaily, arrested both
respectively on October 5 and August 14, remain in detention. Mohammed Al-Harthi, however, who was
arrested on August 18 in relation with posts he made on Twitter in which he
expressed his views on corruption and solidarity with the Azamn newspaper, was released the following day.    
 
The undersigned organisations
express serious concern at the ISS’ systematic targeting of journalists, writers,
human rights defenders including online activists, and view it as a deplorable
and urgent threat to media freedom and freedom of expression in Oman.
 
We call on
you to use your influence in Oman to:
 
1.    
Protect freedom of the media and freedom of speech,
especially online;
2.    
Revoke the closure order of Azamn newspaper by the
Ministry of Information;
3.    
Revoke the sentences issued against journalists Ibrahim
Al-Maamari, Yousef Al-Haj and Zaher Al-Abri;
4.    
Immediately and unconditionally release online activists
Mohammed Al-Harthi and Saqr Al-Balushi;
5.    
Ensure that the ISS stops its attacks on media freedom and
freedom of expression and its targeting of journalists, online activists and other
human rights defenders;
6.    
To guarantee in all circumstances that all human rights
defenders including journalists, writers and online activists in Oman are able
to carry out their legitimate human rights activities without fear of reprisals
and free of all restrictions including judicial harassment.
 
Signed:
1.    
Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ)
2.    
Front Line Defenders (FLD)
3.    
Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR)
4.    
Index on Censorship
5.    
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the
framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
6.    
International Federation of Journalism (IFJ)
7.    
PEN International
8.    
Reporters Without Borders (RSF)
9.    
SKeyes Center for Media and Cultural Freedom
10.  World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders
 
Please find the Arabic version of the letter at the following link: http://ar.rsf.org/2016/10/18/newsjoint-letter-sultan-oman-right-press-freedom-and-targeting-journalists-and-human-rights-defenders/. 