Uganda:  Deportation of four Kenyan human rights defenders
April 14, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uganda / 2011 / AprilUganda: Deportation of four Kenyan human rights defenders

URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

UGA 002 / 0411 / OBS 062
Arbitrary detention / Deportation
Uganda
April 14, 2011
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Uganda.
Description of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the arbitrary arrest in Entebbe Airport in Kampala and the subsequent
deportation to Kenya of Mr. Samwel Mohochi, trustee of Kenya National Coalition of Human Rights
Defenders and member of OMCT General Assembly, Mr. Hussain Khalid, member of Muslims for Human
Rights (MUHURI), Mr. Muhdhar Khitamy, Chairman of the Coast province branch of the
Supreme Council of Kenya Muslims (SUPKEM) and Mr. Hassan Omar Hassan, member of the Kenya National
Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR).
According to the
information received, on April 13, 2011, at 9 a.m., the four Kenyan human
rights defenders flying from Nairobi were arrested by immigration officers at
their arrival at Entebbe Airport in Kampala, Uganda, and detained there. The
four individuals have reportedly not been interrogated, and no reason to their
detention has been provided by the Ugandan authorities. At 3. p.m., they were
deported back to Nairobi. Their passports were given back to them, along with a
notice from the Ugandan government stating that they were “prohibited
immigrants”. They are now free, and no charge has reportedly been brought
against them.
The four human rights defenders
were reportedly travelling with four other Kenyan people, who have been allowed
to enter the country. They were all flying to Kampala to meet with the Chief
Justice of Uganda, in order to discuss the case of Mr. Al-Amin Kimathi, a Kenyan human rights defender,
Executive Director of the Kenyan Muslims Human Rights Forum (MHRF), who was
arrested in Uganda in September 15, 2010 and is now detained at the Luzira
Maximum Security Prison.
The Observatory denounces the
arbitrary arrest and deportation of the four Kenyan human rights defenders,
since they seem to only aim at sanctioning their human rights activities.
Background information:
Mr. Al-Amin Kimathi had been
arrested on September 15, 2010, along with Mr. Mbugua Mureithi, a
Kenyan human rights lawyer and Coordinator of the Litigation Fund Against
Torture (LIFAT), as they were travelling to Kampala to attend a court hearing
in connection with the Kampala bombings of July 11, 2010[1]. The trial was scheduled on
September 16. and Mr. Mureithi was to represent Kenyan civilians transferred
from their country to Uganda for having allegedly participated in the bombings.
Mr. Kimathi and the MHRF are known for denouncing the human rights violations
perpetrated in the name of the fight against terrorism in the East and Horn of
Africa.
Mr. Murethi and Mr Kimanthi were taken
to the headquarters of the Ugandan Police's Rapid Response Unit in Kireka, a
suburb of Kampala, and detained there. They were questioned by individuals in
civilian clothing about alleged contacts with Al-Shabaab operatives, an
islamist group which claimed responsibility in the terrorist bombings
perpetrated in Kampala on July 11, 2010.
On September 18, Mr. Mureithi was released and
escorted to Entebbe to take a plane to Kenya in the morning. During his
detention, Mr. Mureithi did not have access to a lawyer and was not allowed to
make any phone calls. Mr. Al-Amin Kimathi, whose laptop has been confiscated,
remains in detention with no access to a lawyer and no authorisation to make
any phone call.
On September 20, Mr. Al-Amin Kimathi was brought
before the Nakawa Chief Magistrate's Court in Kampala and charged with
terrorism, attempted murder and 89 counts of murder in relation to the July 11
bombings. The Magistrate's court did not have jurisdiction to try him on those
charges - murder and terrorism are capital offences - but the charges were read
out to him and he was remanded to Luzira Maximum Security Prison. 
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Uganda, urging them
to:
i.      Repeal the notice from the Ugandan
government stating that Messrs. Samwel Mohochi, Hussain Khalid, Muhdhar
Khitamy, Hassan Omar Hassana were “prohibited immigrants, to allow them to
enter the country, so that they can meet with the Chief Justice of Uganda;
ii.      Put an end to all acts of harassment against
all human rights defenders in Uganda ;
iii.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
and psychological integrity of Mr. Al Amin Kimathi as well as of all human
rights defenders in Uganda;
iv.      Comply with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-         
Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”,
-         
Article
6.a, which states that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others: To know, seek, obtain, receive and hold information about all human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including having access to information as to
how those rights and freedoms are given effect in domestic legislative,
judicial or administrative systems;
-         
Article 9.3 which
provides that “everyone has
the right, individually and in association with others, inter alia […] to attend public hearings, proceedings and trials so as
to form an opinion on their compliance with national law and applicable
international obligations and commitments; and to offer and provide
professionally qualified legal assistance or other relevant advice and
assistance in defending human rights and fundamental freedoms”,
-         
Article 12.2 which
states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary
action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights
referred to in the present Declaration”.
v.   More generally, ensure in all circumstances
the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Uganda.
Addresses:
·        
President Kaguta Yoweri Museveni,
President of the Republic of Uganda, Office of the President of Uganda, State
House Nakasero, P.O. Box 24594, Kampala, Uganda. Fax: +256 (0) 414 436 102 / + 256 41
4235459 / +256 41 4344012. E-mail: museveni@starcom.co.ug /
aak@statehouse.go.ug
·      
Hon. Dr. Edward Kiddhu Makubuya, Attorney General and Minister of
Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional
Affairs, Parliament Avenue, P.O.Box 7183, Kampala, Uganda. Fax: + 256 41
4250829. E-Mail: mojca@africaonline.co.ug
·      
Mr. Richard Buteera, Director of Public Prosecutions, Ministry of
Justice, Constitutional Affairs & the Attorney General, Tel:
+256-414-332-502/332-504, Fax: +256-414-258-565/341-316, Email: admin@dpp.go.ug
·      
Mr. Ruhakana Rugunda, Minister of Internal Affairs, Jinja Rd, PO Box
7191, Kampala, Uganda. Fax: + 256 414343088
·      
Mr. Edward Kale Kaihura, Inspector General of Police, Telephone: +256
(0) 712 755 999
·       H.E. Mr. Maurice Peter Kagimu Kiwanuka, Permanent Mission of Uganda
to the United Nations in Geneva, 6 bis rue Antoine Carteret, 1202 Genève,
Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 340 70 30. Email:
mission.uganda@ties.itu.int.
·       Embassy of Uganda to the EU in Brussels, 317 avenue de Tervueren, 1150
Woluwe-Saint-Pierre, Belgium. Fax: + 32 2.763.04.38. Email: ugembrus@brutele.be
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Uganda in your
respective countries.
***
Geneva-Paris, April 14, 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.  
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is
dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them
concrete support in their time of need.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]              
See Observatory Urgent Appeal UGA 001 / 0910 / OBS 114.


​ 