Bangladesh:  Joint Statement: Government repression and intimidation of families of victims of enforced disappearance
September  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Bangladesh / 2015 / SeptemberBangladesh: Joint Statement: Government repression and intimidation of families of victims of enforced disappearanceBangladesh_2015.09.01_Joint_Statement_EN2 pages / 287 KB​
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
September 1, 2015
A Joint Statement by 
Asian Federation Against Involuntary
Disappearances
Asian Legal Resource Centre
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders [a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)]
 
1 September 2015 – On the occasion of the International Day of the Disappeared on August
30, families of victims of enforced disappearance, AFAD, ALRC, FIDH and Odhikar
had jointly organised a commemorative event in Dhaka, Bangladesh to remember
those who have been forcibly detained and whose fate and whereabouts remain
unknown. However, less than 24 hours before the event was scheduled to take
place, it was suddenly cancelled by the National Press Club where the event was
slated to be held. In addition, families of the disappeared who were scheduled
to speak during the event received threatening phone calls, and police were
deployed to the National Press Club without an explanation.  Our organisations have reason to believe that
the Bangladesh government is behind this sudden cancellation of the event and
the intimidation of victims' families, as part of a wider effort to silence any
voices speaking out against Enforced Disappearances in Bangladesh and to
maintain impunity for these crimes which many claim have been committed by
State authorities. 
On 29 August 2015 at 5:20 PM, the National Press Club
informed one of the organisers of the Odhikar/AFAD/ALRC/FIDH event that the
President of the Club had ordered the event to be cancelled, claiming that
there was “another programme” scheduled at the same time. However, witnesses
confirmed that no programme was held at the venue on Sunday, and that several
police officers were deployed to the Press Club on Sunday morning and remained
on the premises throughout the day with no explanation for their presence.
In addition, family members of the disappeared who
were scheduled to speak at the event received threatening telephone calls
dissuading them from participating. 
In areas outside Dhaka, other commemorations were also
met with threats and police deployment. However, with the support of local
civil society activists, the families of the disappeared went ahead with the
events, and commemorations were successfully held in Khulna, Rajshahi, and
Rajbari district among others.
The events scheduled on August 30 aimed to highlight
the worsening human rights situation in Bangladesh, particularly for the
families of the disappeared who are systematically denied truth, justice and
recovery. Between January to June 2015 alone, Odhikar has recorded 38 cases of
enforced disappearances in Bangladesh. The victims were reportedly picked up by
men claiming to be from law enforcement agencies.
As partners of Odhikar and the families of the
disappeared, AFAD, ALRC, FIDH, and OMCT strongly condemn this State repression
of human rights defenders and those speaking out against human rights
violations. Articles 19 and 20 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
establish the rights of all people to freedom of opinion and expression, and
freedom of peaceful assembly, respectively. The right to assembly is likewise
provided for by the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights
(Article 21), which Bangladesh has ratified. This right has also been
reaffirmed in the UN Human Rights Council in its  resolution 15/21 (October 2010), resolution 21/16 (October 2012) and resolution 24/5 (October 2013).
Our organisations call on the government of Bangladesh
to honour its commitments as a State party to the ICCPR and member of the UN,
to immediately stop harassing and curtailing the rights of organizations and
individuals to assemble and speak out in the pursuit of truth and justice for
the victims of enforced disappearances.
Moreover,
we call on the government to adhere to the principles of the 1992 Declaration
on the Protection of All Persons Against Involuntary Disappearances, which
states that: “No State shall practise,
permit or tolerate enforced disappearances” [Article 2.1], and that “Each State shall take effective legislative,
administrative, judicial or other measures to prevent and terminate acts of
enforced disappearance in any territory under its jurisdiction” [Article
3]. The victims of enforced disappearances and their families deserve truth and
justice, and we will continue to support their struggle until they are afforded
these rights. 

 

The Asian Federation Against Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD) is a federation of human rights organizations working directly on the
issue of involuntary disappearances in Asia. Envisioning a world without desaparecidos, the Federation was founded on June 4, 1998 in Manila,
Philippines.
 
The Asian
Legal Resource Centre (ALRC) works towards
the radical rethinking & fundamental redesigning of justice institutions in
Asia, to ensure relief and redress for victims of human rights violations,
as per Common Article 2 of the International Conventions. Sister organisation
to the Asian Human Rights Commission, the ALRC is based in Hong Kong &
holds general consultative status with the Economic & Social Council of the
United Nations. 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is
to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. 