India: New Delays and Reprisals against victim families in Supreme Court ordered Investigations in Manipur
February  1, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2019 / FebruaryIndia: New Delays and Reprisals against victim families in Supreme Court ordered Investigations in Manipur
Geneva, 31 January 2019
The World Organization Against Torture (OMCT), the principal
global coalition against torture principle  is deeply concerned about delays and reprisals
against victim families in one of the most significant human rights judgments
in Asia from the past years.
Between 1979 and 2012, more than
1,500 people were allegedly killed in extra-judicial executions by the police
and security forces in insurgency-ridden Manipur. The Armed Forces Special
Powers Act (AFSPA) granted the paramilitary forces and armed state
police with special powers to combat insurgency and ensure
security in this area, mostly inhabited by indigenous peoples of Tibetan-Burman
descent. This legal framework has licensed a catalogue of human
rights abuses with complete impunity.
It was a historic step to come to
terms with past impunity when the Supreme Court of India decided in 2016 that
any allegation of the use of excessive force by uniformed personnel resulting
in death required a thorough inquiry into the incidents and that the use of
such force was never permissible, including in operations led against suspected
insurgents and terrorists. Moreover, the Court stressed the importance of
investigations and legal judgements for a much broader truth seeking and asked
that the magnitude of the extrajudicial executions be taken into account.
Following this worldwide acclaimed judgement, in July 2017 the Supreme Court
directed the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to examine 98 killings by
police, army, and paramilitary forces in Manipur.
Yet, almost two years after the 2017
judgement there are serious concerns about attempts to defeat investigations. In
August 2018, 356 soldiers and officers of the Indian Army presented a petition
to the Supreme Court challenging the investigations into the Manipur cases
arguing that such investigations would disturb the morale of the troops (see
our previous statement here). Furthermore,
as of January 2019, the CBI was still not granted prosecution sanction from the
government which is needed under the Criminal Procedure Code in order to
prosecute public officials for acts committed in the course of their official
duty. This is seriously hindering prosecution of personnel who have already
been indicted but still serve in the police and army. 
Moreover, victim families and
non-governmental groups reported reprisals and humiliations by public
officials. In December 2018 and early January 2019, Inspector Pebam John,
indicted by the CBI, repeatedly pressured a witness, Ms Sukham Punimabati Devi,
to meet with him in order to ensure that “she remains safe when leaving her
house”. We are seriously concerned for her safety. In addition, during a court
hearing on 14 January 2019, victim families and trial observers were subjected
to repeated search of their personal belongings upon request of one of the
accused police officers who claimed that several people had taken photos of him.
Subsequently, handbags were searched, and two women were forced to open photo
files of their cell phones causing embarrassment and humiliation in front of
the entire court. 
We ask that the government implement the Supreme Court
decisions without delay and recall the positive obligation of the state to
protect victims, witnesses and human rights defenders, especially pertinent in
a sensitive case such as this one. We particularly request that the competent
authorities guarantee the safety of Ms Sukham Punimabati Devi.
For further information:

Nicole Bürli, Human Rights Adviser, OMCT, nb@omct.org, +41 22 809 49 26 