Occupied Palestinian Territory :  Palestine Autonomous Areas: Re-arrest of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim
February 21, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Occupied Palestinian Territory  / 2000 / FebruaryOccupied Palestinian Territory : Palestine Autonomous Areas: Re-arrest of Dr. Abdel Sattar QasimRe-arrest of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim   Case PAL 011299.5 Fifth follow-up of Case PAL 011299  Geneva 21st February 2000  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Palestinian Autonomous Areas.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information from the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW) a member of the OMCT network, that on Friday 18 February 2000 the Palestinian police criminal department arrested Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim, 50, professor at al-Najah National University in Nablus and one of the signatories of the "petition 20" statement issued in November 1999 criticizing corruption in PNA institutions.   According to the information received, Dr. Qasim's wife reported that on Friday 18th February two officers, who said they were from the criminal police department, arrived at their house in Nablus at approximately 11:00pm and arrested her husband without an arrest warrant. The officers explained that they had an order to arrest Dr. Qasim issued by Ghazi Jabali, head of Palestinian civil police, and President Arafat. She added that the reasons for his arrest are yet unknown and that the two officers who came to arrest him had originally told her that they needed him for questioning for only fifteen minutes. Dr. Qasim's wife added that the Palestinian police in Jericho are still holding her husband and he has not been allowed visits.  Furthermore, LAW's lawyers attempted to obtain permission to visit Dr. Qasim, however, a police official in Jericho prison refused the issue of a permit and explained that the visit would only be allowed after Jabali's authorization. This is considered as illegal especially as LAW's lawyer officially represents the professor due to a power of attorney issued by his family.     Brief reminder of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed of the arrest of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim on 28th November, along with a number of Palestinian political and social figures, following the release on 27th November of a statement accusing the Palestinian Authority of corruption.  Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim had been transferred to the General Intelligence detention centre in Jericho and was informed that he would not be allowed visits, without a satisfactory reason.  OMCT received further information from LAW, that on 5th January 2000, LAW's lawyer was able to visit Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim at the Jericho detention center.  At this time, the attorney general had renewed his detention period for the third successive time on 30 December 1999 for a further 15 days.   Finally, the International Secretariat of OMCT received information (LAW) that Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim was released on 6th January 2000 from Jericho Detention Centre.  According to the information, Khaled Al Qidra, Head of the State Security Court, informed the detainees that President Arafat had issued a release order for bail.  He was required to sign a pledge that bound him to appear at police stations if summoned.  Bail, was placed at 50,000 Jordanian Dinars (approximately $USD75,000) to be forfeited for non-compliance with the summons.    Actions requested  Please write to the Palestinian Authorities urging them to:  i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim;  ii.	ensure the immediate release of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim or in the event that valid legal charges exist ensure that he is brought immediately before an impartial and competent tribunal and that his procedural rights be guaranteed at all times, in accordance with international human rights standards;  iii.	guarantee an immediate full and impartial enquiry into the circumstances of the arrest of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim and ensure that his legal rights be upheld and that he be able to meet with his lawyer;  iv.	finally request that all human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards are guaranteed.  Addresses  Yasser Arafat, President of the Palestinian Authority, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, via Israel.  Fax : + 972 7 2822 365/6 ( if voice, say "fax, please").  Freih Abu Meddein, Palestinian Authority, Minister of Justice, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, via Israel. Fax : + 972 7 2822 236   Khalid al-Qidrah, Attorney General, Palestinian Authority, Attorney General Building, Yarmouk, Gaza, via Israel.  Fax : + 972 7 2824 502.  Geneva, 21st February 2000  Kindly inform the International Secretariat of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 