Sudan:  Sudan: Four men arbitrarily arrested and tortured by armed forces
February 28, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2005 / FebruarySudan: Sudan: Four men arbitrarily arrested and tortured by armed forcesCase SDN 280205 Arbitrary Detention / Torture / Release  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information concerning the following situation in Sudan.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that on 15 February 2005, the armed forces and military intelligence in Nyala arrested and tortured Yasir Hassan Osman (20yrs), merchant, Hassan Younis Abdella Ateam (25yrs), caterer, Hussain Younis Abdella Ateam (25 yrs), labourer, and Abdella Mohamed Fadul (40 yrs), shoe trader on suspicion of joining the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA). All four men belong to the Zaghawa community from Sanya Afondu village, east of Nyala.   According to the information received, the men were arrested whilst at the local market and taken to a military camp, 1km West of Sanya Afondu village where they were detained in a hole in the ground. The men were reportedly tortured and received severe injuries. They were allegedly flogged on their chests and backs, and beaten severely with sticks on their testicles, head, back, shoulders and legs.  On 18 February 2005, one of the detainees, Mr. Yasir Hassan Osman was released and received medical treatment for his injuries at SOAT’s partner organisation in Nyala, Amel Medical Centre for Rehabilitation of Torture Victims. The three remaining persons are still in detention and according to information, have not received any medical treatment. Hassan Younis Abdella Ateam is reportedly seriously wounded. Furthermore, they do not face any official charges.  The alleged perpetrators have been identified as Mohamed Nour (Sergeant), Shole Daing, Fadul, Salah, Burram (Sergeant) and Abdel Nasir (Lieutenant).  OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons.   Requested Action: Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:   i.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above mentioned persons;  ii.	order the immediate release of Hassan Younis Abdella Ateam, Hussain Younis Abdella Ateam and Abdella Mohamed Fadul in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times;  iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events and in particular the alleged torture of all four men, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply to them the civil, penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;  iv.	guarantee that adequate medical care is provided to all victims and that they are awarded reparation;  v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international humanitarian law and human rights standards.   Addresses: His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 783223  Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 788941  Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affair, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779383   Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 770883  His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mohamed Al- Hassan Ahmed Al-Haj, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, +41 22 716 19 70, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, 28 February 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 