Bahrain:  The court's decision not to grant Nabeel Rajab an early release is flawed
December  4, 2013
Human rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2013 / DecemberBahrain: The court's decision not to grant Nabeel Rajab an early release is flawedThis article is available in:English (main language)Paris-Geneva, December 4, 2013. Two days
ago, the Bahraini Court of Appeals refused to grant Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President
of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) and Deputy Secretary General of
FIDH, an early release which would have been in accordance with the Code of
Criminal Procedure. FIDH and OMCT, in the framework of their joint programme,
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, deem this
decision as arbitrary. 
 
On December 2, 2013, the Court of Appeals scheduled an urgent session to
examine the request filed by Mr. Nabeel
Rajab's lawyers for an early release of their client and decided not to
grant such release without providing any grounds. According to the information
received, the Court also failed to investigate duly on whether conditions for
early release had been met. A representative from the US Embassy was preventing
from observing this court hearing. Previously, on November 24, a penalty
enforcement judge had issued the same decision. During the session, Mr. Rajab's
lawyers presented their arguments that Mr. Nabeel Rajab was eligible for early
release in pursuance to the conditions laid under Article 349 of the Criminal
Procedural Code, which sets three conditions: that ¾ of the sentence has been
served, good behaviour during detention and not being a threat to public
security. The proceedings failed to comply with the right to a fair trial as
the court failed to properly examine the request for early release; failed to
provide grounds for its decision and did not guarantee the public nature of the
hearing. Lawyers were told that the decision was final and could not be
appealed. By this, all local remedies have been exhausted. 
 
“This
decision confirms that the Bahraini judiciary not only does not care about
conforming to international human rights standards but also about implementing
domestic law in full independence”,
said Karim Lahidji, President of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH).
 
This court's decision blatantly contradicts the Opinion recently
published by the United Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
(WGAD) session that the detention of Nabeel Rajab is arbitrary and that the
Bahraini authorities should release him immediately. The UN WGAD argued that
the “denial of a universally accepted human right to freedom of opinion and
expression cannot be condoned by a domestic court, as
seen in the case of Mr. Rajab”. 
 
“The ongoing detention of Nabeel Rajab blatantly violates the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) ratified by Bahrain as well as
basic internationally recognised human rights such as the right to fair trial. It is time for the Bahraini authorities to face
up to their international obligations and abide by the WGAD decision and
release at last Mr. Rajab”, said Gerald
Staberock, Secretary General of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
 
The Observatory recalls that the Bahraini authorities detained and convicted
Mr. Rajab under existing domestic laws in violation of the basic right
to freedom of opinion, expression and assembly. He was prosecuted for
exercising his universally recognised human rights. The entire procedure was fraught
with serious human rights violations from the time of arrest, through
detention, trial and conviction.
 
The Observatory deeply regrets the court's refusal to grant Mr. Rajab an
early release, and deplores the judge's decision that did not provide any
grounds. It considers the decision an attempt to curtail Mr. Rajab's activities
as a human rights defender and calls on the Bahraini authorities to adhere to
its international human rights obligations and apply them to the case of Mr.
Nabeel Rajab. 
 
For more information, please contact:
·       FIDH: Audrey Couprie/Arthur Manet:
0033 1 43 55 25 18
·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
0041 22 809 49 39 