Philippines:  Philippines: OMCT presents a report on State sponsored violence to the United Nations Human Rights Committee in collaboration with partner NGOs.
October 20, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2003 / OctoberPhilippines: Philippines: OMCT presents a report on State sponsored violence to the United Nations Human Rights Committee in collaboration with partner NGOs.PRESS RELEASE   For the attention of the Press  Geneva, October 20th, 2003   Philippines: OMCT presents a report on State sponsored violence to the United Nations Human Rights Committee in collaboration with partner NGOs.   On October 20th, 2003, OMCT presented an alternative report, in collaboration with the Preda Foundation, Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), and Women’s Education, Development, Productivity and Research Organisation (WEDPRO), on State sponsored violence to the Untied Nations Human Rights Committee’s experts.  The report highlighted the fact that torture continues to be perpetrated in the Philippines. Since the accession to power of President Arroyo in 2001, 88 persons have been reported subject to torture, and many more unreported. The perpetrators of these acts have for the most part been members of the Armed Forces. These figures seem to indicate that the use of torture continues unabated, when compared with statistics from previous periods.  Of particular interest in this report, is the continuing harassment and threats to which journalists and human rights defenders are being subjected. Since 1986, 43 journalists have been assassinated. To this day, none of these cases have been solved.  Concerning the implementation of the Rights of the Child, it must be noted with concern that a large number of street children have been arrested and detained without valid charges having been brought against them. Children as young as 8 years old are imprisoned in very small cells with no beds, no furniture, shower or toilet. They are also subject to torture and ill-treatment. Furthermore, a number of children have been summarily executed, in particular in the Mindanao region, where “death squads” have reportedly executed over 150 persons over the last seven years.  Further to this, trafficking of women remains a serious problem in the country. Between 25’000 and 35’000 women have become victims of trafficking, including being “exported” to various countries in Southeast Asia and the West. Women in prostitution in the Philippines, being arrested on a Friday are sometimes forced to stay in jail over the weekend since there are no official functions on weekends. During these instances, women are abused, including raped while in jail.  Consequently, OMCT, the Preda Foundation, Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), and Women’s Education, Development, Productivity and Research Organisation (WEDPRO) call upon the authorities of the Philippines to order investigations in order to bring the perpetrators of theses crimes before an independent court, guarantee that adequate reparation is awarded to the victims of these violations, and take all measures necessary to prevent all forms of violence from being perpetrated by state agents.   Please click here to view the report  Contact OMCT : Christine Ferrier +4122 809.49.39 