Chad:  Chad: identity of the 5 people killed and 12 others wounded in inter-ethnic clashes
November  1, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Chad / 2001 / NovemberChad: Chad: identity of the 5 people killed and 12 others wounded in inter-ethnic clashesCase TCD 171001.1 Follow-up of TCD 171001 Identification of 5 people killed and 12 others wounded in inter-ethnic clashes  Geneva, 1 November 2001  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information concerning the following situation in Chad.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Association Jeunesse Anti-Clivage, a youth association and member of the OMCT network, of the identity of the 5 people killed and 12 others wounded in inter-ethnic clashes which occurred in Bongor, Chad.  According to the information received, the names of the 5 people who died are as follows :  Abakar Hama Hamadou, Youssouf Tidjani, Baifouta Soua Hama, Barlya Wanga Hama and Djibrine Souleymane   The names of the12 people who were wounded are as follows :  Abakar Abderamane Saleh, Souleymane Issaka, Mahamat Nahar, Issa Souleymane, Oumar Nganansou, Hassane Hama, Service Sarsou, Garga Sarsou, Moumouna Tara, Daga Vounansou,, Brimba Mounkang and Djona Waysou  According to the information received, currently, the situation is relatively calm.  The military authorities and the police have been transferred to another region, but have not been subjected to any judicial investigation so as to determine their responsibility in the massacre.  Colonel Soumain Hassan Kare, known as "Thick-skinned" is currently posted to Massaguet, 80 km north of Bongor.  As far as the families of the victims are concerned, two types of negotiations have been undertaken so as to guarantee them compensation.  Two of the families have negotiated on the basis of "DIA" (the price of blood under Islamic law), which defines the amount to be paid for a death (generally 3 million CFA francs per deceased).  The Chadian government has agreed to participate in these financial settlements.  However, this traditional system, common in the north of the country where there is a Muslim majority, is little used in the region of Bongor.  Therefore, the government has made other alternative proposals of financial compensation to the majority of the families originating from the south.  The International Secretariat of OMCT welcomes this commitment by the State to compensate the victims.  However, OMCT wishes to express its concern that the delivery of arms by the local military authorities has not been investigated and followed up by legal proceedings or sanctions against those responsible, thus preventing a legal settlement of the conflict.  Brief reminder of the facts  According to the information received, an argument between two young men, Messrs. Abakar Hama and Orozi outside "La Paillote", a bar in Bongor, sparked off a local ethnic conflict, which subsequently degenerated over the next ten days.  Following the murder by stabbing of Abakar Hama, his parents who are from Bongor and belong to the Massa ethnic group, retaliated against the murderer's family.  They reportedly attacked and killed a certain Youssouf Tidjani whom they believed to be a relative of Orozi.  However, Youssouf Tidjani was not related to Orozi.  Youssouf Tidjani's family in turn decided to take revenge.  This family is originally from Kanem in the north of the country and belongs to the Kréda ethnic group, as do the military authorities in the town.  Hence, the authorities supplied the arms, as well as the uniforms and the vehicles.  The local soldiers and police concerned are :  ·	Colonel Souman Hassan Kare known as "Blindé" ("Thick-skinned"), Mayo-Dallah Gendarmerie Legion commander ·	Ali Noukouri, Bongor central police commissioner ·	Moussa Yaya, Bongor Gendarmerie Brigade commander  Fighting took place for several days between the Massa and Kréda families, causing twelve people to be injured and five deaths.  Businesses were burned, among them that of the head of the Canton of Bongor who had to take refuge with neighbours.  Action requested  We request you kindly to write to the authorities in Chad, requesting them to :  1.	order a complete and impartial enquiry into the circumstances of these clashes, and in particular the role of the local authorities, so as to identify those responsible and bring them before a competent court, and to apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as foreseen by the law; 2.	ensure total disarming of armed groups;  3.	to ensure respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms all over the country, according to national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	H.E. Mr. IDRISS DEBY, Président de la République, Présidence de la République, B.P. 74 	N'Djamena    		Fax : (+235) 51 45 01  -  Tel. (235) 51 44 37; Telex 5201 KD/ 5307 KD  ·	H.E. Mr NAGOUM YAMASSOUM, Premier Ministre, Primature  N'Djamena 		Fax (235) 52 20 89  -  Tel. (235) 52 63 41  -  Telex 5351 KD  ·	H.E. Mr. MAHAMAT ABDOULAYE, Minister of Justice, Garde des Sceaux, Ministère de la Justice, BP 426, N'Djamena  ·	Mr ADÉRAMANE MOUSSA, Ministre de of the Interior, Security and Decentralisation, Ministère de l'Intérieur, N'Djaména  Please also write to the diplomatic representation of Chad in your country.  Kindly inform us of any action you may take, citing the code of this appeal in your reply.  Geneva, 1 November 2001 