Maldives:  Move to dissolve about 70% of the NGOs would seriously impact human rights activities in the country
April 26, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Maldives / 2013 / AprilMaldives: Move to dissolve about 70% of the NGOs would seriously impact human rights activities in the country

Geneva-Paris,
April 26, 2013. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), in the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, express
their concern about the authorities’ announcement to dissolve about 70% of the
Maldivian NGOs for failing to abide by their reporting requirements. 
 
On
March 18, 2013, Maldives
Minister of State for Home Affairs, Mr. Abdulla Mohamed, announced that his
Ministry will dissolve about 1,300 legally registered NGOs - i.e. nearly 70% of
the Maldivian NGOs - for allegedly failing to adhere to reporting requirements
and to elect executive committees.
 
In Maldives, the Associations Act is
extremely broad as it covers all types of NGOs, including human rights ones[1].
NGOs have to submit annual report to the government agencies, which most of
them are reported to have not submitted. In February 2013, the Ministry of Home
Affairs formally reminded the NGOs to submit annual reports on time or face
risk of dissolution. After the deadline, the Registrar of NGOs, which is posted
at the Ministry of Home Affairs, publicly announced that the majority of NGOs
did not comply with the guidelines. The Registrar is legally empowered to
dissolve NGOs who failed to submit annual report for two consequent years.
 
“The Ministry’s
move to dissolve a large part of the Maldivian NGOs would clearly have a devastating
impact on the ability of civil society to conduct activities to promote and
protect human rights, as provided for in the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders”,
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock said today. “We fear that it might
aim at stifling
human rights defenders’ activities, especially in the run-up to the
presidential elections that are scheduled for September 2013”, he added.
 
The Observatory recalls that the right to
freedom of association is a universally recognised right enshrined in numerous
international and regional instruments, especially Article 22 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). 
 
Such a move would also violate Article 30 (b) of the
Constitution of the Maldives, which guarantees the right to form associations
and societies. Moreover, in line with Articles 42 and 43 of the Maldivian
Constitution, the Government must ensure judicial oversight by an independent
and impartial court of any executive decision to dissolve NGOs. The Government
must also immediately communicate the grounds for its decision in each and
every case, citing clear examples.
 
“Although the right of NGOs to freedom of
association is naturally accompanied by certain responsibilities on their part,
especially in terms of transparency and good governance, as in any other sector
of society, one shall not forget that legitimate restrictions on this right
must be “necessary in a democratic society”, and respect the primacy of the
general interest and the principle of proportionality”, said FIDH President
Souhayr Belhassen. 
 
The Observatory therefore calls upon the authorities
of the Maldives to guarantee the right of the concerned NGOs to benefit
from suspensive measures so
that they can comply with the reporting and governance requirements and to
an effective remedy in the event of suspension or dissolution, as well as to
ensure that any limitation on the right to freedom of association is consistent
in its entirety with Article 22 of the ICCPR.
 
The
Observatory further calls upon Maldivian NGOs to respect, to the extent
possible, the provisions relating to the transparency of reporting, financing
and auditing in order to avoid unfounded indictment by the authorities; as well
as to ensure that their modes of operation and purpose are consistent with
Article 22 of the ICCPR. 
 
The Observatory more generally urges the authorities
of the Maldives to guarantee that human rights defenders and NGOs can carry out
their activities free of any hindrances and to ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and instruments ratified by the Maldives. 



[1]     Recreational clubs, law societies, GONGOs
etc. are reportedly also registered under the same act. However, some of these
groups, while not adhering to the terms of the act, do not seem to face any
problems with the Ministry of Home Affairs. 