Thailand:  Free Somyot Now
September 19, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2012 / SeptemberThailand: Free Somyot Now




 


 


 




 


 




 


 


 


 











 
FOR IMMEDIATE
RELEASE 
 
19 September 2012 – Bangkok
 
Free Somyot Now
 
Human
rights and labour organizations today urge that magazine editor and human rights defender Somyot Prueksakasemsuk be immediately released from
17-month pre-trial detention.  If
convicted, he faces up to 30 years in prison under Article 112 of the Criminal
Code (the lèse-majesté law) for the publication of two articles
deemed insulting to the monarchy.  The
group further called on the Thai authorities to uphold international standards
of freedom of expression, and to stop using Article 112 and arbitrary detention to
criminalize or restrict free speech.  
  
The outcome of Somyot’s trial
is a litmus test of Thailand’s commitment to protect the rights to freedom
of opinion and expression, the group said
 
Somyot has been held in prison
since his arrest in April 2011, five days after he launched a petition campaign
to collect 10,000 signatures required for a parliamentary review of lèse-majesté law.  Lengthy pre-trial detention of Somyot clearly
violates Thailand’s obligations to refrain from arbitrary detention.
 
On 18 September, the Thai
Criminal Court cancelled a court hearing in his case scheduled for 19
September, prolonging his pre-trial detention indefinitely.  The Criminal Court did not provide reasons
for the cancellation or a new date for the hearing.  
 
Background
 
Authorities have turned down
Somyot’s eleven requests for release on bail. In denying him provisional
release, the court has not provided adequate justifications, as required by
Section 40(7) the Constitution and Section 107 of the Criminal Procedure Code,
which restrict pre-trial detention to exceptional circumstances, and by the
International Covenant on Civil Political Rights (ICCPR), which Thailand has ratified.

 
During the past two years,
Thai courts have repeatedly denied bail to alleged lèse-majesté offenders. The UN Human Rights Committee, which
oversees compliance of States with the ICCPR, has reminded States that
pre-trial detention may, in itself, be a violation of the rights to liberty and
presumption of innocence. 
 
Thailand’s lèse-majesté law prohibits any word or
act, which “defames, insults, or threatens the King, the Queen, the
Heir-apparent, or the Regent”. The law overrides the Thai constitution and
places the country in contravention of its international legal obligations to
uphold international standards of freedom of expression. Thai civil society
groups, families of those prosecuted under the lèse-majesté law, and United Nations human rights experts have
repeatedly called for a public debate on reform of the lèse-majesté law. When Thailand’s human rights record was examined
in October 2011 during the Universal Periodic Review of the UN Human Rights
Council, its member states addressed more than a dozen recommendations to amend
or repeal both the lèse-majesté law
and the 2007 Computer Crimes Act that criminalizes online defamation under the
same provision.  Four of the alleged lèse-majesté offenders, including
Somyot, have pending requests to the Constitutional Court to rule on the
constitutionality of Article 112.  On 19
September, Somyot was expected to learn if the Constitutional Court had ruled
on whether Thailand’s lèse-majesté
law complies with guarantees of freedom of expression and the press in the 2007
Constitution.
 
The UN Special Rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression
“reiterate[d] the call to all States to decriminalize defamation” in his report
(A/HRC/17/27) to the UN Human Right Council in May 2011. The UN Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders guarantees the right “[t]o submit to governmental bodies
and agencies and organizations concerned with public affairs criticism and
proposals for improving their functioning and to draw attention to any aspect
of their work that may impede the realization of human rights.” Thailand has
increasingly criminalized writers and editors of publications that carry
articles deemed offensive to the monarchy. 

 
For more information, please
contact: 
 



Arthur Manet
Press Officer
International Federation for Human
  Rights (FIDH) 
+ 33 1 43 55 25 18 


 


Isabelle Scherer
Coordinator
World
  Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) + 41 22 809 49 39




 


 


 




Brittis Edman
Southeast
  Asia Programme Director
Civil
  Rights Defender
+46 8545
  27751 


 


Mary McGuire 
Senior
  Communications Officer 
Freedom
  House 
+1.202.747.7035




 


 


 




Ineke Zeldenrust 
International
  Coordinator
Clean
  Clothes Campaign 
+31-6-51280210


 


Olof Blomqvist 
Press
  Officer Asia/Pacific, Media Programme
Amnesty
  International – International Secretariat 
Tel: + 44
  (0) 20 7413 5871 
Mobile:
  +44 (0) 790 4391 956 