Saudi Arabia:  Sentencing of Messrs. Mohamed Al-Otaibi and Abdullah Al-Attawi to fourteen and seven years in prison
January 30, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2018 / JanuarySaudi Arabia: Sentencing of Messrs. Mohamed Al-Otaibi and Abdullah Al-Attawi to fourteen and seven years in prison​SAU 001 /
0118 / OBS 012Sentencing /
Arbitrary
detention
Saudi Arabia
January 30,
2018
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Saudi Arabia.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the sentencing of
Messrs. Abdullah Al-Attawi and Mohamed Al-Otaibi, two founders of the
Union for Human Rights, as well as about the ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr.
Mohamed Al-Otaibi.
(c) Gulf Center for Human Rights 
According
to the information received, on January 25, 2018, Section 12 of the Specialised
Criminal Court[1] sentenced Messrs. Mohamed
Al-Otaibi and Abdullah Al-Attawi to fourteen and seven years in prison respectively,
under a series of charges, including: “participating in setting up an
organisation and announcing it before getting an authorisation”, “dividing
national unity”, “spreading chaos and inciting public opinion by preparing,
drafting and publishing statements that are harmful to the reputation of the
Kingdom and its judicial and security institutions”, “opposing
judicial decisions”, “formulating data aimed at disrupting security”,
“participating in a hunger strike”, and “publishing information
about their interrogations despite signing pledges to refrain from doing so”.
 
Mr.
Mohamed Al-Otaibi was facing additional charges of “disseminating information
about an investigation”, “abusing the Kingdom via Twitter”, “calling to change
the basic system of governance” as well as “spreading harmful information about
Saudi Arabia via a satellite channel”.
 
Messrs.
Mohamed Al-Otaibi and Abdullah Al-Attawi’s trial started on October 30, 2016
and all charges relate to the Union for Human Rights, a human rights
association set up in 2013 and almost immediately shut down by the Saudi
authorities[2].
 
The Observatory recalls that this is not the first
time Messrs. Mohamed Al-Otaibi and Abdullah Al-Attawi are being judicially harassed by the Saudi
authorities, and that Mr. Mohamed Al-Otaibi remains detained at the Intelligence Prison in Al-Damam since May
2017 (see background information). As of issuing
this Urgent Appeal, Mr. Abdullah Al-Attawi remained free.
 
The Observatory expresses its utmost concern over
the sentencing of Messrs. Abdullah Al-Attawi and Mohamed Al-Otaibi and the arbitrary
detention of the latter, which only seem to aim at sanctioning their peaceful
and legitimate human rights activities. Consequently, the Observatory urges
Saudi authorities to release Mr. Mohamed Al-Otaibi immediately and unconditionally and to put
an end to all acts of harassment against him and Mr. Abdullah Al-Attawi as well as all human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia. 
 
Background
information[3]:

 
Mr. Mohamed Al-Otaibi was first arrested on January 1, 2009, charged
with “attempting to initiate a peaceful demonstration” to protest the Gaza war
and subsequently sentenced on these charges to three years in prison. He served
three years and seven months in prison before he was finally released on June
10, 2012. 
 
In April 2013, Messrs. Mohamed Al-Otaibi and Abdullah Al-Attawi
co-founded the Union for Human Rights
in Riyadh and applied for registration. Less than a month after the first
position papers of the organisation were published on social networks by the Union
for Human Rights[4],
a criminal enquiry on the above-mentioned charges was launched against them. In
May 2013, Saudi authorities rejected the application for registration of the Union
for Human Rights and sought undertakings from the
founders that they would dissolve the association and desist from carrying on
its activities.
 
In March 2014, Messrs. Mohamed Al-Otaibi and Abdullah Al-Attawi were
summoned by Saudi authorities and as a result both pledged to stop issuing
statements, reports, or participating in TV interviews.
 
In 2015, following the publication of the Law on Associations and
Foundations, Messrs. Mohamed Al-Otaibi and Abdullah Al-Attawi filed an
application to register the Union for Human
Rights. Their application was rejected and proceedings against them upheld. 
 
On October 30, 2016, the trial of Messrs. Mohamed Al-Otaibi and Abdullah
Al-Attawi opened before the Specialised Criminal Court on the basis of the charges
brought against them in 2013.
 
In February 2017, Mr. Mohamed Al-Otaibi managed nonetheless to flee to
Qatar. On May 24, 2017, on his way to Norway where he had been granted refugee
status, he was arrested at Hamad International Airport in Doha and deported to
Saudi Arabia the following day. He has been in prison ever since.
 
A hearing scheduled to take place on July 12, 2017 was postponed to
August 8, 2017 and further to January 25, 2018.

Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Saudi Arabia asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Messrs. Mohamed Al-Otaibi and Abdullah Al-Attawi as
well as all human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia;
 
ii. Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Mohamed
Al-Otaibi, as well as all detained human
rights defenders in Saudi Arabia, as their detention is arbitrary since it
only aims at punishing them for their legitimate human rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against Messrs. Mohamed Al-Otaibi and Abdullah
Al-Attawi
and all human rights defenders in the country
so they
are able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrance and fear of
reprisal;
 
iv. Comply in all circumstances with all the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular its Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2;
 
v. More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and instruments.
 
Addresses:
 
·     His Majesty, King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia and
Custodian of the two Holy Mosques, Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11
403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa;
Twitter: @KingSalman
·     His Majesty, Mohammad Bin Salman Al Saud, Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia,
Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11 403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
·     H.E. Waleed bin Mohammad Al Samaani, Minister of Justice, Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, Fax: + 966 11 405 7777; Email: info@moj.gov.sa
·    
His Royal Highness
Prince Mohammed bin Naif bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud, Minister of Interior, Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. Fax: + 966 11 401 1111 / + 966 11 401 1944 / + 966 11 403
1125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Adel bin Ahmed El
Jubeir, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: + 966 11 403 0645 ; Email: info@mofa.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Abdulaziz Alwasil,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the United
Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 758 00 00. Email: saudiamission@bluewin.ch
·     H.E. Abdulrahman bin Soliman Al-Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Saudi
Arabia in Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 6468538. Email: beemb@mofa.gov.sa
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Saudi Arabia in
your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, January 30, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the
protection of human rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.




[1] Set up in 2003, the
Specialised Criminal Court was originally tasked with trying terrorism and
national security cases in accordance with Sharia. However, the Court has been
used as a tool to repress human rights defenders tried on charges affecting
national security in the broadest sense. For more information, see Observatory
Mission Report, Saudi Arabia: Condemned
to Silence, the situation of women human rights defenders, January 2018.


[2] Founded in
2013, the Union for Human Rights’ main objectives were to defend the rights of
citizens, spread the culture of human rights, abolish the death penalty, and to
strengthen the role of women in society. In 2015, the application to have the
NGO officially registered under the Law on Associations and Foundations was
rejected. While it was operating, the Union for Human Rights monitored trials
of human rights defenders, released explanatory statements about the hearings,
documented and published appeals on human rights violations.


[3]
For more information, see Observatory Mission Report, Saudi Arabia: Condemned to silence: the situation of women human rights
defenders, January 2018.


[4] The position papers were detailing the objectives of the Union
for Human Rights. 