Honduras:  Over 200 Organizations Call on Secretary Kerry to Support Independent Investigation into Murder of Honduran Environmental and Indigenous Rights Activist Berta Cáceres
March 10, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Honduras / 2016 / MarchHonduras: Over 200 Organizations Call on Secretary Kerry to Support Independent Investigation into Murder of Honduran Environmental and Indigenous Rights Activist Berta CáceresPR Kerry Open Letter1 page / 121 KBOver
200 human rights, faith, indigenous rights, environmental, labor, and 
nongovernmental groups sent an open letter to Secretary of State Kerry 
expressing “shock and deep sorrow regarding the murder of Honduran human
rights and environmental defender Berta Cáceres,” the founder and 
general secretary of the Civic Council of Popular and Indigenous 
Organizations of Honduras (COPINH). The organizations urged “a response 
from the State Department that is not business as usual but a profound 
change of direction towards improving the abysmal situation of human 
rights in Honduras.”Berta Cáceres, winner of the prestigious 
2015 Goldman Environmental Prize, was a visionary indigenous and 
environmental rights leader. She championed efforts to protect 
indigenous peoples from large-scale development projects that are being 
advanced in Honduras without consultation of communities and without 
concern for the environment. She was killed on March 3, 2016 by armed 
men who broke into her home in La Esperanza, department of Intibucá, 
Honduras. Mexican environmentalist and journalist Gustavo Castro Soto of
Otros Mundos Chiapas/Friends of the Earth Mexico and the Mesoamerican 
Movement against the Extractive Mining Movement was also wounded in the 
attack. The organizations urged Secretary of State Kerry to 
support an independent international investigation led by the 
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights into Ms. Cáceres’ murder and 
to urge that the Honduran government invite and fully cooperate with 
such an investigation. They also urged the Secretary to press the 
Honduran government to comply with the precautionary measures granted by
the IACHR on March 5 and provide immediate, effective, and carefully 
consulted protection to members of COPINH, members of Ms. Cáceres’ 
family, Mr. Castro and all witnesses in the case.The
organizations support the call by Senator Patrick Leahy to abandon the 
Agua Zarca dam project and to protect the territory that Berta Cáceres 
devoted her life to protecting. They ask the Honduran government to 
recognize that “the pace and process by which it is facilitating the 
extraction and trade of natural resources by national and international 
investors is contributing to social conflict and human rights 
violations.” They urge the Honduran government to meet its obligation to
provide prior, free, and informed consultation of indigenous 
communities. In addition, the organizations call on the U.S. government 
to ensure that no U.S. assistance and support for multilateral bank 
projects promote or permit development projects without meeting the 
obligation for prior, free and informed consultation with indigenous 
communities, nor without ensuring meaningful consultation of all 
affected communities and that strong human rights, labor rights and 
environmental safeguards are in place.Finally, the organizations
urge the State Department “to suspend all assistance and training to 
Honduran security forces, with the exception of investigatory and 
forensic assistance to the police, so long as the murders of Berta 
Cáceres and scores of other Honduran activists remain in impunity.” 