Cambodia:  #FreeThe5KH, arbitrarily detained for one year
April 28, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2017 / AprilCambodia: #FreeThe5KH, arbitrarily detained for one year





Paris-Geneva, April 28, 2017 - The arbitrary pre-trial detention of five human rights defenders for
one year marks a new low for the Cambodian Government, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership) said today. 
 
Today marks one year since
four staff members of the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association
(ADHOC), Messrs. Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda,
and Ms. Lim Mony, and former ADHOC senior staff member Mr. Ny Chakrya
were detained on trumped-up charges. The Observatory reiterates its call
for their immediate and unconditional release.
 
“The authorities’ treatment
of the five human rights defenders as if they were
dangerous criminals shows the extent to which Cambodia’s judiciary is in Prime
Minister Hun Sen’s pocket. The international community must band together and
demand the Cambodian Government immediately end the crackdown on its critics
and civil society and #FreeThe5KH,” said FIDH President Dimitris Christopoulos.
 
On April 27, 2017, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court’s
Investigating Judge Theam Chanpiseth extended the detention of Messrs. Ny
Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, Ny Chakrya, and Ms. Lim Mony for another six-month
period. The Observatory condemns the court’s decision as the latest act of
judicial harassment against the five. Article 208 of Cambodia’s Criminal
Procedure Code allows for up to 18 months in pre-trial detention.
 
“The one-year long
pre-trial detention on fabricated charges of Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, Ny
Chakrya and Lim Mony is outrageous and bears all the hallmarks of
politically-motivated harassment of human rights defenders in Cambodia. It clearly illustrates the Government’s
deliberate efforts to suppress any human rights work and dissenting voices in
the country,” said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
On April 26, 2017, #FreeThe5KH were named finalists for the 2017 Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders as a
recognition of their human rights work and reprisals they face because of their
legitimate activities.
 
The Observatory
recalls that their ongoing arbitrary detention is a blatant breach of Cambodia’s international human rights obligations. 
 
On November 21, 2016, the United Nations Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) declared that the detention of Messrs. Ny Sokha,
Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, Ny Chakrya, and Ms. Lim Mony was arbitrary. The WGAD said
their deprivation of liberty was in contravention of Articles 7, 9, 10, 11, and
20 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and Articles 9, 10, 14,
22, and 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),
to which Cambodia is a State party. The WGAD called on the Cambodian
authorities to immediately release the five human rights defenders and award
them appropriate compensation.
 
Background information:
 
On April 27 and 28, 2016, Messrs. Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan,
Nay Vanda, Try Chhuon, Ny Chakrya and Ms. Lim Mony were brought in for
questioning by the Anti-Corruption Unit (ACU). Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) official Mr. Soen Sally, who was also summoned, did not appear before the ACU
due to his immunity as a UN staff member.
 
On May 2, 2016, Messrs. Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay
Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony were charged with “bribery of a witness” under Article
548 of the Criminal Code and detained. In addition, Messrs. Ny Chakrya and Soen
Sally were charged with being “accomplices to bribery of a witness” (Articles
29 and 548 of the Criminal Code). Mr. Ny Chakrya was also detained.
 
In March 2016, Ms. Khom Chandaraty (aka Srey Mom) had
requested the assistance of ADHOC, one of
Cambodia's leading human rights NGOs and FIDH member organisation,  in connection with her interrogation by
anti-terrorism police and a prosecutor about an alleged affair with deputy
opposition leader Mr. Khem Sokha. ADHOC responded to Ms. Srey Mom’s request for
legal and material assistance and provided a US$204 allowance to cover her food
and transportation costs. This legitimate support, aimed at covering the basic
expenses of a client, was subsequently construed by the ACU as bribery and
corruption.
 
On June 13 and September 28, 2016 respectively, the
Court of Appeal in Phnom Penh and then the Phnom Penh Municipal Court denied
bail to the five defenders.
 
On October 27, 2016, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court
extended the detention of the five for up to another six months under the
pretext that the defendants needed to remain available for any further
interrogation and court procedures. 
 
On November 11, 2016, the five defenders were denied
bail for the second time by the Court of Appeal.
 
On November 28, 2016, the Court of Appeal upheld the
extension of the pre-trial detention for another six months and refused to
close the investigation. It argued that the issues of the extension of the
detention and the continuation of the investigation were up to the discretion
of the Investigating Judge of the Phnom Penh Municipal Court.
 
On November 30, 2016, the Supreme Court upheld the
June 13, 2016 decision by the Court of Appeal to refuse to release the five on
bail. The Court based its decision on Article 205 of the Criminal Procedure
Code, therefore upholding the continued applicability of both detention
grounds, i.e. to maintain public order and to prevent collusion with
accomplices, victims, and witnesses.
 
On February 27, 2017, the Supreme Court decided to
sever the appeal of Mr. Ny Chakrya from that of the other four defenders. On
March 13 and March 31, 2017 respectively, the Supreme Court upheld the November
28, 2016 decision by the Court of Appeal to extend the pre-trial detention of
Messrs. Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony on the one hand and of
Mr. Ny Chakrya on the other hand for up to another six months.
 
Messrs. Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, and Nay Vanda remain in
detention in Prey Sar’s Correctional Centre 1 (‘CC1’), while Ms. Lim Mony is
detained in Prey Sar’s Correctional Centre 2 (‘CC2’). Mr. Ny Chakrya is
detained in Police Judiciaire (PJ) prison. All three jails are located in Phnom
Penh. All of the detainees are being held alongside convicted criminals,
contrary to Article 10(2)(a) of the ICCPR and Article 26 of Cambodia’s Law on Prisons.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
For
more information, please contact:
·       FIDH: Audrey Couprie/Samuel Hanryon:
+33143551412
·       OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41228094939 