Kenya:  2017 elections: Broken promises put human rights defenders at risk - Publication of an international fact-finding report
May  3, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Kenya / 2017 / MayKenya: 2017 elections: Broken promises put human rights defenders at risk - Publication of an international fact-finding reportKenya mission report54 pages / 1.57 MB
Geneva-Nairobi-Paris,
May 3, 2017 - The abduction, torture
and killing of renowned Kenyan human
rights lawyer Willie Kimani in June 2016 shocked the entire world, provoking a
wave of outrage at national and international level. This is only the tip of
the iceberg of a widespread pattern of violence and harassment aimed at
silencing dissenting voices and perpetuating impunity, declared the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OMCT-FIDH partnership) in the mission report it published
today.
 
Kenya, a country that in
2010 voted a very progressive Constitution strengthening the country’s human
rights framework in compliance with international standards, has in recent
years chosen a different path. So far the freedoms enshrined in the
constitutional Bill of Rights have not been fully incorporated into domestic
legislation, and, most importantly, are not upheld or implemented in practice.
 
“To date, the effective implementation of
this progressive framework unfortunately remains a mirage and still needs
substantial improvement”, declared OMCT Secretary General Gerald
Staberock. “With all the right
instruments put in place to bring about change, lack of implementation and
political will appear to be the main reasons for such disillusionment”.
 
On the contrary, a report published today by the Observatory
accounts for high levels of police and security forces’ violence, especially
against human rights defenders involved in the fight against impunity for human
rights violations. The mission report compiles several testimonies
of incidents of violence, including cases of harassment, threats, torture,
enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings.
 
Moreover, human rights
defenders are often criminalised on the basis of trumped-up charges, which aim
at intimidating them through episodes of frequent arrests, detentions in police
stations, long trials and punitive bail and bond terms. This inevitably
prevents them from pursuing their legitimate human rights activities.
 
Adding to this, the lack of
a clear legal framework regulating the civil society sector due to the failure
to commence implementation of the Public Benefit Organisations (PBO) Act 2013
creates a legal limbo which obliges NGOs to operate in a hostile environment,
characterised by the threat of arbitrary de-registration and asset freezes,
continuous attacks and smearing campaigns.
 
“In such a context, and ahead of the
upcoming general elections, it is urgent that Kenyan authorities publicly
recognise the crucial role of human rights defenders as pillars of democracy
and watchdogs of the rule of law. They must improve their safety, truly
implement the police and security sector reforms, hold perpetrators
accountable, acknowledge the misuse of criminal law to harass defenders, and
finally commence the PBO Act of 2013”, concluded FIDH President Dimitris Christopoulos.
 
The full report is available in English here.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
For interviews, please contact:
·        
Brussels:
Peter Zangl, Observatory mission delegate and OMCT Representative at the
European Union: +41 22 809 49 39
·        
Nairobi:
Moses Okinyi, ICJ-Kenya Communication Officer: +254 726 98 97 13

For more
information, please contact:
• OMCT: Chiara Cosentino: +41 22 809 49 39
		• FIDH: Samuel Hanryon: +33672284294 