Libyan Arab Jamahiriya:  Release
July 24, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Libyan Arab Jamahiriya / 2007 / JulyLibyan Arab Jamahiriya: ReleaseCase LBY 280901.4 Follow-up of case LBY 280901 Release Geneva, 24 July 2007 The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has received new information concerning the following situation in Libya. New information The International Secretariat of the OMCT has been informed about the release on 24 July 2007 of the five Bulgarian nurses, namely Ms. Christiana Vulcheva, Ms. Nassya Nenova, Ms. Valenitina Siropulo, Ms. Valya Chervenyashka, Ms. Snejana Dimitrova, and one Palestinian doctor, Mr. Ashraf al-Hajuj (who was granted Bulgarian citizenship). They were reportedly immediately pardoned by Bulgarian President following their arrival in Bulgaria in the morning. They had been in prison since 1999 and under sentence of death since 2004 following unfair trials, for allegedly infecting hundreds of children with HIV. Reminder of the situation On 9 February 1999, over seventy health professionals from Bulgaria (23 persons), Egypt, Hungary, the Philippines and Poland were arrested in Benghazi, Libya, following an investigation into an HIV virus epidemic in the Al-Fateh Pediatric Hospital in Benghazi, in which 393 children were reportedly infected. All of the persons that were arrested were released the next day, except the 23 Bulgarian detainees. All but five of these were released one week later. The five persons who remained in custody were all female nurses, including: Christiana Vulcheva, Nassya Nenova, Valenitina Siropulo, Valya Chervenyashka, Snejana Dimitrova. One Palestinian doctor was also arrested and charged. All of them were first sentenced to death by firing squad in May 2004 after being convicted of deliberately infecting 426 children with HIV in al-Fateh Children’s Hospital, Benghazi -- a charge which they have all consistently denied. The death sentences were overturned on 25 December 2005 by the Supreme Court, which ordered the health professionals to be retried. The retrial began on 11 May 2006 at a criminal court in Benghazi, concluding with the death sentences of 19 December 2006. On 11 July 2007 Libya's Supreme Court confirmed the sentences. The case was examined by the Supreme Council of Judicial Authorities, which reportedly decided on the commutation of the death sentences. According to the information, by law all death sentences in Libya have to undergo a final review by the Supreme Council of Judicial Bodies. According to the information, all of the defendants have complained that during the initial stage of detention they have been subjected to torture and inhuman treatment. The forms of torture to which they have been subjected typically include: electrocution, beating with electrical wire, being kept naked and crucified for lengthy periods of time, being beaten on the soles of the feet, being drugged, the use of fire and ice-cold showers, being held in over-crowded cells, being blinded by bright lights and being intimidated and bitten by police dogs (see OMCT urgent appeal LBY 280901). Furthermore, they were at first detained for about 10 months without having access to their families. They were allowed access to a defence lawyer only after trail proceedings had begun. In mid-May 2000 the Libyan defence lawyer for the Bulgarian defendants, Osman Bizanti, who was hired by the Bulgarian Embassy, told the media that he had only met his clients on two occasions. Remarks OMCT wishes to thank all of the individuals and organizations that have taking action. No further action is currently required on your part concerning this case. *** Geneva, 24 July 2007 