Spain:  Open Letter: End the arbitrary pre-trial detention of social leader Mr. Jordi Cuixart
November 22, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / Spain / 2018 / NovemberSpain: Open Letter: End the arbitrary pre-trial detention of social leader Mr. Jordi Cuixart
To:
Mr. Pedro Sánchez Castejón
President of the Government
of Spain
Ms. María José Segarra
Spanish Attorney General
Mr. Francisco Fernández Marugán
Spanish Ombudsman
 
Geneva, November 22, 2018
 
Re: End the arbitrary
pre-trial detention of social leader Mr. Jordi Cuixart
 
Dear Messrs. Sánchez
Castejón and Fernández Marugán, 
Dear Ms. Segarra,
 
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest network of NGOs fighting
against torture, summary executions, enforced disappearances, arbitrary
detentions, other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and
providing a comprehensive system of support and protection for human rights
defenders in the world, is writing to you to express serious concern about the ongoing
arbitrary pre-trial detention of Mr. Jordi
Cuixart i Navarro, President of the non-governmental organisation Òmnium
Cultural. 
 
Òmnium Cultural is a non-profit organisation, founded
in 1961 under Franco’s dictatorship to promote the use of the Catalan language,
which had been suppressed and reduced to family use for decades, and culture.
Throughout the years, the NGO has expanded its areas of work. In 2015, it led a
campaign against impunity
for crimes committed during Franco’s dictatorship as well as the campaign
“shared struggles” that aimed at recalling 50 years of joint commitment between
civil society organisations fighting for workers’ rights, non-discrimination on
grounds of sex or origin or the right to housing. In 2018 it also launched a
campaign “Tomorrow it could be you”, that aims at denouncing the Organic Law on
the Protection of Citizen Security (known as the Gag Law, “Ley Mordaza”) and the reforms of the Criminal Code, which have been
widely criticized due to the imposition of severe limitations on the rights to
freedom of assembly and expression[1].
 
The OMCT recalls that Mr. Jordi Cuixart has remained in pre-trial
detention[2] since October 16, 2017, on charge of “sedition” (article 544 of the Spanish
Criminal Code). On March 21, 2018, Mr. Cuixart was also charged with “rebellion”
(article 473 paragraph 1 of the Criminal Code). On November 2, 2018, the Public
Prosecution requested 17 years in jail for Mr. Cuixart. 
 
The
charges relate to Mr. Cuixart’s leading role in the mobilisation of 40,000
demonstrators on September 20, 2017, who gathered outside the Regional Ministry
of Economy, while a judicial commission, composed of 25 Civil Guard agents, was
inside searching its facilities[3], to protest against the raids, searches and
arrests of various Catalan officials that were carried out by the Spanish
police with the aim of stopping the referendum on Catalan independence, which
was organised on October 1, 2017, and which Spain’s Constitutional Court had
declared illegal[4]. The OMCT is also seriously disturbed by the
pre-trial detention of Mr. Jordi Sánchez
I Picanyol, former president of the Catalan National Assembly (ANC) -
grassroots organisation with around 80,000 members which advocates for Catalan
independence - who has been deprived of liberty and prosecuted with the
charges, and for the same facts, as Mr. Jordi Cuixart. 
 
The
OMCT recalls that freedom of assembly enshrines the liberty to come together to
debate and speak out about shared concerns as long as the organisers of the
gathering have peaceful intentions, means and manners. Nevertheless, as
observed by the OSCE/ ODIHR Guidelines on Freedom of Peaceful Assembly, the “the ﷽﷽﷽﷽﷽﷽ and distribute leaflensitive
casesCT is concerned by the fact that Supreme Court  wave placards and distribute leaflethe ﷽﷽﷽﷽﷽﷽
and distribute leaflensitive casesCT is concerned by the fact that Supreme
Court  wave placards and distribute
leafleterm ʻpeacefulʼ should be interpreted to include conduct that may
annoy or give offence, and even conduct that temporarily hinders, impedes or
obstructs the activities of third parties”[5]. In the case Taranenko v. Russia (15 May 2015, Application no. 19554/05)[6] the European Court of Human Rights underlined
that the protest, although involving some disturbance of public order, had been
largely non-violent and had not caused any bodily injuries and highlighted that
the disproportionate sanction against Taranenko had a deterring effect on
protesters.
 
On
October 4, 2017, OMCT also criticised the indiscriminate and excessive use of
force by the police in Catalonia during the referendum organized on October 1,
2017, and called for an immediate, exhaustive and impartial investigation of
police interventions that could amount to torture or cruel, inhumane or
degrading treatment[7].
 
The
OMCT recalls that Mr. Cuixart has lodged requests and appealed several times
against to be released, before Spain’s Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court
and the Constitutional Court, with no success. The prosecutor and the courts
assert that there is risk of recidivism if he was granted release, arguing that
he could lead mass demonstrations that favour a social uprising and he belongs
to an organized group which pushes for Catalan independence by means outside
the Spanish legal framework. The OMCT further recalls that as a measure
impacting the right to personal liberty,
in order to be compatible with international standards and the
presumption of innocence, pretrial detention must only be applied as a last
resort.
 
The OMCT condemns the ongoing arbitrary detention and
judicial harassment against Mr. Jordi Cuixart and Mr. Jordi Sánchez, which
constitutes a disproportionate restriction on his fundamental rights to free
expression, peaceful assembly and personal liberty. The OMCT further considers
that the charges against them are unfounded and must therefore be dropped.
 
The
OMCT is also particularly concerned by the fact that Mr. Cuixart and Mr.
Sánchez are prosecuted before the Supreme Court (Tribunal Supremo), the highest judicial body, whose decisions are
not subject to appeal, instead ob being prosecuted in front of their natural
judge. Moreover, OMCT is concerned by the fact that Supreme Court judges are
appointed by the General Council of the Judiciary (CGPJ), body elected by the
Spanish parliament, in a process which has been challenged due to political
interference which can potentially jeopardize the independence of the high
ranks of the judiciary, particularly in politically sensitive cases[8]. The highly political nature of the ongoing
criminal procedure is evidenced by the fact that the far-right political party
VOX is taking part of the private prosecution.
 
Accordingly, the OMCT respectfully urges you to:
 
i. immediately
and unconditionally release Mr. Jordi Cuixart and Mr. Jordi Sánchez, as their
pre-trial detention is arbitrary:
 
ii. put
an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against them
and guarantee in all circumstances the right to a
fair trial, in particular by:
-          ordering that the facts be examined by
their natural judge, in application of the right to equality before the courts,
by transferring the file to an ordinary court and competent to judge facts that
took place in Catalonia;
-          guaranteeing that Messrs. Jordi Cuixart and Jordi
Sánchez can benefit from a double degree of jurisdiction.
 
iii. comply
with all international obligations to respect the exercise of the citizens'
rights to freedom of expression and freedom of association and assembly, as
established in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),
in particular its Articles 19.2 and 21, in
particular by:
-          amending the Basic Law for the Protection of Public Security and the
Criminal Code so as to guarantee the highest international human rights
standards regarding the right to social protest. 
 
iv.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Spain.
 
In the hope that the
concerns expressed in this letter will receive the attention they deserve, we
remain at your disposal for any further information.
 
Sincerely
yours,
 
Gerald Staberock
OMCT Secretary General



[1] For more information, see http://www.omct.org/es/human-rights-defenders/statements/spain/2015/03/d23072/. 


[2] Jordi Cuixart was held
for eight months in Soto del Real prison (Autonomous
Community of Madrid), 700 km away from his place of residence, and, since July
2018, he is in Lledoners Prison 
(Autonomous Community of Catalonia). 


[3] The judicial commission
was de facto blocked inside the Regional Ministry of Economy for 19 hours, due
to the presence of crowds outside the building, the last agents were able to
exit on the early morning of September 21, 2018, escorted by the Mossos
d’Esquadra (police force of the Autonomous Community of Catalonia).


[4] Repressive measures taken by Spanish authorities ahead of the Catalan
referendum on October 1, 2018, were criticized by UN experts, stating that
“regardless of the lawfulness of the referendum, the Spanish authorities have a
responsibility to respect those rights that are essential to democratic
societies”. See UN statement, September 28, 2017, available at: https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=22176.


[5] OSCE / ODIHR Guidelines
on Freedom of Peaceful Assembly, para. 1.3. Available at: . https://www.osce.org/odihr/73405?download=true


[6] The
case concerned the detention and conviction of a participant in a protest
against the politics of Russian President Vladimir Putin in 2014, organised by
the Bolsheviks Party. Yevgeniya Taranenko was part of a group of about 40
people that forced their way through identity and security checks into the
reception área of the president’s administration building and locked themselves
in one of the offices, where they started to wave placards and distribute
leaflets out of the winwow.


[7] For more information
see: http://www.omct.org/es/urgent-campaigns/statements/spain/2017/10/d24562/


[8]
The criteria and evaluation requirements for the appointment of the higher
ranks of the judiciary, including the Supreme Court judges, in Spain, have been
questioned by the Group of States against Corruption (GRECO), Council of
Europe’s anti corruption body, who has recommended that objective criteria are
laid down to ensure that these appointments do not cast any doubt on the
independence, impartiality and transparency of this process. Fourth Evaluation
Round of Spain, GrecoRC4(2017)18, para. 39. See also “Rights International
Spain and Judges for Democracy Request UN Expert Visit to Spain, 22 February
2017 (https://www.liberties.eu/en/news/ris-jueces-para-la-democracia-letter-to-un/11444). 