Russian Federation:  NGOs officially portrayed as “foreign agents”, “anti-constitutional” and “anti-Russian”, what next?
November 23, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Russian Federation / 2015 / NovemberRussian Federation: NGOs officially portrayed as “foreign agents”, “anti-constitutional” and “anti-Russian”, what next?Russia_2015.11.23_Joint_PR_English2 pages / 254 KB​
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights defenders
Anti-Discrimination Centre Memorial
Public Human Rights Organisation "Citizen Watch"
Geneva-Paris, November 23, 2015. The “war” against the human rights
movement in Russia is reaching a new stage.
While more than a hundred NGOs have been officially labelled as “foreign
agents” since June 2013, they are now being targeted for so-called
“anti-constitutional” and “anti-Russian” activities - accusations reminiscent of
the Soviet era repressive rhetoric. Several recent draft laws would
allow the Constitutional
Court to overrule decisions handed down by international jurisdictions, prohibit Russian citizens from providing
information to international organizations
without the authorities' permission,
and criminalise “public
expression of non-traditional sexual relationships”. While the law on “foreign agents” has drastically restricted freedom of
association, the Observatory fears that this new legislative attack simply aims
at eradicating the entire human rights movement in Russia.    
 
Following an inspection planned and conducted in October 2015, the Ministry
of Justice concluded that the Human Rights Center “Memorial” “undermines the
Constitution”, “calls for the dismantling of the authority and changing the
country’s political regime”, expresses in its statements and publications
“disagreement to the authorities” and contributes to the “formation of negative
public opinion towards the official policy pursued by the Russian authorities”.
Furthemore, the Ministry of Justice reportedly sent its findings to the
Prosecutor General, in violation of the law in force, according to which an NGO
has two weeks to challenge the findings of the audit. If the court agrees with
the Ministry of Justice's findings, “Memorial” may be shut down. 
 
“The accusations of being anti-constitutional,
anti-Russian, or in “disagreement with the authorities” are not only vague and
legally absurd, but also mark a new step in the attempt by the Russian
authorities to silence human rights defenders and annihilate the very idea of
human rights protection”, declared Karim Lahidji, FIDH
President. 
 
On November 6, 2015, another human rights organisation, Mashr (“Peace”), a
human rights organisation operating in Ingushetia, led by Mr. Magomed
Mutsolgov, was subjected to a search on suspicions of conducting
“anti-Russian” and “extremist” activities. A dozen national security agents,
with some wearing masks, raided the offices of the NGO, confiscating
documentation, computers, and mobile phones. the operation was based on a
search warrant issued by the Chief Department for Investigation in Russia’s
North Caucasus Federal District on allegations that Mr. Mutsolgov carried out
acts of sabotage to incite inter-religious conflicts in the North Caucasus.
This raid occurred while Mashr had successfully undergone several
administrative inspections. In November 2015, a court decision confirmed the
legality of its activities. Under these circumstances, the Observatory fears
that the search conducted recently aims at intimidating local human rights
defenders. 
 
“Defending the rights set out in the Russian Constitution should be the
states and citizens duty. Sadly, in the Russia of today, exercising and
defending the very rights protected in the Constitution and in the treaties
ratified by the Russian State can be declared unconstitutional, anti-Russian or
subversive”, said
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. “And it can get worse: the
potential control of any communication on human rights violations to global
organisations is a new dimension of suffocating any critical voice leaving
victims of torture and other violations unheard”, he added in a comment. 
 
A new bill, introduced in November before the Parliament, if adopted, will
allow the prosecution of Russian citizens and organisations for communicating
information to any international body, in violation of Russia's human rights
obligations under international law. Offenders risk fines of a maximum of
50,000 Rubles (approx. 700 Euros) if they are natural persons, of one million
Rubles (approx. 14,000 Euros) managers and 10 million Rubles (approx. 140,000
Euros) legal entities. The new provisions blatantly contradict the right to
access and communicate with international bodies as enshrined in the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders. Similarly, another bill risks to deprive
citizens of their right to seek remedies for human rights violations before
regional and international courts by authorizing the Constitutional
Court of Russia to overlook decisions handed down by such courts.
 
In the current period, every week, new draft laws marked by very repressive
provisions are being introduced before the Parliament. These new attacks
targeting human rights organisations add to previous legislative initiatives
allowing the authorities to impose the label of “foreign agent” or “undesirable
organisation” against independent civil society organisations critical of the
country's human rights record. These concepts were introduced into the Russian
legislation despite their pejorative and non-legal character. The defence of
universal human rights, such as the prohibition of torture and ill-treatment,
is considered by Russian courts as “political activity”. As a result, the
Anti-Discrimination Centre “Memorial” (ADC Memorial) became the first human
rights organisation officially declared to be a “foreign agent” in April 2014;
last week, the media NGO Glasnost Defence Foundation (GDF) and Human Rights
Institute led by Mr. Sergei Kovalev were included in the register of
“foreign agents”. 
 
 
For more information, please contact:
•
FIDH: Audrey Couprie - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57
(Paris) / Arthur Manet - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)
• OMCT: Delphine
Reculeau - Tel: +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva) / Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui - Tel:
+32 2 218 37 19 (Brussels) 