India:  Release on bail of Dr. Binayak Sen
April 18, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2011 / AprilIndia: Release on bail of Dr. Binayak Sen

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

New information
IND 004 / 0408 / OBS 055.3
Release on bail / Judicial harassment
India
April 18, 2011
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
India.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by People’s Watch
about the release on bail of Dr. Binayak Sen, National Vice-President of the Peoples’ Union for
Civil Liberties (PUCL) and Secretary General of the PUCL branch in the
Chhattisgarh State.
According
to the information received, on April 15, 2011, the Supreme Court of India
ordered the release on bail of Dr. Binayak Sen. As a matter of fact, the
Supreme Court had to review the decision of February 10, 2011 of the
Chhattisgarh High Court, which refused to grant bail to Dr. Sen on the grounds
that he was closely
associated with “alleged” people from the Naxalite Maoist guerrilla, which made him
guilty of sedition. Dr. Sen had filed an application for a release on bail on
January 6, 2011 before the Chhattisgarh High Court. In its April-15 ruling, the
Supreme Court stated that Dr. Sen may be a sympathiser to the Naxalite
Maoist guerrilla[1] but that this could not be considered as
sedition, thus overruling the February-10 decision of the Chhattisgarh High
Court and allowing the release on bail of Dr. Sen. 
Dr. Sen had been sentenced in first instance on
December 24, 2010 to life imprisonment by the Raipur Additional District and
Sessions Judge of the same Chhattisgarh High Court, on charges of “sedition” and “conspiracy” under the
Sections 124 (A) and 120 (B) of the Indian Penal Code. Dr. Sen had been accused - inter alia - of aiding Naxal activity through
the transmission of letters written by Maoist leaders of the Communist Party of
India to a suspected guerrilla leader from the same party in Chhattisgarh
prison. Dr. Sen had appealed against the December-24 decision to the Chhattisgarh High
Court on the grounds that his incrimination lacked evidence to
prove that he had committed sedition and conspiracy.
As of issuing this urgent appeal,
in spite of the release on bail granted by the Supreme Court to Dr. Sen, the charges against him have reportedly not been
dropped. The hearings in appeal against the December-24 decision will therefore
be held before the same Chattishgargh High Court, at an unknown date.
The Observatory welcomes the release on bail of Dr.
Binayak Sen, and thanks all the persons, institutions and organisations who intervened
in his favour.
The Observatory nonetheless remains concerned about
the charges pending against him and calls the Indian authorities to put an end
to the judicial harassment against Dr. Sen and to drop charges against him,
since his condemnation only aims at sanctioning his human rights activities.
Background information:
Before his arrest, Dr. Binayak Sen had led human
rights activities in the State of Chhattisgarh, where the State police and
armed Maoists have been engaged in clashes over the last seven years. 
Dr. Sen was notably engaged on the promotion and
protection of the right to health of marginalised and indigenous communities in Chhattisgarh. He reported on
unlawful killings of indigenous peoples from the Adivasis minority by the
police and by Salwa Judum, a private militia allegedly sponsored by the State
authorities to fight the armed Maoists.
He organised fact-finding investigations on human
rights violations in the State of Chhattisgarh, especially in prisons where he
documented abuses against detainees such as murders, underfeeding and absence
of adequate sanitation leading to dysentery epidemics. In this context, he
was in contact with people arrested for their alleged involvement in the Maoist
Nataxite guerrilla. 
Dr. Sen had notably visited Mr. Narayan Sanyal, a guerrilla
leader of the Communist Party of India (CPI), to monitor his health status and
conditions of detention in Chhattisgarh prison.
Those visits to the Maoist leader led to his arrest
and detention four years ago. On May 14, 2007, he was charged under the
“Chhattisgarh Special Public Security Act 2005” and the “Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act 1967”, amended by the “Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Ordinance, 2004”, for
“aiding and abetting Naxal activity” and for having transmitted letters written
by Maoist leaders of the CPI to Mr. Narayan Sanyal in Chhattisgarh prison. From
March 15 to April 11, 2008, Dr. Sen was placed under solitary confinement at
the Raipur Central Jail
in Chhattisgarh.
On May 25, 2009, the Supreme Court of India granted
bail to Dr. Sen on medical grounds as he was awaiting
his trial by a court of first instance. Dr Senhad been suffering from a heart
ailment and needed treatment at Christian Medical College, Vellore, in Tamil
Nadu.
On December 24, 2010, Dr. Binayak Sen was sentenced
in first instance to life imprisonment by the Raipur Additional District and
Sessions Judge of the Chhattisgarh High Court  under charges
of sedition and conspiracy. Immediately after the sentencing, the bail granted
on May 25, 2009 by the Supreme Court of India to Dr. Sen was revoked, and he
was taken back into the Raipur Central Jail. 
Dr. Binayak Sen then
decided to appeal against this sentence on the grounds that his incrimination
lacked evidence to prove his accusation of sedition and conspiracy. He declared
that he had met with Maoist leaders in prison in the frame of his work to
monitor conditions of detention, and that he had never transmitted any
documents to Mr. Narayan Sanyal. Moreover, acccording to him, his visits to the latter
were always watched by the prison authorities, and no convincing evidence of
his involvement in the Maoist guerrilla have reportedly been submitted to the Raipur Additional District and
Sessions Judge in Chhattisgarh.
Following the
December-24 sentencing, on January 6, 2011, Dr. Sen’s filed a bail application,
which was notably supported by forty Nobel Laureates in a
signed letter dated February 8, 2011[2].
The EU delegation in India was allowed to attend the proceedings which took
place on February 10, 2011. However, at the end of these hearings on the
same day, his release on bail was
rejected by the Chhattisgarh High Court on the grounds that Dr. Sen was
closely associated with “alleged” people from the Naxalite Maoist guerrilla. The Chhattisgarh High Court
referred to the doctrine of ‘guilt by association’ to justify its refusal. Dr. Sen then appealed the decision of the Chhattisgarh High Court dismissing his bail
application before the Supreme Court of India, which ordered the release on
bail on April 15, 2011. 
Actions requested:
Please write to the Indian authorities and ask them
to: 
i.                    
Take
all necessary measures to guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Dr. Binayak Sen;
ii.                   
Put
an end to any act of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Dr.
Binayak Sen as well as against all human rights defenders in India;
iii.                  
Comply
with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the
UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular:
-         
Article
1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
levels”;
-         
Article
6.a, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to know, seek, obtain, receive and hold information
about all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including having access to
information as to how those rights and freedoms are given effect in domestic
legislative, judicial or administrative systems”;
-         
Article
9.3.c, which states that: “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to offer and provide
professionally qualified legal assistance or other relevant advice and
assistance in defending human rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-         
Article
12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually or
in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
iv.                 
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human rights
instruments ratified by India.
Addresses:
·        
Shri
Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s
Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857 E-mal:
pmosb@pmo.nic.in
·        
Dr.
P. Chidambaram, Union Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home
Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979.
hm@nic.in
·        
Justice
Kapadia, Chief Justice of India, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi -1,
Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in 
·        
Justice
K. G. Balkrishnan, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of
India, Faridkot House, Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001, Tel: +91 11 230
74448, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: covdnhrc@nic.in ;
ionhrc@nic.in 
·        
Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Permanent Representative to the United
Nations (Geneva), Rue du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Tel: +41 22 906 86
86, Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·        
Embassy
of India in Brussels, 217 Chaussée de Vleurgat, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax:
+32 (0)2 6489638 or +32 (0)2 6451869
Please also write to the diplomatic representations
of India in your respective countries.
***
Geneva-Paris, April 18, 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.  
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is
dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them
concrete support in their time of need.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·        
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·        
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1] Dr. Sen always asserted, however,
that his visits to prisons had solely a humanitarian basis. This human rights
defender has been harassed since 2007 under the "Chhattisgarh Special
Public Security Act 2005" and the "Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act 1967", amended by the “Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Amendment Ordinance, 2004”, for alleged links with the Naxalite Maoist
guerrilla. See infra, and 2010 Annual Report of the Observatory. 


[2]              
The letter is available on the Free Binayak Sen campaign’s website:
http://www.freebinayaksen.org/?p=1504 