UN body concerned over Israel’s abuse of Palestinian children
May 18, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Statements / Israel / 2016 / MayUN body concerned over Israel’s abuse of Palestinian children​Ramallah,
May 18, 2016—The UN Committee
Against Torture expressed concern on Friday at allegations of Israel’s
excessive use of force, including lethal force, against Palestinians and its
ill-treatment and torture of Palestinian detainees.
The
Committee, a body of 10 independent experts, reviewed Israel's compliance with
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment on May 3 and 4.
The
“concluding observations” of the Committee, issued on May 13, noted with grave
concern Israel’s use of administrative detention against “700 persons,
including 12 minors,” as of the time of the review session. Under the practice,
detainees are “held without charge indefinitely on the basis of secret
evidence.”
According
the report, measures taken by Israel to safeguard minors were not “implemented
in practice” in cases involving “Palestinian minors accused of security-related
offences.”
The
Committee expressed alarm at the “many instances in which Palestinian minors
were exposed to torture or ill-treatment, including to obtain confessions; were
given confessions to sign in Hebrew, a language they do not understand; and
were interrogated in the absence of a lawyer or a family member.”
The
Committee also took aim at Israel’s use of solitary confinement and separation
against minors for interrogation purposes.
Defense
for Children International – Palestine (DCIP) and the World Organization
against Torture (OMCT) presented testimony to the Committee Against Torture in
Geneva, and attended the review.
In
March, DCIP and OMCT submitted a joint alternative report to the
Committee, focusing on the ill-treatment and torture of Palestinian children in
Israeli military detention and the use of excessive force by Israeli forces.
The
alternative report was based on testimonies, collected by DCIP, from 429
children detained by the Israeli military or police in the occupied West Bank
between January 2012 and December 2015.
Three-quarters
of the children interviewed had endured some form of physical violence
following their arrest. More than 41 percent were arrested from their homes in
the middle of the night. And 97 percent were interrogated in the absence of a
parent or legal counsel.
DCIP
also documented 66 children held in solitary confinement, for an average period
of 13 days, during the reporting period.
Ill-treatment
and torture of Palestinian child detainees has regularly been raised by UN
human rights treaty bodies. In June 2013, the Committee on the Rights of the
Child reviewed Israel’s compliance with the UN Convention on the Rights of the
Child and found that
Palestinian children arrested by Israeli forces were “systematically subject to
degrading treatment, and often to acts of torture” and that Israel had “fully
disregarded” previous recommendations to comply with international law.
In
addition to concern over the treatment of Palestinian child detainees, the
Committee Against Torture also highlighted Israel’s excessive use of force
against Palestinians.
According
to the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, quoted in the Committee’s
concluding observations, some of Israel’s responses to alleged attacks by
Palestinians “strongly suggest unlawful killings, including possible
extrajudicial executions.”
The
number of child fatalities has drastically increased since October last year,
after tensions across East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied West Bank
escalated into lethal attacks.
Forty-five
Palestinian children from the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have been
killed since October as a direct result of intensified violence, all except one
at the hands of Israeli forces. Of this number, 36 allegedly carried out knife
or gun attacks.
According
to the Committee, “accountability for instances of excessive use of force is
rare.”
Since
2014, only one incident, the fatal
shooting of Nadeem Nawara, 17, in May
2014, has resulted in both an investigation and indictment. The trial against
the Israeli border policeman charged with manslaughter in connection with
Nadeem’’s death began on May 5.
For more information please contact: Brad Parker, International Advocacy Officer &
Attorney, Defense for Children International Palestine, +1.518.744.9071, brad.parker@dcips.org ;
or Carolina Bárbara OMCT Child
Rights Coordinator, cb@omct.org,+41
228 0949 38. 