Bulgaria:  Civic Solidarity Platform Statement: On the Attack against the Chair of the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee Krassimir Kanev
November  1, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bulgaria / 2016 / NovemberBulgaria: Civic Solidarity Platform Statement: On the Attack against the Chair of the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee Krassimir KanevBulgaria_2016.10.31_CSP2 pages / 243 KB​The Civic Solidarity
 Platform, of which OMCT is member organisation, is a coalition of 50 human rights NGOs from Europe, Eurasia 
and the US aimed at serving as a conduit through which civic activists 
can build alliances, strengthen mutual support and solidarity
31 October 2016
 
We, members of the Civic Solidarity
Platform[1],
strongly condemn a violent attack in Sofia against Krassimir Kanev, one of
the most prominent human right defenders in Europe and the chair of the Bulgarian
Helsinki Committee (BHC). BHC is the largest human rights organisation in
Bulgaria and a member of our network. We express our solidarity with Krassimir
and members of Bulgarian human rights community. 
 
Mr. Kanev was attacked by two unknown men in downtown Sofia in the morning on
27 October 2016. He was hit in the face and stomach. His attackers did not say
a word and immediately fled the scene after the incident. Police were called to
the site after the attack. Mr. Kanev sustained minor injuries.
 
Members of BHC have been repeatedly harassed and threatened in the past because
of their human rights work. However, the attack on Krassimir Kanev is the first
case of direct physical violence.

The work of the BHC is well known at the
international level and is highly respected. Among its many activities, BHC is
actively involved in the protection of minority rights and takes a public
position in this respect. Increasingly, xenophobic and homophobic expressions
and views are spread in the public media and statements by politicians and
public figures in Bulgaria. Speech inciting hatred or violence against
minorities has been allowed, approved and even praised in this country.
Aggression is directed towards both members of minorities and NGOs who stand in
support of their rights.
 
The inability
and/or unwillingness of the Bulgarian authorities to take a clear and
uncompromising regarding manifestations of intolerance, hate speech and
hate-motivated violence and effectively investigate hate crimes has created an
atmosphere of impunity where a violent attack against a prominent human rights
defender has become possible. 
 
We, as human
rights NGOs working across Europe, Asia and North America and as members of the
Civic Solidarity Platform, call upon the Bulgarian authorities to take
immediate action to identify the perpetrators of the attack against Krassimir
Kanev and its masterminds. They must use all necessary means for a swift and
effective investigation of the crime in order to bring the culprits to justice.

 
We also urge the
government of Bulgaria to implement its international obligations by taking all
necessary steps to protect human rights defenders in the country, especially
those working to defend the rights of minority members, and refrain from
negative rhetoric regarding human rights and those working to defend them.
 
 
 
Signed by the following members of the Civic Solidarity Platform:
 
Albanian Helsinki Committee
Analytical Center for Interethnic Cooperation and
Consultations (Georgia)
Article 19 (UK)  
Association of Ukrainian
Human Rights Monitors on Law Enforcement
Barys Zvozskau Belarusian Human Rights House
(Lithuania)
Belarusian Association of
Journalists
Belarusian Helsinki Committee
Center for Civil Liberties (Ukraine)
Center for the Development of Democracy and Human
Rights (Russia)
Committee against Torture (Russia)
Crude Accountability (USA)
Freedom Files (Russia)
German-Russian
Exchange (Berlin, Germany)
Helsinki
Association of Armenia
Helsinki Citizens Assembly –
Vanadzor (Armenia) 
Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia
Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights
(Poland)
Human Rights Information Center (Ukraine)
Human Rights Monitoring Institute (Lithuania)
Human Rights Movement “Bir
Duino-Kyrgyzstan”
Helsinki Committee of Armenia
Human
Rights Center of Azerbaijan
Humanrights.ch (Switzerland)
HURIDDOCS (Switzerland)
Institute "Respublica"
(Ukraine)
International Rehabilitation Council
for Torture Victims (Belgium)
International Partnership for Human
Rights (Belgium)
International Youth Human Rights Movement 
Kazakhstan International Bureau for
Human Rights and Rule of Law 
Kharkiv Regional Foundation “Public
Alternative” (Ukraine) 
Kosova Rehabilitation Centre for Torture Victims
Legal Transformation Center (Belarus) 
Moscow Helsinki Group (Russia)
Netherlands Helsinki Committee
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
Nota Bene (Tajikistan)
Office of Civil Freedoms (Tajikistan)
SOVA Center for Information and Analysis (Russia)
Promo LEX Association (Moldova)
“Protection of Rights without Borders” (Armenia)
Public Association “Dignity” (Kazakhstan)
Public Foundation “Golos Svobody” (Kyrgyzstan)
Public Verdict Foundation (Russia)
Regional Center
for Strategic Studies (Georgia/Azerbaijan)
Swiss Helsinki Committee
Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights UnionUNITED for Intercultural Action – European network against nationalism, racism,
fascism and in support ofmigrants, refugees and minorities
World Organisation
against Torture (OMCT)
ZARA – Zivilcourage
und Anti-Rassismus-Arbeit (Austria)
Anki Wetterhall,
Swedish OSCE Network (in personal capacity)
Melissa
Hooper, Human Rights First, USA (in personal capacity)



[1] Civic Solidarity Platform is a network of more than 80 human rights NGOs
from Europe,
Asia and North America. For more information, please see http://civicsolidarity.org. 