OMCT convenes meeting with NGOs from around the world how to fight torture amid greater threats to human rights
November 21, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionAssistance to victims  / Events / 2016 / NovemberOMCT convenes meeting with NGOs from around the world how to fight torture amid greater threats to human rights
OMCT convenes
meeting with NGOs from around the world how to fight torture amid greater
threats to human rights 
21 November 2016 (Geneva) – The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and its
global network of anti-torture activists and human rights defenders will meet
in Geneva this week to discuss how best to fight torture amid heightened terrorist
threats, intensifying migration fluxes and rising populist leaders who condone
the use of this inhumane practice. 
The two-day
forum will take place at Geneva’s CICG on 24-25 November. High-ranking officials such as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Director of the European
Union’s Fundamental Rights Agency, and the Head of Switzerland’s Human Security
Division, as well as some 100
human rights experts, advocacy specialists, and members of OMCT’s SOS-Torture
network of NGOs from all over the world will exchange views
on issues ranging from the refugee
crisis to innovative methods of reporting torture. 
Torture
is not a remote, specialists’ issue; nor is it bound to times of war or civil
conflict or to the prisons of dictatorships. On the contrary, what OMCT, the
catalyst of a network of more than 200 non-governmental organizations (NGOs) spanning
90 countries, has been able to observe on a daily basis in its 30 years of
existence to date is that torture is pervasive and even becoming socially
acceptable as more States accept compromises with human rights in the name of
‘national security’. 
“The
recourse to torture serves as the litmus test; it’s symptomatic of a weakening
of the values that are the foundations of democracy. It is urgent we bring them
to the forefront of the global agenda,” said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary
General. “We can only manage that together, in a single voice pressuring States
to stick to these principles uncompromisingly and at all times.”
OMCT
has invited its members and supporters to celebrate its 30th
anniversary during an invitation-only cocktail party on 24 November from 6 to
9 p.m. hosted by the City of Geneva at the Palais Eynard. The ceremony will
include live performances by French singer Louisy Joseph and actresses Anne Richard and Noémie Kocher, who is also OMCT’s
goodwill ambassador.
For
the full programme of the Forum,
please visit here. Forum list of speakers List of Forum participants
The event offers participants and the media the
opportunity to hear from leading experts
on torture and human rights:
·     
Mr.
Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights;
·     
Mr.
Dick Marty, OMCT Vice-President and Former President of the
Human Rights Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe,
Switzerland; 
·     
Mr.
Michael O’Flaherty, Director of the Fundamental Rights
Agency of the European Union; 
·     
Ambassador
Heidi Grau, Head of Human Security Division, Federal Department
of Foreign Affairs, Switzerland
·     
Mr.
Francois Longchamp, President of the Conseil d’Etat,
Canton and Republic of Geneva;
·     
Mr.
Nils Melzer, newly appointed United Nations Special
Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of
punishment (Swiss national); 
·     
Mr.
Jens Modvig, Chairperson, United Nations Committee Against
Torture. 
Meet OMCT
leadership:
·     
Mr.
Yves Berthelot, OMCT’s President since 2008, former Director of
the UN Economic Commission of Europe;  
·     
Mr.
Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General;
·     
Ms.
Hina Jilani, Founder of the Human Rights Commission of
Pakistan and incoming President of OMCT 
At the event, human
rights defenders from across the world will share stories that illustrate the
nature of torture and its consequences. Representatives from the following
countries will appear:   
·     
Azerbaijan:
Ms. Leyla Yunus, Institute of Peace and Democracy,
Azerbaijan, recently released
·     
Bangladesh: Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar Bangladesh; 
·     
Burundi:
Mr. Armel Niyongere, representative of SOS-Torture Burundi; 
·     
Belgium: Mr.
Peter Zangl, OMCT Representative at the European Union;
·     
China:  a human rights defenders from a Chinese NGO;
·     
Colombia:
Ms. Jahel Quiroga Carrillo, Director of the human rights
organization REINICIAR and Mr. Gustavo Gallón, Director of the Comisión
Colombian de Juristas;  
·     
Guatemala:
Ms. Anabella Sibrian, Plataforma Internacional contra la Impunidad, Guatemala;
·     
Greece:
Mr. Panayote Dimitras, Greek Helsinki Monitor;
·     
India:
Mr. Henri Tiphagne, Representative of People’s Watch India;  
·     
Macedonia:
Mr Gordan Kalajdziev, Director of the Helsinki Committee of the Republic of
Macedonia; 
·     
Mexico:
Ms. Stephanie Brewer,Director of
International Affairs at Centro Prodh;
·     
Russia:
Ms. Olga Sadovskaya, Interregional Public Organisation
“Committee Against Torture” (CAT);
·     
Togo:
Mr. André Kangni Afanou, Director of the Collectif des Associations Contre l’Impunité
au Togo; 
·     
Tunisia:
Mr. Mokthar Trifi, Former president of the Ligue Tunisienne des Droits de l’Homme
and Ms Gabriele Reiter, Director of OMCT Tunisia;
·     
Turkey: Mr.
Yavuz Bimbay, Sohram Casra founder and torture victim himself;
·     
Tadjikistan:
Ms. Favziya Nazarocka, Director of the Public Foundation “Nota Bene” and the
Tadjikistan Coalition Against Torture; 
·     
Philippines:
Ms. Rosemarie Trajano, Director of the Philippine Alliance of Human Rights
Advocates;
·     
Uruguay: Mr.
Luis
Pedernera, recently elected member  of the UN Committee
of the Rights of the Child and representative of Instituto de Estudios Legales
y Sociales del Uruguay; 
·     
Senegal:
Ms. Aminata Dieye, National Coordinator of Amnesty
International’s Human Rights Education Programme in Senegal.
Specialists
on communicating on torture: 
·     
How global digital campaigns can help
combat torture: Mr. Matthias Lüfkens,
social media architect at Burson-Marsteller;
·      How video can help
report cases of torture: Ms. Kelly
Matheson, WITNESS Senior Attorney and Program Manager. 
About OMCT 
Created at the end of 1985, the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) is the catalyst of the SOS-Torture network, a coalition
of more than 200 international and national non-governmental organizations
fighting torture, summary execution, enforced disappearances and all other
cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment. 
With offices in Geneva, Brussels and Tunis, OMCT runs programmes
to favour State compliance with anti-torture legislation, support victims of
torture, with particular attention to children in detention and women, and
protect human rights defenders worldwide.
For more
information, please visit: www.omct.org
For our
latest #HumanAgainstTorture campaign: www.joinhat.org
Follow us
online:
Twitter
Facebook
https://vimeo.com/omct
Instagram
For
all media inquiries : Lori Brumat, OMCT Head of Communications  +41 78 823 0669 or lb@omct.org. 