Switzerland:  Human Rights Council: Invitation to a side event on Torture, National Security and Accountability, 7 March 2011 With the participation of Mr. Juan E. Méndez, UN Special Rapporteur on Torture.
March  4, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionEvents / Switzerland / 2011 / MarchSwitzerland: Human Rights Council: Invitation to a side event on Torture, National Security and Accountability, 7 March 2011 With the participation of Mr. Juan E. Méndez, UN Special Rapporteur on Torture.Human Rights Council: Invitation to a side event on Torture, National Security and Accountability1 page / 303 KB       
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the 

International
Commission of Jurists (ICJ)
 
cordially
invite you to a parallel event to the 16th Regular Session
of the Human Rights Council on
 
TORTURE,
NATIONAL SECURITY and ACCOUNTABILITY
 
Monday
7th
March 2011, 3pm – 5pm
Room
XXVII
Palais
des Nations, Geneva
 
Mr.
Juan E. Méndez
UN
Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment
 
Mr.
Gerald Staberock
Deputy
Secretary General, World Organisation Against Torture 

 
Mr.
Tad Stahnke
Director
of Policy and Programs, Human Rights First 

 
Mr.
Alex Conte
Representative
to the UN, International Commission of Jurists (Moderator)
 
The
lack of legal accountability for serious human rights violations
committed in the name of national security, such
as torture or other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment,
remain today an important unaddressed challenge in the global
response to terrorism. If not addressed, it risks undermining the
foundations of the UN human rights framework as well as the
legitimacy of counter-terrorism and national security laws and
policies.
 
The
parallel event will take stock of practical and legal impediments to
accountability, such as national security doctrines, state secrecy
invocations or the protection of intelligence information. It will
seek to identify ways forward for the UN Human Rights Council and its
independent mandates in upholding the right to remedy and reparation
under international law and fostering fully accountable national
security responses.
For
further information, please contact Alexandra Kossin (ak@omct.org)
or Alex Conte (alex.conte@icj.org) 