Egypt:  Ministry of Social Solidarity announces the reopening of CTUWS
June 20, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2008 / JuneEgypt: Ministry of Social Solidarity announces the reopening of CTUWSGeneva-Paris, June 20, 2008. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights and the World Organisation Against Torture, and the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR) held yesterday a press conference in Cairo to announce the launching of the Annual Report 2007 of the Observatory. On June 19, 2008, the Observatory and EOHR organised a press conference parallel to several other Observatory conferences worldwide to announce the release of the 2007 Annual Report of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, which presents regional trends of violations towards human rights defenders and efforts taken by the Observatory to support cases locally. During the press conference, to which took part Mr. Kamal Abbas, director of the Egyptian Center for Trade Union and Worker Services (CTUWS), Counsellor Mohamed Shattat, Assistant of the Minister of Social Solidarity, who spoke on behalf of the Ministry, announced on behalf of the Egyptian Ministry of Social Solidarity that the decision n°38381/61 issued by the Administrative Court of Cairo on March 30, 2008, which rejected the closure of the CTUWS[1], would be implemented immediately. This announcement implies that the CTUWS has been officially recognised by the Egyptian Government after many months of struggling from the CTUWS with support from the Observatory and several local and international civil society organisations. Mr. Hafez Abu Seada, President of the EOHR, and Ms. Stephanie David, Representative for the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and Director of the North Africa / Middle East Desk at FIDH , also took the floor during the conference, which was attended by over 30 journalists and civil society representatives. The Observatory and EOHR welcome the decision of the Ministry of Social Solidarity and encourage its implementation as soon as possible. However, the Observatory remains concerned that the appeal procedure lodged by the Association of Human Rights and Legal Aid (AHRLA), a non-governmental organisation providing legal assistance to victims of torture, against an administrative decision of closure, has still not been heard[2]. To that extent, the Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities to put an end to all forms of harassment against AHRLA and ensure in all circumstances that its members as well as of CTUWS are able to carry out their work freely without any hindrances, as well as to put an end to all forms of harassment against human rights defenders in Egypt. Moreover, the Observatory calls upon the Egyptian authorities to fully respect international standards with regards to freedom of association, in particular the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, which Article 5(b) states that “for the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and international levels [...] to form, join and participate in non-governmental organisations, associations or groups”. More generally, the Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities to promote and ensure freedom of association in Egypt and ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Egypt. For further information, please contact: OMCT : Delphine Reculeau, + 41 22 809 49 39 FIDH : Gael Grilhot, + 33 1 43 55 25 18    [1] See Observatory Press Releases issued on April 2 and May 21, 2008.   On March 29, 2007 the Naj-Hamadi branch of the CTUWS located in the Qena Governorate, in Upper Egypt, had been shut down by Administrative Decision No. 44 issued by the Chairman of the City, General Al Sherbeery Hasheesh. In particular, the Government had called for the discontinuance of the Naj-Hamadi branch citing that it was responsible for disruptive demonstrations and inciting strikes that took place in the Delta region of the country during the months of December 2006 and January 2007. Yet, although some demonstrators were CTUWS members, there was no evidence that the CTUWS did organise these strikes. On April 22, 2007, the police ordered the closure of the headquarters of the organisation. [2] The organisation was closed down in September 2007 subsequent to an order issued by the Ministry of Social Solidarity, alleging financial transgressions. 