Bahrain:  Nabeel Rajab On Hunger Strike
October  8, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / OctoberBahrain: Nabeel Rajab On Hunger Strike


PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
BAHRAIN: Detained Human Rights Defender Nabeel Rajab
On Hunger Strike
 
Paris-Geneva, October 8, 2012 – The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), is
highly concerned about the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel
Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), Director of the
Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and FIDH Deputy Secretary General. The
Observatory deplores the ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of
Mr. Rajab. 
 
According to information received, on October 5, 2012,
Mr. Nabeel Rajab announced that he had started a ”dry” hunger strike (refusing
water in addition to food) and had stopped taking his medication in protest
against the Public Prosecutor's decision to withdraw the authorisation granted
to him on October 4, 2012, to attend the second day of his mother's funeral who
died on October 3. On October 5, 2012, the Public Prosecutor announced that he
had withdrawn this authorization, stating that Mr. Rajab had « violated
the law as he spoke to the mourners and incited them to join illegal protests »[1].
The Observatory is concerned by such a statement as it clearly aims to curtail
and punish Mr. Rajab's fundamental right to freedom of expression and opinion.
 
Today, the court rejected the appeal lodged against
the decision to maintain Mr. Rajab in provisional detention. Mr. Rajab is
expected to appear before the Bahraini Appeals Court on October 16. The
Observatory reiterates its call to the Bahraini authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release him and to put an end to all acts of judicial harassment against him, as his prolonged
detention seems to merely aim at sanctioning his activities in favour of human
rights. 
 
The Observatory urges the Bahraini authorities to
guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Rajab, as well as of all human rights defenders in Bahrain.
 
The
Observatory recalls that the rights to freedom of expression and of peaceful
assembly constitute fundamental freedoms, and that no form of criminalisation
of those rights can be tolerated or justified under any circumstances.
 
The Observatory also urges the Bahraini authorities to
ensure that international observers will be able to attend Mr. Rajab's next
appeal hearing on October 16 without any hindrances.
 
 
For more information,
please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur
Manet/Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Delphine
Reculeau: +41 (0) 22 809 49 39
 



[1]            Bahrain News Agency,
October 5 2012, http://www.bna.bh/portal/news/527621#.UG3-hGwqZnM.twitter 