Algeria:  Joint Press Release: Call for the release of nine arbitrarily arrested labour rights activists
February 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Algeria / 2015 / FebruaryAlgeria: Joint Press Release: Call for the release of nine arbitrarily arrested labour rights activistsCopenhagen-Paris-Geneva,
February 10, 2015 – On February 11, 2015, the Laghouat Court of First Instance
will issue the verdict for two trials of nine Algerian labour rights defenders.
Our organisations call for their immediate, unconditional release and denounce
their arbitrary arrest and the judicial harassment against them, as their
detention seems to only aim at sanctioning their human rights activities.
 
Mr. Mohamed Rag, an active member of the
National Committee for the Defence of the Rights of Unemployed Workers (Comité National pour la Défense des Droits
de Chômeurs - CNDDC), was arrested on January 22, 2015 in front of his home
by police officers who had come to arrest a presumed thief. Mr. Rag was taken
away with the alleged thief for refusing to answer a policewoman who had spoken
to him. He was immediately placed under a detention warrant in application of a
flagrante delicto procedure and
accused of “assaulting a security force
agent in the exercise of his duties”, under Article 148 of the Penal Code.
His lawyer denies that any act of violence was committed and denounces the
misuse of authority by the police as well as the unsubstantiated charges. At
the end of the first hearing, on January 28, the prosecutor requested a
one-year prison term. 
 
Eight
other CNDDC activists who were close to Mr. Mohamed Rag, some of whom witnessed
his arrest, were arrested in turn on January 28, 2015 during the first hearing
against Mr. Rag. They wanted to meet in front of the city court to demand that
Mr. Rag be released. According to the defence lawyers, the police arrested them
upon arrival, before they started their demonstration. Messrs. Khencha Belkacem, Brahimi Belelmi, Mazouzi
Benallal, Azzouzi Boubakeur, Korini Belkacem, Bekouider Faouzi, Bensarkha
Tahar and Djaballah Abdelkader
are being charged with “gathering”
(Art. 97 of the Penal Code) and “exercising
pressure on the decisions of magistrates” (art. 147 of the Penal Code).
Their hearing was held on February 4, 2015. The prosecutor requested a two-year
prison term. 
 
The
nine activists are known in the area for their commitment to defend human
rights. On January 17, 2015, they had participated in a sit-in to show their solidarity
with the inhabitants of the city of In Salah who have been demonstrating
peacefully since December 2014 to protest against shale gas operations.
Although the state of emergency was lifted in 2011, unauthorised demonstrations
are still equated to illegal gatherings. Therefore, participants can be taken
to courts and can be sentenced to a term ranging from two months to three
years' imprisonment.  
 
Mr.
Rag was already arrested on February 20, 2013 at a demonstration in front of
the Laghouat labour office when he came to claim the right to work. He was
charged with “gathering”, “inciting gathering”, and “destruction of property belonging to others”,
and was finally acquitted on March 12, 2013. Similarly, he was acquitted for
lack of evidence on July 13, 2014 in another case related to a demonstration in
Laghouat on June 8, 2014. After another demonstration, held three months later,
Mohamed Rag, Khencha Belkacem, Brahimi Belelmi, Azzouzi Boubakeur and two other
young people were charged with “armed
gathering” and “insulting a civil
servant”; they were acquitted on November 30, 2014.   
 
Our
organisations call upon the Algerian authorities to:
 
·      
Immediately
and unconditionally release Messrs. Mohamed Rag, Khencha Belkacem, Brahimi
Belelmi, Mazouzi Benallal, Azzouzi Boubakeur, Korini Belkacem, Bekouider
Faouzi, Bensarkha Tahar and Djaballah Abdelkader, as their detention seems to
only aim at sanctioning their human rights activities;
·      
Put
an end to any act of harassment against them, including at the judicial level,
in compliance with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders;
·      
Guarantee
the right to freedom of assembly, association and expression, in compliance
with the Algerian Constitution and the provisions of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), ratified by Algeria. 
 
 
Contacts
:
EMHRN:
Hayet Zeghiche: hze@euromedrights.net /+32 488 08 00 41 
FIDH:
Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: presse@fidh.org / +33 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT:
Miguel Martin Zumalacarregui: +41 22 809 49 24 