China:   Fear for the safety of Tibetan singer Lo Lo whose whereabouts and fate are unclear since his arrest
April 27, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2012 / AprilChina:  Fear for the safety of Tibetan singer Lo Lo whose whereabouts and fate are unclear since his arrestCHN 270412
Whereabouts unknown/ Fear
for safety
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.

Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the arrest
of Lo Lo, a well-known Tibetan
singer, on 19 April 2012. His whereabouts and fate since then are unclear.
OMCT is gravely concerned for his safety. 
According to the information received, on 19 April
2012, Lo Lo, 29 years old, was arrested and taken to an unknown location by
local police officers of Dhomda village, in Trindu (Chinese: Chengdu) County,
Jyekundo (Chinese: Yushu) Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, Qinghai Province. 
According to the same information received, Lo Lo
released a few months earlier an album titled “Raise the Tibetan Flag, Children
of the Snow land”. The album reportedly contains 14 songs with lyrics calling
for Tibet’s independence, unity of the Tibetan people and the
return of his Holiness the Dalai Lama to Tibet. It is believed that Lo Lo was arrested
solely on the basis of his political songs. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the safety of Lo Lo, as
his whereabouts and fate remain unknown. OMCT urges the competent authorities to guarantee his physical
and psychological integrity at all times, in accordance with international
human rights law, in particular the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and to immediately locate and
disclose his whereabouts. 
OMCT further calls on the competent authorities to order his immediate
release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international law and
standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him promptly before an impartial,
independent and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all
times, including immediate and unconditional access to a lawyer of his choice. 
Actions
Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.                    
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of Lo Lo; 
ii.                  
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, his physical and psychological integrity;  
iii.                 
Grant him
immediate and full access to a lawyer of his choice and his families, as well
as guarantee that he is examined by independent doctors and receives adequate
medical care if necessary, in accordance, inter
alia, with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iv.                
Order his immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring him before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee
his procedural rights at all times;
v.                  
Guarantee
the
respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses

 Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General
Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs) 
Ms. Wu
Aiying, Minister of Justice of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang
Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s
Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn 
Mr. Dai
Bingguo,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang
Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People’s Republic of
China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn; 
Mr. Meng
Jianzhu, Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China,
Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741,
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216 
Ambassador
He Yafei, Permanent Mission of the People’s
Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, P.O. Box 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2,
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7937014, E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int; 

·    
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 27 April 2012
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 