Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: demonstrators beaten and arrested by police.
June 14, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2000 / JuneKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: demonstrators beaten and arrested by police.Case KGZ 140600  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Abdrahmanov Okon, the leader of a picket on 12th June, who was beaten and still bleeding when he was arrested and taken to the Pervomai district ROVD.  He was released that day at 4pm.      OMCT was informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of the OMCT network, that Abdrahmanov Okon lost consciousness this morning of 14th June 2000.  An ambulance was called but Abdrahmanov did not react to an injection given to him.  He is currently in hospital No. 4 of Bishkek city in a serious condition.  Reportedly, whilst in detention, the police had refused to call for an ambulance nor did they provide any medical assistance themselves.       Abdrahmanov is one of a number of demonstrators who were severely beaten by police during a picket in front of the Governmental House.  10 were arrested but released at 4pm later that day.  Others injured included Kerimova Shirinbubu and Asrankulova Kenje, who was battered on her face.  Also, a 10 year old girl was left behind without care when her mother was taken away in a bus with other picketers.  These demonstrators were protesting with demands for justice in relation to the results of past parliamentary elections for the constituency #44.  During these elections, on 12th March 2000, Felix Kulov, was defeated in what has been described as a highly suspicious second round parliamentary election.  Shortly after this vote, on 22nd March 2000, Kulov was arrested and detained.  A number of demonstrations have taken place since these elections.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by this incident and other reports of the violent dispersion of demonstrators by the police in the run up to the presidential election.     Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan urging them to:  take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Abdrahmanov Okon and ensure that he receive immediate medical attention;  order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these arrests and the use of violence against demonstrators in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  ensure that all those injured are provided immediately with the appropriate medical care and compensation;  guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  The President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Askar Akayev, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205 Fax: + 996 (312) 218 627  Geneva, June 14, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 