10 YEARS ANNIVERSARY OF THE UN DECLARATION ON HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS:  Much done, yet much left to do?
December  9, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / 2008 / December10 YEARS ANNIVERSARY OF THE UN DECLARATION ON HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS:  Much done, yet much left to do?Paris-Geneva, December 9, 2008. Ten years after the adoption of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), wishes to pay tribute to those who are on the forefront of the struggle for human rights worldwide, and expresses concern with the persistance of human rights violations against them. Since its adoption by the United Nations General Assembly in 1998, the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders has become a tool of mobilisation of the international community, highlighting the necessity to guarantee and enhance the protection of human rights defenders worldwide. On the basis of that instrument, protective actions have been carried out by international organisations and non-governmental organisations alike, which resulted, on many occasions, in the release of defenders, in the end of threats and harassment against them, and in bringing their assailants to trial. Under the pressure of the international community, Ms. Mutabar Tojibaeva, head of the “Ardent Hearts' Club”, was released on June 2, 2008[1]. International mobilisation also led to the end of 13-year legal proceedings against Ms. Irene Fernandez, co-founder and Executive Director of Tenaganita, an NGO working with migrant women and promoting their rights and welfare in Malaysia, on November 24, 2008[2]. Yet, the situation of human rights defenders remains extremely worrying in a number of countries. “Threats, ill-treatments, torture and judicial harassment against human rights defenders remain commonplace. The Observatory continues to register an impressive number of violations, as in Iran, where human rights defenders involved in the “One Million Signatures” campaign have been facing massive legal harassment, or in Colombia, where human rights defenders continue to be subject to assassinations and enforced disappearances” Ms. Souhayr Belhassen, FIDH President, said. “We also firmly deplore the recent waves of repression in Uzbekistan and China against human rights activists involved in the preparation of local events to celebrate the 60 years of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights”[3] stresses Eric Sottas, OMCT Secretary General. Even though much has been done to enhance the protection of human rights defenders in the world, there is still a long way to go. Today, the mobilisation of all on the question of human rights defenders remains essential. For further information, please contact: FIDH : Gael Grilhot / Karine Appy, + 33 1 43 55 25 18 OMCT : Delphine Reculeau, + 41 22 809 49 39    [1]    See Press Release of June 3, 2008, Ms. Mutabar Tojibaeva finally released!. [2] See Press Release of the Observatory, November 24, 2008, on the acquittal of Ms. Irene Fernandez following a trial observation mission mandated by the Observatory. [3] See urgent appeal CHN 011/1108/OBS 209. 