India:   Allegations of ill-treatment and arbitrary arrest
January 16, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2013 / JanuaryIndia:  Allegations of ill-treatment and arbitrary arrest
Case IND 160113
Allegations of torture and ill-treatment/ Arbitrary detention/ False
charges/ No proper investigation/ Risk of impunity
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requestsyour URGENT intervention in the following situation in India/
West Bengal.
Brief
description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture
Network, about two cases of alleged ill-treatment, arbitrary detention and
false charges by Border Security Force (BSF) soldiers and police in West
Bengal, namely the cases of Mr. Prosenjit Mondal, a 20 years-old
labourer living in Harudanga Village, in Murshidabad district, and Mr. Omar Ali Gazi, a 46 years-old car
driver from Merudondi Village, in North 24 Pargonas district. 
According to the information received, on 27 September 2012 at about
9:00 pm, around seven Border Security Force (BSF) soldiers from Harudanga BSF
Out-Post no. 3, apprehended Mr. Prosenjit Mondal when he was at Mauja
Majhardiar West patrolling the pea-legume cultivation of his brother-in-law.
The BSF soldiers, armed with wooden sticks and rifles, chased, beat and kicked
him with their boot-clad. They subsequently brought Mr. Prosenjit Mondal to
Harudanga Mini Camp, tied his hands and legs with rope and kept him under
arrest for the night. While detained he was allegedly not given any medical aid
for the injuries sustained, neither was he provided with drinking water. The
very next day, on 28 September 2012, Mr. Prosenjit Mondal was brought to Codhan
Para Health Centre where he was given a nominal check-up and no medicine at
all. Right after that he was moved to Raninagar Police Station and charged under
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act. The BSF reportedly claimed
to have seized 30 bottles of Phensydil from Mr. Prosenjit Mondal, accusations
that this latter denied. On 18 October 2012 Mr. Prosenjit Mondal was released
after his family allegedly paid a bribe amounting to Rs. 5,000. During the detention
period at the Correctional Home, he was not given any medical support. 
                                                                                                          
On 18 December 2012, Mr. Prosenjit Mondal lodged a written complaint to
the Superintendent of the Police in Murshidabad district, to denounce the
aforementioned events. To date, there has been reportedly no investigation
carried out into the aforementioned events. 
According to the same information received, on 18 September 2012 at
about 9:45 pm, two policemen in plainclothes detained Mr. Omar Ali Gazi while
he was standing in front of the Natun Bazar near Basirhat Board Ghat. The two
policemen, personnel of Basirhat Police Station, took him to Basirhat Police
Station where he was illegally detained without further explanation of the
motives. Mr. Omar Ali Gazi’s family was not informed about the detention at
that time and there is no memo of arrest available. The same day of detention at
around 12:00 pm he was forced to give 8 to 10 finger impressions on some blank
papers and written documents. The Duty Officer of the police station together
with one of the aforementioned policemen allegedly hit several times Mr. Omar
Ali Gazi at his face with their hands making his mouth bleed. After this
incident Mr. Omar Ali Gazi was having serious pain when eating food for a week.
On 19 September 2012, Mr. Omar Ali Gazi was brought to Basirhat Hospital where
he was given a nominal check-up and no treatment for the pain on his face. He
was later presented before the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate’s Court charged
under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act. Right after that he
was moved to Dumdum Central Jail until 18 December 2012 when he was released on
bail. 
On 24 December 2012, Mr. Omar Ali Gazi lodged a written complaint to the
Sub Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) of Basirhat Sub Division to denounce the
aforementioned events and appealed for redress. To date, there has been
reportedly no investigation carried out into the aforementioned events. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its
concern about the safety and physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Prosenjit Mondal and Mr. Omar Ali Gazi. OMCT urges the competent authorities to guarantee their physical and
psychological integrity at all times, notably by immediately putting in place
adequate protection measures for them, and by suspending the BSF soldiers and
the police personnel believed to be responsible for the allegations of
ill-treatment, pending an investigation. 
OMCT recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their
obligations under
the Indian Constitution and under international human rights law to
protect the right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment and the right to liberty and security, to
consider seriously any allegations of ill-treatment and arbitrary arrest, and
to undertake a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and
impartial investigation in this
regard, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and
apply adequate sanctions. OMCT also recalls that victims must be ensured the
right to an effective remedy for the human rights violations suffered as well
as the right to full redress, including compensation and rehabilitation. 
OMCT
has documented many cases of arbitrary arrest, false charges and torture and ill
treatment committed by the BSF and the Police over the years in West Bengal. Although
in some cases complaints were lodged, no effective investigations have been
carried out and no perpetrators were brought to justice.
Action requested
Please write to the authorities in India
urging them to:

Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Prosenjit Mondal and Mr. Omar Ali Gazi; 
Immediately
put in place adequate protection measures for them;
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation into the alleged acts of ill-treatment, arbitrary detention
and false charges suffered by Mr.
Prosenjit Mondal and Mr. Omar Ali Gazi, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and
apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt reparation including
adequate compensation and rehabilitation is granted to Mr. Prosenjit Mondal and Mr. Omar Ali Gazi;
Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms
throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international
human rights standards

Addresses
Ø Mr. Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, Fax:
+ 91 11 2301 6857;
Ø Union Minister
of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home
Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979; 
Ø Chief Justice of India,
Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi
-1, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in;  
Ø National Human Rights
Commission of India, Faridkot House, Copernicus
Marg, New Delhi 110 001, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: chairnhrc@nic.in; 
Ø Acting Chairman, West Bengal Human Rights
Commission, Bhabani Bhaban, Alipur, Kolkata -27. Fax +91 33 24799633, Email: wbhrc@cal3.vsnl.net.in; 
Ø Governor, West Bengal, Raj Bhaban,
Kolkata – 62, Phone:
+91 33-2200 1641, Fax: +91 33 – 2200 2444 / 2200 1649, secy-gov-wb@nic.in;

Ø Miss Mamata Banerjee, Chief
Minister, Government of West Bengal, Writers’ Buildings, BBD Bagh, Kolkata
– 1, Fax - +91 33 22145480, Email - cm@wb.gov.in, sechome@wb.gov.in; 
Ø Permanent Mission of
India to the United Nations (Geneva),Rue du Valais
9, 1202 Geneva, Tel: +41 22 906 86 86, Fax:
+41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of India in your respective country.
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
Geneva, 16 January 2013 