Kyrgyzstan:  Burglary of the offices of “Bir Duino” and targeted intimidation and threats against Ms. Tolekan Ismailova and her family
January 20, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2014 / JanuaryKyrgyzstan: Burglary of the offices of “Bir Duino” and targeted intimidation and threats against Ms. Tolekan Ismailova and her familyRUSSIAN_Burglary of the offices of “Bir Duino” and targeted intimidation and threats against Ms. Tolekan Ismailova and her family4 pages / 262 KB​KGZ 001 / 0114 / OBS 004
Intimidation
/ Burglary
Kyrgyzstan
January
20, 2014
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Kyrgyzstan.
Description of the situation: 
The
Observatory was informed by reliable sources about the second burglary of the
offices of the Human Rights Movement “Bir Duino” and targeted intimidation and
threats against Ms. Tolekan
Ismailova and her family. Ms. Ismailova is the
leader of “Bir Duino” and FIDH Vice-President.
According
to the information received, in the night of December 26, 2013, unknown
perpetrators broke into the office of the Human Rights Movement “Bir Duino” in
Isanova Street in Bishkek. They broke two safes and stole some money (33,000
som - around 485 EUR) as well as the video surveillance camera and five laptops
that contained a lot of key data of “Bir Duino”. A criminal investigation was
opened on December 27 by the Investigation Department of the Pervamaysky
District of Bishkek, which has not led to any result as of today.
Back
in July 2013, unknown perpetrators had already broken into “Bir Duino” second office
on Juvenal Justice, in Sydykova Street in Bishkek. They stole two computers and
data from the computer of Mr. Ashirov
Abdykerim, a lawyer who had worked with “Bir Duino” on strategic cases and
suddenly died on June 28, 2013. An investigation opened by Leninski District
Police Department has brought no results as of today.
In
parallel, Ms. Ismailova and her family have faced a series of acts of
harassment since the beginning of 2014. On January 1, 2014, at 3am, Ms.
Ismailova received a call from Ms.
Aziza Abdirasulova, another human rights defender, who was concerned about Ms.
Ismailova's whereabouts. Ms. Abdirasulova had indeed received information about
Ms. Ismailova's and her family's alleged departure from Kyrgyzstan from a
journalist of radio “Azattyk”. In reality, Ms. Ismailova has not left
Kyrgyzstan and has no intention of doing so.
In
addition, on January 6, 2014 at 10.30 am, as two of Ms. Ismailova's daughters
and grandson were at home, somebody tried to open the front door with a key.
When they wanted to see what was going on outside, the person had already gone.
The
very next day, on January 7, 2014, Ms. Ismailova noticed two suspicious men
outside the flat. On her question for whom they were waiting for such a long
time, the men did not answer. When she repeated the question, they said that
they were waiting for a man named “Misir” who actually was not living in the
area.
Furthermore,
on January 8, 2014 at 18:09, somebody knocked and then kicked at the front door
of the flat. Footprints were found on the door afterwards.
The
Observatory believes that these acts are related to the professional activity
of Ms. Ismailova and are aimed at intimidating her and paralysing the work of
the Human Rights Movement “Bir Duino”. The Observatory notes that harassment
intensified following some “Bir Duino”'s activities in December. Indeed, on
December 23, 2013, Ms. Ismailova, together with a member of Parliament, Mr.
Abdumanap Kutushev (from the Kyrgyzstan Social Democrat Party), was invited by
radio “Azattyk” to talk about the negative influence of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organisation (SCO) and the Collective Security Treaty
Organisation (CSTO) on the enjoyment of human rights in Kyrgyzstan and on
the territory of post-Soviet countries. Previously, on December 18, “Bir Duino”
published its 2013 annual report, and on December 22, during a meeting with the
Anti-Corruption Council of the General Office of Public Prosecutor, Ms.
Ismailova also presented the results of prison monitoring undertaken by “Bir
Duino” in Kyrgyzstan.
The
Observatory condemns the attack on “Bir Duino”'s office and the series of acts
of intimidation against Ms. Ismailova and her family. The Observatory urges the
authorities of Kyrgyzstan and the local police to take immediate action to
ensure their safety. The Observatory also calls upon the Kyrgyz authorities to
ensure that Ms. Ismailova and the Human Rights Movement “Bir Duino” can
continue their legitimate work.
Background information:
The
Human Rights Movement “Bir Duino”, previously known as “Citizens Against
Corruption”, is one of the oldest and most active human rights organisations in
Kyrgyzstan. The Observatory notes that due to its activities it has long been a
target of harassment, but has received neither support from the government nor
protection from the police.
“Bir Duino” defends all human
right and does not shy away from the very politically-sensitive topics such as
corruption, transparency in extractive industries and the negative influence of
security organisations (such as SCO and CSTO) on human rights. 
Moreover,
“Bir Duino” fights for the release of Mr. Azimjan Askarov, a prominent human rights defender who in 2010 was sentenced to life
imprisonment on charges of organising mass disturbances and causing the death
of a policeman during the 2010 riots in South Kyrgyzstan.
“Bir Duino” organises the
annual International Film Festival on Human Rights, where it screens films that
sometimes address human rights issues that are controversial in Kyrgyzstan. The
Observatory recalls that “Bir Duino” and Ms. Ismailova personally had
previously faced threats because of their attempt to show the film “I am Gay
and Muslim” at the 6th International Film Festival on Human Rights in 2012.
Following these threats, Ms. Tolekan Ismailova did not receive any protection
from the authorities. Just to the contrary: the State Committee of National Security
(SCNS) sent her an official warning that read as follows: “according to the
decision by the State Commission of Religious Affairs, based on point 6.1 of
Article 1 of the ’Law on Combating Extremist Activity’, the film is considered
’extremist’ and its diffusion and broadcasting within the territory of the
Republic of Kyrgyzstan might encourage religious hatred and set the scene for
mass disorder”. The warning is still in force and should Ms. Ismailova decide to screen
the film 'I am Gay and Muslim', she will face the charges of extremist
activity.
At
the 7th International Film Festival on Human Rights in 2013, “Bir Duino”
attempted to screen a film about Mr. Askarov, made by Freedom House. On
September 20, 2013, the day before the screening in the cinema “Manas” in
Bishkek, a group of protesters demanded that the film be taken off the agenda.
On September 21, 2013, another group tried to disrupt the festival. They
threatened the organisers of the festival, shouted nationalist slogans and urged viewers to leave the cinema.
The screening in Bishkek took place, but the film was taken
off the agenda in other cities visited by the festival.
Actions requested:
Please
write to the Kyrgyz authorities, urging them to:
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms.
Tolekan Ismailova, all “Bir Duino” members and all human rights defenders in
Kyrgyzstan; 
ii.
Order an immediate, thorough, transparent investigation into the
above-mentioned events against Ms. Tolekan Ismailova, her relatives and the
premises of the Human Rights Movement “Bir Duino”, in order to identify all
those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and apply them
the sanctions provided by the law;
iii.
Put an end to all acts of harassment against Ms. Tolekan Ismailova and all
human rights defenders in Kyrgyzstan;
iv.
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-
its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
-
its Article 5 (a): “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights
and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, at the national and international levels (a) To meet
or assemble peacefully”;
v.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Kyrgyzstan. 
Addresses:
·     
Mr. Almazbek Atambaev,
President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Chuy Ave, 205, Bishkek, 
Kyrgyzstan.
Fax: + 996312626191
·      
Mr. Abdulda Suranchiev,
Minister of Internal Affairs, Frunze st. 469, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, Fax: +
996312682044 / + 996312623853,Eemail: pressa226@mvd.kg  
·      
Ms. Aida Salyanova, General
Prosecutor of Kyrgyzstan, Fax: +996312661734
·      
State Committee of National
Security, Erkindik blvd 70, Bishkek 720040, Kyrgyzstan, Fax: + 996 312 66 00 24
·      
H.E. Ms.
Gulnara Iskakova, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
Kyrgyzstan to the United Nations in Geneva, Rue Maunoir 26/Rue du Lac 4-6, 1207
Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 707.92.21 Email: kyrgyzmission@bluewin.ch
·      
Embassy of Kyrgyzstan in
Brussels, 47 rue de l’Abbaye, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 640 01 31,
Email: kyrgyz.embassy@skynet.be 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Kyrgyzstan in your
respective countries.
***
Paris-Geneva, January 20,
2014 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 