Uzbekistan:  New charges against Mr. Azamjon Formonov 15 days before his release from prison, after 9 years of arbitrary detention
April 20, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2015 / AprilUzbekistan: New charges against Mr. Azamjon Formonov 15 days before his release from prison, after 9 years of arbitrary detentionNew information
UZB 002 / 1111 / OBS 131.1
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment /
Torture and ill-treatment
Uzbekistan
April 20, 2015
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.
New information:
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about the transfer of Mr. Azamjon Formonov,
former Chairman of the Syrdarya regional branch of the Human Rights Society of
Uzbekistan (HRSU), from his prison cell to a pre-trial isolation facility, 15
days before his release from prison. Mr. Formonov has been arbitrarily detained
for 9 years at the U/Ya 64/71 Special Regime Colony in Jaslyk (Republic of
Karalpak), one of the worst prison in Uzbekistan, known as a “death zone”
because of its severe climate and extremely tough detention conditions.
According to the
information received, on April 12, 2015, Mr. Azamjon Formonov was transferred
from his cell to isolation facility No. 9. Two days later his wife was informed
that a new criminal case had been filed against Mr. Formonov under Article 221
of the Criminal Code for alleged “violations of prison rules”. If convicted Mr.
Formonov faces up to three additional years of detention.
On April 29, 2015,
Mr. Formonov was due to be released from prison after having served his prison term.
Charged with “attempted blackmail” and tried without the presence of either his
attorney of choice or a public defence attorney, Mr. Formonov was sentenced in
2006 to nine years in prison. Allegations of ill-treatment and torture against
Mr. Formonov were reported since the beginning of his detention[1]
(see background information).
The Observatory
strongly condemns the continued harassment of Mr. Formonov. The practice of
accusing human rights defenders of alleged "violations of prison
rules" is recurrent and has been used several times, preventing the
release of Mr. Zafar Rakhimov and Mr. Nasim Isakov, about whom
very little information is available to date.
The Observatory urges
the Uzbek authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Azamjon
Formonov as his detention seems to merely sanction his human rights activities.
Furthermore, the
Observatory further deplores the continued detention of six other members of
HRSU, namely Messrs. Nasim Isakov, Zafar Rahimov, Yuldash
Rasulov, Khabibilla Okpulatov, Alisher Karamatov and Gaybullo
Jalilov, who remain arbitrarily detained, despite the serious deterioration
of their health, and calls for their immediate and unconditional release.
Background
information:
Mr. Formonov was
arrested on April 29, 2006, together with another human rights defender, Mr. Alisher
Karamatov, for refusing to stop their human rights activities.
On January 22, 2010,
Mr. Formonov was transferred for a few days to the remand centre U/Y a 6/SI-9
in Nukus (Republic of Karakalpak) to be hidden from the International Red
Cross, which had organised a visit to monitor conditions in the prison, to
prevent him from denouncing the abuses he had suffered from. He was reportedly
tortured on several occasions due to his human rights work.
On November 16, 2011,
Mr. Azamjon Formonov was severely beaten up and tortured because he had refused
to write an “explanatory letter”, stating that he had never been tortured or
beaten during his detention in the colony, that his rights had always been
respected and that his health was good. 
He was tortured
during an hour by the Head of the Operations Division of the prison, Mr.
Chavkat Vaysnyozov, who tied his hands before kicking him in the back, stomach
and head. According to Mr. Formonov, a colleague of Mr. Vaysnyozov, Ms.
Ablullaeva, was also present and observed the scene while he was tortured. He
was threatened to death and coerced to write the letter, including through
threats against his wife and children. He was accused to be an enemy of the
nation and an agent of the European Union and the United States.
In September 2014,
Ms. Ozoda Yakubova, the wife of Mr. Formonov, submitted a complaint to the
United Nations Human Rights Committee concerning the arbitrary character of her
husband's detention and violations of his rights under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
Actions requested :
Please write to the
Uzbek authorities and ask them to :
i. Take all necessary measures to guarantee, in all
circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Azamjon
Formonov, Nasim Isakov, Zafar Rahimov, Yuldash Rasulov, Khabibilla
Okpulatov, Alisher Karamatov and Gaybullo Jalilov and more generally of all human rights defenders in Uzbekistan;
ii.  Release Messrs. Azamjon Formonov, Nasim Isakov, Zafar Rahimov, Yuldash Rasulov, Khabibilla
Okpulatov, Alisher Karamatov and Gaybullo Jalilov, immediately and unconditionally as
their detention is arbitrary;
iii. Put an
end to any act of harassment - including at the judicial level - against all
human rights defenders in Uzbekistan, including Mr. Azamjon Formonov;
iv. Conduct a fair and
impartial investigation into the above-mentioned allegations of torture and
ill-treatment in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before a
competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them the penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions provided by the law, in
accordance with international human rights law, in particular the Convention against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishments;
v.Ensure that an
effective remedy as well as the right to full redress, including compensation,
is granted to Mr. Azamjon
Formonov;
vi. Comply with the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, in particular: 
-     its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or
collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
-     as
well as its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually or in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure
or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate
exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration” ;
vii. Comply with the
provisions of the Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the 2nd
Conference on the Human Dimension of the Cooperation and Security Conference in
Europe (CSCE) (1990), and guarantee the respect of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human
Rights and other international human rights instruments ratified by Uzbekistan.
Addresses :
·        
Mr. Islam
Abduganiyevich Karimov President of Uzbekistan, ul. Uzbekistanskaya 43,
Rezidentsia prezidenta, 700163 Tashkent, Uzbekistan. Fax: +998 71 133 1395325.
E-mail: presidents_office@press-service.uz
·        
Mr. Adham Akramovich Ahmedbaev,
Minister of Internal Affairs; ul. Junus Rajabiy 1; Tashkent 700029, Uzbekistan.
Fax: + 998 71 233 89 34. Email: mvd@mvd.uz, info@mvd.uz
·        
Mr. Rashidjon
Hamidovich Kodirov, General Prosecutor of the Republic of Uzbekistan, ul. Gulamova 66, 700047 Tashkent, Uzbekistan. Fax: +998 71 133 39 17. E-mail: prokuratura@lawyer.com
·        
Mr. Abdulaziz
Komilov,, Minister of Foreign Affairs, pl. Mustakillik, 5; Tashkent 700029,
Uzbekistan. Fax: + 998 71 139 15 17. E-mail: rnews@mfa.uz
·        
Ms. Sayora
Rashidova, Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights, ul. Xalqlar Dostligi 1,
700035 Tashkent, Uzbekistan. Fax: +998 71 139 85 55. E-mail: office@ombudsman.gov.uz
·        
Senator Akmal
Saidov, Natsionalny Tsentr po pravam cheloveka / National Centre for Human
Rights, Mustakillik Maidoni 5/3, 700029 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan Fax: +
998 71 139 13 56 / 45 16, E-mail: office@nchr.uz
·        
Mr. Javohir Nurmetov, Permanent Mission of Uzbekistan to the United Nations
in Geneva, International Centre Cointrin (ICC), Bloc D (7th Floor), Route de
Pré-Bois 20, 1215 Geneva 15, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 799 43 02. Email: uzbekistan@bluewin.ch
·        
H.E. Mr.
Vladimir NOROV, Ambassador, Embassy of Uzbekistan to Belgium, Avenue Franklin
D. Roosevelt 99, B-1050, Brussels, Belgium. Fax. +32 2 672 39 46 Email: embassy@uzbekistan.be

Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Uzbekistan in
your respective countries as well as
to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in Uzbekistan.



[1]               See the Observatory's Urgent
Appeal UZB 002 / 1111 / OBS 131, November 29, 2011. 