Myanmar (ex-Burma):  United Nations Working Group finds that the detention of human rights defender Mr. Htin Kyaw was arbitrary
February  5, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2014 / FebruaryMyanmar (ex-Burma): United Nations Working Group finds that the detention of human rights defender Mr. Htin Kyaw was arbitrary
Paris-Geneva, February 5,
2014. In an opinion adopted at its 68th session on November 21, 2013, the
United Nations (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) found that the
detention of Burmese human rights defender Mr. Htin Kyaw was arbitrary. The
opinion was transmitted to the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (FIDH-OMCT joint programme) on February 3, 2014.
 
On December 11, 2013, Burma’s President Thein Sein
ordered the release of 41 political prisoners in a presidential amnesty. Among
those freed was prominent human rights defender Mr. Htin Kyaw, leader of
the Movement for Democracy Current Force (MDCF), an organisation that assists
grass-roots communities in their struggle against land-grabbing and other human
rights violations. He was re-arrested on the same day on sedition charges and
eventually released in another presidential amnesty on December 31, 2013.
 
In its opinion, adopted when Mr. Htin Kyaw was still
behind bars, the UN WGAD found that the latter had exercised his “right to
freedom of opinion and expression and to freedom of association” by
engaging in a peaceful protest against the eviction of some people from their
lands. The UN WGAD noted that the Burmese Government did not challenge the
peacefulness of Mr. Htin Kyaw’s protest.
 
The UN WGAD also stated that the Government
acknowledged that Mr. Htin Kyaw had been arrested, detained, and
sentenced to six months’ imprisonment under the Act on the Right to Peaceful
Assembly and Peaceful Procession, and Article 505 (b) of the Penal Code. The UN
WGAD found that those two pieces of legislation “fall below the standards of
international human rights law, offending in particular articles 9, 19 and 20
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights” (UDHR).
 
As a result, the Working Group concluded that the
deprivation of liberty of Mr. Htin Kyaw was “arbitrary, being in
contravention of the said articles of the [UDHR]”.
 
The Observatory recalls that about 40 political
prisoners remain behind bars and over 100 people, including farmers who
peacefully protested against land confiscation, are awaiting trial on various
charges, including trespassing and sedition.
 
“In line with the UN Working
Group’s opinion, we reiterate our call for the immediate and unconditional
release of all remaining human rights defenders and political prisoners in
Burma”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji. “The Government
of Burma must stop prosecuting individuals who are merely exercising the rights
and freedoms guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights”,
he urged.
 
“The
international community is looking at the changes in Burma with hopes but also
anxiety as to their seriousness and speed of implementation. Demonstrated
commitment to universal human rights standards and their implementation is the
real litmus test for the authorities”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “The obligations flowing from the
UN Working
Group’s decision are now clear:
the provision of reparation for the unlawful detention suffered, and the repeal
of a set of legislation that lends to arbitrary forms of detention as recognised
by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention”, he added in a comment on the decision.
 
For more information, please contact:
· FIDH: Audrey Couprie/Arthur Manet: +33 1 43 55 25 18
· OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 