Belarus:  HRC “Viasna” office unlawfully raided, dozens arrested
March 25, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2017 / MarchBelarus: HRC “Viasna” office unlawfully raided, dozens arrested 
Geneva-Paris,
March 25, 2017 - At least 57 persons involved
in the monitoring of ongoing peaceful protests, including foreign nationals
from France, Germany, Ukraine and Russia, were arrested today at the
office of Human Rights Centre “Viasna” in Minsk. The arrest took place ahead of
peaceful protests to be held on March 25, 2017. Arrests of protesters,
journalists and monitors are reportedly on-going.
 
On March 25, 2017, at 1pm, masked
and armed members of the special police unit stormed into the Human Rights
Centre (HRC) “Viasna” office, forced those
present in the office to lay to the floor and subsequently took them in a bus
to the Pervomaiskii
police station in Minsk. Those
detained included several members of HRC “Viasna”, Ms. Raisa Mikhailovskaya,
Head of Belarusian Documentation Centre, Mr. Aleh Hulak, Chairman of the
Belarusian Helsinki Committee, Ms. Maria
Chichtchenkova, Front Line Defenders Coordinator, and Ms. Evgenia Andreiuk, Co-coordinator for the
NGO Crimea-SOS. The group was participating in a meeting to coordinate protest
monitoring. 
 
They were all released without
charge a few hours later. The special police unit did not have a warrant to
raid the office. No material or equipment was seized. 
 
“Colleagues
were detained harshly - thrown to the floor by special police unit”, said Ales Bialiatski, Chairman of the HRC "Viasna". At least
one person was taken to the hospital.
 
FIDH member organisation in
Belarus HRC “Viasna” is a major source of independent information on the human
rights situation in Belarus, in particular the recent crackdown of peaceful protests
against Presidential Decree No. 3 that imposes a tax on the unemployed. 
 
“Banning
the right to peaceful assembly is not a sign of power. It is more a sign of
weakness and insecurity of the Belarusian regime”, commented Dimitris
Christopoulos, FIDH President. 
 
“Belarus
must accept that its people has the right to protest peacefully and it
must stop harassing human rights defenders”, said Gerald Staberock,
OMCT Secretary General. “Closer ties between EU and Belarus are no
excuse for the international community not to put pressure on the country”, he
added.
 
The massive crackdown, unseen
since 2010 when the EU and the US imposed sanctions on Belarus for massively
infringing human rights, proves the absence of any change in the nature of this
repressive regime. 
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.

For more information, please contact:
·        
FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Samuel Hanryon: + 33143552518
·        
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau / Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui:
+41228094939
​ 