Swaziland:  Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Thulani Rudolf Maseko and Mr. Bheki Makhubu
March 21, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Swaziland / 2014 / MarchSwaziland: Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Thulani Rudolf Maseko and Mr. Bheki Makhubu​













SWZ 001 /
0314 / OBS 023
Arbitrary
detention /
Judicial
harassment
Swaziland
March 21,
2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Swaziland.
 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the
arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Thulani Rudolf Maseko,
a human rights lawyer, senior member of Lawyers for Human Rights Swaziland and
the Southern Africa Human Rights Defenders Network as well as a columnist for The
Nation[1], and Mr. Bheki Makhubu,
Editor-in-Chief of The Nation.
 
According to the information received, on March 17 and 18, 2014
respectively, Messrs. Thulani Maseko and Mr. Bheki Makhubu were arrested under
the same warrant, issued by Chief Justice Ditto Ntate Ramodibedi, on charges of
“scandalizing the judiciary” and “contempt of court” following the publication
of articles criticizing the judicial system.
 
The charges arise from articles written by Messrs. Thulani Maseko and
Bheki Makhubu in February and March 2014 in The Nation, in which they
questioned circumstances surrounding the arrest of government vehicle
inspector, Bhantshana Vincent Gwebu and criticized the lack of impartiality of
the Swazi judicial system[2].
 
On March 18, 2014, Messrs. Maseko and Makhubu, who were expected to
appear in court, were subjected to a private hearing in the Chief Justice
Ramodibedi’s chambers, in violation of Section 21 of the Constitution of the
Kingdom of Swaziland, which guarantees the right to a fair trial. The accused's
lawyers were not informed that the hearing would take place in the Chief
Justice's chambers and were only present by chance. The latter remanded them
into custody pending a bail hearing on March 25, 2014. Messrs. Maseko and
Makhubu are currently detained in the provisional detention centre of
Sidwashini in Mbabane. 
 
In April 2013, Mr. Makhubu had already been sentenced
on charges of “scandalizing the court” to a fine of E400,000 (approximately EUR
26,758) by the High Court for publishing articles that criticized the judiciary
of Swaziland (an appeal is pending) and in 2009 Mr. Maseko was charged with
contravening the Sedition and Subversive Activities Act (the case was never
brought to trial).
 
The Observatory expresses its deep concern about the
arbitrary detention and judicial harassment faced by Messrs.
Thulani Maseko and Mr. Bheki Makhubu, since they seem to aim solely at
sanctioning their activities of human rights defenders and calls upon the
authorities of Swaziland to release them immediately and unconditionally.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Swaziland, urging them to:
 
 i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Messrs. Thulani Maseko and Bheki
Makhubu, as well as all human rights defenders in Swaziland;
 
ii. Release Messrs. Thulani Maseko
and Bheki Makhubu immediately and unconditionally,
since their detention is arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning their human
rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment -
including at the judicial level - against Messrs.
Thulani Maseko and Bheki Makhubu, and more generally against all human rights
defenders in Swaziland to ensure that
in all circumstances they carry out their activities without any
hindrances;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially: 
-              
Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels” 
-              
Article 9.3.c which states that
“Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to offer
and provide professionally qualified legal assistance or other relevant advice
and assistance in defending human rights and fundamental freedoms” 
-              
Article 12.2, which provides that
“"the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de
jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”;
 
v.
More generally, ensure in all circumstances
the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international human rights instruments ratified by Swaziland.
 
Addresses:


 
·    
King of Swaziland, Head of State and Chief of Arm
forces, MSWATI III, Royal Palace, Mbabane, Swaziland. Email: hello@kingofswaziland.com 
·     Prime Minister, Mr. Barnabas Sibusiso DLAMINI, Cabinet
Offices, Hospital Hill P.O. Box 395, Mbabane, SWAZILAND. Fax: +268 2404 3943·     Secretary to Cabinet and Head of the Public Service, Mr. Mbuso
C. DLAMINI, Fax: +24043943, E-mail: dlaminimb@gov.sz
·     Minister of Justice, Senator Mr.
Sibusiso SHONGWE, Ministry of
Justice Building, 5th Floor, Mhlambanyatsi/Usuthu Link Road, P.O. 924, Mbabane, SWAZILAND. Fax: +268 404 5626, E-mail: ps@justice.gov.sz
·    
Acting Principal Secretary to the Minister of Justice, Mr. Siboniso MASILELA, Tel: +268 404 5159, Email: masilelasib@gov.sz
·    
Attorney
General, Mr. Majahenkhaba DLAMINI, P.O. Box 578, Mbabane, SWAZILAND. Fax: +268
4044796. Email address: matsebulasa@gov.sz
·    
H.E. Mr. Mahlaba
Almon MAMBA, Counsellor, Permanent
Mission of the Kingdom of Swaziland to the Office of the United Nations in
Geneva, Chemin William-Barbey 51, 1292 Chambésy, Geneva, SWITZERLAND. Fax: +41
22 758 94 24, Email: swazimission-geneva@dslnets.ch
·     H.E. J.M. Nhleko, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary, Head of the Mission; Embassy of the Kingdom of Swaziland,
Avenue Winston Churchill 188, 1180 Bruxelles, BELGIUM; Email:
brussels@swaziembassy.bePlease also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Swaziland in
your respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
March 21, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·       Tel
and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49
39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] The Nation
is considered as the sole independent newspaper which denounces abuse of power,
corruption and political repression in the absolute monarchy of Swaziland. 


[2] According to Mr. Makhubu, Justice
Ditto Ntate Ramodibedi arrested Chief Justice Gwebu without bringing any formal
charges against him, denied him access to a lawyer, and deprived him from the
opportunity to seek release on bail. 