Russian Federation:  The appeal court orders ADC “Memorial” to register as a “foreign agent”, amid marred judicial proceedings
April  9, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2014 / AprilRussian Federation: The appeal court orders ADC “Memorial” to register as a “foreign agent”, amid marred judicial proceedingsParis-Geneva, April 9, 2014. In a hearing observed
yesterday by the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
(FIDH-OMCT joint programme), the Saint Petersburg City Court upheld that the
Anti-Discrimination Centre (ADC) “Memorial”, a Russian NGO at the forefront of
the defence of Roma's rights, was performing the functions of a “foreign agent”
and had to register as such for its human rights work.
 
Yesterday's decision confirms the first instance
ruling issued by the Leninsky District Court on December 12, 2013, which
considered ADC “Memorial” as a “foreign agent” following unfair proceedings on
the basis of a repressive NGO law. The Russian law on “foreign agents” imposes
all NGOs receiving funds from foreign sources for any kind of “political
activities” (defined as anything likely to “influence public opinion in order
to change the policy”) to register as “foreign agents” or face administrative
and civil sanctions. The Observatory has repeatedly called for the abrogation
of that law, which blatantly violates international human rights standards.
 
At the end of yesterday's hearing, which lasted less
than an hour, the Observatory mission delegate reported that the judge
interrupted ADC “Memorial”'s lawyers on several occasions throughout the
session, thereby hindering their capacity to develop their arguments and
breaching their right to a fair trial and due process, while no one objection
or remark was voiced when the accusation representative was speaking.
 
“ADC “Memorial” pursues legitimate human rights
activities for a free and democratic society in accordance with international
standards. It is a legitimate human rights NGO, which has to be protected and
in no way criminalised nor suffer reprisals for having cooperated with the UN
human rights system. This decision of the City Court is further evidence of the
constant judicial harassment faced by ADC, amid highly politicised proceedings
where the judges and the prosecutor have been implementing orders from above”
FIDH President Karim Lahidji said today.
 
Once again, the City Court pointed a report submitted by ADC “Memorial”
to the United Nations Committee Against Torture in 2012 as the only evidence of
its so-called “political activities”. Ironically, the decision of the City Court against ADC “Memorial” came
on the same day as the adoption of a ruling on the “foreign agents” law by the
Russian Constitutional Court, stating that this law is in line with the
Constitution as the obligation to register as a foreign agent would not prevent
NGOs from carrying out their activities.
 
“Should we not see working on human rights as inherently part of
the 'national interest' of a State? Is it not Russia that voluntarily signed and
ratified international human rights treaties that also guarantee freedom of
association?” asked Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of OMCT. “This
ruling is very concerning far beyond the case of one organisation. We are
alarmed that the present climate in Russia will result in a new wave of attacks
against human rights organisations who are part of a global human rights
community”, he added in commenting on the ruling by the court today.
 
The Observatory reminds the Russian authorities that the UN Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders provides that everyone has the right, individually
and in association with others, “at the national and international levels […]
to form, join and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations
or groups” (Article 5) and “to solicit, receive and utilize resources for the
express purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms through peaceful means” (Article 13). 
 

For more information on the cases against ADC “Memorial”, please check
out the Observatory Press Releases issued on December
12, 2013 and April
7, 2014. 