Mexico:     Inter-American Commission on Human Rights holds important hearing on implications of Mexico’s new Internal Security Law
March 22, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Mexico / 2018 / MarchMexico:    Inter-American Commission on Human Rights holds important hearing on implications of Mexico’s new Internal Security LawWashington,
D.C. / New York City / Stuttgart / Geneva, March 20,
2018 - The International Observatory
on Human Rights in Mexico remains deeply concerned about the new Internal
Security Law and the Mexican Government’s refusal to accept the Law’s
implications. The International Observatory urges the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights (IACHR) to utilize all mechanisms at its disposal to prevent
the militarization of public security in Mexico. In particular, the Observatory
encourages the IACHR to lend its expertise to the Mexican Supreme Court as it
reviews the proposed Law, and that it seek an advisory opinion from the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights on the matter, as well.
Enacted on December 21st, 2017, the
Internal Security Law gives broad and superseding authority to the Mexican
military to engage in domestic law enforcement, including criminal
investigative powers, but does not include specific measures for accountability
or civilian oversight of military operations. 
Members of the International Observatory,
which includes 10 international human rights and justice groups, have warned
that the Law could only add to the current climate of impunity in Mexico, given
the Mexican military’s repeated failure to hold its personnel accountable for
gross human rights violations, including forced disappearances, torture and extra-judicial
killings.
Indeed, only last week the UN
High Commissioner for Human Rights concluded that, in the investigation into
the disappearance of 43 students from Ayotzinapa in 2014, “there are strong
grounds to believe” that some of the people apprehended and accused in the case
were arbitrarily detained and tortured by federal officials. It further
highlights “an almost uniform modus operandi” of arbitrarily detaining and
torturing people to extract information or confessions, and of significant
delays in bringing them before a public prosecutor.
On March 2nd, the IACHR held a hearing
during its recent session in Bogota, Colombia, and included testimony from
Mexican human rights defenders and responses from representatives of Mexico’s
government. Prior to the Law’s passage, the IACHR had expressed its concern
about the human rights risks posed by the Law and warned that it includes
provisions that are contrary to international human rights standards. In fact,
the IACHR urged Mexico to “develop a concrete plan for the gradual withdrawal
of the Armed Forces from public security tasks and for the recovery of such
tasks by the civilian police force,” while strengthening the capacity of the
police to carry out public security tasks. 

These concerns were restated by a number
of commissioners during the hearing. They expressed concern that the armed
forces not only lack the appropriate training to deal with citizen security,
but that the Law also threatens other core rights, including the right to protest
and the right to access information. 
The members of the International
Observatory welcomed the IACHR’s continued interest in this issue, but were
disappointed by the response of the Mexican government, which included:
1)   
Arguing
that the Law was justified because civilian law enforcement agencies had been
compromised by ties to criminal gangs in several cases. This claim ignores
other factors, including the fact that the deployment of the armed forces has
increased violence in parts of the country and that soldiers and marines
frequently commit human rights abuses with impunity, or the fact that the armed
forces are far from immune of being influenced by organized crime. 
2)   
Citing
examples of troops being deployed in counter-terrorism operations in several
European countries. This claim again ignores the armed forces’ dismal record of
involvement in abuse and the government’s failure to hold those responsible to
account. 
On March 13th, the
IACHR expressed "deep concern" over the presidential decree that authorizes
a federal intervention regarding matters of public order in the state of Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, as it grants extensive powers to the armed forces to restore
order and places the police forces under the command of an Army general. The
similarities with the Mexican case are evident and we expect a reaction just as
strong.
The International Observatory on Human
Rights in Mexico was established in December 2017 by 10 international human
rights and justice groups to monitor the country’s human rights situation and
to support national civil society partners in the face of growing threats. 
The International Observatory’s inaugural
members include: Amnesty International, the Center for Justice and
International Law, the Due Process of Law Foundation, the German Network for
Human Rights in Mexico, Latin America Working Group, Peace Brigades
International, Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights, Washington Office on Latin
America, the Open Society Justice Initiative and the World Organisation Against
Torture. 