Bahrain:  Arrest and ill-treatment of Mr. Hussain Jawad, Chairman of the European-Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR)
February 18, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2015 / FebruaryBahrain: Arrest and ill-treatment of Mr. Hussain Jawad, Chairman of the European-Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR) 011 BHR_001_0215_OBS 011 - Arabic2 pages / 86 KBBHR 001 / 0215 / OBS
011
Arbitrary detention /
Ill-treatment
Bahrain
February 18, 2015 
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Bahrain.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arrest of Mr. Hussain Jawad, Chairman of the European-Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights
(EBOHR) on February 16 2015, by masked police officers in plain clothes, who
searched his house and confiscated his passport and mobile phone. Mr. Jawad was
not informed about the reason of his arrest. After 10 hours of incommunicado
detention, Mr. Jawad managed to call his wife and inform her that he was
currently detained in the Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID). He also
informed her that he was ill-treated in detention.
The
Observatory strongly condemns the arrest of Mr. Jawad, and considers that he is
targeted solely for his legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory
calls on the Bahraini authorities to immediately release him and to drop all
the charges against him (see background information). The Observatory is
further concerned by the allegations of ill-treatment in detention, and urges
the authorities to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Jawad, as well to open an immediate and effective investigation into these
allegations and to bring those responsible to justice.
The
Observatory more generally urges the Bahraini authorities to put an end to all
acts of harassment – including at the judicial level – against Mr. Jawad, and
to comply with the relevant international norms and standards, in particular
the United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, and international human rights
standards and instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Background
information:
 
Mr. Hussain
Jawad was previously arrested on November 23, 2013, and was interrogated about
a speech he gave at a protest rally in 2013. He was released on bail on January
9, 2014. He is currently on trial for charges of “criticising government institutions”,
“insulting the flag and emblem of the country”, “attempting to disrupt public
security” and “illegal gathering”. 
His next hearing is scheduled for February 25, 2015. 
 
Actions
requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to:

Guarantee the physical and psychological
     integrity of Mr. Hussain Jawad and all human rights defenders in Bahrain;

Immediately release Mr. Hussain Jawad and drop
     all charges against him, and against all human rights defenders in
     Bahrain;

Carry out an independent and effective
     investigation into the allegations of ill-treatment against Mr. Hussain
     Jawad, in order to identify all those responsible and apply them the
     sanctions provided by law;

Put an end to any act of harassment, including at
     the judicial level, against Mr. Hussain Jawad and against all human rights
     defenders in Bahrain;


Conform in any circumstances with the provisions
     of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998
     by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular: 

            - its Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually or in association     with others, to promote the protection and realization of human
rights and         fundamental freedoms at
the national and international levels” ;
-         
its Article 6 (c) which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others to study,
discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice,
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other
appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters” ;
-         
and its Article 12.2 which states that
“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”.
 
vi.
   Ensure in all circumstances respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 


Addresses: 
·        
Cheikh
Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·        
Cheikh
Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555;
Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·        
Cheikh
Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973
175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·        
Lt.
Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Tel: +973  17572222 and
+973 17390000.
Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·        
Permanent
Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin
Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland.
Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your
respective countries. 