Sri Lanka:  Sri Lanka: arrest of the alleged rapists of two women
April 12, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2001 / AprilSri Lanka: Sri Lanka: arrest of the alleged rapists of two womenVIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN Case LKA 090401.1.VAW  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of arrest of the alleged rapists of two women in Sri Lanka.  According to the information received, the International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that a Sri Lankan judge has ordered the arrest of four members of the Sri Lanka security forces, including three policemen and one naval officer, following the alleged arbitrary detention, rape and torture of two women, one of whom is pregnant. The identity of the men in question remains unknown.  According to the information received, the two women, Mrs. Wijikala Nanthan - who is pregnant - and Mrs. Sivamani Sinnathamby Weerakon, as well as the main witness to the case concerning the alleged human rights violations, are reportedly now taking refuge at the Catholic Bishop of Mannar's residence. OMCT remains concerned for their safety.   Brief reminder of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed by a reliable source of the alleged arbitrary detention, rape and torture of Mrs. Wijikala Nanthan, who is pregnant, and Mrs. Sivamani Sinnathamby Weerakon, by the Mannar Police's Counter Subversive Unit (CSU) on March 13, 2001.  According to the information received, Wijikala and Sivamani were arrested at around 11 pm by the CSU under the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Emergency Regulations, with the CSU falsely accusing them of being trained members of the Liberation Tigers rebel group. Wijikala and her husband, and Sivamani and her six-year-old son were transported to the CSU's offices in Mannar. Here the women were raped and tortured until dawn by CSU officials. Both women were reportedly tortured until they agreed to falsely confess that they were trained military members of the Liberation Tigers, who had brought bombs to Mannar. The women were forced to sign typed confessions to this effect, while still under arbitrary detention by the CSU on March 17, 2001.   According to the reports, the CSU had also threatened the women not to give evidence against them in the case of a judicial investigation. The women were reportedly sentenced to a total of 14 days in judicial custody by Mannar district judge M.H.M Ajmeer, during which time they were allegedly repeatedly raped. Reports indicate that the CSU has previously arrested, raped and tortured women under the pretext of the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Emergency Regulations.  OMCT expressed grave concerns about these reports of torture, including rape, and arbitrary detention of women at the hands of the CSU. Previous similar cases in Sri Lanka have often gone unpunished.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka urging them to:   - take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mrs. Wijikala Nanthan, Mrs. Sivamani Sinnathamby Weerakon and the main witness in the case;  - complete a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these arrests in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  - guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Her Excellency President Chandrika B. Kumaratunga, Presidential Residence, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka Fax: 94 - 1 - 333 - 703   Mr. Mangala Samaraweera, Minister of Posts, Telecommunications and Media, Old CTO Building Lotus Rd, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka   Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, New Secretariat, Colombo 1, Sri Lanka  Hon. Ambassador, Permanent Mission and Consulate General of Sri Lanka, 56, Rue De Moillebeau,  5th Floor, 1 209, Geneva 19, Switzerland, Fax: (41-22) 734 9084, E-mail: mission.srilanka@itu.ch  Hon. High-Commissioner, The High Commission of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 13 Hyde Park Gardens London W2 2LU United Kingdom Fax: (0171) 262-7970, E-mail: lancom@easynet.co.uk  Please also write to the embassies of Sri Lanka in your respective country.  Geneva, April 12, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 