Kyrgyzstan:  Prominent women human rights defenders at risk following their participation in OSCE meeting
September 26, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2016 / SeptemberKyrgyzstan: Prominent women human rights defenders at risk following their participation in OSCE meeting
Paris-Geneva, September 26, 2016 - The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT partnership) strongly condemns
the verbal attacks and acts of harassment by the Kyrgyz authorities against
Tolekan Ismailova and Aziza Abdirasulova in reprisal to their participation in the
2016 OSCE HDIM, and call upon diplomatic missions and the OSCE to provide them
with all necessary protection.
 
Human rights defenders Tolekan Ismailova
and Aziza Abdirasulova are both heads of FIDH member organisations in
Kyrgyzstan, Bir Duino and Kylym Shamy. They have recently been the subject to
virulent verbal attacks and threats by Kyrgyz Members of Parliament (MPs), law
enforcement agents and State-owned on-line media following their
participation in the 2016 Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Human Dimension Implementation Meeting (HDIM),
which is taking place from September 19 to 30, 2016, in Warsaw (Poland). 
 
On September 20, 2016, Ms. Tolekan Ismailova
made a speech in Warsaw, focusing on the rights of Kyrgyz women migrants and
their children, during the working session of the annual OSCE/HDIM conference, titled “The International Covenants on Human
Rights and their importance for OSCE Human Dimension”. As she was delivering
her speech, she found herself sitting by coincidence next to a Kyrgyz ethnic
Uzbek political activist sentenced to life imprisonment in absentia for
his alleged role in the ethnic conflict that took place in 2010 and who now
resides in Sweden as a political refugee. 
 
Shortly after Ms.
Ismailova' speech, a photo of her sitting next to the individual was published
on the Internet, and sparked virulent reactions on the part of Kyrgyz MPs and
law enforcement agents. Ms. Aziza Abdirasulova was also captured on the picture
as she was entering the plenary hall, and was also subject to similar threats.
 
On September 22, 2016, a
representative of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Kyrgyzstan who attended a
Parliamentary Committee on International Affairs Defence and Security publicly
stated that the Ministry had received a negative reply from Interpol to its
request to search for the above-mentioned individual, on the grounds that
Interpol would not search persons prosecuted on politically motivated charges.
During the same session, some MPs called for the opening of a criminal case
against Ms. Ismailova, after which the press office of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs confirmed that ”operational work” had been opened to hold “Kyrgyz
citizens” accountable[1]. Through social networks,
a number of Internet users also promised to “welcome” “the traitors” upon their
return to the country. 
 
The Observatory fears for
the physical integrity of the two human rights defenders, and urges diplomatic
missions and the OSCE office in Bishkek to condemn the threats uttered against
Ms. Tolekan Ismaikova and Ms. Aziza Abdirasulova, and provide them with all
necessary protection, in line with the European Union and OSCE Guidelines on
Human Rights Defenders.  
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this program is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.



[1] See http://kloop.kg/blog/2016/09/22/mvd-proverit-pravozashhitnitsu-ismailovu-za-ulybku-vo-vremya-vystupleniya-batyrova/ 