Bangladesh:  Killing of Mr. Aminul Islam
April 17, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2012 / AprilBangladesh: Killing of Mr. Aminul Islam

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
BGD 001 / 0412 / OBS 035
Assassination
Bangladesh
April 17, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent 
intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources, including 
Odhikar, of the killing of Mr. Aminul Islam, a 41 year-old leader of the 
Garments and Industrial Workers' Federation and a staff member of the Bangladesh 
Centre for Workers Solidarity (BCWS). 
 
According to the 
information received, on April 4, 2012, Mr. Aminul Islam closed the BCWS office 
(located in Baipal, near Dhaka) earlier, at around 6.30 p.m., after seeing what 
he believed was a police van parked outside of the 
premises.
 
On the evening of April 4, three of his colleagues and his wife tried 
to call Mr. Islam but his phone had been switched off. Therefore, nobody was 
able to get information on his whereabouts. They eventually decided to call 
Ashulia police station to find out whether Mr. Islam had been arrested, but 
could not get any information either.
 
On April 5, 2012, a member of BCWS and Mr. Islam's wife went to the 
Ashulia police station to file a General Diary[1]. However, as 
Mr. Islam had been missing for less than 24 hours, they were not able to file it 
until around 10:30 am on April 6, when the General Diary was finally accepted 
and registered as GD number-357.
 
On April 8, 2012, Mr. Islam's wife discovered a picture of her 
spouse's corpse in a local newspaper, revealing that the body had been found 
close to the Ghatail police station in Tangail district, 100 kilometres away 
from Mr. Islam's supposed place of abduction. His wife and some family members 
decided to go there to ascertain that was Mr. Islam's body. They were joined by 
Mr. Islam’s BCWS colleagues. Unfortunately, as nobody had reclaimed the corpse 
before, the corpse had already been buried on April 7. If Mr. Islam's relatives 
were therefore prevented from accessing the body in spite of their request to 
dig up the corpse, they were able to identify him on a picture showed by the 
police.
 
The picture reportedly establishes that Mr. Islam was direly tortured 
before he was killed: his right leg had drilled under his knee, toes had been 
smashed, both knees were marked with coagulated blood and many other beaten 
spots were noticed over his body. These elements were, moreover, confirmed by an 
“inquest report” prepared by the police. 
 
The Observatory deeply condemns Mr. Aminul Islam's extrajudicial killing, as it seems to be a mere reprisal for his 
peaceful human rights activities as a trade-unionist, and calls on the 
Bangladeshi authorities to carry out a fair, prompt, independent and transparent 
investigation on his assassination to identify and sanction all those 
responsible for his death.
 
In the past, Mr. Islam had already been pressured by official 
representatives for being a leader of the garments' workers movement. He was 
therefore believed to be one of the main investigators of the so-called 
“political disturbances”. 
 
For instance, Mr. Aminul Islam had already been tortured in 2010 and 
arbitrarily detained several times by law enforcement agents[2]. Recently, on 
March 12, 2012, he was interrogated all day long as he was suspected to rally 
10,000 workers to a mass protest organised by the opposition Bangladesh 
Nationalist Party (BNP) on the same day to put pressure upon the present 
government for them to accept a neutral caretaker government to hold the next 
parliamentary election.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Bangladeshi authorities urging them to: 

 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological 
integrity of all human rights defenders in Bangladesh;
 
ii. Order an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial 
investigation into the assassination of Mr. Aminul Islam, the result of which 
must be made public, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them 
before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them the penal 
sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii. Provide adequate reparation to Mr. Islam’s family;
 
iv. Put an end to all acts of harassment against all human rights 
defenders in Bangladesh, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to 
carry out their work without hindrances;
 
v. Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the 
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United 
Nations General Assembly, in particular:
 
-          
its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and 
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels”, 
 
-          
its Article 9.1, which states that “in the exercise of human rights 
and fundamental freedoms, including the promotion and protection of human rights 
as referred to in the present Declaration, everyone has the right, individually 
and in association with others, to benefit from an effective remedy and to be 
protected in the event of the violation of those rights”,
-          
Article 12.1, which foresees that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to participate in peaceful 
activities against violations of human rights and fundamental 
freedoms”,
-          
and its Article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
vi. Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in 
accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other 
international human rights instruments ratified by 
Bangladesh.
 
Addresses:
 
· Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime 
Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +880 
2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
· Ms. Sahara Khatun, Minister for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: 
mediacell@homemin-bd.org
· Barrister Qamrul Islam, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary 
Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh 
Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
· Mr.Hasan Mahmud Khandaker, Inspector General of Police, Police 
Headquarters, Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Email : ig@police.gov.bd 
· Ambassador Mr. Abdul Hannan, Permanent Mission of the People’s 
Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
· Mr. Ismat Jahan, Embassy of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in 
Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 646 59 98; 
Email: bdootbrussels@freegates.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Bangladesh in 
your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, April 17, 2012
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 

· Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
· Tel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 
80
· Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29
 



[1] A General Diary is used to record every major incident (e.g. theft, 
murder, traffic accidents) happening within the jurisdiction of the police 
station on a daily basis.

[2] See Observatory Annual Report 
2011. 