United States:  Torture should qualify for trial and not running the CIA
March 14, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / United States / 2018 / MarchUnited States: Torture should qualify for trial and not running the CIA
Geneva, 14 March 2018, The World Organisations
Against Torture (OMCT), the principal coalition against torture, is alarmed of the
proposed appointment of Gina Haspel to lead the CIA amidst serious allegations
of responsibility for torture.
“The
appointment of a person against whom there is serious evidence having
responsibility over serious international crimes, including torture and
enforced disappearance, is truly shocking”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT
Secretary General. 
Gina
Haspel has been nominated to lead the US Central Intelligence Agency, CIA, as
part of yesterdays’ government reshuffle in the Trump administration. There are
serious allegations against her having run and overseen the operation of a so-called
black site in Thailand during the Bush area. Records show that she has overseen
interrogations that included in one case more than 80 sessions of waterboarding
and other forms of torture. She is also known for ordering the destruction of
tapes that allegedly show torture during interrogations. 
“This
sends an alarming message to all those who are concerned over the return of the
US torture policies. These policies have done tremendous harm, have been
outright illegal and a crime, but ultimately have also done nothing to make us
safer”, added Gerald Staberock. 
The
US Government under the Bush administration had operated a policy of torture,
prescribed in various ‘legal memos’ and a spider-web of secret detention
facilities that made disappearance, kidnapping and the use of torture possible in
an environment outside any legal protections. The US Senate Committee with
access to confidential intelligence information concluded not only its
unlawfulness but also its complete non-effectiveness to yield credible
intelligence.
Torture
is absolutely prohibited under international law under any circumstances and a
crime anywhere it happens. The US bears legal responsibility to bring those
responsible for torturing or overseeing it to trial and justice. Appointing alleged
torture perpetrators to high level government positions is incompatible with
this obligation and unprecedented in a democratic state.
“This must be a wake-up call also to all
remaining allies to the United States. We need European and other partners of
the US, notably in the UK, and their security apparatus to speak out and make
clear that they would not be able to work with US intelligence if torture is returning.
It should also be seen as an insult to the ethics and
integrity of all the women and men that work within the security sector within
the law to keep us safe,” said Gerald
Staberock.
Let us not be naïve: this is not only about the US,
it concerns all of us. 
A world in which torture is the rule is not the
world we strive for, it is also not a safer world. To the contrary, torture
increases sympathy for extremist causes, serves as recruiting ground and will
make us less safe – anywhere, not only in the United States. 
For media inquiries please contact Lori Brumat, OMCT Head of
Communications at  +41 22 809 49 33 or lb@omct.org. 