Bangladesh:  Arrest of Odhikar Director, a new step in persecution of prominent human rights organisation
November  6, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / NovemberBangladesh: Arrest of Odhikar Director, a new step in persecution of prominent human rights organisation
Geneva-Paris, November 6, 2013. The World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, express their deep concern as Mr. ASM Nasiruddin Elan, the Director of the prominent human rights non-governmental organisation Odhikar, was sent to jail today after he appeared before the Dhaka Cyber
Crimes Tribunal.

Today,
Mr. ASM Nasiruddin Elan, Director of Odhikar, and his
lawyers appeared before the Dhaka Cyber Crimes Tribunal and appealed for bail in a case filed by the Government under
Section 57 of the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Act, 2006 (amended in 2009) and under Sections 505 and 505A of the Penal
Code, in relation to a fact-finding report issued by Odhikar on the killing of
61 people during an operation carried out on May 5-6, 2013 by security forces
against Hefazat-e Islam activists in Dhaka. At 12:20 in the afternoon Judge
Shamsul Alam rejected the plea for bail and ordered that Mr. Elan be arrested
and taken to Dhaka Central Jail.
 
“The arrest order by the specially set up Cyber Crimes Tribunal on the basis of vaguely
defined crimes under the ICT Act is appalling and we are very concerned for the
safety and physical integrity of Mr. Elan in detention”, said today Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of OMCT. “Publishing human rights reports even if their
conclusions may be contested or unpleasant for the authorities is not a crime”, he added.
 
“We call upon the authorities of Bangladesh to release Mr.
Elan immediately and unconditionally”, said Karim Lahidji, President of FIDH. “It is time to return to the rule
of law, ensuring that the ICT Act is revised and applied in a manner compliant
with international human rights law”, he added.
 
On September 4, 2013 Mr. ASM
Nasiruddin Elan and Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of Odhikar and a member of OMCT General
Assembly, were accused of allegedly
“distorting images by using photo shop and publishing a fabricated
report, which enraged public sentiment”, in relation to Odhikar above-mentioned report. If found
guilty, they might face up to 14 years in jail or Tk 10,000,000 (about
93,660 €) fine under the ICT Act and seven years’ jail term under the Penal
Code.
 
The Observatory considers the prosecution against Messrs. Nasiruddin Elan and Adilur Rahman Khan as
arbitrary since it only aims at
sanctioning and preventing their activities as human rights defenders, therefore
contradicting international human rights standards and
Bangladesh’s obligations. Accordingly, the Observatory calls upon the
authorities of Bangladesh to put an end to any harassment against Odhikar and
its members.
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr.
Khan was arbitrarily detained from August 10, 2013 to October 11, 2013, when he
was finally released on bail, after spending more than two months in Kashimpur
prison. On September
11, 2013, the Cyber Crimes
Tribunal issued an arrest warrant against Mr. Nasiruddin Elan, who was granted an order of “no arrest or harassment” for four weeks from the High Court
Division of the Supreme Court on October 10, 2013.
 
In addition, on October 21, 2013, Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan appeared
before the Cyber Crime Tribunal, where the
Tribunal Judge fixed the next date of hearing on November 10, 2013 and asked
Odhikar’s lawyers at the time to ensure the presence of Mr. Nasiruddin Elan
at that hearing.
 
More
generally, the Observatory calls upon the authorities in Bangladesh to ensure full
respect for the rights set forth in the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders. 