Bahrain:  Slandering media campaign launched against Messrs. Nabeel Rajab, Mohamed Al-Maskati and Abdul Ghani Al-Khanjar
February 18, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2010 / FebruaryBahrain: Slandering media campaign launched against Messrs. Nabeel Rajab, Mohamed Al-Maskati and Abdul Ghani Al-KhanjarBHR 001 / 0210 / OBS 020
Slandering media campaign
Bahrain
February 18, 2010
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
Description of the situation :
The Observatory has been informed by the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights (BYSHR) about the slandering media campaign launched against Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), Mr. Mohamed Al-Maskati, BYSHR President, and Mr. Abdul Ghani Al-Khanjar, Spokesperson of the National Committee for Martyrs and Victims of Torture (NCMVT).
According to the information received, on February 16, 2010, Mr. Faisal Fulath, member of the Shura Council, Mr. Adel Al Mghwdah, member of the Parliament, and Mr. Mohammed Al-Shooruqi, broadcaster, accused the three human rights defenders in a live program on the Bahrain Radio Station of having links with foreign governments, of having committed acts of violence using Molotov cocktails as well as of betraying the country. They also accused them of inciting young people to violence against the State, and defaming the State before international organisations.
These false statements concerning the three human rights defenders were also published in a series of articles in the local on-line newspapers The Gulf News (http://www.akhbar-alkhaleej.com), Al-Watan News (http://www.alwatannews.net) and Bahrain Voice (http://www.moltaqabh.org/vb/) since February 9, 2010.
This defamation campaign started after Human Rights Watch (HRW) has launched a report on Torture in Bahrain entitled Torture Redux on February 8, 2010, which contains testimonies of recent victims, among them human rights defenders and political activists. In the report, HRW expressed its thanks to the several human rights defenders who assisted in the preparation of the report including Messrs. Nabeel Rajab, Mohamed Al-Maskati and Abdul Ghani Al-Khanjar.
The Observatory condemns this media slandering campaign and considers that the above-mentioned statements manifestly aim at discrediting Messrs. Nabeel Rajab, Mohamed Al-Maskati and Abdul Ghani Al-Khanjar’s human rights activities. In particular, the Observatory is deeply concerned that such statements are fuelling, among the public opinion, a feeling of hostility against human rights defenders and organisations working on denouncing human rights violations.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Bahrain urging them to :

 Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Nabeel Rajab, Mohamed Al-Maskati and Abdul Ghani Al-Khanjar and all human rights defenders in Bahrain ;
 Put an end to all acts harassment against Messrs. Nabeel Rajab, Mohamed Al-Maskati and Abdul Ghani Al-Khanjar as well as all human rights defenders in Bahrain ;
 Order an immediate, effective, thorough and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned campaign and identify all those responsible to justice in accordance with international standards;
 Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, Article 11, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to the lawful exercise of his or her occupation or profession”, Article 12(1) that provides “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”, as well as Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually or in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain.

Addresses :

Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax : +973 176 64 587
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel : +973 172 27 555 ; fax : +973 172 12 6032
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel : +973 175 31 333 ; fax : +973 175 31 284
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax : + 41 22 758 96 50. Email : info@bahrain-mission.ch


Paris-Geneva, February 18, 2010
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80

Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 