Viet Nam:  Release terminally ill human rights defender Dinh Dang Dinh
February 14, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2014 / FebruaryViet Nam: Release terminally ill human rights defender Dinh Dang Dinh

Paris-Geneva,
February 14, 2014. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), together with the Vietnam
Committee on Human Rights (VCHR), express deep concern over the health of human
rights defender Mr. Dinh Dang Dinh who is suffering
from terminal stomach cancer but remains under detention in hospital in
Vietnam.
 
Human rights defender and blogger
Mr. Dinh Dang Dinh, who is currently serving a six-year sentence, is
gravely ill. He is currently in the Oncology Hospital in Ho Chi Minh City
suffering from terminal stomach cancer, which has now metastasised to his lymph
nodes. His wife reports that his life may be “counted in days and hours,” and
calls on the Vietnamese government to release him immediately so he may die
among his family and friends. The Vietnamese Government has not responded to
her pleas.
 
Despite his life-threatening
condition, Mr. Dinh has been kept under surveillance since he was admitted to
hospital last month, with policemen posted outside his room and a camera
installed beside his bed to monitor him and his visitors. Ms. Dinh says that
the family has to pay for all her husband’s medical expenses, including 250,000
VND (US$ 12) per day for his bed in a room with three other patients.
 
Mr. Dinh Danh Dinh, born in 1963, is
a former army officer and high school chemistry teacher. He has published many
online articles protesting corruption, lack of democracy, and the negative
environmental impact of Bauxite mining in the Central Highlands, which is
destroying the livelihood of hundreds of thousands of ethnic minority people in
this region. 
 
Mr. Dinh was arrested in October
2011 and convicted in an unfair trial at the People’s Court in Dak Nong for “circulating propaganda against the
Socialist Republic of Vietnam” (Article
88 of the Criminal Code) and sentenced to six years in prison in August 2012.
His conviction was upheld on appeal on November 21, 2012 in a trial that lasted
only 45 minutes. He began to suffer from stomach haemorrhage shortly after his
detention, but was denied access to medical treatment. According to his wife,
when he asked for medical treatment in 2012, not only was it denied, but also a
dozen camp officials beat and strangled him. He was admitted to hospital in
December 2013.
 
In December 2013, Ambassadors of the
EU, USA and 24 other countries wrote to the Vietnamese Government calling for
Mr. Dinh Dang Dinh’s release.
 
Mr. Dinh Dang Dinh has repeatedly
claimed his innocence. Article 88 of the Criminal Code is one of several
vaguely-worded and repressive provisions in Vietnamese law that the government
has routinely used to criminalise free speech and imprison peaceful dissidents.
 
Our organisations strongly condemn
the crackdown that has been targeting human rights defenders, including
bloggers, in Vietnam over the past few years, and urge the Vietnamese
authorities to abide by the resolutions that were adopted by consensus in June
2012 and March 2013 by the United Nations Human Rights Council on the right to
freedom of expression online and the protection of human rights defenders
respectively. 
 
Our organisations urge the Vietnamese authorities to: release immediately and unconditionally Mr.
Dinh Dang Dinh; ensure in all
circumstances that human rights defenders are able to work without any fear of reprisals; and conform to the
UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 