Sudan:  'Sudan: arbitrary arrest and detention of 11 leaders from the Four tribe
July 18, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2002 / JulySudan: 'Sudan: arbitrary arrest and detention of 11 leaders from the Four tribeCase SDN 180602.1 / SDN 180602.1.ESCRC Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Concern  Arbitrary arrest / Incommunicado detention / Risk of torture  Geneva, 18th July, 2002  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information concerning the following situation in Sudan.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrest and detention of 11 leaders from the Four tribe by security forces in Zalingei, Western Darfour, on July 11th, 2002.   According to the information received, the leaders were all involved in reporting recent attacks against the tribe by Arab militia, and include:  Adam Abdel Rasool (teacher); Abdel Moula Aam Abdel Moula  (farmer); Gialani Omer (driver); Abdel Wahid Mohamed Ahmed  (advocate) ; Mohamed Ahmed Abdel Moula (teacher); Amir Bahr elDin (farmer); Abdo Harran (farmer); Abdel Gabbar Abdalla (Ommda – tribal leader); Abbo Hassan (Shartai – tribal leader); Abdel Karim Mohamed Abkr (Ommda); Abdalla Muhagir  (Sheikh – tribal leader).  According to the information received, no reasons for their arrest has been provided, no arrest warrants were served and no charges have been pressed against these persons. The report indicates that Abdel Wahid Mohamed Ahmed is in a very poor state of health and only has one lung.  According to the information received, a further four men were arrested on July 15th, 2002, including:   Ali Shogar (health worker in Nartiti); Mohamed Abdel Rasool (teacher and chairman of labourers trade union in Zalingei); Mohamed Ismael (pharmacist at Zalingei hospital); Adam Ahmed (transport commission agent).   According to the information received, none of the above detainees have been allowed to receive family visits since their respective arrests and OMCT fears therefore that they may be subjected to torture during their detention.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the afore-mentioned detainees, in particular Mr. Abdel Wahid Mohamed Ahmed, given his reported ill-health, notably in light of the worsening human rights situation in Darfour and the continuing persecution of the people from the African tribes native to the region.  Background information  According to the information received, the recent spate of human rights violations can be linked to the worsening of the socio-economic situation in Darfour and the ongoing conflict taking place in the province between the Four and Massaleet tribes and Arabs from Darfour and neighbouring Chad.  Confrontations between these two groups have led to the destruction and depopulation of villages and the displacement of a great number of people, who now suffer from a shortage of food, security and shelter.  As a result, crime has reportedly increased, as the displaced are desperate to ensure their and their family’s survival.    According to the report, drought has severely worsened the situation in the region, inciting conflict as tribes fight over the little viable land that remains. The whole of Darfour is reportedly affected and almost 1 million people currently risk starvation.  According to the information received, the Government of Sudan claims that the conflict in Darfour is simply the result of inter-tribal disputes centred on the competition for land between pastoral and crop farmers in the area.  The leaders of the Four tribe, however, insist that the depopulation of villages, displacement of people, and consequently the changes in land ownership are all part of a government strategy to alter the demography of the region.  So far, 56 Four villages in the region have been depopulated following attacks by militia from Arab tribes.     According to the information received, although the authorities are aware of the attacks by the Arab tribes, no investigations have been launched into the events and the perpetrators of these acts have not been brought to justice, despite a number of them having been identified by leaders of the Four and Massaleet tribes. The fact that these very leaders have now been arbitrarily arrested and detained, tends to reinforce claims that the Government of Sudan is in fact training and supporting the militia from the Arab tribes.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the aforementioned detainees; ii.	order that these persons be released immediately in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events and guarantee that those responsible are brought to trial and that the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions are applied as provided by law; iv.	put an immediate end to the harassment of members of the Four tribe; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms, including economic, social and cultural rights, throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights laws and standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 249 11 783223 / 787676 / 771651  ·	His Excellency Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 249 11 779383 / 777268  If you are experiencing difficulties getting through to the fax numbers mentioned above, please send your letters to:  ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the diplomatic representatives of Sudan in your country.  Geneva, 18th July, 2002	  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 