“Child Concern” Urgent Appeals
January  7, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Statements / 2004 / January“Child Concern” Urgent AppealsIn cases of grave violations of children's rights, it is OMCT's task to establish a connection and create solidarity between groups, in the north as well as throughout the world, that are influential in the promotion and protection of human rights. However, transmission of all urgent communications pertaining to men, women and children sent out by OMCT to these various groups, without taking into account their needs, would be counter-productive since it would fail to achieve effective action and would be financially irresponsible. Since 1991, OMCT has been sending out urgent appeals under the heading "Child Concern" to a specific target audience who is most likely to take prompt and effective action concerning these cases. This is part of the strategy of maximising results: effectiveness is maximised by specifying the type of victim, thus making it possible to identify with increasing accuracy the organs which should receive the information concerned. Launching urgent appeals specifically relating to violence against children both defends children that are at particular risk and raises awareness on their situation. It gives national NGOs an efficient instrument to let their voice be heard at the international level. More than 200 “Child Concern” urgent appeals have been circulated by OMCT since 1999. These appeals - which are circulated to several thousands recipients all around the world - are a support for the UN mechanisms who consider them as an important source of information, notably:  The Special Rapporteur on Torture  The Special representative on children in armed conflict  The Special Rapporteur of the Sale of Children, Child prostitution and child Pornography   Most acts of torture committed against children denounced in OMCT “child concern” urgent appeals take place in the context of juvenile justice, especially during arrest, and custody in police stations. Children are also too often victims of arbitrary detention and violations of there fundamental rights, be it in pre-trial detention, in prisons, or in migrant reception centres. Unfair trial and lack of due process are very frequent, as children are often not provided with adequate legal assistance, have confessed under threat, and are not listened to. In its appeals, in addition to art. 37 and 40 of the CRC, OMCT thus refers to key UN rules and guidelines on juvenile justice :   • United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (The Riyadh Guidelines)  • United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty  • United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice ("The Beijing Rules")   For more information on juvenile justice, see also: The Vienna Crime Prevention Centre 