Guatemala:  Guatemala: 18 files stolen from Casa Alianza office
March 20, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Guatemala / 2002 / MarchGuatemala: Guatemala: 18 files stolen from Casa Alianza officeURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY   GTM 001/0104/OBS 029.2 18 files missing from Casa Alianza office GUATEMALA 20th March 2002  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the FIDH and the OMCT, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Guatemala.  New information:  The Observatory has been informed by Casa Alianza that 18 files are missing from its offices in Guatemala City.   According to the information received, following the ransacking of its offices on March 7th, 2002 (see Press Release on the Observatory 2002 Guatemala mission report), Casa Alianza has determined that 18 active files concerning street children in Guatemala City have been stolen from its archives (an active file is that of an actual street child or youth with whom Casa Alianza is working at the present time, all of whom are between the ages of 14 and 22). The files are those of: Debora Garcia Siam, Brenda Marisolgomez, Mario Ernest Adolfo Pineda, Jose Alexander Aguilar, Jesus Moises Aguilar Martinez,  Angel David Aleman,  Rodolfo Misael Aleman Centeno, Elmer Aleman Lara, Rigoberto Alonzo Agustini, Daniel Alonzo Alvarez, Cesar Augusto Alonzo Cortez, Luis Arturo Alonzo Enriquez, Julio Rene Navarro, Carlos Santos Alvarado, Dennis Alvarado, Jorge Alexander Alvarado, Jose Antonio Carranza and Luis Enrique Catalan.  As can be seen from the above list, the majority of the files were with surnames starting with the letter “A” yet there are a few specific files that were selected from other letters in the locked metal filing cabinets. The Casa Alianza street educators are trying to locate these children who’s files were stolen to make sure they are safe.  These facts are more generally part of a context characterized by the deterioration of the situation of human rights defenders in Guatemala. An international investigation mission mandated by the Observatory in this country has revealed, in its report published on March 12th, 2002 (available on the FIDH and OMCT websites), that there has been a significant increase in the number of attacks against defenders who denounce corruption, grave violations of economic and social rights and the continuing impunity of those responsible for crimes committed during the civil war.  These violations occur in the framework of the persistence at the highest state level of the military intelligence apparatus and diverse parallel military structures that were put in place during the war (PAC, “military commissaries”, action groups linked to the military intelligence, etc).  Brief reminder of the situation:  It has to be recalled that on March 7th, 2002, Casa Alianza offices in Guatemala City suffered a break-in, during which hundreds of files of street children were strewn over the floor. After  the arduous task of collecting these numerous files, it was then determined that the files belonging to the 18 previously mentioned children were stolen.  This same Casa Alianza office was ransacked in April 2001, and files concerning12 street children, who had been helped by the Street Educators, were stolen (see Observatory urgent appeal GTM 002/0104/OBS 029 and 029.1).  Despite the fact that Casa Alianza filed police reports, there have been no advances in either of the break-in investigations.  Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Guatemala urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the street children in question;  ii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iii.	take all necessary measures to stop any kind of harassment against human rights defenders and their organisations; iv.	ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders in particular its Article 1 which provides that "Every person has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national and international level" and its article 5.b which provides that “for the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the rights, individually or in association with others, at the national and international levels to form, join and participate in non-governmental organisations, associations or groups." v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses:  Lic. Alfonso Portillo Cabrera, Presidente de la República de Guatemala, 6a. Avenida "A" 4-41, Zona 1, Ciudad de Guatemala, GUATEMALA Fax: + 502 239 0090; Email: mensajes@presidenteportillo.gob.gt  Sr. Eduardo Arévalo Lacs, Ministro de Gobernación,  Ministerio de Gobernación 6 Avenida 4-64, Zona 4, Ciudad de Guatemala, GUATEMALA Fax: + 502 362 0239/0237; Email: monica24@intelnet.net.gt  Comisario Luis Arturo Paniagua Galicia, Director General de la Guardia Civil Nacional, 6¦ Avenida 13-71, Zona 1; Ciudad de Guatemala, GUATEMALA Fax: + 502 251 9382  Corte Magistratura de Menores, Edificio Magistratura de Me Menores Calle 6 4-44, Zona 9,Ciudad de Guatemala, GUATEMALA Fax: + 502 360 7958    Please also write to the embassies of Guatemala in your respective country.  Geneva-Paris, March 20th , 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 