Iran:  Enforced disappearance, arbitrary arrests, ongoing detentions and judicial harassment against human rights defenders
August 19, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2011 / AugustIran: Enforced disappearance, arbitrary arrests, ongoing detentions and judicial harassment against human rights defenders

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 

IRN 006 / 0811 / OBS 108
Arbitrary arrest and ongoing detention / 
Disappearance
 / Judicial 
harassment
Iran
August 19, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in Iran. 
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the enforced disappearance of Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi, member of the Committee of Human Rights Reporters (CHRR), the summons 
against Mr. Ali Kalaei, a former member of the CHRR, the arbitrary arrest and ongoing arbitrary detention of Messrs. 
Ahmad Ghabel, a religious scholar and activist fighting against death penalty and 
reporting on extra-judicial executions in Iran, Saeed Jalalifar, member of the CHRR and a former member of the Association for 
Defence of Street and Working Children, and Kayvan Samimi Behbahani, a 67 year-old human rights defender and journalist, and of the ongoing judicial harassment against, Ms. Shiva Nazarahari, member of the CHRR and of the “One Million Signatures” 
campaign.
 
According to the information received, around July 30, 2011, Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi was arrested in Tehran. As of issuing this urgent 
appeal, his whereabouts remain unknown. In the morning of July 31, 2011, his 
mother Ms. Parvin Mokhtar’e was arbitrarily arrested at her home in Kerman, by 
four plainclothes agents, without a warrant. She is currently detained at the 
Central Prison of Kerman. While in detention, she has been informed that she was 
accused of “insulting the Supreme leader”, “propaganda against the regime”, and 
“acting against national security”, whereas she has no political or human 
rights-related activities. The Observatory believes that her arrest and 
detention are related to the human rights activities of her 
son.
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi was previously arrested in December 2009[1] and subsequently sentenced to one year in prison[2], on charges among others, of “propaganda activity against the regime 
through effective collaboration with the Committee of Human Rights Reporters 
website”, “collection and publishing of biased news against the regime and 
transfer of this information to terrorist organisations based abroad” as well as 
“interview with foreign media and publishing articles in websites,” pursuant to 
Iranian Criminal Code. He served the sentence and was released on 14 December 
2010. 
 
On July 25, 2011, Mr. Ali Kalaei received a summon order which gave him three days to appear before 
the Executive Branch of Evin Prison, to serve his seven-year imprisonment sentence. He was sentenced in 
December 2010 on charges of “propaganda against the system”, “publishing false 
reports about prisoners”, “giving interviews”, “assembly and collusion with 
intent to commit crimes through membership of the CHRR”. Mr. Kalaei was previously detained on three occasions, in December 
2007, February 2010, and May 2010[3]. No information could be obtained since then as to his situation. 

 
On July 31, 2011, Mr. Ahmad Ghabel was taken to Vakilabad prison to serve a twenty-month sentence, on charges of “offending the 
Leader of the Revolution” and “propaganda against the system” pursuant to 
Articles 6 and 9 of the Press Law, which the Appeals Court in Mashhad later 
upheld. He was previously detained on three occasions. He first spent 125 days 
in solitary confinement in 2001, he was then arrested on December 20, 2009 and 
released on bail on June 11, 2010, and after disclosing that mass executions had 
taken place in Vakilabad Prison of Mashhad, he was detained for the third time 
on September 14, 2010 and released on bail on December 26, 
2010.
 
On July 31, 2011, Mr. Saeed Jalalifar was arrested and transferred to 
the Evin prison. He was informed by the judge of the Islamic Revolution Court 
that he would remain in detention until a date is scheduled for his trial. Mr. 
Jalalifar was first arrested on November 30, 2009 for “engaging in propaganda 
activities against the regime” and released on bail on March 16, 2010. His new 
arrest is related to the same case.
 
In addition, Mr. Kayvan Samimi Behbahani, former member of the 
Association for the Defence of Press Freedoms, a member of the National Council 
for Peace, member of the Committee for Investigation of Arbitrary Detentions and 
member of the Committee for the Defence of the Right to Education, remains 
detained at Rajaieshahr prison. Although he is suffering from a risky liver 
ailment, prison authorities are refusing to take him to hospital. He was 
arrested after the presidential election in 2009 and sentenced to six years' 
imprisonment and 15 years ban on political, social and cultural activities. He 
had also been a political prisoner under the former regime prior to the Islamic 
revolution.
 
The Observatory also deplores the ongoing judicial harassment against 
Ms. Shiva Nazarahi[4]. Ms. Nazarahi was sentenced on September 18, 2010, following her 
arrest by the Ministry of Intelligence on June 14, 2009, and her subsequent 
arbitrary detention, including three months in solitary confinement, to six 
years in prison and 76 whiplashes, on charges of "attempts to deface the Islamic 
Government", "disturbing the public peace of mind" and "waging war against God". 
On January 8, 2011, Branch 36 of Tehran Appeals Courts sentenced Ms. Shiva 
Nazarahari to 4 years imprisonment to be spent in internal exile away from her 
home. As to date, she remains free on bail, but she stands a risk of arrest any 
time. 
 
The Observatory strongly condemns these arbitrary arrests, detentions 
and acts of judicial harassment, which merely seem to aim at sanctioning the peaceful and legitimate 
activities of these human rights defenders, amid the continuing repression of the 
Iranian civil society.
 
The Observatory urges the Iranian authorities to put an end to these 
acts of harassment against human rights defenders, to immediately disclose the 
whereabouts of Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi, to immediately and unconditionally release those presently detained in the country, and more generally 
to conform to the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights instruments 
ratified by Iran. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Iranian authorities and ask them 
to:
 
i.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Ms. Shiva Nazarahari, Ms. Parvin Mokhtar’e and Messrs. Kouhyar Goudarzi, Ali Kalaei, Saeed Jalalifar, Ahmad 
Ghabel, Kayvan Samimi Behbahani as well as all human rights defenders and 
their families in Iran;
 
ii.     Immediately and unconditionally disclose the whereabouts of Mr. 
Kouhyar Goudarzi and ensure his access to his lawyers and 
families;
 
iii.    Release Messrs. Kouhyar Goudarzi, Ali Kalaei, Saeed Jalalifar, Ahmad 
Ghabel and. Kayvan Samimi Behbahani immediately and unconditionally as their 
detention only aims at sanctioning their human rights 
activities;
 
iv.    Release Ms. Parvin Mokhtar’e immediately and unconditionally as her 
detention seems to be related to the human rights activities of her 
son;
 
v.     Put an end to any kind of harassment – including at the judicial 
level – against Ms. Shiva Nazarahari, Ms. Parvin Mokhtar’e and Messrs. Kouhyar Goudarzi, Ali Kalaei, Saeed Jalalifar, Ahmad 
Ghabel, Kayvan Samimi Behbahani and more generally against all human rights 
defenders in Iran.
 
vi.    Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations 
General Assembly, in particular:
-                                  
its article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and 
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels”;
-                                  
its article 5.b, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, 
at the national and international levels, (…) to form, join and participate in 
non-governmental organizations, associations or groups”;
-                                  
its article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a 
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the 
present Declaration”; 
    
vii.  Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:
 
·   Leader of the Islamic Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali 
Khamenei, The Office of the Supreme Leader, Shahid Keshvardoost St., Jomhuri 
Eslami Ave., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, E-Mail: info_leader@leader.ir, 
Faxes: + 98 21 649, + 98 21 649 / 21 774 2228, info_leader@leader.ir
·   President Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, 
Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 649 
5880.
·   Head of the Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, 
Ministry of Justice, c/o Public relations Office, Number 4, 2 Azizi Street, Vali 
Asr Ave., above Pasteur Street intersection, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: bia.judi@yahoo.com / info@dadgostary-tehran.ir 
·   Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh 
Abdolmajid Keshk-e Mesri Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: 
+98-21-66743149 
·   Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Chemin du 
Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: 
mission.iran@ties.itu.int
·   Embassy of Iran in Brussels, 15 a avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 
Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Iran in your 
respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, August 19, 2011
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the 
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in 
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency 
line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 
80
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29



[1] See Press Releases of the Observatory, January 5 and August 4, 
2010.

[2] Mr. Goudarzi was released on December 14, 2010, after he served his 
entire prison sentence in the Rejaishar Prison well outside the city of Karaj. While in detention, Mr. Goudarzi was awarded the 2010 John 
Aubuchon Press Freedom Award by the US National Press 
Club.

[3] Mr. Ali Kalaei was detained 57 days starting on December 4, 2007, 
following his sentencing to one year in prison and his subsequent suspension of 
sentence. On February 7, 2010, he was sentenced and detained once again, before 
he was released on bail. Finally for the third time on May 12, 2010, he spent 
two months in detention in the detention centre of the Intelligence Ministry. 


[4] See Urgent Appeal of The Observatory IRN 007/0910/OBS111.1, January 11, 2011. 