China:  China : secret trial of Mr. Zheng Enchong
August 22, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2003 / AugustChina: China : secret trial of Mr. Zheng EnchongURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  CHN 001 / 0803 / OBS 041 Arbitrary detention / Judicial proceedings China August 22nd 2003  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint  program of FIDH and OMCT, requests your URGENT intervention in the  following situation in China.  Brief description of the situation :  The Observatory has been informed by the non-governmental  organization Human Rights in China (HRIC), that a formal public  prosecution was opened against Mr. Zheng Enchong, a Shanghai lawyer  involved in the defence of economic and social rights of displaced  persons, on charges of illegally obtaining state secrets.  According to the information received, Mr. Zheng Enchong was arrested  on June 6 after assisting displaced families in more than 500 cases  relating to Shanghai's urban redevelopment projects. He is currently  detained at the Shanghai Public Security Bureau Detention Center. His  first family visit was allowed on 20th August only. His house was  searched at least twice; during the searches, Public Security police  warned his wife, Mrs Jiang Meili, not to speak to the foreign media  or other parties outside of China.   According to the information received, Mr. Zheng's license was  revoked in 2001 in relation to cases he was handling for people  displaced by urban redevelopment. In spite of Mr. Zheng's deprivation  to practice law and increasing official persecution, he has continued  to provide legal advice to people, even though he could not represent  them in court.  Most recently Mr. Zheng was advising families involved in a lawsuit  alleging corrupt collusion between officials and a wealthy property  developer, Mr. Zhou Zhengyi. Although the authorities have not  provided details regarding the reasons for Zheng's arrest, Mr.  Zheng's June 3 arrest may be directly related to the Zhou Zhengyi  case.  Mr. Enchong's case has raised considerable attention and concern  overseas and also within China's legal community. The Observatory is  gravely concerned about the detention and the lawsuit against Mr.  Zheng Enchong, recalling that charges for illegally obtaining state  secret can result in heavy prison sentences. The Observatory  considers that Mr. Enzhong's detention is arbitrary since it clearly  aims at preventing him from continuing to defend economic and social  rights and fight against State corruption.  The Observatory recalls that these acts of reprisal are a flagrant  violation of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, which  states in its article 9.3.c that "In the exercise of human rights and  fundamental freedoms, […], everyone has the right, individually and  in association with others, to offer and provide professionally  qualified assistance in defending human rights and fundamental  freedoms". They also contravene the United Nations Basic principles  of the Role of Lawyers which state that "Governments shall ensure  that lawyers (a) are able to  perform all of their professional  functions without intimidation, hindrance, harassment or improper  interference" (article 16).  Action requested :  Please write to the authorities of China urging them to :  i.	Guarantee in all circumstances Mr. Zheng Enchong's his physical  and psychological integrity; ii.	Drop the charges against Mr. Enchong since they are arbitrary and  release him immediately;  iii.	Ensure that Mr. Enchong be immediately given back his license; iv.	Put an end to any form of harassment against lawyers and human  rights defenders in China; v.	Conform to the provisions of the Declaration on Humans Rights  Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on  December 9, 1998, in  particular article 1, which states that "everyone has the right,  individually or in association with others, to promote the protection  and realization of human rights and  fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels" and  9.3.c above mentioned; vi.	Conform with the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers; vii.	Conform to the provisions of the Universal Declaration on Human  Rights and international human rights standards;  Addresses :  President Jiang Zemin, People's Republic of China; C/o Embassy of the  People's Republic of China; 2300 Connecticut Ave., NW, Washington,  D.C., 20008: Fax: + 01 202  588-0032  President Jiang Zemin, People's Republic of China; c/o Permanent  Mission of the People's Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11,  Case postale 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2,  Geneva, Switzerland, fax: +4122 7937014, e-mail:  mission.china@ties.itu.int  Paris - Geneva, 22 August 2003  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the  code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the  protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete  support in their time of need.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 