Philippines:  Alleged extrajudicial killing of a former rebel
January 24, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2008 / JanuaryPhilippines: Alleged extrajudicial killing of a former rebelCase PHL 240108 Alleged extrajudicial killing  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Philippines. Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture network, of the alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Ronald Sendrijas, a 37 years old resident of San Jose, Inabanga town in Bohol, on 17 January 2008 in Tagbilaran City. According to the information received, on 17 January 2008 at around 9:15 p.m., Mr. Ronald Sendrijas went out to buy medicines at the pharmacy situated in front of the Ramiro Hospital in Tagbilaran City where his sister was reportedly hospitalized. Suddenly a man, reportedly wearing a white jacket and shirts, approached and shot him point blank. Mr. Ronald Sendrijas reportedly sustained two gunshot wounds in the nape and neck causing his instantaneous death. No one was reportedly able to identify the assailant. According to the same information received, Mr. Ronald Sendrijas had been arrested and detained on 26 May 2004 in Barangay Gutlang, Argao town in Cebu, in connection with several killings reportedly perpetrated by the New People’s Army (NPA). The cases lodged against him included a raid of a police detachment in Sta. Fe, Danao town in Bohol, during which two policemen were killed and the camp commander wounded. Mr. Ronald Sendrijas was arrested along with Mr. Jigger Geverola, who remains detained at the Cebu Provincial Detention and Rehabilitation Center (CPDRC) in Barangay Kalunasan, Cebu City, and charged with crimes of arson, robbery with serious physical injury, and rebellion at the Branch 18, Regional Trial Court, Cebu City.  Mr. Ronald Sendrijas was reportedly released in July 2006 after he had posted bail. He then went home to Inabanga and reportedly announced to his family and friends his intention to no longer return in the underground movement and to live peacefully in the community. Tagbilaran City Police Chief Jacinto Cesar has reportedly even confirmed in an interview immediately after the incident, that the victim told him he no longer wanted to return to the rebel movement. At the time of his death, Mr. Ronald Sendrijas was reportedly working as a barangay (small community) secretary in San Jose, Inabanga. However, according to the same information, prior to his death, the military had reportedly tagged Mr. Ronald Sendrijas as the Front 2 Secretary of the Central Visayas Regional Party Committee of the Communist Party of the Philippines. Relatives of Mr. Ronald Sendrijas also reported that he had been receiving death threats. They did not mention the sources of the death threats except saying that they were “political in nature.” The family of Mr. Ronald Sendrijas reportedly sought help from the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) to speed up the identification of the killers and bring to justice whoever perpetrated the killing. The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the alleged extra-judicial killing of Mr. Ronald Sendrijas. OMCT calls on the authorities to order a prompt, thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of this extra-judicial killing, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.  Action requested Please right to the authorities in the Philippines urging them to:   Order a prompt, thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the alleged extra-judicial killing of Mr. Ronald Sendrijas in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  Guarantee that adequate reparation is granted to the victim’s family;   Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President, Republic of the Philippines New Executive Bldg. Malacañang Palace Compound J. P. Laurel St. San Miguel, Manila, Philippines E-mail: opnet@ops.gov.ph, kgma@yahoogroups.com Fax: (+63) 2 929 3968 The National Defense Secretary Rm. 301 DND Bldg. Camp Aguinaldo, EDSA, 1110 Quezon CityPhilippines, E-mail: snd@dnd.gov.ph/osnd@philonline.com, Fax: +63 2724 8763 PNP Chief Jacinto Cesar, City Police Chief, PNP HQ, Tagbilaran City Gen. Hermogenes Esperon, Jr, Armed Forces Chief of Staff, AFP GHQ, Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Edsa, Quezon City Gen. Oscar Calderon, PNP Chief, Camp Crame, Edsa, Quezon City, Fax No. 063 2 724 8763, Tel: +63 2911 6213 Hon. Dr. Purificacion Quisumbing, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC Building, Commonwealth Ave., UP Complex, Quezon City, Email address: drpvq@chr.gov.ph Bienvinido C. Blancaflor, Director, Fact-finding Investigation, Corruption, Prevention and Public Assistance Bureau, Office of the Deputy Ombudsman for the Military and Other Law Enforcement Offices, 3rd Flr. Ombudsman Bldg, Agham Rd Diliman (1104) Quezon City Tel. +632 926 9032 Office of the Presidential Adviser on Peace Process (OPAPP), Hon. Jesus Dureza, 10th Flr, Agustin 1 Bldg, Emerald Avenue, Ortigas Center Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the United Nations in Geneva, 47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19 32, Email: mission.philippines@ties.itu.int Embassy of the Philippines in Brussels, 297 Avenue Moliere, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Tel: +32 2 340 33 77 / 2 340 33 78, Fax: +32 2 345 64 25.  Please also write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country. Geneva, 24 January 2008. Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 