The Observatory: Contribution to the 51st ordinary session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
April 27, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2012 / AprilThe Observatory: Contribution to the 51st ordinary session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
 
AFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN AND PEOPLES' 
RIGHTS
 
51st ordinary session
 
Banjul, The Gambia
 
April 18 - May 2, 2012
 
Contribution of
the International Federation for Human Rights 
(FIDH)
and the World Organisation Against Torture 
(OMCT)
 
Within the framework of their joint 
programme,
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights 
Defenders
 
Under agenda item:
“Situation of human rights defenders” The International 
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against 
Torture (OMCT), in the framework of their joint programme, the 
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, express their 
deep concern regarding the measures of harassment and reprisals faced by
 human rights defenders in Africa because of their peaceful activities 
of promotion and protection of human rights.Over the past six months, the Observatory has continued to observe 
that political and judicial contexts surrounding human rights defenders’
 activities have remained particularly hostile and have often been used 
by authorities as pretexts to adopt repressive measures: electoral 
contexts, armed conflicts, movements of social protest marred by serious
 human rights violations and acts of repression targeting human rights 
defenders, repressive laws, etc.

In addition, far from recognising human rights defenders as the main
 actors for change and as the guarantors of a free society, governments 
continue to control every activity of the civil society and human rights
 defenders, multiplying hindrances or judicial proceedings against their
 legitimate activities. Therefore, several human rights defenders in 
Africa continue to face a number of obstacles at legislative, judicial, 
or administrative levels, in order to sanction their human rights 
activities.

Human rights defenders are also subjected to assaults, harassment or
 various forms of threats. While they are often targeted by non-State 
actors, acts of violence against them are quite often tolerated, 
encouraged or even directly perpetrated by State agents, in particular 
by security forces supposed to protect them. The continued impunity 
prevailing for authors of human rights violations in several countries 
of Sub-Saharan Africa has contributed to fuel the cycle of violence 
faced by human rights defenders.

Violations targeting either their physical or psychological 
integrity (disappearances, assassinations, threats, assaults, 
defamation) or their freedoms (arrests, arbitrary detention) are 
perpetrated in blatant violation of international human rights 
standards. Moreover, certain categories of human rights defenders, 
because of the nature of the rights they stand for, are privileged 
targets of repression.

The Observatory also wishes to recall that the cooperation between 
national and international organisations is the cornerstone of the 
international human rights protection system. On March 15, 2012, the 
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights 
Defenders, along with the Rapporteurs of the African Commission on Human
 and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) and of the Inter-American Commission on 
Human Rights (IACHR), urged all States, through a joint statement, to 
put an end to any kind of threats or acts of harassment against 
individuals or organisations involved in a direct dialogue with these 
institutions.

Criminalisation of the defence of human rights

In some countries of the continent, the judicial system is utilised,
 manipulated by the authorities to sanction human rights defenders 
activities. Such criminalisation usually takes the form of arbitrary 
judicial proceedings, which sometimes lead to abusive sentences. 
Besides, a legislative framework criminalising human rights defenders’ 
activities continues to be in force, or develops. Judicial proceedings 
faced by human rights defenders sometimes last several years, thus 
affecting their determination to successfully fulfil their activities. 
The nature of such phenomena is very concerning as these institutional 
and legalised attacks blatantly violate the most basic international 
human rights protection standards.

a) Criminalisation of human rights defenders fighting against impunity

On the African continent, human rights defenders fighting against 
impunity and denouncing violations, including the most serious 
international crimes, are targeted by attempts to criminalise their 
actions. Such criminalisation is generally triggered by a deficient, 
sometimes corrupted, judicial system.

In Algeria, Mr. Mohamed Smain is at risk of imminent arrest to serve
 his two-month imprisonment sentence after having been subjected to a 
continued judicial harassment for more than ten years. In 2001, Mr. 
Smain had alerted the Algerian media about the discovery and the 
exhumation of mass graves by the services of the gendarmerie and by 
members of the militia of Mr. Hadj Fergane, the former mayor of 
Relizane. This is more generally because of the activities of Mr. Smaïn 
in Oran and Relizane in favour of the families of disappeared persons 
and because of his activities for truth regarding the violations 
committed in Algeria, especially during the civil conflict which ravaged
 the country in the 1990s, that the latter has been targeted by the 
political and judicial authorities. Already convicted in first instance 
and in appeal, the Supreme Court of Algiers, through a decision issued 
on October 27, 2011, found Mr. Smain guilty under charges of “calumnious
 denunciation” and “denunciation of imaginary crimes” and sentenced him 
to two months’ imprisonment, to a fine of 50,000 Algerian dinars (about 
510 Euros) and to 10,000 Algerian dinars in damages for each of the 
plaintiffs. Late February 2012, on the basis of this decision, police 
services were ordered to arrest Mr. Smain by the Prosecutor General of 
Relizane.

During the period covered, several human rights defenders were also 
subjected to arbitrary detentions and unfair judicial proceedings, but 
were however able to be released, acquitted or discharged, sometimes 
following an independent judicial process.

For instance, in Chad, on December 30, 2011, Mr. Daniel Deuzombé 
Passalet, President of the human rights organisation “Human Rights 
Without Borders” (Droits de l’Homme sans frontières - DHSF), was found 
not guilty, as he benefited from a “reasonable doubt”, following an 
11-day pre-trial detention. These proceedings followed his statement 
made on December 18, 2011 on Radio France Internationale (RFI) about the
 abduction of the wife of the late village head of Mataléré. Through the
 interview, Mr. Passalet had denounced the obstruction of the 
investigation into the assassination of this village head in September 
2011, and the fact that the widow of the latter would have been 
kidnapped by security forces to prevent her from withdrawing a complaint
 for “false accusation”, which she had lodged against a political 
opposition leader and parliamentary representative, Mr. Saleh Kebzabo, 
regarding her husband’s assassination. The Prosecutor had decided to sue
 him for “calumnious denunciations”. Although the discharge of Mr. 
Passalet must be welcomed, it illustrates the judicial harassment faced 
by human rights defenders when their public statements do not please 
representatives of local or national political authorities.

In Egypt, bloggers Alaa Abdel-Fatah and Bahaa Saber were arrested on
 October 30, 2011, after they denounced the violent repression of a 
protest in Cairo which had led to the death of 27 persons, and were 
accused of “instigating violence against the armed forces” and “assault 
against military agents”. Although Mr. Saber was released on the same 
day of their arrest, Mr. Abdel-Fatah remained detained until December 
25, 2011. Similarly, it is only on January 21, 2012 that blogger Maikel 
Nabil was released following an amnesty issued by the Supreme Council of
 the Armed Forces on the first anniversary of Egyptian Revolution. The 
latter had been arrested on March 28, 2011 for allegedly “insulting the 
army” and “disseminating false information” after he had denounced human
 rights violations which had occurred during the Egyptian Revolution, 
and had then been sentenced on April 10, 2011 to two years’ 
imprisonment.

In Guinea, five members of the organisation “Same Rights For 
Everyone” (Mêmes droits pour tous - MDT), focusing on detainees’ rights,
 were placed in custody and released on November 3, 2011. Those arrested
 were Mr. Foromo Frédéric Loua, President, Mr. Tossa Montcho, 
Coordinator, Mr. Pierre Camara, Programme Supervisor, Mr. Boniface Loua 
and Ms. Fatouma Bangoura, protection assistants. All of them had gone to
 the central police station of Conakry to accompany the release, ordered
 on November 2 by the Attorney General before the Appeal Court, of two 
individuals detained without judgement since 2001 and 2005. While in 
detention throughout the afternoon and evening, they were lengthily 
questioned regarding cases they had been raising and about MDT 
activities. Following their arbitrary detention, the five defenders 
lodged a complaint. On November 30, 2011, the Tribunal of First Instance
 of Conakry found the governor of the capital, Commander Sekou Resco 
Camara, guilty of unlawful intrusion into judicial proceedings and 
sentenced him to a fine of one million Guinean Francs (108 Euros) in 
favour of the MDT President, and to one fine of one symbolic Franc in 
favour of the other members. The Observatory welcomes this judicial 
decision which, in spite its mainly symbolic character, marks a first 
positive step for an enhanced protection of human rights defenders 
against hindrances, threats or intimidations they meet in the exercise 
of their functions, and more generally for the independence of the 
Guinean judiciary. Nevertheless, the Observatory deplores the threats 
faced by MDT and the environment surrounding the hearings. Indeed, the 
trial court was systematically invaded by supporters of the governor, 
including several policemen both in plain-clothes and uniforms. The 
latter continuously showed their support to the governor through noisy 
interventions and repeated acclamations during his declarations. 
Furthermore, MDT members and their lawyers were subjected to several 
verbal threats and physical intimidations. They were blamed by policemen
 for being “villains not deserving to live” and these policemen promised
 that the “last word” would be theirs. Some of the police officers also 
declared that, now that they knew Messrs. Frédéric Loua and Tossa 
Montcho, “they would show them how the country is governed”. 
Furthermore, at the end of the trial hearing on November 23, 2011, an 
important group of policemen and military agents, surrounding the 
governor’s vehicle, headed to the building where the MDT offices are 
located, yielding “Enemies: zero! NGO: zero!” while they were pointing 
at the floor occupied by MDT.

In Zimbabwe, Mr. Joel Hita, Regional Director of the Zimbabwe Human 
Rights Association (ZimRights) in Mavingo, was acquitted on January 23, 
2012 by Judge Mwanisa of Masvingo jurisdiction, after little less than 
two years of judicial harassment. He had indeed been prosecuted since 
April 26, 2010, after he had organised an exhibit in the framework of a 
programme to foster thought about the 2008 political violence, in breach
 of the Public Order and Security Act (POSA).

Independent journalists who publish information addressing human 
rights violations or denounce them in line with the very nature of their
 profession are also subjected to attempts to silence them, in order to 
prevent them from freely denouncing the exactions committed by State 
authorities.

Thus, in Burundi, on November 14, 2011, Messrs. Bob Rugurika and 
Bonfils Niyongere, journalists for the Radio publique africaine (RPA), 
spent the whole day in the Public Prosecutor’s Office of Bujumbura, 
before being released after approximately twelve hours of questioning. 
This incident would be directly related to the broadcast by RPA of 
information about the Gatumba slaughter, which resulted in 39 people 
dead and to 40 wounded, on September 18, 2011, in the city of Mutumbuzi.
 The day before, the Editor-in-chief of Isanganiro radio, Mr. Patrick 
Mitabaro, had also been summoned. On November 8, Messrs. Bob Rugurika 
and Patrick Nduwimana, Editor-in-chief of Bonesha FM, had to present 
themselves before Bujumbura Public Prosecutor. The Prosecutor blamed the
 radios for having disclosed some information on the Gatumba slaughter, 
including the testimony of the main suspect, Mr. Innocent Ngendakuriyo 
alias Nzarabu, gathered by phone from Bubanza prison. Those elements 
would have been disclosed despite the governmental statement of 
September 21 which bans the media from making any commentary on the 
investigation, and in a context where the investigation report had not 
yet been published. On November 10, three private radio directors were 
summoned: Messrs. Patrick Nduwimana, Eric Manirakiza, RPA Director, and 
Vincent Nkeshimana, Isanganiro Director, were asked to provide the 
Prosecutor with documents about their statutes, their internal rules of 
procedure and the proofs of funding of their radios. They all refused to
 comply with the Prosecution’s request, which had failed to give any 
justification to both this summon and request. Furthermore, 
intimidations aiming at impeding the journalists from exercising their 
profession freely sometimes come from the highest governmental 
authorities. On November 16, 2011, the Minister of Communication, Ms. 
Concilie Nibigira, stated, in a letter referring to the investigations 
into the Gatumba slaughter, that any person who disclose, in the media 
or by other means, elements on a case which is still at a pre-trial 
investigation stage exposes him/herself to prosecution as set out by 
Article 11 of the Law of November 27, 2003 regulating the press in 
Burundi (addressing the exceptions to the freedom of dissemination and 
publication of documents). The Minister ended her letter by urging the 
media to avoid escalation, otherwise they would have “to assume 
consequences in compliance with relevant provisions of the Criminal 
Code”.

b) Criminalisation of human rights defenders who exercise their right to freedom of peaceful assembly

In several countries, meetings and gatherings organised by human 
rights defenders are used as pretexts to hinder their actions. In this 
framework, women defenders are particularly exposed to gender specific 
violence. Protest actions related to democratic reforms, to free and 
transparent elections, to economic and social claims, including an 
increased respect of workers’ rights, are often met with repression in 
spite of their peaceful character. Human rights defenders, NGO members, 
trade unionists, journalists, students’ union leaders, can therefore be 
particularly targeted because of their participation in, or their 
monitoring of, the good conduct of these gatherings. Thus, over the 
period covered, several human rights defenders were prosecuted on 
charges of “disturbing public order” or “participation in an 
insurrectional movement”.

In Djibouti, members of the Djiboutian League for Human Rights 
(Ligue djiboutienne des droits humains - LDDH) are subjected to constant
 harassment when a protest is organised by the population or in relation
 to past demonstrations. Thus, on February 1, 2012, Mr. Farah Abadid 
Heldid, LDDH member and journalist for La Voix de Djibouti, was arrested
 by agents of the Section of Research and Documentation (Section de 
recherches et de documentation - SRD). He was released on a waste land 
the following day, after having been subjected to particularly degrading
 treatments (torture, forced nudity...) and threatened with death in the
 course of his detention because of his activities as a human rights 
activist. He had already been arrested on February 5, 2011, following a 
protest organised on the same day by both university and high school 
students to denounce the education policy carried out by the government,
 before being released on bail on June 23, 2011. As of April 13, 2012, 
Mr. Jean-Paul Noël Abdi, President of LDDH, remained prosecuted on 
charges of “participation in an insurrectional movement” under Articles 
145 and 146.4 of the Criminal Code, which set out maximum sentences of 
15 years’ criminal imprisonment and a fine of 7,000,000 Djiboutian 
Francs (approximately 27 222 Euros). Similar charges are still pending 
against Mr. Abadid Heldid. These accusations are related to the 
above-mentioned protest of February 5, 2011.

In Cameroon, seven trade unionists were subjected to an almost 
one-year-and-a-half-long judicial harassment in relation to a sit-in. 
Thus, Mr. Jean-Marc Bikoko, President of the Public Sector Central Trade
 Union (Centrale syndicale du secteur public - CSP), Mr. Maurice Angelo 
Phouet Foe, Secretary General of the Autonomous National Education and 
Training Union (Syndicat national autonome de l’éducation et de la 
formation - SNAEF), Mr. Théodore Mbassi Ondoa, Executive Secretary of 
the Cameroon Federation of Education Unions (Fédération camerounaise des
 syndicats de l’éducation - FECASE), Mr. Joseph Ze, Secretary General of
 the Unitary National Union of Teachers and Professors (Syndicat 
national unitaire des instituteurs et professeurs des écoles normales - 
SNUIPEN), Mr. Eric Nla’a, CSP accountant, and Messrs. Nkili Effoa and 
Claude Charles Felein, SNUIPEN members, were prosecuted under charges of
 “organisation of an unlawful demonstration” and “disturbing public 
order”. These proceedings followed their arrest on November 11, 2010, 
during a sit-in called for by CSP in front of the Prime Minister’s 
offices, in Yaoundé, in order to deliver to the Prime Minister, Mr. 
Philémon Yang, a memorandum made by public services workers for the 
attention of the Head of State, Mr. Paul Biya, addressing the necessary 
improvement of working conditions in Cameroon. The CSP had notified the 
authorities its intention to organise a protest, as provided by Article 6
 of Law n°990/055 on the Regime of Gatherings and Protests. On November 
8, 2010, the Deputy Prefect of the district of Yaounde III had issued a 
letter banning the activists from protesting, arguing that “public 
demonstrations with a vindictive and/or protesting character are and 
shall remain prohibited in the District of Mfoundi”. However, according 
to Article 8 of this very same law, a protest can only be prohibited by a
 by-law issued by the prefect, as a deputy prefect does not enjoy the 
legal capacity to do it. The Observatory welcomes the judgement of the 
Court First Instance of Yaoundé issued on March 5, 2012, which acquitted
 all seven trade unionists.

In Algeria, in spite of the lift of the state of emergency, trade 
unionists continue to be targeted by an intense repression aiming at 
limiting their freedoms of expression and assembly. On February 26, 
2012, 40 members of the National Workers’ Committee of Pre-Employment 
and Social Net (Comité national des travailleurs du pré-emploi et filet 
social), affiliated to the National Autonomous Union of Public Servants 
(Syndicat national autonome des personnels de l’administration publique -
 SNAPAP) were thus arbitrarily arrested during a demonstration staged in
 front of the Maison de la Presse in Algiers. Among them were Ms. Malika
 Fallil, Chair of the National Workers’ Committee of Pre-Employment and 
Social Net, and Mr. Tahar Belabès, Spokesperson of the National 
Coordination for the Defence of the Rights of the Unemployed 
(Coordination nationale de défense des droits des chômeurs - CNDDC). 
They were released a few hours later. This kind of arrests has become 
recurrent in Algeria where trade unionists are subjected to an almost 
permanent police and judicial pressure. Both Ms. Fallil and Mr. Belabès 
had already been arrested on February 22 at a gathering that took place 
in front of the Palais des Expositions in Algiers, where they had 
attempted to question the Minister of Labour and the representative of 
the President of the Republic, Mr. Belkhadem Abdelaziz, about the rights
 of unemployed and casual workers. Both had already been subjected to a 
number of similar arrests in 2011, together with other union activists. 
Moreover, Mr. Hadj Aïssa Abbas and Mr. Mohamed Bouamer, representatives 
of the CNDDC branch in Laghouat, 400 km south of Algiers, were sentenced
 on January 18, 2012 in first instance to one year in jail for 
“gathering in a public place”, after having taken part in a peaceful 
gathering in favour of the rights of unemployed workers in August 2011 
in Laghouat. The decision was issued by the Tribunal of Laghouat in 
absence of the accused, who had received no summons and who lodged an 
appeal. Such harsh sentences send a clear and disturbing message to 
union leaders and human rights defenders calling for the recognition of 
the right to decent living and working conditions.

In Senegal, Mr. Alioune Tine, Coordinator of the June 23 Movement 
(Mouvement des forces vives de la nation du 23 juin - M23) and President
 of the African Assembly for the Defence of Human Rights (Rencontre 
africaine pour la défense des droits de l’Homme - RADDHO), was arrested 
on January 28, 2012, in reaction to the organisation of a protest 
denouncing the announcement of the candidacy of the outgoing President 
for a third mandate. At the margin of these protests, a police auxiliary
 had been killed. Mr. Alioune Tine was eventually released on January 
31, 2012, without charges.

In Zimbabwe, members of Women and Men for Zimbabwe Arise (WOZA), an 
organisation involved in the defence of women’s rights and freedoms in 
Zimbabwe, have been constantly harassed at judicial and police levels. 
On January 19, 2012, 17 WOZA members, including 16 women, were arrested 
and molested by police officers in Bulawayo. The police officers even 
threatened the activists to “remove their panties and beat their 
bottoms”. On February 7, 2012, ten members of the association, including
 Ms. Jennifer Williams, National Coordinator, were arrested while they 
were participating in a peaceful demonstration in Bulawayo to 
commemorate the 10th anniversary of the association. Initially detained 
for having organised the demonstration without prior notification of the
 authorities (Section 25 of the POSA), they were eventually charged with
 "criminal nuisance" under Section 46 of the Criminal Law (Codification 
and Reform) Act. All were then released on bail pending trial, and 
denounced the acts of physical violence they sustained while in custody.
 The lawyers decided to apply to the Supreme Court for review, and the 
decision should be issued on April 27, 2012. Besides, two WOZA members, 
Ms. Jennifer Williams and Ms. Magodonga Mahlangu, have been prosecuted 
since December 2011 for “kidnapping” and “theft” following a 
demonstration organised on September 21, 2011. Despite the lack of 
evidence and contradictions in the witness statements, the charges 
against them have never been dropped. The next hearing is to take place 
on April 26, 2012.

In Tanzania, sixteen human rights defenders were arrested on 
February 9, 2012 following an “unlawful assembly”. Those arrested 
included Dr. Helen Kijo Bisimba, Executive Director of the Legal and 
Human Rights Centre (LHRC), LHRC staff members, Mr. Marcus Albany, Ms. 
Anna Migila and lawyer Godfrey Mpandikizi, an intern from the Canadian 
Bar Association Ms. Erin Riley, the Executive Director of the Tanzania 
Media Women’s Association (TAMWA) Ms. Ananilea Nkya, the Executive 
Director of SIKIKA Mr. Irenei Kiria, as well as Ms. Anna Kikwa. All were
 arrested as they arrived at the National Hospital (MUHIMBILI), where 
the Prime Minister Mr. Mizengo Pinda was to address health staff in 
relation to a national strike organised by doctors. Although they were 
released on bail, as of April 12, 2012, the charges brought against them
 had however not been dropped, yet implying a permanent risk of arrest 
against them.

In Mauritania, Mr. Bakary Bathily, Secretary General of the National
 Trade Union of Mauritanian Students (Syndicat national des étudiants de
 Mauritanie), disappeared on February 2, 2012, when the authorities 
violently dispersed, through the use of truncheons and tear-gas, a sit 
in organised by several students in front of Nouakchott University to 
demand the improvement of their student conditions. Besides, thirteen 
students were arrested and questioned on Mr. Bakary Bathily’s 
whereabouts, although the latter did not participate in the sit-in, 
before being released without charges on February 9. As of April 16, 
2012, no information could be obtained concerning Mr. Bathily’s 
whereabouts.

c) Reprisals against human rights lawyers

In some countries, the activities of lawyers are hindered by the 
authorities. Indeed, whether they provide a legal assistance to 
defenders or support directly victims of human rights violations, they 
may be subjected to reprisals because of their professional activities.

For instance, in The Gambia, Mr. Lamin K. Mboge, a lawyer and former
 magistrate who has also been involved in the legal defence of two women
 human rights activists, was sentenced on February 21, 2012 for “making 
false documents without authority”, “false swearing” and “uttering false
 documents” to two years’ imprisonment and forced labour by the Tribunal
 of Banjul.

In Zimbabwe, Mr. Alec Muchadehama, a lawyer who represented several 
victims of abduction and torture, who had been acquitted on December 10,
 2009 following baseless charges pending against him since May 6, 2009, 
remains subjected to judicial harassment. He is accused of having 
impaired the reputation of a court and of justice by having permitted 
the release on bail of his clients. On February 15, 2012, the Supreme 
Court postponed sine die the decision to allow the Public Ministry 
represented by Attorney General Johannes Tomana to appeal the acquittal 
of December 10, 2009. The Attorney General argued that her late request 
to lodge an appeal was due to her family issues.

Freedom of association: a right to respect, protect and guarantee!

Aside from individual threats potentially affecting human rights 
defenders, the working structures they belong to are directly targeted 
by hindrances, and sometimes by legal repressive provisions, regarding 
in particular the exercise of freedom of association. This dissuasive 
legal framework leads to several restrictions at various levels:

 On
 the one hand, the pieces of legislation regulating the registration of 
civil society organisations may, while implemented, restrain both their 
autonomy and independence. Thus, rules regarding registration procedures
 for NGOs have sometimes been used to judicially harass these 
organisations or to deny the agreement to so-called disturbing 
organisations or trade unions.

In The Gambia, for instance, NGOs register on the basis of a 
two-tier system. First, they register as charities with the Attorney 
General’s Chambers under the Companies Act. This allows them to operate 
as legal entities, and also provides limited access to duty waivers. 
Then, they register as NGOs with the NGO Affairs Agency (NGOAA), which 
submits them to a Code of Conduct and to a Protocol signed with the 
authorities. Subsequently, in order to avoid reprisals from State 
authorities, NGOs choose to focus on issues which are deemed not 
sensitive and on which the government is making progress such as women 
and children’s rights. In this context no NGO can carry out any 
monitoring of human rights violations.

In Egypt, several organisations, though prominent ones, are still denied, without precise grounds, any official registration.

 On
 the other hand, the national legislative framework restraining NGOs 
funding resources, such as freezing of assets, was also used as a mean 
to negate the capacity of action of some NGOs.

In Ethiopia, for instance, since the Charities and Societies Act of 
2009, NGOs receiving more than 10 percent of their funding from foreign 
sources, even from Ethiopian living abroad, remain officially prohibited
 from exercising activities related, amongst others, to human rights and
 democracy. This is under these circumstances that, on October 24, 2011,
 the Federal High Court upheld the decision of the Charities and 
Societies Agency to freeze the assets of the Human Rights Council 
(HCRO). HCRO appealed this decision before the Supreme Court.

In Egypt, several raids were conducted in the offices of several 
national and international NGOs and questioned the staff of these NGOs 
about the enforcement of various financial restrictions in view of 
restraining the capacity of NGOs to fulfil their mission. Following 
these raids, 43 employees of American and German NGOs were summoned to 
court on February 26, 2012, upon accusations of having illegally opened 
offices in Egypt and having received funding from abroad. Beyond these 
foundations, NGOs themselves are targeted by these acts of intimidation,
 in order to clamp down on their activities.

In The Gambia, criminal laws are sometimes twisted to wrongly accuse
 human rights defenders and hinder the normal functioning of their 
associations. Thus, Dr. Isatou Touray and Ms. Amie Bojang-Sissoho, 
respectively Executive Director and Programme Coordinator of The Gambia 
Committee on Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and 
Children (GAMCOTRAP), an organisation working on sexual and reproductive
 health and rights of women and children, have been prosecuted for 
“theft” since November 2010, for the alleged embezzlement of 30,000 
Euros, an amount sent in 2009 by “Yolocamba Solidaridad”, a Spanish 
development NGO supporting local civil society groups. January 11, 2012 
marked the 41st hearing of this trial. Throughout the proceedings, the 
Prosecutor explicitly denounced the activities of GAMCOTRAP in terms of 
genital mutilation. As of April 16, 2012, hearings were ongoing, with 
the interrogation of Dr. Isatou Touray by the Prosecutor.

Repressive legislation specifically targeting defenders of the rights of sexual minorities

The defenders of the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender (LGBT) individuals, together with the persons they defend, 
have continued to face, in many sub-Saharan African countries, various 
forms of prejudice and intimidation. Laws or bills criminalising sexual 
minorities in many countries also hinder the work of defenders.

In Uganda, a law criminalising homosexuality was again submitted to 
Parliament on February 7, 2012. This text, if enacted, would reintroduce
 into the Ugandan Criminal Code the notion “crime of homosexuality”. The
 foreseen sentences would range from five years’ imprisonment for 
“promoting homosexuality” to the possibility of a life imprisonment 
sentence or even death penalty for “aggravated homosexuality”. This text
 directly targets the action of human rights defenders as it states that
 every NGO violating these provisions would see its official 
authorisation to act cancelled. One has to recall that homosexuality is 
already severely repressed by the existing Criminal Code as it provides 
life imprisonment for anyone accused of same-sex sexual relations. The 
draft law submitted to Parliament would contribute to expand and 
strengthen the repression in the form of arbitrary arrests, physical and
 psychological violence and an increased marginalisation of LGBT 
community members over the country. One has to recall that in 2011, Mr. 
David Kato, LGBT rights defender, was assassinated following the release
 of his name and picture in the Ugandan media.

Impunity and continuation of attacks suffered by human rights defenders

Aside from legislative and judicial threats against militant 
activities, human rights defenders are subjected to other forms of 
intimidation, outside of legal ways: threats, defamation campaigns, 
assaults and even assassinations. Moreover, the climate of impunity that
 prevails in several countries of the continent contributes to the 
reinforcement of the violence cycle.

a) Ongoing impunity for the assassination of several human rights defenders

On the continent, assassinations and other violations human rights 
defenders’ right to life and physical integrity remain an awful reality,
 all the more as they generally remain unpunished. The lack of 
independence of certain national judicial systems prevents victims and 
the human rights organisations that represent them from obtaining 
justice and breaking the cycle of violence, therefore encouraging the 
perpetuation of new acts of violence.

Thus, the full chain of criminal responsibility has not yet been established in the assassination:

 in
 the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), in 2010, of Messrs. Floribert 
Chebeya Bazire, President of Voice of the Voiceless (Voix des sans voix -
 VSV) and a member of OMCT General Assembly, and Fidèle Bazana, a member
 of VSV, as well as in 2005 of Mr. Pascal Kabungulu Kibembi, Executive 
Secretary of the NGO “Heirs of Justice” (Héritiers de la justice);

 in
 Burundi, in 2009, of Mr. Ernest Manirumva, Vice-President of the 
Anti-Corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory (Observatoire de 
lutte contre la corruption et les malversations économiques - OLUCOME);

 in Uganda, in January 2011, of Mr. David Kato, advocacy officer within the organisation Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG);

 in
 Kenya, in 2009, of Messrs. Oscar Kamau King’ara, a lawyer and Chief 
Executive Officer of the Oscar Foundation Free Legal Aid Clinic Kenya 
(OFFLACK), and John Paul Oulu, OFFLACK Communications and Advocacy 
Officer;

 in
 The Gambia, in 2004, of journalist Deyda Hydara, as well as in the 
enforced disappearance of journalist Ebrima Manneh since 2006.

b) Ongoing threats and violence against human rights defenders

During the period covered, new acts of violence were committed against human rights defenders.

Thus, in the DRC, Mr. Mbatswe Mushunju, a member of the “Legitimacy 
Core” (Noyau de légitimité) in Kibati, of the Research Centre on 
Environment, Democracy, and Human Rights (Centre de recherche sur 
l’environnement, la démocratie et les droits de l’Homme - CREDDHO) and 
customary head of the Kibati group, in North Kivu, was murdered on March
 15, 2012. Mr. Mushunju was denouncing and documenting various human 
rights violations committed, amongst others, by agents of the Armed 
forces of the DRC (Forces armées de RDC - FARDC) in a region bordering 
Rwanda. Threatened several times over 2011, he had already been abducted
 by FARDC members from December 15, 2011 to January 5, 2012.

Still in the DRC, Ms. Justine Masika Bihamba, Coordinator of the 
Women’s Synergy for Victims of Sexual Violence (Synergie des femmes pour
 les victimes des violences sexuelles - SFVS) and Vice President of the 
Civil Society of North Kivu (Société civile du Nord Kivu), was 
threatened on March 15, 2012. Those threats followed the interview she 
had given the day before to BBC radio, in which she had welcomed the 
International Criminal Court (ICC) ruling issued the very same day 
against Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, found guilty of war crimes for 
recruitment, enlistment, and use of child soldiers in Ituri. She had, on
 the same occasion, urged the ICC and the Congolese authorities to 
implement the warrants issued against the other alleged authors of grave
 crimes carried out in the Eastern DRC, in particular General Bosco 
Ntaganda. Following this interview, General Ntaganda and other FARDC 
colonels would have planned actions to “silence” her. In addition, on 
March 27, 2012, Ms. Masika Bihamba received an anonymous threatening 
message by phone, which stated the following: “Justine Masika, stop 
meddling in things that are none of your business”.

In Algeria, Mr. Noureddine Belmouhoub, Spokesperson of the Committee
 for the Defence of the Former Interned of Safety Camps (Comité de 
défense des ex-internés des camps de sûreté - CDICS), was abducted on 
October 23, 2011, in a street of Algiers, and held in an unknown 
location for three days by members of security services, before being 
released on October 26, 2011. During his detention, he was subjected to 
both insults and pressures from the persons who were maintaining him 
into custody, and who blamed him for having lodged a complaint in 2001 
against General Khaled Nezzar, former Minister of State Defence from 
1991 to 1993. These individuals also attempted to force him to sign a 
solemn statement that he would withdraw his complaint. As to date, the 
Algerian judiciary has not yet examined this complaint for torture.

In Tunisia, lawyer Najet Laabidi, member of the human rights 
organisation “Freedom and Equity” (Liberté et équité), who defends 
several torture victims in the framework of the so-called Baraket 
Essehel case, was violently told off on November 8, 2011 by relatives of
 Messrs. Abdallah Kallel, former Interior Minister, and Mohamed Ali 
Ganzouï, former Head of the National Security Services, who notably 
insulted her, and it is only under the protection of the military police
 that she was able to leave the tribunal. Previously, Ms. Laabidi had 
been informed that the families of those accused had contacted the 
plaintiffs to incite them to withdraw their complaints in the framework 
of the Baraket Essehel case.

Moreover, amid tensed electoral contexts, the authorities and press 
organs close to those in power often stigmatise the role played by human
 rights defenders, hence reinforcing their insecurity.

Thus, in a particular context of denunciation of electoral frauds in
 the DRC, human rights defenders were targeted by threats and public 
defamation campaigns aiming to reduce the legitimacy of their attempts 
to denounce the fraudulent political manipulations taking place in this 
context.

For instance, Mr. Zacharie Bababaswe, journalist for the Radio 
télévision nationale congolaise (RTNC) and candidate of the presidential
 majority to the legislative national election in Kinshasa, denied, in 
his show entitled “Vert Vert Toleka” on January 7, 2012, the title of 
human rights defender to Mr. Dismas Kitenge Senga, President of the 
Lotus Group (Groupe Lotus) and FIDH Vice President, and assimilated him 
to “political opponents who would be preparing a plot against the 
Government and the Congolese nation”. He added that “Dismas Kitenge, 
[the Lotus Group and FIDH] are obeying to obscure powers harmful to the 
interests of the DRC” and that Mr. Kitenge would be “leading a campaign 
to be granted asylum in the West”. This same journalist had, in December
 2011, directly targeted FIDH, by stating that “(...) The international 
community through FIDH has resolved to draw blood in the DRC, and would 
have given weapons to the population so that the latter attacks 
policemen dispatched all over Kinshasa City...” in the framework of an 
interview granted to RTNC in Kinshasa. During this show, he explicitly 
targeted Mr. Jean-Claude Katende, National President of the African 
Association for the Defence of Human Rights (Association Africaine de 
défense des droits de l’Homme - ASADHO), and Mr. Paul Nsapu, President 
of the League of Electors (Ligue des électeurs) and FIDH Secretary 
General, accusing them to be manipulated and to receive money from FIDH.

Besides, the residence of Mr. Dismas Kitenge Senga was burned down 
on January 5, 2012. A fire fighting vehicle arrived on the spot only 
three hours after the beginning of the arson, despite immediate alerts 
by family members and neighbours. Although no member of the family was 
injured, all the goods and the whole residence of the family were 
reduced to ashes. Furthermore, despite the complaint lodged by Mr. 
Kitenge, no investigation was diligently led regarding the causes of the
 arson. This incident took place little after public statements made by 
Mr. Kitenge to denounce certain electoral irregularities, the lack of 
independence of justice in electoral litigation, the lack of willingness
 of the Congolese authorities to fight impunity and to allow 
compensation to victims of serious human rights violations.

Recommendations:

1) In view of the persistence of human rights violations committed 
against human rights defenders in the States parties to the African 
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR), the Observatory calls on 
the States to implement the provisions of the Charter related to the 
protection of human rights defenders by committing to:

·                     Guarantee in all circumstances the physical 
and psychological integrity of all human rights defenders and their 
families in compliance with Article 4 of ACHPR which recognises the 
inviolability of the human person;

·                     Release human rights defenders arbitrarily 
detained and put an end to the judicial harassment against them in 
accordance with Article 6 of the ACHPR which prohibits every form of 
arbitrary arrest or detention and with Article 7 of the ACHPR regarding 
the right to an effective judicial remedy;

·                     Guarantee in all circumstances the free 
exercise of the rights of human rights defenders guaranteed by the ACHPR
 such as freedom of assembly (Article 8), freedom of association 
(Article 10), freedom of circulation (Article 12) and freedom of 
expression and opinion (Article 9);

·                     Commit to an effective fight against impunity 
of State or non-State actors responsible for violations of the rights of
 human rights defenders; guarantee, in particular that effective and 
impartial investigations be carried out by police and judicial 
authorities into assassinations and other violations against human 
rights defenders, in compliance with Articles 4 and 7 of ACHPR;

·                     Take all necessary measures to enhance the 
security of human rights defenders and their organisations, in 
accordance with the obligation to respect and protect human rights 
defenders, in conformity with Article 4 of ACHPR. This protection shall 
be guaranteed, in particular, by official agents trained and sensitised 
to the particular question of human rights;

·                     Establish national mechanisms for the 
protection of human rights defenders, in cooperation with human rights 
defenders and with the Special Rapporteur of the African Commission on 
Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders in 
Africa in compliance with Article 4 of ACHPR. Such mechanisms can take 
the form of the concerted implementation of a protection programme 
defined by law and accompanied by an enhanced sensitisation of State 
representatives and policemen about human rights;

·                     Recognise the essential role of human rights 
defenders in the implementation of the United Nations Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and other human rights instruments, 
including the ACHPR, as well as in the prevention of conflicts, the 
advent of rule of law and democracy;

·                     Conform with all the provisions of the United 
Nations Universal Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the 
United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998, the ACHPR and 
international and regional human rights protection instruments; Provide 
accurate information on initiatives undertaken at both individual and 
national levels to prevent violations of the rights and freedoms of 
human rights defenders in line with these instruments; Commit to a 
substantial legislative reform process to adjust national positive 
legislation with international standards;

·                     Facilitate the mandate of the ACHPR Special 
Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders in Africa, in particular by 
addressing her a standing invitation to enable her to carry out official
 visits in their countries, and by putting sufficient financial and 
human resources at her disposal for the successful accomplishment of her
 mandate;

·                     Support the mandate of the United Nations 
Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders, in particular by 
addressing her a standing invitation to enable her to carry out official
 visits in the States parties; provide satisfying replies to 
observations sent by the Rapporteur in the framework of her mandate.

2) The Observatory also calls on the ACHPR Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders in Africa to:

·                     Continue to fully implement her mandate, with 
the aim of protecting human rights defenders and the independent civil 
society and of promoting their activities;

·                     Put in place an early warning system in order 
to prevent any violation against human rights defenders, taking into 
consideration situations in which there is a danger of escalation of 
violence, such as contexts of social protest, elections, political 
crises and internal armed conflicts;

·                     Offer technical assistance to States parties 
for the establishment of national mechanisms for the protection of human
 rights defenders;

·                     Communicate more extensively on cases of human
 rights defenders who are harassed and attacked, in particular through 
press releases and public statements;

·                     Call on the States parties to take all 
necessary measures to combat the impunity enjoyed by the authors of 
assassinations of human rights defenders;

·                     Publish and disseminate widely the report on the implementation of her mandate;

·                     Contribute to the finalisation of the study of
 the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights about the laws and 
practices relating to freedom of association, as specified in Resolution
 ACHPR/Res.151(XLVI)09, in particular through the consultation of human 
rights defenders and human rights organisations.

3) The Observatory also calls on the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights to:

·                     Systematically raise the question of the 
situation of human rights defenders during the examination of the 
periodic reports of the States parties to the ACHPR, and on the occasion
 of all visits conducted in a State party;

·                     Ensure the effective implementation of its 
concluding observations in order that everyone, including human rights 
defenders, be able to effectively enjoy all the rights and freedoms 
recognised by the ACHPR and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;

·                     Guarantee, when applications for observer 
status to the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights are 
examined, a fair treatment to all NGOs, including NGOs working on sexual
 minorities and LGBT rights, in accordance with the 1999 criteria for 
granting and enjoying observer status with the African Commission on 
Human and Peoples’ Rights, and with the right to non-discrimination in 
the enjoyment of the rights defined by the Charter as set out in Article
 2;

·                     Increase the means at the disposal of the 
Special Rapporteur of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ 
Rights on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders in Africa in order to 
help her to continue her actions for the promotion and protection of 
human rights defenders in Africa;

·                     Continue and strengthen the collaboration with
 the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders, as 
well as with the other regional mechanisms for the protection of human 
rights defenders;

·                     Establish a regional protection programme 
inspired by the good practices listed in the Commentary of the United 
Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders related to the 
Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and 
Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human 
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.


***

Banjul, April - May 2012

To contact the Observatory :

    Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
    Tel and fax FIDH: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
    Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 