Cambodia:  Joint Statement: On the 1st anniversary of the arbitrary detention of land rights defender Tep Vanny, CSOs call for her release #FreeTepVanny
August 15, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2017 / AugustCambodia: Joint Statement: On the 1st anniversary of the arbitrary detention of land rights defender Tep Vanny, CSOs call for her release #FreeTepVannyDownload full article5 pages / 370 KB

JOINT STATEMENT: On the first anniversary of the grossly unjust imprisonment
of land activist and human rights defender Tep Vanny, civil society organizations
call for her release #FreeTepVanny
Phnom Penh, 14 August 2017 — Tep Vanny, one of Cambodia’s most prominent land
activists and human rights defenders, will have spent one year in prison on 15
August for defending her community and exercising her human rights. We, the
undersigned, condemn her arbitrary imprisonment. We call for her convictions to
be overturned, for all ongoing politically motivated and unsubstantiated
charges against her to be dropped, and for her immediate release from prison. 
Tep Vanny has fought tirelessly to protect the rights of members of the
Boeung Kak Lake community, following their forced eviction from their homes in
Phnom Penh. More recently, she played a leading role in the so-called ‘Black Monday”
campaign, challenging the arbitrary pre-trial detention of five human rights
defenders, Lim Mony, Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ny Chakrya (the
“Freethe5KH” detainees). 
On 22 August 2016, following her arrest at a protest calling for the
release of the five, she was convicted of ‘insulting of a public official’, and
sentenced to six days in prison. However, instead of releasing her based on
time served, the authorities reactivated dormant charges dating back to a 2013
protest and kept her in detention. 
“It is clear that the
authorities are using the courts to lock me up, silence my freedom of
expression and break my spirit” said Tep Vanny. They want to stop me from advocating and
seeking a solution for the remaining people from Boeung Kak Lake as well as
other campaigns to demand justice in our society.”
On 19 September 2016, Tep Vanny was sentenced, along with three other
Boeung Kak Lake community activists, to six months imprisonment for “insulting
and obstructing public officials” in a reactivated case related to a 2011 peaceful
protest calling for a resolution to the Boeung Kak Lake land dispute, despite
the absence of credible inculpatory evidence. This conviction has since been
upheld by the Court of Appeal on 27 February 2017. On 23 February 2017,
following proceedings which fell short of fair trial standards,[1] Tep Vanny was convicted of
“intentional violence with aggravating circumstances”, sentenced to a further 30
months in prison and fined more than 14 million riel (about US $3,500 – or
twice the annual minimum wage in Cambodia) for having peacefully participated
in protests calling for the release of her fellow activist Yorm Bopha, back in
2013. 
While the #FreeThe5KH human rights defenders were released on bail on 29
June 2017, after having spent 427 days in arbitrary detention,[2] Tep Vanny remains in
prison. She is currently on trial in a third reactivated case, facing charges
of “public insult” and “death threats” brought by another member of the Boeung
Kak Lake community, despite the complaint having been dropped by the community
member.[3] On 8 August 2017, the
Phnom Penh Court of Appeals upheld her February 2017 conviction.
Human rights
defenders, like any other person, should enjoy all the fundamental freedoms and
rights guaranteed by international human rights law and the Constitution of
Cambodia. This includes the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly
and association guaranteed by the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, to which Cambodia is a State Party. The UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders[4] affirms the right to
promote and strive for the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, as well as the duty of all states to allow them to work
peacefully and safely, and to protect them from arrest, violence, threats,
retaliation and any
discrimination. In 2013, the UN General Assembly specifically recognized the
valuable work of women human rights defenders, and the systemic and structural
discrimination and violence they face, and called on States to ensure they can
perform their important role.[5] 
Human
rights defenders are regularly subject to harassment through the criminal judicial
system in Cambodia. Among the most commonly used tactics are suspended
sentences and arbitrary resurrection of dormant charges which are used to
intimidate human rights defenders and deter them from further activities. Tep Vanny’s current
imprisonment is only the latest in a series of acts of harassment aimed at
silencing her. It contributes to creating an atmosphere of fear for human
rights defenders and other individuals throughout Cambodia. As a result of her imprisonment, Tep
Vanny is prevented from carrying out her peaceful and valuable
work as a woman human rights defender. Peaceful protest and expressions
of dissent are not a crime, and human rights defenders should not be penalized
for the exercise of their human rights.
“Tep
Vanny is innocent. She is a woman who is greatly committed to fulfilling her
duty as a citizen. Yet, she has been imprisoned three times already, because of
the Cambodian judicial system” said Song Sreyleap, a fellow
Boeung Kak Lake community activist. “Tep
Vanny is the only woman activist in Cambodia who has been imprisoned and
arrested so many times. This is very unjust for her; her children have to live
without the mother’s care for one year. However, even with all the threats, her
will remains unchanged.”
We call on the Cambodian authorities to quash the convictions of Tep
Vanny, to release her from prison, and to cease their harassment of Ms. Tep
Vanny and other Boeung Kak Lake activists through arrests, prosecution and
imprisonment.
This joint statement is endorsed by:
1.    
Adil Soz - International
Foundation for Protection of Freedom of Speech
2.    
Amnesty International
3.    
ARTICLE 19
4.    
ASEAN Parliamentarians
for Human Rights (APHR)
5.    
Association of Caribbean
Media Workers
6.    
Boeung Bram community 
7.    
Boeung Chhouk Community
8.    
Boeung Kak Community
9.    
Boeung Trabek Community
10.  CamASEAN Youth’s Future
11.  Cambodia Development People Life Association (CDPLA)
12.  Cambodia Indigenous Youth Association (CIYA)
13.  Cambodian Alliance Trade Unions (CATU)
14.  Cambodian Center for Human Rights 
15.  Cambodian Domestic Workers Network (CDWN)
16.  Cambodian Food and Service Workers' Federation (CFSWF)
17.  Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC)
18.  Cambodian Independent Teacher Association (CITA)
19.  Cambodian Informal Economic Workers Association (CIEWA)
20.  Cambodian Labour Confederation (CLC)
21.  Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights       
22.  Canadian Journalists for Free Expression
23.  Cartoonists Rights Network International
24.  Center for Alliance of Labor and Human Rights (CENTRAL)
25.  Center for Independent Journalism - Romania
26.  Centro de Reportes Informativos sobre Guatemala - CERIGUA
27.  Digital Rights Foundation
28.  FIDH, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders
29.  Foundation for Press Freedom - FLIP
30.  Free Media Movement
31.  Freedom Forum
32.  Gender and Development for Cambodia (GADC)
33.  Globe International Center
34.  Housing Rights Task Force (HRTF)
35.  Independent Journalism Center - Moldova
36.  Independent Monk Network for Social Justice (IMNSJ)
37.  Indigenous Youth at Brome Commune, Preah Vihear Province
38.  International
Commission of Jurists (ICJ) 
39.  International Press Centre (IPC)
40.  Khmer Kampuchea Krom for Human Rights and Development Association
(KKKHRDA)
41.  Kuoy Ethnic Community, Prame Village, Preah Vihear Province
42.  Land Community, Prek Chik Village, Chikhor Kraom Commune, Koh Kong
Province
43.  Land Conflict Community, Krenh Village, Pailin Province
44.  Land Conflict Community, Skun Village, Siem Reap
45.  Lor Peang community,Kampong Chhnang Province
46.  Media Institute of Southern Africa (MISA)
47.  National Union of Somali Journalists (NUSOJ)
48.  Norwegian PEN
49.  PEN American Center
50.  PEN Canada
51.  Ponlok Khmer
52.  Railway Station, Toul Sangkae A community
53.  Reach Sey Samaky Land Community Romchek Village, Battambang
54.  Samakum Teang Tnaut (STT)
55.  SFLC.in
56.  SOS International Airport Community
57.  Southeast Asian Press Alliance
58.  The Alliance for Conflict Transformation (ACT)
59.  The Asia Democracy Network
60.  The Building and Wood Workers Trade Union (BWTU)
61.  Vigilance pour la Démocratie et l’État Civique
62.  World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters - AMARC
63.  World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
 



[1] Joint statement by
civil society group, ‘Tep Vanny convicted again as para-police attacks
supporters’ (23 Feb 2017), http://bit.ly/2lcS2TL.


[2] Press release by
#Freethe5KH Campaign, welcoming their release and calling for all charges to be
dropped (30 Jun 2017), http://bit.ly/2thSwjq.


[3] Joint press release: ‘Cambodia:
drop charges against land rights defenders’ (14 Jul 2017), http://bit.ly/2uzdXgb. 


[4] United Nations General
Assembly Resolution, ‘Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms’ (8 Mar 1999), http://bit.ly/19w8LEm.


[5] United Nations General
Assembly Resolution ‘Promotion of the Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and
Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms:
protecting women human rights defenders’, (18 Dec 2013), http://goo.gl/yz4xwt. 