Cambodia:  Continued judicial harassment against Ny Chakrya
July 15, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / JulyCambodia: Continued judicial harassment against Ny Chakrya


UPDATE 18.07.2016
 On
  July 18, 2016 at 8am, the trial of Mr. Ny Chakrya, former Head of the Human Rights and Monitoring
Section of the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC) and serving Deputy Secretary-General of the
National Election Committee (NEC) - in his and his three
  lawyers’ presence - commenced. Twenty minutes into the hearing, Mr. Ny Chakrya’s
  lawyer announced the submission of a complaint to the Court of Appeal,
  requesting a change in the trial judge. Within 30 days, the Court of Appeal
  will need to process his complaint and set a hearing date, during which they
  will render their decision to this effect. Mr. Ny Chakrya requested such a
  change, as the sitting judge was unwilling to hear his complaint, condemning
  the absence of both plaintiffs, i.e. the two judicial officials of the Siem
  Reap Provincial Court (see background information), preventing him from
  challenging them in court. Mr. Ny Chakrya also raised that the lack of
  response to his complaint for disciplinary proceedings against the two
  judicial officials to the Supreme Council of Magistracy and the Ministry of
  Justice last year was reason for postponement of his trial. 



New
information
KHM 002 / 0715 / OBS 056.3
Judicial
harassment
Cambodia
July 15,
2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Cambodia.
 
New
information: 
(c) ADHOC
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continued judicial
harassment against Mr. Ny Chakrya, former Head of the Human Rights and Monitoring
Section of the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC) and serving Deputy Secretary-General of the
National Election Committee (NEC).
 
According to the information received, on July 18,
2016, at 8.00am, Mr. Ny Chakrya will stand trial on defamation charges at the
Phnom Penh Municipal Court. The Observatory recalls that Mr. Ny Chakrya is
facing charges of “public defamation”, “acts of slanderous denunciation”, and
“publication of commentaries to put pressure on jurisdiction”, under Articles
305, 311, and 522 of the Cambodian Criminal Code (see background information). Mr.
Ny Chakrya could face up to one-and-a-half
years in prison, in addition to a fine, for the three charges combined[1].
 
The Observatory further recalls that Mr. Ny Chakrya has
been in pre-trial detention since May 2, 2016, in relation to another case in
which he is accused of having been an accomplice in the bribing of a witness[2].
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing judicial harassment of Mr. Ny
Chakrya, which only aims at sanctioning his legitimate human rights activities.
The Observatory demands the Cambodian authorities end Mr. Ny Chakrya harassment
and immediately and unconditionally release him. 
 
Until the charges against Mr.
Ny Chakrya are
dropped, the Observatory urges the Cambodian authorities to ensure that all
judicial proceedings against him are carried out in full compliance with his
right to a fair trial, as protected under international law.
 
Background information:
 
On
July 13, 2015, Mr. Ny Chakrya was summoned to appear before the Deputy
Prosecutor of the Phnom Penh Municipal Court. On that day, Mr. Ny Chakrya was
accused of “public defamation” (Article 305 of the Criminal Code), “acts of
slanderous denunciation” (Article 311 of the Criminal Code), and “publication
of commentaries to put pressure on jurisdiction” (Article 522 of the Criminal
Code), following a complaint filed on May 29, 2015, by the investigating judge and
the Deputy Prosecutor of the Siem Reap Provincial Court on the above-mentioned
charges.
 
The
complaint was related to a press conference organised by ADHOC in Siem Reap on
May 12, 2015, during which Mr. Ny Chakrya, along with one ADHOC lawyer, Ms. Pouk Yarann, condemned the arbitrary
arrest and detention of two victims involved in a high-profile land dispute in Siem
Reap Province.
 
On
May 15, 2015, the Office of Prosecutor of the Siem Reap Provincial Court
published a statement threatening to initiate legal proceedings against Mr. Ny
Chakrya and Ms. Pouk Yarann. The statement alleged that “provocative comments”
made during the press conference jeopardised the performance of the Cambodian
judicial institutions and the on-going proceedings in the related land dispute.
 
On
May 20, 2015, Mr. Ny Chakrya filed a complaint with the President of the
Disciplinary Council of the Supreme Council of Magistracy, claiming that the proceedings
against the two victims involved in the land dispute had not been conducted in
accordance with fair trial standards because of a lack of independence on the
part of the investigating judge and Deputy Prosecutor of the Siem Reap
Provincial Court. To date, the Supreme Council of Magistracy has not responded
to Mr. Ny Chakrya’s complaint.
 
On
June 22, 2015, the Cambodian Bar Association lodged a disciplinary complaint
against Ms. Pouk Yarann, accusing her of providing legal advice to Mr. Ny
Chakrya before he submitted his complaint to the Supreme Council of Magistracy.
She was summoned for questioning on July 30, 2015, by the Investigating
Committee of the Cambodian Bar Association, which subsequently issued a report
to the President of the Cambodian Bar Association. Since then, there have been
no developments.
 
On
July 18, 2015, the Deputy Prosecutor of the Phnom Penh Municipal Court decided
to refer Mr. Ny Chakrya’s case related to the above-mentioned charges of “public
defamation”, “acts of slanderous denunciation”, and “publication of
commentaries to put pressure on jurisdiction” to the investigating judge.
 
On
October 7, 2015, the wife of Mr. Ny Chakrya received a subpoena delivered to their
home address, requesting Mr. Ny Chakrya to appear in camera before the investigating
judge of the Phnom Penh Municipal Court
on October 21, 2015. Pursuant to Article 188 of the Cambodian Criminal
Procedure Code, a subpoena
has to be delivered personally to the concerned person, who then either signs
or fingerprints the document in order
to confirm its delivery. The fact that the subpoena was handed to Mr. Ny
Chakrya’s is therefore a violation of the Criminal Procedure Code. Mr. Ny
Chakrya subsequently declared that he would not go to court unless a new
subpoena was issued for him to fingerprint/sign. 
 
On
March 14, 2016, Mr. Ny Chakrya was summoned to appear before the investigating judge
at the Phnom Penh Municipal Court for questioning on April 6, 2016. This time,
he attended the meeting. 
 
On
May 30, 2016, the Prosecutor of the Phnom Penh Municipal Court filed his final
submission to the investigating judge. On May 31, 2016, the investigating judge
charged Mr. Ny Chakrya with the three counts of defamation under Articles 305,
311, and 522 of the Criminal Code. 
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of the Kingdom of Cambodia asking them to:
 
i.
Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against
Mr. Ny Chakrya, as well as against Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, Soen Sally, and Ms. Lim
Mony, and all human rights defenders in the country so that they are able to carry out their work
without hindrance;
 
ii.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Ny Chakrya, as well as of all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
iii. Immediately and unconditionally release Messrs.
Ny Chakrya, Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda,
Yi Soksan, and Ms. Lim Mony as their detention is arbitrary since it only aims at
sanctioning their human rights activities;
 
iv.
Comply with all the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with its Articles 1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
v.
Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international human
rights instruments signed or ratified by the Kingdom of Cambodia.
 
Addresses
 
·    
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister, Office
of the Prime Minister, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / 855 23 880624
(c/o Council of Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh
/ cppparty@gmail.com
·    
Mr. Sar Kheng, Minister of Interior,
Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 212708
·    
Mr. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of
Justice, Ministry of Justice, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 364 119
·    
Mr. Prak Sokhon, Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 216 144 / 855 23 216 141 Email: mfaic@mfa.gov.kh
·    
Mr. Sok An, Deputy Prime Minister of
the Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: +855 23 882 065, Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / info@pressocm.gov.kh
·    
Mr. Keo Remy, President of the
Cambodian Human Rights Committee, Office of the Prime Minister, Kingdom of
Cambodia, Fax: +855 12 81 37 81 / +855 23 21 11 62 or +855 23 88 10 45 (c/o
Council of Ministers)
·    
Mr. Bun Hun, President of the
Cambodian Bar Association, Fax: +855 23 864 076, Email: info@bakc.org.kh
·    
Ambassador Mr. Ney Samol, Permanent
Mission of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 788 77 74, Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective
countries.



[1] An English translation of the provisions of the Criminal Code can be
accessed at the following link: https://www.unodc.org/res/cld/document/khm/criminal_code_of_the_kingdom_of_cambodia_html/Cambodia_Criminal-Code-of-the-Kingdom-of-Cambodia-30-Nov-2009-Eng.pdf


[2] Mr. Ny Chakrya has been arbitrarily detained
since May 2, 2016, along with Messrs.
Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Ms. Lim Mony, four ADHOC staff members, under
bribery charges for providing legal and material assistance to a client. If
convicted, the five human rights defenders could face from
five to ten years’ imprisonment. For more information, see
Observatory Urgent Appeal KHM 001/0616/OBS 047, issued on June 14, 2016. 