Oman:  Joint Statement: Expression of support to the UN Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association
June 22, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Oman / 2015 / JuneOman: Joint Statement: Expression of support to the UN Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of associationOman_2015.06.22_Joint_English+Arabic4 pages / 2.31 MB

The
undersigned oganisations express their support to Mr. Maina
Kiai the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly
and association and welcomes his statement at the UN Human Rights Council. 
 
On 17
June 2015, at the 29th session of the UN Human Rights Council Mr. Maina
Kaia made a statement and presented his report on his visit to Oman in
September 2014. He expressed his dismay at alleged reprisals against civil
society members, who had engaged with him during his visit and stated ‘ I am
disappointed that the authorities did not take my observations in the spirit in
which they are offered, that of constructive dialogue’.
 
During
the mission he met with Government bodies and members of civil society and raised
concerns regarding restrictions on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly.
To date however, the Omani Government has failed to address these concerns and
has attempted to intimidate the Special Rapporteur and civil society members.  
 
In
his statement Mr. Maina Kiai outlined how broadly worded legal provisions give
excessive discretion to Omani authorities and create uncertainties about what
actions attract penalties. He also noted that peaceful assemblies were
dispersed without explanation and activists targeted.  In terms of the right to freedom of association
he expressed concern regarding the registration of organisations and the
authorities power to restructure associations to ‘promote efficiency’.  
  
On a
more global level the Special Rapporteur said that despite reporting little
improvement in the exercise of the rights of freedom of peaceful assembly and
association he remains optimistic due to the ‘ incredible courage and
determination of activists and ordinary people who refuse to be cowed or
defeated, even if it means paying with their lives’. 
 
The undersigned
organisations once again express their on-going support for the work of the
Special Rapporteur and his team and calls on the Government of Oman to fully
co-operate with him and the UN mandate on the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and association in addition to implement the recommendations set out
in the country report. 
 
Signatories:
Arabic Network for
Human Rights Information (ANHRI)
Cairo Institute
for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS)
CIVICUS World
Alliance for Citizen Participation
Front Line Defenders (FLDs)
Gulf Center for Human Rights (GCHR)
International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders
International
Service for Human Rights (ISHR)
World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders 