Bangladesh:  Abduction attempt of Mr. Mohammad Nur Khan, ASK Director of Investigation
May 16, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2014 / MayBangladesh: Abduction attempt of Mr. Mohammad Nur Khan, ASK Director of Investigation

BGD 002 / 0514 / OBS 042
Abduction
attempt
Bangladesh
May 16, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Bangladesh.
 
Brief description of the situation:
 
The Observatory
has been informed with great concern by Odhikar and Ain-o-Salish Kendra (ASK) about the abduction attempt of Mr. Mohammad Nur Khan, Director of Investigation at ASK, in Dhaka.
 
According to the
information received, on May 15, 2014, at
around 5.10pm, Mr. Mohammad Nur Khan left ASK office in Lalmatia, Dhaka. He got
a rikshaw (manually paddled three wheeler) with another colleague, and they
were just a few yards away from the office when a white microbus obstructed the
rickshaw. Being suspicious, Mr. Nur Khan quickly got down from
the rickshaw and ran back to ASK office. His colleague noticed five to six
people aged around 30 inside the microbus.
 
The Observatory strongly
condemns the abduction attempt of Mr. Mohammad Nur
Khan, and fears that it merely aims at sanctioning his
human rights activities. Along with his
organisation, Mr. Mohammad Nur Khan has always been very vocal against human
rights violations, including enforced disappearances, in Bangladesh, in
particular those committed by the Rapid Action Battalion (RAB) since its
inception in 2010. 
 
Recently, Mr. Mohammad Nur Khan observed that he was constantly followed
by a person on a motorbike, who was even inquiring about his movements at the
office reception. In this context of insecurity, Mr. Nur Khan had already
filed, on April 20, 2014 a General Diary (No 1557) with Mohammadpur police
station. After the incident of May 15, he filed another General Diary (No
1250).
 
The Observatory urges the
authorities of Bangladesh to conduct an immediate, thorough, effective, and impartial
investigation in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before a
civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal sanctions provided
by the law, as well as to adopt urgent measures to protect and guarantee
the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mohammad Nur Khan and, more generally,
of all human rights defenders in Bangladesh.

Action requested:
 
Please write to
the authorities in Bangladesh, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Mohammad Nur Khan as well as of all human rights defenders in
Bangladesh;
 
ii. Order
an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial investigation into the
above-mentioned facts, the result of which must be made public, in order to
identify all those responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial
civil tribunal and apply to them the penal sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii. Put an
end to any kind of harassment against all human rights defenders
in Bangladesh and ensure
in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate
activities without any hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Conform with
the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
- its Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, as well as
- its Article 12.2, which provides that the
State shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”; 
 
v. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Bangladesh.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office
of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka,
Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: pm@pmo.gov.bd
·      
Professor Dr. Gowher Rizvi, Adviser to
the Prime Minister (International Affairs), Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka
1215, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9111312
Email: advinternational@pmo.gov.bd
·      
Mr. Asaduzzaman Khan, State Minister for
Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building 8, 1st
and 3rd florr, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9515541. Email: stateminister@mha.gov.bd
·      
Mr. Anisul Huq, Minister for Law, Justice
and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs,
Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 7168557 
·      
Md. Shahriar Alam, State Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Segun Bagicha, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 9562188.
Email: fm@mofa.gov.bd
·      
Mr. Mahbubey Alam, Attorney General for
Bangladesh, Attorney General's Office, Supreme Court Premises, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Email: adv_mahbubey@yahoo.com
·      
H.E. Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations
in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16,
E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
·      
Embassy of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh in Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32
2 646 59 98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be
 
Please also write
to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Bangladesh in your respective
country as well as to
the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in Bangladesh.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, May
16, 2014
 
Kindly inform us
of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory,
an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of human rights
defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 /
+ 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 /
+33 1 43 55 18 80 