Nepal:  Nepal : Killing of Mr. Chet Prakash Khatri
December 30, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2003 / DecemberNepal: Nepal : Killing of Mr. Chet Prakash KhatriURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  NPL 001/1203/OBS 072 Killing/Impunity NEPAL December 30, 2003  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Nepal.  Brief description:  The Observatory has been informed by the Informal Sector Service Center (INSEC), of the killing of Mr. Chet Prakash Khatri, a human rights defender working in the Binauna Village Development Committee (VDC) of Banke district, in Nepal.  According to the information received, Mr. Khatri was killed on December 24, 2003, at approximately 3:30pm, by a group of unidentified individuals in Sarragaon (Phattepur VDC-7), in the Rapti River, an area close to the Indian border, on his way home from Gangapur VDC. The victim’s body had a mark of a cord on his broken neck and a wound on his chin. Mr. Khatri was working as a facilitator for a Peace Programme launched by INSEC in that area. He was training students and locals on safety measures during conflicts. Mr. Khatri was also working on child rights and was affiliated to Bheri Environmental Excellence Group  (BEE Group), an NGO.  According to the information received, some members of the media blamed the killing on Maoist rebels. However, the Secretary of the CPN-Maoists Paban issued a press statement on December 28, 2003, condemning the accusation as “unsubstantiated.” Also, five Nepalese political parties, the Nepali Congress, the CPN-UML, the People’s Front, the Nepal Peasants’ and Workers’ Party and Nepal Sadbhawana Party (Anandi Devi), issued a joint press statement condemning the government’s unwillingness to investigate the case. The victim’s family members have file a complaint with the District Police Office of Nepalgunj in Banke District.   The Observatory is gravely concerned at the killing of Mr. Chet Prakash Khatri and the deteriorating human rights situation prevailing in Nepal. Since the breakdown of peace talks in August 2003, the incidents of extra-judicial killings, enforced disappearances, torture, and arbitrary detentions in Nepal have indeed risen dramatically.  Actions requested:  Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them to:  i. Order an independent and impartial investigation into the killing of Mr. Chet Prakash Khatri, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to justice and apply the sanctions provided by law;  ii. Guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the family of the victim;  iii. Put an end to all forms of violence against Human Rights Defenders and ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN general Assembly on December 9, 1998 in particular its article 1, which provides that "every person has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national and international level" and article 12, which establishes the duty of the State to protect “everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present declaration;"  iv. Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human rights instruments.  Addresses:  · Prime Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa, Prime Minister's Office, Singha Durbar, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax:+ 977 1 4 227 286   · General Pyar Jung Thapa, Chief of Army Staff (COAS), Army Headquarters, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax + 977 1 4 242 168  · Brigadier General B A K Sharma, Head, Army Human Rights Cell, Army Headquarters, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977 1 4 226 292 / 229 451  · Ambassador, Acharya, Gyan Chandra, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Nepal, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int  · Shyam Bhakta Thapa, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977 1 4 415 593 / 415 594  Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.  Geneva, December 30, 2003   Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 