United Arab Emirates:  Joint Statement: Free prominent rights defender Ahmed Mansoor, held on speech-related charges
April 20, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / United Arab Emirates / 2017 / AprilUnited Arab Emirates: Joint Statement: Free prominent rights defender Ahmed Mansoor, held on speech-related charges20-April-2017Authorities
 in the United Arab Emirates should immediately release Ahmed Mansoor, 
an award-winning human rights defender who is facing charges that 
violate his right to freedom of expression, dozens of human rights 
organisations said today, one month after his arrest.                  Mansoor,
 who received the prestigious Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights 
Defenders in 2015, has been in detention since 20 March 2017 facing 
speech-related charges that include using social media websites to 
“publish false information that harms national unity.” On 28 March, a 
group of United Nations (UN) human rights experts called on the UAE 
government to release him immediately, describing his arrest as “a 
direct attack on the legitimate work of human rights defenders in the 
UAE.”Informed
 sources have told rights groups that about a dozen security officers 
arrested Mansoor at his home in Ajman in the pre-dawn hours of 20 March.
 They conducted an extensive search and took away all of the family’s 
mobile phones and laptops, including those belonging to his young 
children. His family had no information on his whereabouts until 
authorities issued an official statement on 29 March, saying he was in 
detention in the Central Prison in Abu Dhabi.The
 signatories understand that Mansoor’s family have been allowed only one
 short supervised visit with him which took place two weeks after his 
arrest on 03 April, when authorities moved him from where he was being 
held, believed to be a detention facility adjacent to Al-Wathba Prison, 
to a prosecutor’s office in Abu Dhabi. Informed sources told rights 
groups that Mansoor is being held in solitary confinement and has not 
spoken to a lawyer.The
 UAE’s official news agency, WAM, said on 20 March that Mansoor had been
 arrested on the orders of the Public Prosecution for Cybercrimes and 
detained pending further investigation. It said that he is accused of 
using social media websites to: “publish false information and rumors;” 
“promote [a] sectarian and hate-incited agenda;” and “publish false and 
misleading information that harm national unity and social harmony and 
damage the country’s reputation.”The
 statement classified these as “cybercrimes,” indicating that the 
charges against him may be based on alleged violations of the UAE’s 
repressive 2012 cybercrime law, which authorities have used to imprison 
numerous activists and which provides for long prison sentences and 
severe financial penalties.In
 the weeks leading up to his arrest, Mansoor had called for the release 
of Osama Al-Najjar, who remains in prison, despite having completed a 
three-year prison sentence on charges related to his peaceful activities
 on Twitter. Mansoor had also criticised the prosecution of Dr. Nasser 
Bin Ghaith, a prominent academic and economist, who was sentenced to 10 
years in prison on 29 March, for charges that included speech-related 
offenses, including peaceful criticism of the UAE and Egyptian 
authorities.Mansoor
 had also used his Twitter account to draw attention to human rights 
violations across the region, including in Egypt and those committed by 
the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen. He had also signed a joint letter with
 other activists in the region calling on leaders at the Arab Summit in 
Jordan at the end of March to release political prisoners in their 
countries.The
 UN special rapporteurs on human rights defenders, on the promotion and 
protection of the right to freedom of expression and opinion, and on 
freedom of peaceful assembly and association, along with the Working 
Group on Arbitrary Detention and the Working Group on Enforced or 
Involuntary Disappearances, said in their 28 March statement that 
Mansoor’s “outstanding work in the protection of human rights and the 
advancement of democracy, as well as his transparent collaboration with 
UN mechanisms, is of great value not only for the UAE but for the whole 
region.”The
 UN experts said they feared that his arrest “may constitute an act of 
reprisal for his engagement with UN human rights mechanisms, for the 
views he expressed on social media, including Twitter, as well as for 
being an active member of organisations such as the Gulf Centre for 
Human Rights (GCHR), and an active supporter of others, including Human 
Rights Watch.”Mansoor is a member of GCHR's Advisory Board and Human Rights Watch’s Middle East and North Africa Advisory Committee.On
 29 March, the UAE authorities responded directly to the UN experts’ 
statement, disputing the allegation that Mansoor’s detention was 
arbitrary, and stating that Mansoor “has the freedom to hire a lawyer 
and that his family has full access to the place of confinement and is 
allowed to visit him.” In 2015, the UN Special Rapporteur on the 
independence of judges and lawyers, who visited the UAE in 2014, 
expressed concern that lawyers who take up cases related to state 
security “have been harassed, threatened and had pressure exerted on 
them,” and that “impunity surrounding such breaches of the independence 
of the legal profession has had a chilling effect on lawyers,” making it
 difficult for defendants in the UAE to secure a lawyer of their choice.UAE
 authorities have harassed and persecuted Mansoor for more than six 
years. In November 2011, the Federal Supreme Court in Abu Dhabi 
sentenced Mansoor to three years in prison for insulting the country’s 
top officials in a trial marred by serious legal and procedural flaws. 
The UAE president, Sheikh Khalifa Nin Zayed Al-Nahyan, pardoned Mansoor 
on 28 November, 2011, but authorities never returned his passport, 
imposing a de facto travel ban. He has also experienced physical 
assaults, death threats, government surveillance, and a sophisticated 
spyware attack.People
 in the UAE who speak about human rights abuses are at serious risk of 
arbitrary detention, imprisonment, and torture, and many are serving 
long prison terms or have felt compelled to leave the country. To the 
knowledge of the signatories, Mansoor was the last remaining human 
rights defender in the UAE who had been able to criticise the 
authorities publicly.The
 authorities should release Mansoor immediately, since the charges 
against him relate to his human rights work and his criticism of the 
authorities, the signatories said. They should give him immediate and 
regular access to his family and a lawyer of his choosing, and end the 
harassment of rights defenders and critics of the authorities.SIGNATORIES1. ARTICLE 19 2. Action by Christians for the Abolition of Torture (ACAT), Germany 3. Adil Soz - International Foundation for Protection of Freedom of Speech, Kazakhstan 4. Alternative ASEN Network on Burma (ALTSEAN-Burma) 5. Americans for Democracy & Human Rights in Bahrain 6. Arabic Network for Human Rights Information 7. Association for Reconstruction, Development & Aid to Qunaytira- ARDAQ, Syria 8. Bahrain Center for Human Rights 9. Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Manha (MASUM), India 10. Brazilian Association for Investigative Journalism 11. Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC) 12. Cambodian League for the Promotion & Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO) 13. Canadian Journalists for Free Expression 14. Centre Action Sociale Réhabilitation et Réadaptation pour les Victimes de la Torture et de la violence (SOHRAM-CASRA) 15. Center for Media Freedom and Responsibility, Philippines 16. Center for Prisoners' Rights, Japan 17. Center for Respect for Liberties and Human Rights in Tunisia (CRLDHT) 18. CIVICUS 19. Commission for The Disappeared and Victims of Violence (KontraS), Indonesia 20. Day Of The Endangered Lawyer Foundation 21. Dutch League For Human Rights, The Netherlands 22. Electronic Frontier Foundation 23. European-Bahraini Organisation for Human Rights (EBOHR) 24. FIDH, under the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 25. Foro de Periodismo Argentino, Argentina 26. Freedom Forum, Nepal 27. Front Line Defenders 28. Globe International Center, Mongolia 29. Greek Helsinki Monitor, Greece 30. Gulf Centre for Human Rights 31. Human Rights Center of Azerbaijan 32. Human Rights First 33. Human Rights Sentinel 34. Human Rights Information and Documentation Systems (HURIDOCS) 35. Index on Censorship 36. I'lam Arab Center for Media Freedom Development and Research 37. Instituto Prensa y Sociedad, Peru 38. International Association of People's Lawyers Monitoring Committee on Attacks on Lawyers 39. International Centre for Justice and Human Rights (ICJHR), Geneva 40. International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) 41. International Press Institute 42. International Service for Human Rights 43. Internet Law Reform Dialogue (iLaw) 44. Iraqi Al-Amal Association 45. Khiam rehabilitation center for victims of torture, Lebanon 46. Kuwait Watch 47. Lam Echaml, Tunisia 48. Lawyer's Rights Watch Canada 49. Ligue de la Zone Afrique pour la Défense des Droits des Enfants et Elèves, Democratic Republic of Congo 50. Lao Movement for Human Rights (LMHR) 51. Maharat Foundation, Lebanon 52. Martin Ennals Foundation 53. Media Institute of Southern Africa 54. Media Watch, Bangladesh 55. Miguel Agustín Pro Juárez Human Rights Center (Center Prodh), Mexico 56. National Union of Somali Journalists 57. Odhikar, Bangladesh 58. Palestinian Center for Development and Media Freedoms (MADA) 59. PEN American Center 60. PEN Canada 61. PEN International 62. People’s Watch, India 63. Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), Philippines 64. Privacy International 65. Programme Against Custodial Torture & Impunity (PACTI), India 66. Reporters without borders (RSF) 67. Samir Kassir Foundation 68. Scholars at Risk 69. Social Media Exchange – SMEX 70. Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM) 71. Syrian Center for Legal Studies and researches 72. Syrians for Truth and Justice 73. Taiwan Association for Human Rights (TAHR) 74. Tunis Center for Press Freedom, Tunisia 75. Tunisian Forum for Economic and Social Rights (FTDES) 76. Vietnam Committee on Human Rights (VCHR) 77. Vigilance for Democracy and the Civic State, Tunisia 78. World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters - AMARC 79. World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), under the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 