Russian Federation:  Letter to the Investigative Committee
April 19, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2012 / AprilRussian Federation: Letter to the Investigative Committee ​Dear Mr
Bastrykin,
This
letter is sent on behalf the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture
Victims (IRCT), the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and REDRESS. We
are writing to you in relation to the ongoing process of establishing a
subdivision within the Investigative Committee of the Russian Federation to investigate crimes committed by officers of law enforcement
agencies. 
We
are familiar with the work carried out by our Russian partner organisation, the
Interregional Committee Against Torture, and their own partners in Russia, to ensure access to justice for persons who have been tortured or
ill-treated by law enforcement officers. In the face of persistent allegations
of torture and ill-treatment of persons in detention in Russia, we commend your recent initiative. Establishing a Subdivision, which
will be solely focused on investigating complaints of crimes committed by
officers of law enforcement agencies, is a welcome first step in ensuring that
such investigations are prompt, independent, impartial and effective. 
However,
it is crucial that the structure, procedures, practical functioning, and
quality control of the Subdivision’s work, promote an environment in which
investigations are truly prompt, independent, impartial and effective. 
In
this context, we would like to express our strong support for the proposals
made by a group of Russian NGOs (Committee against Torture, Public Verdict
Foundation, Agora, “GROZA” Movement, and Youth Human Rights Movement), which have
been submitted to you. The proposals are based on the many years of experience
of the organisations involved and they are all important elements of ensuring that
the Subdivision functions effectively. These include procedural control of
decisions by the Subdivision not to initiate criminal proceedings; independent
monitoring of the Subdivision’s work; and the implementation of international
standards for effective investigation. We encourage you to ensure that these
proposals are fully implemented and that a broad range of relevant national
NGOs are continuously involved in the process of establishing of the
Subdivision and in the subsequent monitoring of its work. 
The
IRCT, the OMCT and REDRESS have many years of experience of documenting and
pursuing torture cases around the world. This experience has shown that
establishing a system that ensures prompt, independent, impartial and effective
investigations of torture, ill-treatment and other crimes committed by law
enforcement agencies is a continuous work in progress. The new body should be
truly independent, which requires the absence of a hierarchical or
institutional connection with the alleged perpetrators, both in its
institutional set-up and in practical terms. The body should also be sufficiently
resourced to conduct effective investigations in line with internationally
recognised best practices, particularly the Istanbul Protocol on the
documentation and investigation of torture, and be accessible for victims of violations.
Setting up such an independent mechanism should assist the Russian Federation to begin the process of discharging its obligation under international
law to investigate torture and other serious human rights violations. The next
step of course would be to ensure that the mechanism itself is allowed to, and
functions in a way that, ensures that all credible allegations are
appropriately followed up.  
We
therefore encourage the Investigative Committee of the Russian Federation to establish an independent monitoring mechanism, which will keep the work
of the Subdivision under regular review and make the necessary adjustments to
ensure its continued effective functioning. The IRCT, the OMCT and REDRESS would
also like to take this opportunity to offer our expertise within the area of
torture documentation as well as standards and practices relating to the
investigation of torture should this be needed in connection with the
establishment and development of the work of the Subdivision.
Yours
sincerely,



Brita Sydhoff
Secretary General, IRCT


Gerald Staberock
Secretary General, OMCT


Carla Ferstman
Director, Redress 