Cambodia:  Continued judicial harassment faced by Messrs. Vorn Pao, Theng Savoeun, Chan Puthisak and Sokun Sambath Piseth
February  9, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / FebruaryCambodia: Continued judicial harassment faced by Messrs. Vorn Pao, Theng Savoeun, Chan Puthisak and Sokun Sambath Piseth

KHM 001 / 0216
/ OBS 014
Judicial
harassment /
Obstacles to
freedom of peaceful assembly
Cambodia
February 9,
2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Cambodia.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continued judicial
harassment faced by Messrs. Vorn Pao, President of the Independent
Democracy of Informal Economy Association (IDEA)[1],
Theng Savoeun, Secretariat
Coordinator of the Coalition of Cambodian Farmer Community (CCFC), Chan
Puthisak, a human rights defender from the Boeung Kak Lake community, and Sokun
Sambath Piseth, former staff member at the Center for Labor Rights of
Cambodia (CLaRi). 
 
According to
the information received, on January 5, 2016, the Phnom Penh’s Court of Appeal
set the date of January 26 for the appeal trial against the four
above-mentioned human rights defenders. On the same day, Prime Minister Hun Sen
publicly threatened Mr. Vorn Pao with legal action during a speech for the
inauguration of the Pram Makara overpass in Phnom Penh.
 
The
appeal trial date was set two days after the four defenders participated in a
peaceful memorial ceremony to mark the second anniversary of the January 2-3,
2014 violent crackdown on striking workers and the death of several people
during the events (see background information). This ceremony was dispersed by police and security
forces.
 
Messrs. Vorn
Pao, Theng Savoeun, Chan Puthisak and Sokun Sambath Piseth have been prosecuted
for their involvement in organising and leading the January 2-3, 2014 protests
. 
 
All four
have appealed a conviction dating back to May 30, 2014. On that date, the Phnom
Penh Municipal Court sentenced the four men to suspended sentences ranging from
four to four and a half years of imprisonment[2] on charges of
“intentional violence with aggravating circumstances” under Article 218 of the
Criminal Code[3].
They had also been fined eight million riels (approx. 1,840 Euros)[4].
 
On January
26, 2016, the appeal trial against Messrs. Vorn Pao, Theng Savoeun, Chan
Puthisak, and Sokun Sambath Piseth - which was due to take place at the Phnom Penh’s Court of Appeals - was postponed to an
unknown date, at the request of some of the accused[5].
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing judicial harassment against Messrs.
Vorn Pao, Theng Savoeun, Chan Puthisak and Sokun Sambath Piseth, which only
aims at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities, and calls upon
the Cambodian authorities to put an immediate end to it.
 
Background
information:
 
During the
January 2014 crackdown, government security forces arrested 23 protesters,
including striking garment workers and human rights defenders, at two separate
locations in Phnom Penh. Among those detained were Messrs. Vorn Pao[6],
Theng Savoeun, Chan Puthisak and Sokun Sambath Piseth. The 23 men were held
incommunicado by the authorities for five days, without access to lawyers,
medical care or families, and 21 of the 23 were repeatedly denied bail. It was
only on January 7, 2014 that the authorities finally revealed that Messrs. Vorn
Pao, Theng Savoeun, Chan Puthisak and Sokun Sambath Piseth, among others, were
being held at Correctional Center 3 in Kampong Cham Province. They were all
released on May 30, 2014.
 
On April 25,
2014, the first hearing of the trial against the 23 men arrested, including
Messrs. Vorn Pao, Theng Savoeun, Chan Puthisak, and Sokun Sambath Piseth,
commenced at the Phnom Penh Municipal Court. Four more hearings took place from
May 22 to 30, 2014, when the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced the 23 to
prison terms ranging from one and four and a half years in connection with the
January 2014 crackdown[7].

 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities of Cambodia asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Vorn
Pao, Theng Savoeun, Chan Puthisak and Sokun Sambath Piseth, as well as of all
human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
ii. Put an
end to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against
Messrs. Vorn Pao, Theng Savoeun, Chan Puthisak, and Sokun Sambath Piseth, as
well as against all human rights defenders in the country so that they are able
to carry out their work without hindrance;
 
iii. Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with its:
- Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right,
individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”,
- Article 5(a), which
stipulates that everyone has the right “to meet or assemble peacefully”,
- Article 12.1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.”
-
Article 12.2, which says that “the State shall take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually or
in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration”;
 
iv.
Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human
rights instruments signed or ratified by Cambodia.
 
Addresses:
 
· Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 41
Russian Federation Blvd, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / +855
23 880624 (c/o Council of Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / cppparty@gmail.com
·    
Mr. Sar Kheng, Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior, 275 Norodom
Blvd, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 212708
·    
Mr. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, 240
Sothearos Blvd, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 364 119
·    
Mr. Hor Nam Hong, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, 161 Preah Sisowath Quay, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 216144 /
+855 23 216141 Email: mfaic@mfa.gov.kh
·    
Mr. Mak
Sambath, President of the Cambodian Human Rights Committee, Office of the Prime
Minister, Phnom Penh, Cambodia, Fax: +855 12 813781 / +855 23 211162 / +855 23
881045 (c/o Council of Ministers)
·    
Mr. Sok
An, Deputy Prime Minister, Fax: +855 23 882065, Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh, info@pressocm.gov.kh
·    
Ambassador
Mr. Ney Samol, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva, Chemin de Taverney 3, Case
postale 213, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 788 77 74, Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh / 

cambodge@bluewin.ch

 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective
countries.



[1] IDEA is a labour group that unites
around 4900 workers in Cambodia. The organisation is located in Phnom Penh and
works in protecting the rights of informal workers such as street vendors,
domestic workers and Tuk Tuk drivers. 


[2] Messrs. Vorn
Pao, Chan Puthisak and Sokun Sambath Piseth were sentenced to four and a half
years and Mr. Theng Savoeun to four years.


[3] The charges of the four men were
changed at the last minute as they were initially charged with “intentional
damage with aggravating circumstances” under Article 414 of the Criminal
Code.


[4] In addition, on January 27, 2016, 13
other activists appeared before the Phnom Penh’s Court of Appeals. The appeal's
verdict was issued on February 4, 2016, upholding the convictions of the 13.


[5] On January 26, four other striking
workers were also due to appear alongside Messrs. Vorn Pao, Theng Savoeun, Chan
Puthisak, Sokun Sambath Piseth. A total of 10 individuals had been sentenced in
first instance by the Phnom Penh Municipal Tribunal in that case, but only
eight of them had decided to appeal their sentencing.


[6] Before being arrested, Mr. Vorn Pao
was severely beaten up by the military in the streets. 


[7]
The convictions follow a trial process that was characterised by a total
absence of fair trial standards. The judges failed to act with impartiality,
often favouring the prosecution in the admission of evidence and the permission
to cross-examine witnesses; there was also little evidence of the presumption
of innocence or of the prosecution’s burden to prove guilt beyond reasonable
doubt, as the judges and prosecutors focused mainly on the defendants’ presence
at the protests and possible inconsistency of testimony rather than on finding
evidence that would link them to the charges. 