Martin Ennals Award Ceremony 2013 - 8 October 2013 in Geneva
October  7, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Events / Egypt / 2013 / OctoberMartin Ennals Award Ceremony 2013 - 8 October 2013 in Geneva




At 6pm on October 8,
2013, the Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders will be presented to
the 2013 Laureate at a ceremony hosted by the City of Geneva (UNI-Dufour U-600).
 
Follow the live broadcast of the Ceremony here (from 18:00 GVA time)!
 
Live streaming video by Ustream

This award is given to human rights defenders who
have shown deep commitment and face great personal risk. The aim of the award
is to provide protection through international recognition.
 
The Jury will also select two recipients of the New
Martin Ennals Prizes.
 
The nominees
for the 2013 Martin Ennals Award are: Ms. Mona
Seif from Egypt, the Joint
Mobile Group working Chechnya and Mr. Mario Joseph from Haiti.
 
Mona Seif, Egypt:
Core founder of the” No To Military Trials for Civilians”, a grassroots
initiative which is trying to stop military trials for civilians. Since
February 25, 2011, Mona has brought together activists, lawyers, victims’
families, local stakeholders and started a nationwide movement against military
trials. They have succeeded in putting military trials on the political
agenda, and have helped to overturn of long sentences by military courts. "International solidarity, and I mean
people's support not governments, empowers us to continue our battle and stop
military trials for civilians". 
 Mona Seif - Martin Ennals Award Nominee 2013 from Martin Ennals Award on Vimeo.
Joint Mobile Group, Russia: After the murder of
several human rights activists working in Chechnya,
Igor Kalyapin started the Joint Mobile Group. To reduce the risk they send
investigators on short missions to Chechnya to document Human Rights abuses.
This information is then used to publicise these abuses to seek legal redress.  Igor Kalyapin speaking of the effect of
international publicity said “… when
the international community is watching us it is more difficult for the
authorities to take steps against us…”  
 Joint Mobile Group - Martin Ennals Award Nominee 2013 from Martin Ennals Award on Vimeo.
Mario Joseph, referred to as Haiti’s most important human rights
lawyer, he has worked on some of the most important cases in Haiti, including
the current case against the former dictator Jean-Claude “Baby Doc”
Duvalier. His family received asylum in the United States in 2004, while he
chose to return to Haiti. He has faced threats and harassment for much of his
20 years as a lawyer although it has intensified in recent months.  “This
recognition from the Ennals Award shines a vital spotlight on my work, and on
the work of everyone who is fighting for human rights in Haiti. That spotlight
will make our work safer and more effective.”

 
 
The main award of the human rights movement. The
Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders (MEA) is a unique collaboration
among ten of the world’s leading human rights organizations to give protection to human rights defenders
worldwide.  The Jury is composed of the following NGOs: 




-     
Amnesty International
-     
Human Rights Watch
-     
Human Rights First
-     
Int’l Federation for Human Rights 
-     
World Organisation Against Torture
-     
Front Line Defenders
-     
International Commission of Jurists
-     
German Diakonie
-     
International Service for Human Rights  
-     
HURIDOCS



 
For further information, please contact: Michael Khambatta +41 79
474 8208
khambatta@martinennalsaward.org or visit www.martinennalsaward.org 