Freedom of Assembly under Threat: Muzzling dissent in the Euro-Mediterranean region
December 11, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / Algeria / 2014 / DecemberFreedom of Assembly under Threat: Muzzling dissent in the Euro-Mediterranean regionEMHRN_FoA_Report_English124 pages / 6.26 MBBrussels, 10 December 2014 ─ In its latest report, Freedom of Assembly under Threat: Muzzling Dissent in the Euro-Mediterranean Region,
 the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network (EMHRN) rings the alarm on 
the increasing stifling of the right to peaceful assembly in the region.
The report was launched at the European Parliament on 8 December 2014
 to mark the International Human Rights Day. During the event, sponsored
 by the European Parliament Vice President for Democracy and Human 
Rights, Mr Alexander Graf Lambsdorff, EMHRN members presented the main 
findings of the report and made a set of recommendations to EU decision 
makers.
The speakers particularly addressed the situation of freedom of 
assembly in Morocco, Egypt and Europe. They underlined that meetings and
 demonstrations – especially those critical of the authorities – are 
viewed by states in the Euro-Mediterranean region as a political and 
security risk to be contained, and not as a component of democratic life
 and a right whose exercise the authorities must facilitate.
‘The right of assembly is in Morocco is in real danger’, warned 
Abdelslam Lassal of the Moroccan Association of Human Rights (AMDH). 
‘The Moroccan authorities have been relentless in their crackdown on 
human rights organisations in general, and those working on the right of
 assembly in particular.’
‘All those wishing to publicly protest in Egypt face significant 
risks,’ said Bahey Eldin Hassan, Director of Cairo Institute for Human 
Rights Studies. “Human rights organisations that defend the rights of 
murdered protesters and prisoners are punished through defamation 
campaigns, media distortion, the pursuit of their staff and threats of 
closure and confiscation.”
In Europe also, if the respect for civil liberties is the rule rather
 than the exception, many restrictions and obstacles to the freedom of 
assembly are a reminder that rights must be constantly defended and 
exercised lest they lose their substance.
‘Protest is a healthy, democratic exercise, crucial to good 
governance and accountability,’ said Rosa Curling, Solicitor 
International Human Rights Group (SIHRG).  “However, many European 
member states view protest at best as an inconvenience to be controlled 
or discouraged, and at worst a threat to be suppressed.’
‘It is essential for a democracy to enable opposition, differing and 
minority views to be expressed publicly and peacefully through the 
exercise of the right of assembly and demonstration,’ said Isaías 
Barreñada, member of the Executive committee ‘Therefore, the European 
Union should use every opportunity for dialogue with the authorities of 
both its member states and its neighbouring countries, to promote the 
development of a more conducive environment for the freedom of 
assembly.’
He also called on the EU to make the respect and promotion of freedom
 of assembly an EU priority in the revised EU Action Plan on Human 
Rights and Democracy and European Neighbourhood Policy.
In 2013, EMHRN published the first part
 of the report examining the legislative framework of the right of 
assembly in 11 countries of the Mediterranean and the European Union and
 their compliance with international human rights standards. This second
 part complements the regional study with an analysis of the 
implementation of laws and the exercise of the freedom of assembly and 
demonstration in practice.
Download the separate chapters by country-region here.EMHRN Contact:
Samer Ibrahim Abu Rass
sar@euromedrights.net
Tel: +32 2 213 51 95 