Press Release: In the wake of assassinations of activists, the UN Human Rights Council recognizes the major role of defenders of economic, social and cultural rights
March 24, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / 2016 / MarchPress Release: In the wake of assassinations of activists, the UN Human Rights Council recognizes the major role of defenders of economic, social and cultural rights 
	
Geneva, March 24, 2016 – Days after the murders of land 
and environmental rights activists Berta Cáceres and Nelson 
García in Honduras and of indigenous leader Walter Manfredo 
Méndez Barrios in Guatemala, the UN Human Rights Council adopts today 
a strong resolution focused on economic, social and cultural rights 
defenders. It reaffirms their legitimate work, their protection needs, and 
the states' obligations in this regard. It also condemns attacks against 
human rights defenders and their widespread impunity, within the global 
context of shrinking space for civil society. 

		 

		In the framework of the current globalised world, it has become 
increasingly evident that the pressure on land is unbearable and that 
mobilisation for the respect of the economic, social and cultural rights of 
affected communities has become a high-risk activity. Too often states 
negotiate investments and trade agreements without taking into account the 
needs and will of entire communities, and trample their rights.

		 

		Moreover, private actors, especially national and transnational 
enterprises, both at home and abroad, contribute to human rights violations, 
for instance by implementing hydroelectric or mining projects without 
engaging in consultations to obtain the prior, free and informed consent of 
the affected communities, in particular when these are indigenous peoples. 
Furthermore, in most places, persons who defend communities against 
development projects are attacked or assassinated with almost total 
impunity. They are routinely accused of being “criminals”, 
“traitors”, “terrorists” or “enemies of 
development”. Accessing justice largely remains an illusion for the 
victims.

		 

		In a report published in 2014 
, FIDH and OMCT, within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection 
of Human Rights Defenders, shed light on the daily struggle carried out by 
land rights defenders in all regions in the world, Asia and Latin America 
being the most affected. Confronted with economic super-powers supporting 
unbridled development, land rights defenders face an extremely hostile 
environment and are captured in a seriously disproportionate fight. In fact, 
the affected communities and their activists very often live in remote rural 
areas, far from actors of protection that could ensure their personal 
integrity and help them to seek justice. The aforementioned factors 
facilitate widespread acts of violence against them, the level of violence 
being proportional to sky-rocketing profits.

		 

		Today's resolution was adopted in spite of attempts by a group of 
states led by Russia, Egypt, China, Cuba and Pakistan to 
 obstruct it by proposing numerous amendmentsthat ran counter to 
its spirit and purpose. These hostile amendments mirror the 
 position taken by the same states during the vote last December of 
the UN General Assembly resolution on the protection of human rights 
defenders. The same position was adopted this time at the Human Rights 
Council and shows these states' willingness to repress independent civil 
society at home as well as at the international level, and their failure to 
ensure protection against attacks for defenders.

		 

		Building on this important resolution, the international community – 
including states, regional organisations, businesses, international 
financial institutions, development and other economic actors – should 
unequivocally recognize the role played by economic, social and cultural 
rights defenders, in particular land and environmental rights defenders and 
those who work to protect human rights in the context of corporate 
activities. Human rights and their champions must be placed once and for all 
at the center of the development, trade and investment agendas in order to 
make 
 international governance genuinely open, fair and democratic. 