Human Rights Situation in Darfur_OMCT written statement to the 4th Human Rights Council special session
December 14, 2006
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Events / 2006 / DecemberHuman Rights Situation in Darfur_OMCT written statement to the 4th Human Rights Council special sessionLike other non-governmental organisations (NGOs) that have followed the situation in Darfur since the beginning of the conflict in 2003, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) has observed a number of violations of both human rights and humanitarian law. OMCT remains concerned that the Government of the Sudan and its sponsored “Janjaweed” militias continue to be the primary authors of international human rights and humanitarian law violations, so widespread and systematic, that they amount, according the UN International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur, to war crimes and crimes against humanity. Among the grave violations, OMCT has documented indiscriminate attacks throughout the region against civilians, including killings, torture, enforced disappearances, destruction of villages, rape and other forms of sexual violence, pillaging and forced displacement. Moreover, OMCT has reported on attacks on IDPs camps, along with recourse to sexual violence against women and in several instances of abduction of women and children[1]. Violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law are also being committed by rebel groups.  As stressed by the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Louise Arbour, in her address to the Human Rights Council on 29 November 2006, the human rights situation in Darfur has worsened from July 2005, and has spilled over into Chad and the Central African Republic. Furthermore, attacks on humanitarian staff and convoys have impeded access to people in need across Darfur.  In light of this, OMCT welcomes the fourth Human Rights Council Special Session to address the human rights situation in Darfur and the efforts by the international community to work towards a solution of the conflict in the region.   However, OMCT is alarmed by the Sudanese authorities’ persistent unwillingness to protect civilian populations from the above-mentioned atrocities, coupled with their conspicuous failure to disarm the militias responsible for these crimes and bring their leaders to justice, in spite of explicit Security Council injunctions to this end. Furthermore, following many reports by NGOs, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Sudan, the High Commissioner for Human Rights, etc, documenting the grave human rights violations in the region, OMCT is concerned that, by the end of 2006, no concrete and effective steps have been taken thereon.   OMCT would like to express its worries in regard to attempts to minimize the scale of the human rights violations in the region. Moreover, some States have put into question the link between the Government of the Sudan and the “Janjaweed” militias. The UN Panel of Experts [2] report of October 2006 indicates that it has credible information that the Government of the Sudan continues to support the “Janjaweed” through the provision of weapons and vehicles. The High Commissioner for Human Rights stated that the Government of the Sudan must provide convincing answers regarding its well documented links with the militia, as well as the possible criminal culpability of its officials in aiding or abetting acts committed by the militia on the Government’s behalf.  OMCT calls for the immediate end to the ongoing violations of human rights and international humanitarian law and to the prevailing climate of impunity.  OMCT urges that thorough and impartial investigations are conducted into these events in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply sanctions as provided by law.   OMCT welcomes the proposal by Finland (on behalf of the European Union) to dispatch an urgent assessment mission to Darfur headed by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Sudan.   [1]  www.omct.org  [2]  established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan. 