Israel:  Israel : arbitrary detention and torture against a  Palestinian lawyer
March  5, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2003 / MarchIsrael: Israel : arbitrary detention and torture against a  Palestinian lawyerURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  ISR 001 / 0303 / OBS 010 Arbitrary detention  / Torture Israel 5 March 2003  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint  program of FIDH and OMCT, requests your URGENT intervention in the  following situation in Israel.  Brief description of the situation :  The Observatory has been informed by Defence for Children  International / Palestine Section (DCI/PS) that, on February 21st  2003, Mr. Daoud Dirawi, lawyer for DCI/PS and resident of Jerusalem,  was detained in Jerusalem by Israeli soldiers as he was taking his  daughter to hospital. He was then taken to the Asyun military prison  where he is currently detained without charges and has allegedly been  subjected to torture.   According to the information received, on 21st of February, Mr.  Dirawi and his wife took their daughter to a hospital in the Old City  of Jerusalem. Mr. Dirawi had gone to get some medicine from a  pharmacy in the Old City when he was stopped by Israeli soldiers who  asked him for his ID card. He had left his ID with his wife but  showed them an official paper indicating that he has made family  reunion. He rang his wife to bring his ID. They were made to stand  outside for two hours by the soldiers. Afterwards, a jeep came and  took Mr. Dirawi to Qeshle Police Station near Bab al Khaleel in the  Old City. At Qeshle, the police told Mrs Dirawi that her husband  would be kept for 24 hours and then transferred to a judge. At 8am  the following morning, Mrs. Dirawi rang the police station and they  told her that her husband had been taken by the Israeli Secret  Intelligence (Shabak) and he would be kept for interrogation for 12  days. They refused to tell her where he was or to let him meet with a  lawyer during this period.  On February 24th, another DCI/PS lawyer was able to visit Mr. Dirawi,  in Asyun military prison in the Negev, when he related the details of  his treatment, transportation and detention. Allegedly on the way to  the prison, soldiers beat him, pushed him to the floor of the jeep  and stamped on him with their boots, hitting him with their fists and  rifle butts. Mr. Dirawi sustained heavy bruising and a broken lower  jaw. It has been reported that at the Negev checkpoint, a Russian  soldier, Mr. Strovosky, beat him even more violently in a further  attack.  On his arrival at Asyun military prison at 1.30am on February 22nd,  Mr. Dirawi was tied up outside with his hands locked above him, a  form of torture known as "shabah". He was kept in this position  throughout the freezing rain and snowstorm of that night until  8.30am. When he asked the  prison guards for food, he was punished by being kept in this  position for a further four hours.  According to the information received, soldiers then found out that  Mr. Dirawi was a human rights lawyer and as a consequence of this his  treatment worsened. Mr. Dirawi has been working for DCI/PS as a  researcher and a lawyer for below 18 political prisoners in the  Palestinian courts for 10 months. He is the coordinator of DCI/PS  Juvenile Justice Program in the Palestinian Areas, a program  supported by UNICEF. Prior to joining DCI/PS he was employed by Al  Haq, a Palestinian human rights organization based in  Ramallah. He is also the author of several books and research papers  on Palestinian legal issues, including a pioneering study on the  Palestinian State Security Court, which was published  in 2000.  At the present time, Mr. Dirawihe is allegedly being held, along with  80 others in Asyun prison, without charges or trial, suffering from  extreme cold, hunger and lack of medical care. Under Israeli law, Mr.  Dirawi can be detained for 12 days without charges or coming before a  military judge or court. The prison has no official administration,  and many issues are left up to the individual soldiers.   The Observatory is gravely concerned for the physical and  psychological integrity of Mr. Daoud Dirawi as well as the  allegations of torture used against him. In addition, the Observatory  is seriously concerned by the deteriorating situation of human rights  defenders prevailing in Israel, in particular against human rights  lawyers.   Action requested :  Please write to the authorities of Israel urging them to:  i. Guarantee in all circumstances, the physical and psychological  integrity of Mr. Dirawi and provide him with appropriate medical  treatment as a matter of urgency.  In general, put an end to any form  of harassment against human rights defenders in Israel;   ii. Immediately release Mr. Daoud Dirawi in the absence of charges  against him;   iii. Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the  circumstances of these events, notably the alleged violations of Mr.  Dirawi's fundamental rights and the physical attacks to which he was  subjected in detention, in order to identify those responsible, bring  them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative  sanctions as provided by law;  iv.  Guarantee adequate reparation to Mr. Dirawi;  v.  Conform to the provisions of the Declaration on Humans Rights  Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on  December 9, 1998, in particular article 12.2 which states that "The  State should take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by  the competent authorities of everyone, individually or in association  with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or  de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary  action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the  rights referred to in the present Declaration", article 1 which  states that "everyone has the right, individually or in association  with others, to promote the protection and realization of human  rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international  levels"; and article 9.3.c which states that everyone has the right  "to offer and provide professionally qualified legal assistance or  other relevant advice and assistance in defending human rights and  fundamental freedoms";  vi. Conform to the provisions of the Universal Declaration on Human  Rights and international instruments relating to Human Rights which  bind Israel.  Addresses :  Ariel Sharon, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan  Street, PO Box 187, Kiryat Ben-Gurion, Jerusalem 91919, Israel. Fax:  + 972 2  651 2631  Yosef Lapid, Minister of Justice, 29 Salah Eddin Street, Jerusalem  91010, Israel. Fax : + 972 2 628 8618  Elyakim Rubinstein, Attorney-General, 29 Salah Eddin Street,  Jerusalem, Israel.  Fax:  + 972 2 6285438   Paris - Geneva, 5 March 2003  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the  code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the  protection  of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in  their  time of need.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to  the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer  them concrete support in time of need.  To Contact the Observatory, call The Emergency Line: Tel: FIDH: 33 (0) 1 48 05 82 46      OMCT: 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 E-mail: observatoire@iprolink.ch 