Cambodia:  Ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Messrs. Ny Chakrya, Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony - #FreeThe5KH
December  9, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / DecemberCambodia: Ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Messrs. Ny Chakrya, Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony - #FreeThe5KH





New
information
KHM 001 / 0616 / OBS 047.2
Judicial
harassment /
Arbitrary
detention
Cambodia
December
9, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in
the following situation in Cambodia.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Ny
Chakrya, former Head of the Human Rights and Monitoring Section of the
Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC) and now Deputy
Secretary-General of the National Election Committee (NEC), as well as of four
ADHOC staff members, Messrs. Ny Sokha,
Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony.
 
According to the
information received, on November 30, 2016, the Supreme Court upheld a previous decision adopted by the Court of
Appeals on June 13, 2016 to refuse to
release Messrs. Ny Chakrya, Ny
Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony on bail. The Court based its decision on Article 205 of the Criminal Procedure Code[1],
therefore, upholding the continued applicability of both detention grounds,
i.e. to maintain public order and prevent collusion with accomplices, victims,
and witnesses.
 
The Supreme Court’s verdict
was preceded by two other Court of Appeals rulings. On November 11, 2016, the
five defenders were denied bail for the second time by the Court of Appeals (see
Background information). On November 28, 2016, the Court of Appeals upheld the
extension of the pre-trial detention for another six months and refused to
close the investigation. The Court argued that the issues of the extension of
the detention and the continuation of the investigation were up to the
discretion of the Investigating Judge of the Phnom Penh Municipal Court.
 
The Observatory considers
that this decision infringes upon Article
208 of the Criminal Procedure Code because there is no “clear and
well-motivated warrant” to extend the detention, as stipulated in the article[2].
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing
arbitrary detention of Messrs. Ny Chakrya, Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and
Ms. Lim Mony, which only aims at sanctioning their legitimate human rights
activities, and calls upon the Cambodian authorities to immediately and unconditionally
release the five human rights defenders.
 
Until their
unconditional release, the Observatory further urges the Cambodian authorities
to ensure that all judicial proceedings against them are carried out in full
compliance with their right to a fair trial, as protected under international
law.
 


 
Background
information:
 
On April 27 and 28, 2016, Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay
Vanda, Yi Soksan, Try Chhuon, and Ms. Lim Mony - as well as Mr. Ny Chakrya were
brought in for questioning by the Anti-Corruption Unit (ACU). UNOHCHR official
Mr. Soen Sally, who was also summoned, did not appear before the ACU due
to his immunity as a UN staff member.
 
On
May 2, 2016, following five to six days of questioning by the ACU and then by
the prosecutor, Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Ms. Lim Mony were
charged with “bribery of a witness” under Article 548 of the Criminal Code and
detained. In addition, Messrs. Ny Chakrya and Soen Sally were charged as
“accomplices to bribery of a witness” (Articles 29 and 548 of the Criminal
Code). Mr. Ny Chakrya was also detained.
 
The
charges were related to a complaint signed by Ms. Khom Chandaraty (also known
as Ms. Srey Mom), which was lodged following her questioning in March 2016 by
anti-terrorism police and a prosecutor about an alleged affair with deputy
opposition leader Mr. Khem Sokha, after ADHOC responded to Ms. Srey Mom’s
request for legal and material assistance - a US$204 allowance to cover food
and transport costs. This legitimate support, aimed at covering the basic
expenses of a client, was construed by the ACU as bribery and corruption.
 
On
June 13, 2016, the Court of Appeals in Phnom Penh denied bail to Messrs. Ny
Chakrya, Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Ms. Lim Mony. The defendants
appealed the decision.
 
On
September 22, 2016, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced Mr. Ny Chakrya to six months in prison and
a six-million-Riel (about 1,414 Euros) fine in relation to another criminal
case[3].
Mr. Ny Chakrya filed an appeal
against his conviction. After a hearing scheduled on December 6, 2016, the
Court of Appeals is expected to render its decision on December 14, 2016.
 
On
September 28, 2016, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court denied bail to Messrs. Ny Chakrya, Ny
Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony.
 
On
October 27, 2016, as the period of pre-trial detention of Messrs. Ny Chakrya,
Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony was about to expire, the Phnom
Penh Municipal Court extended the detention of the
five for up to another six months under the pretext that the defendants needed
to remain available for any further interrogation and court procedures.
 
Messrs.
Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, and Yi Soksan remain in detention in Prey Sar’s
Correctional Centre 1 (‘CC1’), while Ms. Lim Mony is detained in Prey Sar’s
Correctional Centre 2 (‘CC2’). Mr. Ny Chakrya is detained in Police Judiciaire
(PJ) prison. All three jails are located in Phnom Penh. All of the detainees
are being held alongside convicted criminals, contrary to Article 10(2)(a) of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), and Article
26 of Cambodia’s Law on Prisons.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of the Kingdom of Cambodia asking them to:
 
i.
Immediately and unconditionally release
Messrs. Ny Chakrya, Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony as their detention is arbitrary since
it only aims at sanctioning their human rights activities;
 
ii.
Guarantee in all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity, as
well as that of all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
iii. Put an end to all forms of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Messrs. Ny Chakrya, Ny
Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Ms. Lim Mony and all human rights defenders in the country so that they are
able to carry out their work without hindrance;
 
iv.
Comply with all the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with its Articles 1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
v.
Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human
rights instruments signed or ratified by the Kingdom of Cambodia.
 
Addresses:
 
·     Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime
Minister, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / +855 23 880624 (c/o
Council of Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / cppparty@gmail.com
·     Mr. Sar Kheng, Minister of Interior, Kingdom of
Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 212708
·     Mr. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of Justice, Ministry
of Justice, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 364 119
·     Mr. Prak Sokhon, Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 216 144 / +855 23 216 141, Email: mfaic@mfa.gov.kh
·     Mr. Sok An, Deputy Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 882 065, Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / info@pressocm.gov.kh
·     Mr. Keo Remy, President of the Cambodian Human
Rights Committee, Office of the Prime Minister, Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855
12 81 37 81 / +855 23 21 11 62 or +855 23 88 10 45 (c/o Council of Ministers)
·     Mr. Bun Hun, President of the Cambodian Bar
Association. Fax: +855 23 864 076, Email: info@bakc.org.kh
·     Ambassador Mr. Ney Samol, Permanent Mission of the
Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22
788 77 74, Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective
countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
December 9, 2016
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory)
was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this programme is
to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.




[1]
Article 205 of the Criminal Procedure Code states that “provisional detention
may be ordered when it is necessary to: […] prevent any harassment of witnesses
or victims or prevent any collusion between the charged person and
accomplices”.


[2]
Article 208 of the Criminal Procedure Code states that “for an adult accused of
a felony, the pre-trial detention shall not exceed 6 (six) months. However,
when this time period ends, the investigating judge can extend the pre-trial
detention for another 6 (six) months each time, by a clear and well-motivated
warrant”.


[3]
See Observatory’s Press Release, September 23, 2016. 