Bahrain:  Nabeel Rajab sentenced to three years imprisonment while judicial harassment continues
August 16, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / AugustBahrain: Nabeel Rajab sentenced to three years imprisonment while judicial harassment continues


URGENT APPEAL -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
New Information
BHR 001 / 0812 / OBS 048.5
Sentencing
Arbitrary
detention / Judicial harassment
Bahrain
August 16, 2012
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the conviction to three
years’ imprisonment of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for
Human Rights (BCHR), Director of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and
FIDH Deputy Secretary General[1].
 
According
to the information received, on August 16, 2012, the Lower Criminal Court
sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab to three years’ imprisonment. Mr. Rajab appeared
before the Court for three cases related to his participation in peaceful
gatherings in favour of fundamental freedoms and democracy:
 
-
The first case relates to charges of “participating in an illegal assembly” and
“calling others to join”, in relation to a protest organised on March 31, 2012
in Manama to denounce the detention of the founder of GCHR, former President of
the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), and former MENA Director at Front
Line, Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja.
 
-
The second case relates to charges
of “involvement in illegal practices and incitement to gatherings and
calling for unauthorised marches through social networking sites” in relation
to preparations for a protest in Manama on January 12, 2012.
 
-
The third case relates to charges of “participating in an illegal assembly” in
relation to several protests that took place in Manama in February 2012.
 
The
Court thus sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab to one year imprisonment for each of
these three cases. 
 
His
relatives were denied access to the courtroom.
 
The
three cases mentioned above were merged on July 26, 2012, and the hearing for
all three cases had been initially re-scheduled to September 26. However, the
date was changed again to August 5, 2012, and the latest hearing took place on
August 12, 2012, leaving no time to the defence to prepare.
 
In
addition, Mr. Rajab also remains charged with allegedly “libelling the
residents of Al Muharraq” after a tweet he posted on his Twitter account on
June 2, 2012 (see background information). He was sentenced by the 5th Lower
Criminal Court to three months’ imprisonment on July 9, 2012, and the Higher
Appeal Court is now expected to issue the verdict on the appeal filed on this
case. The verdict was expected today, but was eventually re-scheduled to August
23, 2012 (see background information).
 
The
Observatory strongly denounces the terms of imprisonment issued against Mr.
Nabeel Rajab and is extremely concerned about the ongoing judicial harassment
against him.
 
The
Observatory therefore urgently calls for the immediate and unconditional
release of Mr. Rajab, as such judicial harassment and ongoing arbitrary
detention seem to merely aim at stifling his legitimate use of the right to
freedom of expression and at hindering his human rights activities.
 
More generally, the
Observatory once again urges the Bahraini authorities to put an end to all acts
of harassment – including at the judicial level – against Mr. Rajab, and to
comply with the relevant international norms and standards, in particular the
United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN
General Assembly on December 9, 1998, and international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Background
information:
 
On
July 9, 2012, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was arrested by masked police officers at his
house[2]
after he had tweeted the following on June 2: "Khalifa,
leave the residents of Al Muharraq, its Sheikhs and its elderly. Everyone knows
that you are not popular here, and if it wasn't for the subsidies, they
wouldn't have gone out to welcome you. When will you step down?".
 
On
the same day, the 5th Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Rajab to three months
imprisonment for allegedly libelling the residents of Al Muharraq through
tweets posted on his twitter account.
 
Following
this sentence, on August 12, the Higher Appeal Court called to the stand the
only police officer responsible for the investigation of this case. The purpose
of the hearing was to identify the possible existence of proofs that Mr. Nabeel
Rajab was indeed the author of that tweet. During the questioning,
inconsistencies were noted in the statements of the police officer. The latter
stated in particular that he was not the technical expert to determine whether
Mr. Rajab was the author of the tweet, and that he was not personally
possessing such proofs. The judge was expected to issue the verdict on August
16, 2012, but on that day, the hearing was postponed to August 23, 2012.
 
In total, five cases were brought against
Mr. Rajab over the past months. 
 
In one of them, relating to charges of
“insulting the statutory bodies” pursuant to Article 216 of the Penal Code, the
court issued its final verdict on June 27, 2012 and
sentenced him to pay a fine of 300 Bahraini dinars. Mr. Rajab was released on
the same day and the travel ban against him was lifted. Such charges had been
pressed against him in relation to tweets he had posted to denounce the lack of
investigation, by the Ministry of Interior, into the killings of civilians.
 
Actions
requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
i.      Release Mr. Nabeel Rajab
immediately and unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since it seems to
merely sanction his human rights activities;
 
ii.     Put an end to any act of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and against all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
iii.   Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel Rajab
and all human rights defenders in Bahrain; 
 
iv.   
Conform
in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular: 
            - its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in
association             with others, to
promote the protection and realization of human rights and         fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels” ;
-       
its Article 6 (c) which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law
and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through
these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those
matters” ;
-       
and its Article 12.2
which states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence
of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”.
 
vi.   Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 


Addresses: 
·      
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of
Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·      
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·      
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice
and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·      
Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Interior, Tel: +973  17572222 and +973 17390000. Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·       Permanent Mission of
Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218
Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of
Bahrain in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
August 16, 2012
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and
OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims
to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line:
·       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80 
·     
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22
809 49 29



[1]                  Mr. Rajab is also a member of the Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch's
Middle East Division  and Chair of CARAM
Asia. 


[2]           
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nENlacyy3Sw&feature=youtu.be 