Indonesia:  Failure to deliver full justice for the killing of human rights defender Munir
September  7, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Indonesia / 2013 / SeptemberIndonesia: Failure to deliver full justice for the killing of human rights defender MunirNine years after the killing of human rights defender Munir Said Thalib,
 Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono must take decisive and 
concrete action to ensure those responsible – including those at the 
highest levels – are brought to justice, and that all defenders of human
 rights are better protected.

President Yudhoyono, who has himself described Munir’s case as a 
“test of our history” has just one year of his presidency remaining, in 
which to ensure full justice and reparations are delivered. The 
President’s failure so far to do so, at a time the protection of human 
rights defenders across the country remains seriously under threat, 
raises serious questions about his legacy.

One of Indonesia’s most prominent human rights campaigners, Munir 
took up the cause of dozens of activists who had been subjected to 
enforced disappearance.  He  co-founded two  human  rights  
organizations,  helped  to uncover  evidence  of  military  
responsibility for human rights violations in Aceh, Papua and 
Timor-Leste  (formerly East Timor), and made recommendations to the 
government on bringing high-ranking officials to justice. In September 
1999, he was appointed to the Commission of Inquiry into Human Rights 
Violations in East Timor (KPP-HAM).

On 7 September 2004, Munir was found dead on a ﬂight from Jakarta to
 the Netherlands. An autopsy carried out by the Dutch authorities showed
 that he had been poisoned with arsenic.  Munir had been in constant 
danger as a result of his human rights work. In 2002 and 2003, his 
office was attacked, and in August 2003, a bomb exploded outside his 
home in Bekasi, West Java.

Although three people have now been convicted for their involvement 
in Munir’s death, there are credible allegations that those responsible 
for his death at the highest levels have not been brought to justice. 
Further, President Yudhoyono has still not published a 2005 report into 
Munir’s killing by an independent fact-finding team, despite such a 
recommendation in his decree on its establishment.

The continuing lack of full accountability for Munir’s killing is a 
chilling reminder to human rights defenders in Indonesia of the dangers 
they face and the utter disregard Indonesian authorities have for their 
crucial work.

We, the undersigned international, regional and local civil society 
organizations from Cambodia, France, Germany, Indonesia, Malaysia, the 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Philippines, Singapore 
and the United Kingdom therefore urge the President of Indonesia to 
ensure that the following steps are taken as a matter of priority:

    - Publication of the 2005 report of the fact-finding team into Munir’s killing as a key step towards establishing the truth;

   -  A new, independent investigation is initiated by the police 
into the murder of Munir to ensure that all perpetrators, at all levels,
 are brought to justice in accordance with international human rights 
standards;

    - A review of past criminal proceedings is conducted by the 
Attorney General into Munir’s killing, including alleged violations of 
international human rights standards; in particular, investigate reports
 of witness intimidation and bring those suspected of committing them to
 justice;

    - Effective steps are taken to ensure that human rights 
violations committed against all human rights defenders are promptly, 
effectively and impartially investigated and that those responsible are 
brought to justice in fair trials; and

    - The passage of specific legislation aimed at providing better legal protection for human rights defenders.

This joint statement is endorsed by:

1.        ACAT (Action des Chrétiens pour l’Abolition de la Torture), France2.        Aceh Online, Indonesia3.        Alternative ASEAN Network on Burma (Altsean-Burma)4.        Amnesty International5.        Article 196.        Arus Pelangi, Indonesia7.        ASEAN Parliamentarians for Human Rights (APHR) Indonesia8.        Asia Indigenous Peoples Pact9.        Asia Monitor Resource Centre, Hong Kong10.        Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC)11.        Asian Muslim Action Network, Indonesia12.        Asia Pacific Human Rights Coalition, New Zealand13.        Asosiasi LBH APIK, Indonesia14.        Badan Advokasi Rakyat (BARA) Persatuan Indonesia (Perindo)15.        Cambodian Center for Human Rights(CCHR), Cambodia16.        Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC)17.        Cambodian League for the Promotion & Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO)18.        Center for Human Rights Law Studies (HRLS) Faculty of Law, Airlangga University, Indonesia19.        Centre for Human Rights Studies University of Surabaya, Indonesia20.        Center for Human Rights Studies of Islamic University of Indonesia21.        Children’s  Human Rights Foundation (Yayasan Pemantau Hak Anak/YPHA), Indonesia22.        Community Legal Education Center (CLEC), Cambodia23.        Cross Cultural Foundation, Thailand24.        Dignity International25.        FORUM-ASIA (Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development)26.        Foundation Pro Papua, the Netherlands27.        GANDA Filipinas, Phillipines28.        Housing Rights Task Force (HRTF), Cambodia29.        Human Rights Ambassador for Salem-News.com, UK30.        Human Rights Foundation of Aotearoa New Zealand, New Zealand31.        Human Rights Working Group (HRWG) Indonesia32.        IMBAS, Germany33.        IMPARSIAL, The Indonesian Human Rights Monitor34.        Indonesia for Humans, Indonesia35.        Indonesian Forum for Budget Transparency (FITRA)36.        Indonesian Legal Aid and Human Rights Association (PBHI)37.        Indonesian Planned Parenthood Association (PKBI), Indonesia38.        Institute for Policy Research and Advocacy (Elsam), Indonesia39.        Jakarta Legal Aid Institute (LBH Jakarta), Indonesia40.        Judicial Support Monitoring Programme (JSMP), Timor-Leste41.        Justice for Peace Foundation, Thailand42.        Kalyanamitra Foundation, Indonesia43.        Koalisi Perempuan Indonesia untuk Keadilan dan Demokrasi (Indonesian Women’s Coalition for Justice and Democracy)44.        KontraS (Commission for The Disappeared and Victims of Violence), Indonesia45.        LBH Masyarakat (The Community Legal Aid Institute), Indonesia46.        LIPS (Sedane Labour Resource Centre/Lembaga Informasi Perburuhan Sedane) ,Indonesia47.        LRC-KJHAM (Legal Resources Center for Gender Justice and Human Rights), Indonesia48.        MADPET(Malaysians Against Death Penalty and Torture)49.        Mauerpark Institut, Germany50.        Mindanao Migrants Center for Empowering Actions, Inc. (MMCEAI), Philippines51.
        Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defender (a joint
 programme of International Federation for Human Rights/FIDH and World 
Organization Against Torture/OMCT)52.        Our Voice, Indonesia53.        Pax Christi, New Zealand54.        Pax Romana-ICMICA55.        Peace Women Across the Globe Indonesia, Indonesia56.        Peoples’ Empowerment Foundation (PEF), Thailand57.        Pergerakan Indonesia58.        Persatuan Aliran Kesedaran Negara (Aliran), Malaysia59.        Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), Philippines60.        Philippine Human Rights Information Center (PHILRIGHTS), Philippines61.        Philippines Migrant Centre, New Zealand62.        Protection International63.        Reclasseering Indonesia64.        Rumpun Tjoet Nyak Dien, Indonesia65.        Sarawak Dayak Iban Association, (SADIA), Borneo, Malaysia66.        SCN - CREST, Indonesia67.        Sehjira Deaf Foundation, Indonesia68.        Solidaritas Perempuan (Women’s Solidarity for Human Rights), Indonesia69.        South East Asian Committee for Advocacy (SEACA)70.        Sawit Watch, Indonesia71.        Serikat Jurnalis untuk Keberagaman,SEJUK (Journalist Association for Pluralism and Diversity), Indonesia72.        Setara Institute, Indonesia73.        Solidaritas Perempuan (Women’s Solidarity for Human Rights). Indonesia74.        Solidarity for Asian Peoples’ Advocacy (SAPA) Working Group on ASEAN75.        Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM), Malaysia76.        TAPOL, United Kingdom77.        Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), Philippines78.        Tafena Tabua Society, Kupang, Indonesia79.        Thai Volunteer Service Foundation (TVS), Thailand80.        Terre des hommes Germany in Southeast Asia.81.        The Initiatives for International Dialog (IID)82.        The Asia-Pacific Solidarity Coalition (APSOC)83.        Think Centre, Singapore84.        Watch Indonesia!, Germany85.        Women Corp of Indonesian Moslem Student Movement (KOPRI PB PMII)86.        Yayasan Mandiri Kreatif Indonesia (Yamakindo), Indonesia87.        Yayasan Transformasi Lepra Indonesia (YTLI), Indonesia88.        Yayasan LINTAS NUSA Batam, Indonesia89.        Youth for Peace Cambodia90.        Youth Resource Development Program, YRDP-Cambodia 