India:  Death threats and acts of intimidaction against a torture victim
July 19, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / India / 2012 / JulyIndia: Death threats and acts of intimidaction against a torture victim
Case IND 190712
Alleged torture and ill-treatment/ Death threats/ Acts of intimidation
and harassment/ No proper investigation/ Risk of impunity
The International
Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requestsyour
URGENT intervention in
the following situation in India/ West Bengal.
Brief description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture
Network, about the death threats, acts of intimidation and harassment against
Mr. Krishna Mondal, a victim
of torture and ill-treatment, and his
family by Border Security Force (BSF) personnel. OMCT is gravely
concerned about his safety and physical and psychological integrity. 
According to the
information received, on 1 January 2012 around 7 am Mr. Krishna Mondal was
working on his farmland when four BSF soldiers from BSF Out-Post No. 9,
Harudanga BSF Camp, came to him. They detained Mr. Krishna Mondal and tied his
hands on his back, without providing him with an explanation for his arrest.
With the butts of their rifles the BSF soldiers assaulted the victim, which
made him fall on the ground. They continued to attack Mr. Mondal by kicking him
with blood-clad feet, and removed his clothes after which they beat him with a
slip of bamboo that was embedded with nails. The whole time the soldiers verbally
abused Mr. Mondal. When the BSF soldiers left, Mr. Mondal was almost
unconscious and suffered from severe injuries, while bleeding from numerous
wounds all over his body. The witnesses, which included Mr. Mondal’s three brothers
and his neighbour, were able to carry him away and ensured a direct medical
treatment by a local doctor. The BSF soldiers reportedly came back later on the
same day and threatened to kill Mr. Krishna Mondal if he would try to lodge a
complaint at the local police station. 
Nevertheless the
victim’s wife, Mrs. Anita Mondal, sent a written complaint to the
Superintendent of Police, Murshidabad, in which she explained the events and
requested that appropriate legal action be taken against the perpetrators. On 1
June 2012, an application was submitted on behalf of Mr. Krishna Mondal before
the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate of Lalbagh, Murshidabad requesting an
investigation into the aforementioned allegations, since no proper
investigation had been conducted after the written complaint. 
According to the
same information received, on 30 June 2012, a homeguard (a governmental
employee assisting the police) from the Raninagar Police Station went to Mr. Krishna
Mondal’s house. He had a notice with him which was just a piece of paper
indicating the name of Mr. Krishna Mondal and two witnesses: Mr. Bijoy Mondal
and one of the local doctors who had treated Mr. Mondal, Mr. Siraj Islam. The
notice did not indicate any other information or details such as the investigating
officer or dates and places. The homeguard only told Mr. Mondal and the two
witnesses to visit the Raninagar police station on 1 July 2012 at 10 am. Out of
fear for the intentions of the police, the victim and one of the witnesses, Mr.
Bijoy Mondal, did not show up. The doctor however did go to the police station
at the said time and place. He was allegedly threatened with dire consequences
following which he denied having examined Mr. Krishna Mondal. 
The next
morning, on 2 July 2012, the homeguard reportedly went back to Mr. Mondal’s
house and told him that he had to go to Raninagar police station or otherwise
face the consequences. A few hours later, around 12 am, some members of the Intelligence
Branch of the Harudanga BSF Camp went to Mr. Mondal’s house and allegedly intimidated
him, in order to induce him to settle with the BSF. They gave him three days to
withdraw his complaint, and referred an ‘impediment misfortune’ that would
await him and the witnesses if he wouldn’t withdraw the case. 
On 3 July 2012,
the Officer in Charge of Raninagar Police Station reportedly called to Mr.
Islam’s mobile phone in order to talk to Mr. Mondal. He intimidated the victim
by saying that Mr. Mondal seems to think of himself as a Mastan (a
person with informal influence) as he did not visit the police station, that he,
the Officer, will fabricate false evidence against Mr. Mondal and thus that Mr.
Mondal will be brought to the police station by the police. 
According to the
same information, on 7 July 2012, four uniformed BSF personnel and another
individual in plain clothes went back to Mr. Krishna Mondal’s house. They
informed him that they were from Harudanga BSF camp. They reportedly asked Mr.
Mondal and the family present in the house why they did not come to BSF camp as
they were asked. The BSF personnel then told Mr. Mondal, his wife, his
sister-in-law, his two brothers and Mr. Bijoy Mondal to follow them to the BSF
camp for investigation. When they refused to go to the BSF camp, the BSF
personnel allegedly forced them by intimidating them. Once they arrived at the
camp, Mr. Mondal and his relatives were put into a cell. They were then
produced one by one before a BSF officer who asked them a set of questions,
notably who prompted them to file a complaint against the BSF. They were then
all made to sign a document although they could not read it and they were not
provided any copy. They had to stay in the camp for about three hours. 
On 8 July 2012, two
individuals who identified themselves from the BSF Intelligence Branch Roshanbagh
Head Quarter accompanied with four uniformed BSF personnel reportedly went to Mr.
Tojammel Haq’s house, a local doctor who had also examined Mr. Krishna Mondal
after he was tortured, and asked about his whereabouts. As he was not home that
day, two BSF officers from Roshanbagh district went back to his house on 10
July 2012. They reportedly wanted to have the medical details of Mr. Mondal. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT
expresses its deep concern about the safety and physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Krishna
Mondal, his family and the witnesses to his case. OMCT urges the competent authorities to guarantee their physical and
psychological integrity at all times, notably by immediately putting in place
adequate protection measures for them, and by suspending the BSF soldiers
believed to be responsible for the allegations of torture and ill-treatment,
pending an investigation. 
OMCT
recalls that the authorities have to fulfil their obligations under
the Indian Constitution and under
international human rights law to protect the
right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, to consider seriously any allegations of torture and
ill-treatment, and to undertake a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent and
impartial investigation in this
regard, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and
apply adequate sanctions.
OMCT also recalls
that victims of torture and ill-treatment must be ensured the right to an
effective remedy for the human rights violations suffered as well as the right
to full redress, including compensation and rehabilitation. At the time of issuing this urgent appeal, neither the
police nor others within the district or state administration have reportedly
undertaken any kind of action into the torture and ill-treatment allegations.
Mr. Mondal remains in a poor physical condition.
Action
requested
Please write to the authorities in India urging them to:

Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Krishna Mondal, his family and the witnesses to the cases; 
Immediately put in
place adequate protection measures for them;
Put an end
to any act of harassment against the victim, his family and the witnesses;
Guarantee
that Mr. Mondal receives the adequate medical care that he requires; 
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into
the alleged acts of torture and ill-treatment suffered by Mr. Mondal, the
death threats and acts of harassment and intimidation, the result of which
must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
Ensure that
adequate, effective and prompt reparation including adequate compensation
and rehabilitation is granted to Mr. Krishna Mondal;
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the
country in accordance with national laws and international human rights
standards

Addresses
Ø Mr. Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, Fax:
+ 91 11 2301 6857;
Ø Union
Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, 104-107 North Block, New
Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309
2979; 
Ø Chief
Justice of India, Supreme
Court, Tilak Marg,
New Delhi -1, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email:
supremecourt@nic.in;  
Ø Justice K. G. Balakrishnan, Chairperson,
National Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House, Copernicus
Marg, New Delhi 110 001, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: chairnhrc@nic.in; 
Ø Mr. Satyabrata Pal, Member, National
Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House, Copernicus Marg, New
Delhi 110 001, Fax: +91 11 2334 0016, Email: satyabrata49@hotmail.com;
Ø Acting Chairman, West Bengal Human Rights
Commission,
Bhabani Bhaban, Alipur, Kolkata -27. Fax +91 33 24799633, Email: wbhrc@cal3.vsnl.net.in; 
Ø M. K. Narayanan, Governor, West Bengal, Raj Bhaban, Kolkata –
62, Phone: +91
33-2200 1641, Fax: +91 33 – 2200 2444 / 2200 1649, secy-gov-wb@nic.in; 
Ø Miss Mamata Banerjee, Chief
Minister, Government of West Bengal, Writers’ Buildings, BBD Bagh, Kolkata
– 1, Fax - +91 33 22145480, Email - cm@wb.gov.in, sechome@wb.gov.in; 
Ø Permanent
Mission of India to the United Nations (Geneva),Rue du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Tel: +41
22 906 86 86, Fax: +41 22 906 86 96,
Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of India in your respective country.
*******
Geneva, 19 July 2012
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply. 