Turkey:  Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Dr. Istar Gozaydin
December 30, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2016 / DecemberTurkey: Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Dr. Istar Gozaydin
TUR 009 / 1216 / OBS 111
Arbitrary detention /
Denial of access to lawyers /
Judicial harassment
Turkey
December 30, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Turkey.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the
arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Dr. İştar Gözaydın, professor of law and politics and founder of the
human rights NGO the Helsinki Citizens Assembly. She was also the Head of
Department of Sociology at Gediz University, Izmir Province, until she was
relieved of her functions on July 21, 2016, when the University was closed down
under the State of Emergency[1].
 
According to the information received, on December 28, 2016, Dr. İştar
Gözaydın was formally arrested on suspicion of “being a member of an armed terror
organisation” on the basis of alleged testimonies from a secret witness and an
intelligence report. Dr. İştar Gözaydın had been taken into custody from her
house on December 20, 2016 at 6 am by the police of Financial and Organised
Crimes Department of the Directorate General of Security with an arrest warrant
issued by İzmir Prosecutor, and was brought on the same day to İstanbul by
plane. She was detained at the remand centre of the police until December 28, when
she was returned to Izmir by plane. 
 
She has since been detained at Şakran prison, İzmir
Province. Her arbitrary detention and judicial harassment are part of the FETÖ/PDY
(Fethullahist Terror Organisation/ Parallel State Structure) Investigation
launched in 2015 by İzmir Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office and Organised
Crime Bureau Prosecutor’s Office into Gediz
University, targeting several academics, following July’s failed coup. The
investigation is based on allegations that these academics are either members,
or connected to terrorist organisations.
 
Furthermore, Dr. İştar Gözaydın was denied proper access to her lawyer
during the first days of her detention. Indeed, although her lawyer was able to
meet her on the second day of her detention, he was not able to access the
investigation file, as it was restricted. In addition, the police took her
statement only on the fifth day of her detention. Furthermore, to date her
husband has been unable to visit her while in detention.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the arrest, detention and judicial
harassment of Dr. İştar Gözaydın and urges the Turkish
authorities to immediately and unconditionally release her as her detention
appears to be a form of retaliation for her human rights activities. Dr. Gözaydın is particularly known for her positions against capital punishment and mob violence in Turkey.
 
Until she is released, the Observatory calls upon the Turkish
authorities to ensure her physical and psychological integrity as well as that
any proceedings against her are carried out in full compliance with her right
to a fair trial, as protected under international law, which includes access to
her lawyer.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Turkey asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Dr. İştar Gözaydın, as well as that of all human rights defenders in Turkey;
 
ii. Immediately and unconditionally
release Dr. İştar Gözaydın as her detention is arbitrary since it
only seems to aim at sanctioning her human rights activities;
 
iii. Guarantee her right to a fair trial, as protected
under international law, including access to her lawyer;
 
iv. Put an end to all forms of harassment
- including at the judicial level - against Dr. İştar Gözaydın and all human rights defenders in the
country so that they are able to carry out their work without hindrance;
 
v. Comply with all the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998,
in particular with its Articles 1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
vi. Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other
international human rights instruments signed or ratified by the Turkey.
 
Addresses:

President of Turkey,
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525 58 31, E-mail: contact@tccb.gov.trPrime Minister of
Turkey, Mr. Binali Yıldırım, Fax: +90 (312) 403 62 82Minister of Justice,
Mr. Bekir Bozdağ, Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33 70; E-mail: info@adalet.gov.trMinister of Interior,
Mr. Süleyman Soylu, Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30; Email: ozelkalem@icisleri.gov.trAmbassador Izzet
Selim Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the European Union in Brussels,
Belgium; Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50Ambassador Mehmet
Ferden Çarikçi, Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Turkey in
your respective country. ***Paris-Geneva, December 30, 2016 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European
Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.



[1] A Statutory Decree No.667 issued on July 23 closed Gediz University for
alleged membership and connection to FETÖ/Parallel State Structure thus
constituting a threat. 