Bahrain:  Acquittal of Nabeel Rajab on one case but arbitrary detention and judicial harassment continue
August 23, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2012 / AugustBahrain: Acquittal of Nabeel Rajab on one case but arbitrary detention and judicial harassment continue


URGENT APPEAL -
THE OBSERVATORY

 
New Information
BHR 001 / 0812 / OBS 048.6
Acquittal
Arbitrary
detention / Judicial harassment
Bahrain
August 23, 2012
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New
information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about
the acquittal of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights
(BCHR), Director of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and FIDH Deputy
Secretary General[1], in one of the cases brought against him, but
recalls that the latter remains arbitrarily detained on the basis of three
other sentences related to three other cases.
 
According to the information received, on August 23, 2012,
Mr. Nabeel Rajab was acquitted by the Higher Appeal Court in relation to a case
brought against him for allegedly “libelling the residents of Al Muharraq”
after a tweet he posted on his Twitter account on June 2, 2012 (see background
information). He had been sentenced by the 5th Lower Criminal Court to three
months imprisonment on July 9, 2012, and had appealed the sentence.
 
The Observatory is however gravely concerned about Mr.
Rajab's statements made in court today, according to which he was subjected to
psychological and physical torture while in detention.
 
The Observatory welcomes this decision, but strongly
condemns his ongoing arbitrary detention, as he was sentenced on August 16,
2012 to three years' imprisonment in three other cases brought against him for preparation
of and participation in unauthorised marches 
(see background information).
 
The Observatory calls for his immediate and unconditional
release, as his judicial harassment and ongoing arbitrary detention merely aim
at hindering his human rights activities. The Observatory also recalls that
acts of torture and ill-treatment are criminal offences that should be duly
sanctioned according to law.
 
The
Observatory more generally urges the Bahraini authorities to put an end to all
acts of harassment against Mr. Rajab, and to comply with the relevant
international norms and standards, in particular the United Nations (UN)
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on
December 9, 1998, and international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Background
information:
 
On July 9, 2012, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was arrested by masked
police officers at his house[2] after
he had tweeted the following on June 2: "Khalifa,
leave the residents of Al Muharraq, its Sheikhs and its elderly. Everyone knows
that you are not popular here, and if it wasn't for the subsidies, they
wouldn't have gone out to welcome you. When will you step down?".
 
On the same day, the 5th Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr.
Rajab to three months imprisonment for allegedly libelling the residents of Al
Muharraq through tweets posted on his twitter account.
 
Following this sentence, on August 12, the Higher Appeal
Court called to the stand the only police officer responsible for the
investigation of this case. The purpose of the hearing was to identify the
possible existence of proofs that Mr. Nabeel Rajab was indeed the author of
that tweet. During the questioning, inconsistencies were noted in the
statements of the police officer. The latter stated in particular that he was
not the technical expert to determine whether Mr. Rajab was the author of the
tweet, and that he did not personally possess such proofs. The judge was
expected to issue the verdict on August 16, 2012, but on that day, the hearing
was postponed to August 23, 2012.
 
On August 16, 2012, the Lower Criminal Court had also
sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab to three years imprisonment. Mr. Rajab appeared
before the Court for three cases related to his participation in peaceful
gatherings in favour of fundamental freedoms and democracy:
 
- The first case relates to charges of “participating in an
illegal assembly” and “calling others to join”, in relation to a protest
organised on March 31, 2012 in Manama to denounce the detention of the founder
of GCHR, former President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), and
former MENA Director at Front Line, Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja.
 
- The second case relates to on charges of “involvement in illegal practices
and incitement to gatherings and calling for unauthorised marches through
social networking sites” for a protest in Manama on January 12, 2012.
 
- The third case on relates to charges of “participating in
an illegal assembly” in relation to several protests that took place in Manama
in February 2012.
 
The Court sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab to one year
imprisonment for each of these three cases.
 
In total, five cases
were brought against Mr. Rajab over the past months. 
 
Actions
requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 
 
Release Mr. Nabeel Rajab
     immediately and unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since it
     seems to merely sanction his human rights activities;
 
Order a thorough,
     impartial and effective investigation into the alleged acts of torture and
     ill-treatment mentioned above, in order to identify all those responsible,
     bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply to
     them the penal sanctions provided by the law;
 
Put an end to any act of
     harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and
     against all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
Guarantee the physical and
     psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel Rajab and all human rights defenders
     in Bahrain; 
 
Conform
     in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human
     Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations
     General Assembly, in particular: 
            - its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in
association         with others, to
promote the protection and realization of human rights and        fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels” ;
-       
its Article 6 (c) which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others to study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law
and in practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through
these and other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those
matters” ;
-       
and its Article 12.2
which states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”.
 
vi.   Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 


Addresses: 
·      
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of
Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·      
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·      
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister
of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·      
Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA,
Minister of Interior, Tel: +973  17572222 and +973 17390000. Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·       Permanent Mission of
Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218
Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of
Bahrain in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
August 23, 2012
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and
OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims
to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +
     41 22 809 49 29



[1]                 Mr. Rajab is also a member of the Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch's
Middle East Division  and Chair of CARAM
Asia. 


[2]           
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nENlacyy3Sw&feature=youtu.be 