Angola:   Ongoing judicial harassment of Mr. Rafael Marques de Morais
April  3, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Angola / 2018 / AprilAngola:  Ongoing judicial harassment of Mr. Rafael Marques de Morais

URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY


AGO 001 / 0615 / OBS 071.1
Judicial
harassment
Angola
April 3, 2018
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Angola.
 
New information: 
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial
harassment of Mr. Rafael Marques de
Morais, award-winning investigative journalist known for his articles
denouncing corruption[1]. 
 
According
to the information received, on March 19, 2018, Mr. Rafael Marques de Morais
appeared before the Criminal Court of the Province of Luanda facing charges of
“outrage towards a sovereign body” (ultraje ao órgão de soberania – in this instance former President José
Eduardo dos Santos) under Article 25, paragraph 1 of the Law on Crimes
against the State Security and Article 105, paragraph 1 of the Angolan
Constitution, and “insult towards public authority” (injúrias contra
autoridade pública – in this
instance former Attorney General João Maria Moreira de Sousa) under
Article 181 of the Angolan Penal Code. If convicted, he faces up to four years
and six months in prison.
 
These
charges relate to an article published on the anti-corruption
website Maka Angola in November
2006[2].
In the article, Mr. Rafael Marques de Morais exposed the illegality
of Angola’s former Attorney General, Mr. João Maria Moreira de Sousa[3],
activities as a property and real estate developer in addition to his legal
duties, action which violates the “Principle of exclusive dedication” enshrined
in the Angolan Constitution. The article also reported that the President, Mr.
José Eduardo dos Santos, supported some of his subordinates who had been
accused corruption.
 
In
addition, Mr. Mariano Brás, Director of the fortnight weekly newspaper “O Crime” also appeared in court facing
charges of “defamation against public authority” under Article 181 of the Penal
Code for having reproduced and disseminated the information collected by the
investigative journalist[4].
 
During
the hearing, the plaintiffs’ lawyers submitted a last-minute request to
postpone the trial sine die and requested the trial’s proceedings to be
held in camera (i.e. closed to the public). The Court rejected their
demands. The defence lawyers argued that the information reported by Mr. Rafael
Marques de Morais was of public interest and supported by sufficient evidence.
Consequently, they requested the action to be dismissed.
 
The
trial was postponed to April 16, 2018, due to the absence of the main
plaintiff, former Attorney General João Maria Moreira de Sousa. 
 
A
civil case based on the same facts is also pending against Mr. Rafael Marques
de Morais (see background information).
 
The
Observatory recalls that this is not the first time Mr. Rafael Marques de
Morais is being targeted for his legitimate and peaceful human rights
activities. After the publication in 2011 of his book, “Blood Diamonds: Corruption and Torture in Angola”[5],
he has faced continuous judicial harassment[6]. Following its publication, eight
Angolan generals and two private mining companies sued Mr. Marques de Morais
for defamation – twice in Portugal where the book was originally published and
once in Angola. Mr. Marques de Morais was found guilty by the Luanda Provincial
Tribunal on May 28, 2015 for committing “slanderous denunciation” against 12
individuals, including members of the armed forces. He was sentenced to six
months suspended jail term.
 
Under José
Eduardo dos Santos’ administration, the Observatory had documented numerous
cases of harassment, including judicial and administrative harassment, acts of
intimidation, threats and other forms of restrictions to their freedom of
association and expression targeting human rights defenders and journalists
denouncing issues deemed to be sensitive such as corruption, bad governance,
forced demolitions, forced evictions or the human rights situation in Cabinda[7].
 
Thus,
the Observatory particularly deplores the ongoing judicial harassment of Mr.
Rafael Marques de Morais despite new President Joao Lourenço’s promises to fight corruption and
to open the democratic space,
and urges the Angolan authorities to end all forms of harassment against him,
including at the judicial level and to ensure respect for freedom of
association and expression.
 
Background information: 
 
On December
26, 2016, the Criminal Investigation Service called Mr. Rafael Marques de
Morais for interrogation. On May 25, 2017, the then-Attorney General, Mr. João
Maria de Sousa, acting as a private citizen, filed a civil lawsuit against Mr.
Rafael Marques de Morais under the offences of “abuse of press freedom” under
Article 74, paragraph 2, d of the former Media Law No. 7/06, “slander” under
Article 7 of the Penal Code, and “defamation” under Article 410 of the Penal
Code.
 
On June 20,
2017, the Office of the Attorney General came up with new charges against Mr.
Rafael Marques de Morais: “outrage towards a sovereign body”, in this instance
former President José Eduardo dos Santos, “insult towards public authority”, in
this instance former Attorney General João Maria Moreira de Sousa.
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write
to the authorities in Angola, urging them to:
 
i.              
Put an end to all forms of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Rafael Marques de
Morais and all human rights defenders in Angola so that they are able to carry
their peaceful and legitimate human rights activities without any hindrance or
fear of reprisals;
ii. In the
meantime, ensure that any judicial proceedings against Mr. Rafael Marques de
Morais is carried out in full compliance with the defendants’ right to a fair
trial, as protected under international law;
 
iii.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr.
Rafael Marques de Morais as well as of all human rights defenders in Angola;
 
iv. Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular
its Articles 1, 12.1 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in
all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Angola.
 
Addresses:
·      
President of the Republic of Angola,
H.E. João Lourenço, Civil House, Fax :
+244 222 370 366
·      
Minister of justice and human
rights, Mr. Francisco Manuel Monteiro de Queiroz,
Fax: +244 222 330 327
·      
Director of National Center of Human
Rights, Ms. Ana Celeste Januario, Fax: +244 222 333 407; Email:
ana.januario@minjusdh.gov.ao and celestejanuario5@yahoo.com
·      
Ambassador Mr. Apolinário Jorge
Correia, Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations in Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: + +41 22 732 30 72; Email: ambmission.angola@bluewin.ch
·      
Ms. Elizabeth Simbrão; Ambassador of
Angola to the Kingdom of Belgium, in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and
Diplomatic Mission at the European Union; Fax: Fax: +32 2 344 08 94; Email:
info@angolaembassy.be
 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of Angola in your respective country.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, April 3, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·    
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·    
Tel
and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·    
Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 
 
 



[1]                 Mr. Rafael Marques de Morais
has earned several international awards for his anti-corruption investigative
work, including the National Endowment for Democracy’s 2017 Democracy Award,
the 2013 Integrity Award from Transparency International, the Gerald Loeb Award
for International Reporting, the 2014 UCLA Anderson School of Management
(co-winner with Kerry A. Dolan, Forbes)
and the 2015 Allard Prize for Integrity from the British Columbia University. 


[2]                                  “Attorney
General of the Republic involved in corruption” published in November 2006.



[3]                
Former Attorney General João Maria Moreira de Sousa
was relieved by President Lourenço last December.


[4]                                  “So moves the
country. The General Attorney of the Republic is accused of corruption”,
published on November 26, 2016.


[5]                 In “Blood
Diamonds: Corruption and Torture in Angola” (Diamantes de Sangue: Corrupção e Tortura em Angola), Mr. Marques de
Morais documents and denounces the corruption, allegations of homicides,
torture, forced eviction of civilian settlements and intimidation of
inhabitants of the diamond-mining areas of Angola’s Lundas region by some state
agents and business entrepreneurs.


[6]                 See the Observatory’s press release
published on May 28, 2015 and June 18, 2015 and open letter of June 7, 2016.


[7]                See the Observatory’s report “Angola:
They want to keep us vulnerable” – Human rights defenders under pressure,
published on May 19, 2015. 