Pakistan: Open Call
February 11, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Reports and Publications / 2019 / FebruaryPakistan: Open CallDownload full article19 KB
Terms of Reference for: A National Consultation on the Implementation of CAT
Recommendations; a Workshop on an anti-torture law and Campaign; and for the
organizational support of an OMCT follow-up mission to Pakistan
I.      
ORGANIZATIONAL AND PROJECT BACKGROUND 
A.    
The OMCT
The World
Organization Against Torture (Organisation Mondiale Contre la Torture – OMCT)
was founded in 1985. Based in Geneva but working through its large and active
SOS-Torture Network working in more than 90 countries, it is among the largest
civil society coalitions fighting against torture and all other forms of cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the world. The mission of the
OMCT is to contribute to the eradication of torture, summary executions,
disappearances, arbitrary detention and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment and to provide protection to victims and potential
victims through its global network of civil society organizations working in
partnership and solidarity. Moreover, the OMCT is the Civil Society
Organizations (CSO) coordinator for the United Nations Committee Against
Torture (hereinafter CAT) and provides support to civil society organizations
engaging with CAT.
Further
information about the OMCT and its activities with the UN Committee Against
Torture can be found on the website, as well as
the OMCT’s CAT Blog, or through our social
media outlets on Facebook and Twitter. 
B.     
The Project 
Pakistan
has ratified the Convention against Torture in 2010 and has submitted its
initial report to the CAT in 2016. The CAT reviewed Pakistan’s implementation
of the Convention in its 60th Session held in Geneva in April and
May 2017. The OMCT has supported CSOs engagement with the CAT, i.e. in organizing
a CSO workshop on CAT reporting, in drafting alternative reports and in
briefing the CAT members in a private session. 
As a
follow-up to the CAT review, the OMCT would like to support a civil society
organization in; 
·      
Organizing
a national consultation on the implementation of the recommendations
adopted by the CAT in May 2017;
·      
A workshop
on an anti-torture law 
·      
Organizing
an OMCT follow-up mission to Pakistan. 
The national consultation and the
workshop will be organized back to back and have to be carried out in June 2019.
This
project is part of OMCT’s Civil Society United Against Torture Initiative. The OMCT’s
activities contributing to the implementation of the Convention against Torture
are supported by the European Union (EU), the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
the Swiss Ministry of Foreign Affairs (DFAE) and Irish Aid. 
II.    
SCOPE OF THE ASSIGNMENT AND METHODOLOGY
A.    
National
Consultation on the implementation of CAT recommendations
In 2017, in its concluding observations on
Pakistan’s initial report, the CAT made several recommendations related to the
widespread use of torture by police, inadequate investigations of complaints of
torture, torture in the context of counter-terrorism efforts, impunity for
torture by military and paramilitary forces and intelligence agencies, the criminalization
of torture, fundamental legal safeguards, reprisals against journalists and
human rights defenders, enforced disappearance, independent prison monitoring,
violence against women and “honour killings”, trafficking and forced labour, corporal
punishment, juvenile justice procedure that are incompatible with the
Convention, and redress and compensation for victims of torture.[1]
The government has to implement these recommendations. 
The one-day national consultation aims at bringing
together relevant actors and stakeholders, including relevant governmental authorities,
the national human rights institution, members of the judiciary and
legislative, CSOs, and journalists to strategize and discuss the implementation
of the Convention in general and the CAT recommendations in particular. 
The budget for this activity is as follows: 900
EUR local transportation, 1400 EUR for per diem, 1500
EUR for meeting expenses for the national consultation, 700 EUR for a
journalist briefing (meeting expenses), and 2700 EUR as direct assistance to
the organization.
B.     
Workshop on
an anti-torture Law and Campaign
Although the Constitution of Pakistan, the Penal
Code and the Police Order 2002 prohibit torture (or the infliction of “hurt”), Pakistan’s
legislation fails to explicitly criminalize torture and does not provide a
specific definition of torture that incorporates all the elements of article 1
of the Convention. Furthermore, victims of torture do not enjoy the full rights
to complain and redress as provided in the Convention.
In March 2015, the Senate passed the Torture,
Custodial Death and Custodial Rape (Prevention and Punishment) Act 2014.[2]
The draft bill remains pending before the National Assembly. A similar bill was
approved by the sub-committee of the National Assembly’s Committee on the
Interior in January 2017.[3]

In June 2017, the CAT in its concluding observations,
recommended to the government of Pakistan that it “take the necessary measures
to incorporate into its legislation a specific definition of torture that
covers all the elements of the definition contained in article 1 of the
Convention against Torture and establishes penalties that are commensurate with
the gravity of the act of torture. The CAT encourages the State party to review
the torture, custodial death and custodial rape (prevention and punishment)
bill to ensure its full compatibility with the Convention and promote its
adoption, or propose new legislation to accomplish that.”
The activity seeks to capitalize on the CAT review
and the above-mentioned specific recommendation by engaging relevant executive
and legislative actors, the national human rights institution, CSOs, and other
stakeholders in a one-day workshop. The workshop will discuss inter alia (i) content and provisions of
an anti-torture bill, taking into account the draft bills that have been passed
by the Senate and the National Assembly’s Committee on the Interior
respectively; (ii) the requirements and elements for anti-torture legislations
under the Convention against Torture, and other relevant international treaties
binding upon Pakistan; and (iii) strategies around how to gain support,
initiate and pass anti-torture legislation. 
The workshop will have to include the relevant
stakeholders including those representing groups particularly vulnerable to
torture such as children, minorities, and women.
This action further supports advocacy and
campaigning directed at the adoption of anti-torture legislation.  
The budget for the workshop and campaigning is as
follows: 1100 EUR for meeting expenses of the workshop, 2000 EUR for
campaign/communication, and 2200 EUR for organizational costs.
C.    
Organizational
support of an OMCT follow-up mission 
The OMCT
carried out three missions to Pakistan between 2014 and 2016 during which it
met with representatives of civil society, the government, the national human
rights institution, lawyers, and members of Parliament and discussed the
implementation of the Convention against Torture as well as how to engage with
the CAT regarding the review of Pakistan’s initial report. 
Following
the CAT review, the OMCT plans to undertake a 5-day mission in June 2019 with
one OMCT representative and one international expert. The mission will coincide
with the workshop and the national consultation.
The
activity seeks support in setting up meetings with relevant governmental
authorities, CSOs, and the national human rights institution.
The compensation
for the organizational cost for this activity is 500 EUR. (This does not
include travel and per diem for the OMCT representative and the expert as this
expense will be covered by the OMCT).
IV.       DURATION and
DEADLINES
The workshop
and national consultation have to be organized back to back in June 2019. 
Two separate
narrative and financial reports for the national consultation and the workshop
respectively, will have to be submitted to the OMCT by 31 August 2019. 
V.   REQUIREMENTS and
ELEGIBILITY
Organisations
with the following profile and competencies are encouraged to express their
interest: 
Pakistan civil society organisations
specialized in working on the prohibition against torture, including
torture and ill-treatment in detention, violence against women, violence
against children, extrajudicial killings, the death penalty and enforced
disappearance;Pakistan
civil society organizations that have experience in organizing national consultations
and workshops;Pakistan civil society organizations that have engaged
with United Nations treaty bodies (preferably) and/or Human Rights Council
including Universal Periodic Review and Special Procedures.
VI. APPLICATIONS AND
CONSIDERATION 
Applications
will be accepted up to the 3rd March 2019, only via email, to Nicole Bürli, Human
Rights Adviser at the OMCT, at: nb[at]omct.org.
Thank you for understanding that we cannot answer phone enquiries. 
In order for your application to
be considered, please send an email indicating "Pakistan:
National Consultation and Workshop" in the subject heading, with three narrative applications: 
1.     Short narrative regarding the
national consultation
-       Draft agenda
-       Identifying the persons, organisations, and agencies to invite for the national
consultation and the workshop (including the approximate number of people to be
invited)
-      
short explanation on how the
journalist briefing will be organized
-       proposed date
2.     Short narrative regarding the
workshop
-       Draft agenda
-       Identifying the persons, organisations, and agencies to invite for the national
consultation and the workshop (including the approximate number of people to be
invited)
-      
short description of campaign ideas
for the adoption of anti-torture legislation, including planned outputs
-       Proposed date
3.     Short narrative regarding the
mission
-       Short list of people,
organisations and/or governmental agencies proposed to meet during the mission
A budget with estimate costs
should be attached to the narrative for the national consultation and the
workshop.
Please note, co-applications by two or more
organisations will also be accepted. 

This call has been produced with the
financial assistance of the European Union, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
the Netherlands, the Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs and Irish Aid. The contents of this call are the sole responsibility of OMCT and can under no
circumstance be regarded as reflecting the positions of the European Union, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, the Swiss Federal Department of
Foreign Affairs or Irish Aid. 
                                                                                                                        
                                                



[1] ttps://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CAT%2fC%2fPAK%2fCO%2f1&Lang=en.
For more information
on the CAT review see also Reports from Civil Society Organisatations as well
as the Summary Records on the dialogue between the CAT members and the
delegation of Pakistan: https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/TreatyBodyExternal/countries.aspx?CountryCode=PAK&Lang=EN.
The dialogue between the government and CAT members can also be watched here: http://webtv.un.org/search/consideration-of-pakistan-1506th-meeting-60th-session-committee-against-torture/5400323914001/?term=&lan=english&cat=60th%20session&sort=date&page=2
and here: http://webtv.un.org/search/consideration-of-pakistan-contd-1508th-meeting-60th-session-committee-against-torture/5403890548001/?term=&lan=english&cat=60th%20session&sort=date&page=2.



[2] http://www.senate.gov.pk/uploads/documents/1438775288_445.pdf.


[3]
http://epaper.brecorder.com/2017/01/20/12-page/841370-news.html. 