Egypt:  Joint Open Letter to Member and Observer States of the UN Human Rights Council
March  8, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2017 / MarchEgypt: Joint Open Letter to Member and Observer States of the UN Human Rights CouncilEgypt_080317_OL_HRC342 pages / 405 KB
To: Member and Observer States of
the UN Human Rights Council
Cc: HRC Bureau and Secretariat
Geneva, 8
March 2017
Re: Concerns regarding respect for
human rights in Egypt 
Excellencies,

On
the occasion of the 34th session of the Human Rights Council (HRC),
the signatory organisations would like to draw your attention on Egypt, newly
elected as a member for the period 2017-2020. 
According
to Resolution 60/251, paragraph 8, adopted by the General Assembly on April 3,
2006, “when electing
members of the Council, Member States shall take into account the contribution
of candidates to the promotion and protection of human rights and their
voluntary pledges and commitments made thereto”[1].
In this regard, the deteriorating human rights situation in Egypt, as well as its
failure to comply with its human rights commitments made in front this very
institution during its 28th session in March 2015, is a source of
great concern. 
During
the 2nd cycle of Egypt’s Universal Periodic Review, Egypt committed
to take the following steps regarding human rights defenders: 
·      
ensure an enabling and conducing environment for civil society, including
through a revised NGO law that conforms to the provisions enshrined in the Constitution
as well as to international standards; 
·      
ensure the protection of human rights defenders and other civil society actors
while exercising their human rights, including their freedoms of expression,
association and assembly.
Moreover,
regarding the fight against torture and ill-treatment, Egypt committed to: 
·      
adopt a more comprehensive definition of torture in the national
legislation, by amending Article 126 of the Penal Code, in order to harmonise
it with Article 1(1) of the UN Convention Against Torture (CAT); 
·      
submit
its reports to the UN Human Rights Committee and Committee
against Torture, 
·      
strengthen
the investigation and prosecution of the crime of torture,
in particular when committed by State security agents;
·      
ensure that all detainees are protected by law and physically against torture. 
Nevertheless,
two years after making these commitments, the Egyptian authorities have still
not taken action. 
They
have failed to guarantee an enabling environment for civil society and human
rights defenders. Two new draft NGO laws released between September and
November 2016 contained draconian provisions that violate the Egyptian
Constitution and international standards. 
Egyptian
authorities have been cracking down on independent civil society and human
rights defenders in the country, including through asset freezes, travel bans
and systematic criminalisation within case 173/2011, known as the “foreign
funding case”, in which defenders may incur in life sentences for receipt of
unauthorised foreign funding. As Member and Observer States of the UN Human
Rights Council, you had the possibility to witness the gravity of the situation
thanks to the High-Level Panel intervention last week of Ms Mozn Hassan, founder and executive director
of Nazra for Feminist Studies, 2016 “Right
Livelihood” Award Laureate and one of the most prominent women human rights
defenders in the country.
Moreover,
Egypt has not brought the definition of the crime of torture in line with
international standards, nor increased the fight against impunity for torture
perpetrators and the protection and redress of victims. The case of the disappearance,
torture and killing of Italian PhD student Giulio Regeni is an example among
many others that has resonated in the world.
Furthermore,
the Egyptian authorities have been undermining attempts to fight torture effectively
in the country. One such example is the charges brought against human rights
lawyer Mr Negad El-Borai and the United Group – Attorneys-at-law,for presenting a Bill for the
prevention of torture to the Egyptian authorities and advocating for its
adoption in order to bring the national legislation in compliance with
international standards. Moreover, after a year of harassment, El Nadeem Center for the Rehabilitation of
Victims of Torture and Violence has been recently closed for conducting
activities beyond its victims’ assistance mandate, such as producing reports
and statistics on torture.
Finally,
rather than addressing these human rights concerns, the Egyptian Government has
still not submitted any report to the UN Human Rights Committee nor to the
Committee against Torture. It has not done so since 2002.
All
this happens in the context of a dramatic deterioration of the human rights
situation in the country, with a notable increase in cases of torture, deaths
in detention and enforced disappearances and highly prevalent gender-based violence. In light of this, the presence of a free and vibrant civil society in
Egypt is crucial to seeing these concerns addressed, and to seeing the
government effectively implementing its international human rights commitments.

Your
Excellencies, we call on you to take our concerns with the most serious
consideration and to raise them, jointly and individually, at the current
session of the UN Human Rights Council.
We
thank you for your attention and we look forward to your reply.
Best
regards,
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
Euro-Mediterranean
Network for Human Rights (EuroMed Rights)
Front
Line Defenders



[1] See UN Doc. A/RES/60/251 here:
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/A.RES.60.251_En.pdf. 