Syrian Arab Republic:  Arbitrary detention of Mr. Fayez Sarah and Mr. Mohammed Haj Darwish
January 11, 2008
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2008 / JanuarySyrian Arab Republic: Arbitrary detention of Mr. Fayez Sarah and Mr. Mohammed Haj DarwishSYR 002 / 1207 / OBS 169.1 Arbitrary detentions Syria January 11, 2008 The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Syria. New information : The Observatory has been informed by the Committees for the Defence of Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria (Comité pour la défense des droits de l’Homme en Syrie - CDF) about the arbitrary detention of Mr. Fayez Sarah, a journalist and founding member of the Committees for Revitalising Civil Society in Syria, and of Mr. Mohammed Haj Darwish, a member of the Human Rights Association in Syria and a founding member of the Committees for Revitalizing Civil Society in Syria. According to the information received, on January 3, 2008, the Syrian Security Forces arrested Mr. Fayez Sarah, who still remains in detention as of issuing this urgent appeal. Furthermore, on January 7, 2008, Mr. Mohammed Haj Darwish was summoned to the State Security in Damascus and subsequently arrested. Furthermore, the Observatory recalls that Messrs. Akram Al Bunni, Jaber Al Shoufie and Ali Al-Abdullah remain in detention, and expresses its deepest concern about the detention of these five human rights defenders, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning their activities in favour of human rights in Syria. The Observatory also fears for their physical and psychological integrity as an increasing number of human rights defenders have been subjected to torture or ill-treatments by the authorities over the past years. Background information : On December 9, 2007, Syrian security services began a series of arrests that followed the gathering, outside of Damascus, of 163 persons who have been part to the Damascus Declaration[1]. This meeting resulted in the creation of the National Council of the Damascus Declaration, a collective movement of political opposition gathering political activists, including the Muslim Brotherhood, as well as human rights defenders. The Council is composed of 17 elected members, among which CDF representatives. On December 9, 2007, in the aftermaths of the meeting, the security services arrested 37 people who were released few hours later. But Mr. Jaber Al Shoufie, member of the executive board of the CFD remains in detention in State Security centres outside of Damascus. On December 11, 2007, Mr. Akram Al Bunni, a member and founder of the Committee for the Revitalization of Civil Society in Syria and brother of Mr. Anwar al-Bunni, a member and founder of the Syrian Human Rights Association and member of the Committees for the Defence of Prisoners of Conscience who is detained since may 2006 was arrested for his participation in the meeting. He is currently detained in the State Security prison in Damascus. On December 17, 2007, Mr. Ali Al-Abdullah, also a member of the Committee for the Revitalisation of Civil Society in Syria, was arrested for the same reason. Actions requested: Please write to the Syrian authorities, urging them to:  Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Akram Al Bunni, Jaber Al Shoufie, Ali Al-Abdullah, Fayez Sarah and Mohammed Haj Darwish; Release immediately the people arrested in the aftermaths of the meeting of the National Council of the Damascus Declaration, among which Messrs. Akram Al Bunni, Jaber Al Shoufie, Ali Al-Abdullah, Fayez Sarah and Mohammed Haj Darwish, as their detention is arbitrary as it seems to merely aim at sanctioning their human rights activities;  Ensure in all circumstances that Syrian human rights defenders can enjoy their freedom of peaceful gathering ; Put an end to the harassment against all human rights defenders in the Syrian Arab Republic; Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, and Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by the Syrian Arab Republic.  Addresses:  President, His Excellency Bashar al-Assad, Presidential Palace, al-Rashid Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: + 963 11 332 3410 Minister of Defence, His Excellency General, Hassan Ali Turkmani, Ministry of Defence, Omayyad Square, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 223 7842 Minister of Justice, His Excellency Muhammad al-Ghafari, Ministry of Justice, Al-Nasr Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 666 2460 Minister of Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Walid Mu’allim, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, al-Rashid Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: + 963 11 332 7620 Ambassador Faysal Khabbaz Hamoui, Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to the UN in Geneva, 72 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 42 75, Email: mission.syria@ties.itu.in Embassy and Mission to the European Union of the Syrian Arab Republic in Brussels, 1 avenue F.D. Roosevelt, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 648 14 85.  *** Paris-Geneva, January 11, 2008 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic. To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29   [1] The “Damascus Declaration for Democratic and National Change” was issued on October 16, 2005 by a wide coalition of political reform activists and members of civil society, and calls for establishing a democratic system that respects citizens’ rights, ensures freedom of speech and association, and ends discrimination based on religious or political beliefs. 