Kyrgyzstan:  Press Release: Slanderous comments of Kyrgyz President against two leading human rights defenders go unpunished. Decision to be appealed
September 12, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2016 / SeptemberKyrgyzstan: Press Release: Slanderous comments of Kyrgyz President against two leading human rights defenders go unpunished. Decision to be appealed

Paris-Geneva, September 12,
2016 – On September 7, 2016, the lawsuit brought against the President of
Kyrgyzstan for his slanderous statements against two Kyrgyz human rights
activists, Tolekan Ismailova and Aziza Abdirasulova, was dismissed by the
Bishkek City Court. Both defenders intend to appeal the decision before the
Supreme Court.
 
After a two-day trial held
on September 6 and 7, the Bishkek City Court dismissed the lawsuit brought in
appeal by Ms. Tolekan Ismailova, President of Bir Duino Kyrgyzstan and
FIDH Vice-President, and Ms. Aziza Abdirasulova, President of Kylym
Shamy, against the Kyrgyz President Almazbek Atambayev, in relation to a public
speech he gave on May 14, 2016, in which he mentioned their names next to those
of alleged organisers of a political upheaval, promising to ruthlessly suppress
any attempts to destabilise the country. In his speech, the President also
resorted to the “foreign agents” terminology, presenting Ms. Ismailova and Ms.
Abdirasulova as heads of NGOs “faithfully serving their financial donors”. Both
defenders announced their intention to bring the case before the Supreme Court.                                         
The Observatory deplores
that several irregularities occurred during the trial in appeal, as had already
been the case in first instance[1]. On
the one hand, although Ms. Tolekan Ismailova and Ms. Aziza Abdirasulova
requested several times that documents be added to the case file, the court has
systematically refused to allow them to do so. On the other hand, the court
also refused several motions filed by Ms. Tolekan Ismailova's and Ms. Aziza
Abdirasulova's lawyers, such as those summoning the president to court,
requesting video recording of the hearings, and requesting the removal of the
judge from the case for alleged lack of impartiality.
 
The Observatory calls upon
the Kyrgyz authorities to comply with fair trial standards and equality of arms
principles in all circumstances, including for the upcoming proceedings before
the Supreme Court. The Observatory more generally urges the Kyrgyz authorities
to ensure an enabling environment to all human rights defenders in the country
so they are able to carry out their work without hindrances, and to comply with
the recommendations outlined in the report published on June 8, 2016, which is
available here.  The Observatory was created in 1997 by FIDH
and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both
members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.

For more information, please contact:
FIDH: Arthur Manet /
     Audrey Couprie: + 33143552518OMCT: Delphine
     Reculeau / Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +41228094939
 
 



[1]     On June 15, 2016 the
Pervomaysk district Court of Bishkek had already rejected their complaint in
first instance, following a trial marred with a number of irregularities. See
Observatory Press Release, June 22, 2016. 