Israel / Occupied Palestinian Territory / The Netherlands: Attacks against Al-Haq's representative in Europe, Ms. Nada Kiswanson
August 11, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2016 / AugustIsrael / Occupied Palestinian Territory / The Netherlands: Attacks against Al-Haq's representative in Europe, Ms. Nada Kiswanson


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
ISR 001 / 0816 / OBS 071
Threats
/ Defamation
Israel / Occupied Palestinian Territory
 / The
Netherlands
August 11, 2016
 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) requests
your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Israel and the
Occupied Palestinian Territory / The Netherlands. 
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about ongoing, well-organised and serious attacks, including death threats,
interference in communications, intimidation, harassment and defamation against
Ms. Nada Kiswanson, a human rights
lawyer based in the Hague, in the Netherlands, who represents Al-Haq in Europe
and before the International Criminal Court (ICC). Al-Haq is a Palestinian
non-governmental organisation established in 1979 and dedicated to the
promotion and protection of human rights and the rule of law in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory. 


According to the information received, Ms.
Kiswanson has been the subject of a sophisticated pattern of attacks since
February 2016. Ms. Kiswanson and her family have received frequent phone calls,
emails and messages through other means that explicitly and indirectly threaten
her life and security. In most instances, those delivering the threats have
identified themselves by a single false name. However, in some instances Ms.
Kiswanson and persons around her have been contacted by individuals impersonating
representatives of intergovernmental and international organisations and a
Dutch ministry. 
 
In the latest incident, in August 2016, Ms.
Kiswanson received a message over an encryption program linked to a prepaid
number stating that she was “not safe at all and hopefully this would remain”.
This threatening message follows a serious incident in February 2016 when a
close family member of Ms. Kiswanson was told by a person who identified
himself by a  false name that Ms.
Kiswanson would be ‘’eliminated’’ should she not stop working. On other
occasions in March 2016, Ms. Kiswanson was told that there was a great danger
over her and Al-Haq Director and FIDH Vice President Mr. Shawan Jabarin.
And in July 2016 Ms. Kiswanson was contacted by the known source of the threat
over the phone of a close family member in Jordan. In that threatening call she
was told that her whereabouts as well as her possible plans to travel to
Palestine were known. She was also told that the source of the threat was ready
to meet with her in Palestine.
 
In another attempt to undermine the credibility
of Al-Haq and Ms. Kiswanson, estimated thousands of fabricated flyers stamped with Al-Haq’s logo and stating Ms.
Kiswanson’s personal details were handed out in her extended neighbourhood. The
flyers falsely described Al-Haq as an organisation associated with religious
endeavours in the Netherlands. The flyers also called for donations to be
placed at the home of Ms. Kiswanson. 
 
The attacks against Ms.
Kiswanson demonstrate a high level of technological sophistication coupled with
global reach. Ms. Kiswanson has been contacted through channels in various
European countries, in particular the Netherlands. The source of the threat has
also managed to retrieve several prepaid numbers that should be untraceable.
The attacks have also required financial backing. 
 
Ms. Kiswanson has informed
the appropriate authorities in the Netherlands of the attacks against her and a
police investigation is ongoing. 
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the coordinated
attacks against Ms. Kiswanson. These attacks aim at intimidating the
organisation that pressured the Palestinian Authority (PA) to join the ICC and
that submitted together with Al-Mezan Center for Human Rights, Aldameer and the
Palestinian Center for Human Rights (PCHR) communications to the ICC
Prosecutor’s Office urging it to open an investigation. 
 
In light of the continued attacks endured by Ms.
Kiswanson, her family and members of Al-Haq, the
Observatory urges all competent authorities in Israel
to investigate the situation and to comply with the relevant international
norms and standards, including the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
order to create an environment where human rights defenders can operate freely.
The authorities in Israel should in particular refrain from making any
depreciating comments on human rights defenders and publicly support the
important role played by human rights defenders, including those critical of
the country’s human rights record.
 
The Observatory also urges the Dutch authorities
to continue their investigation and to ensure that appropriate measures are put
in place to protect human rights defenders in the Netherlands, in particular by
issuing a public statement condemning these specific threats and all those
against human rights defenders in the Netherlands (including those working on
the ICC) and by creating and putting in place a mechanism to protect NGO
representatives working in The Netherlands (including on the ICC).   
 
Background
information[1]:

 
Since 2015,
Al-Haq has been the target of an intense smear campaign and threats. In
particular, a smear campaign based on the allegation that there was fraud and
corruption within Al-Haq was launched in September 2015. It was claimed that
this allegation stemmed from within the consulting firm Ernst & Young and
the Palestinian Authority. Since then, the State of Palestine and Ernst &
Young have confirmed that this allegation is false and unfounded.
 
On November
23, 2015 and on February 10, 2016, Al Haq submitted together with Al-Mezan
Center for Human Rights, Aldameer and the Palestinian Center for Human Rights
(PCHR) communications to the ICC Prosecutor’s Office urging it to open an
investigation. 
 
At the
beginning of 2016, many of Al-Haq’s staff members
noted unidentified interferences in their e-mails and mobile phones, and found
their accounts hacked. Al-Haq was also subjected to a series of cyber-attacks
via emails containing Trojan horse viruses. On several occasions, confidential
information was also circulated to staff, donors and partners. 
 
In February
2016, the level of attacks escalated, directly targeting Ms. Kiswanson and
Mr. Shawan Jabarin.
 
The
increased attacks against Al-Haq coincide with progress achieved at the level
of the ICC and decisions at the EU level regarding the labelling of settlement
products. As a result of such advances, several Israeli newspapers,
organisations and institutions have attacked Al-Haq and sought to discredit the
organisation. Notably, the Israeli Minister of Justice has taken deliberate
steps towards ensuring that donors do not fund Al-Haq and defamed the
organisation[2].
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Israel urging them
to:
 
i.     
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Nada Kiswanson and Mr. Shawan Jabarin, as well
as all human rights defenders in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory;

 
ii.    
Carry out an immediate,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned
events, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring all those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law and in order to
put an end to the harassment faced by Al-Haq members ;
 
iii.  
Comply with the provisions of the UN Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly on December 9, 1998,
in particular Articles 1, 5(c), 6, 8.2, 9.3(a) and 12.2;
 
iv.   
More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the OPT in accordance with
international human rights instruments. 
 
Addresses:


·      
Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister of
Israel, Office of the Prime Minister, 3 Kaplan St., PO Box 187, Kiryat Ben-Gurion,
Jerusalem 91950, Israel. Fax: + 972 2 651 2631 /
02-670-5475. Email: b.netanyahu@pmo.gov.il, pm_eng@pmo.gov.il
 
·      
Ms. Ayelet Shaked; Minister of Justice; Fax:
02-6285438 E-mail: sar@justice.gov.il
 
·      
Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, Minister of Foreign
Affairs; Tel: 972-2-5303111; Fax: 972-2-5303367
 
·      
H.E. Ambassador Mr. Eviatar
Manor, Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations in
Geneva, Avenue de la Paix 1-3, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22
716 05 55. Email: mission-israel@geneva.mfa.gov.il
 
·      
H.E. Ambassador Simona Frankel; Embassy of
Israel in Belgium and Luxembourg, Avenue de l'Observatoire 40, 1180 Brussels,
Belgium; Fax: +32 2 373.56.17; Email: web@brussels.mfa.gov.il

Please also write to the
diplomatic mission or embassy of Israel in your respective country.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, August 11, 2016 
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an FIDH
and OMCT partnership, is dedicated to the protection of human rights defenders
and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. FIDH and OMCT
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80 
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +
     41 22 809 49 29



[1]                
See the Observatory Press release of March 4, 2016, and see unofficial
translation by the Coalition for the ICC CICC) of an article published in the
NRC Handelsblad, August 16, 2016:
http://coalitionfortheicc.org/documents/Al-Haq_human_rights_activist_seriously_threatened_in_The_Netherlands_NRC2016.pdf


[2]                
See article in the Jerusalem Post, Shaked urges Europeans she meets
to quit funding pro-BDS groups, October 14, 2015: http://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Politics-And-Diplomacy/Exclusive-Shaked-gives-European-ministers-lists-of-anti-Israel-NGOs-they-fund-424942 