Congo, Democratic Republic:  D.R. Congo: arrest of a journalist
March  9, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2001 / MarchCongo, Democratic Republic: D.R. Congo: arrest of a journalistCase COD 090301.1 Follow up of Case COD 090301  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Democratic Republic of Congo.  New Information:  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the release of Mr Guy Kasongo Kilembo in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  According to the information received, after 23 days in detention, Mr Guy Kasongo Kilembo, chief editor of the satirical newspaper "Pot-Pourri" was released without explanation in the morning of 22 March 2001. He reports to have seriously been beaten by his custodians. He also stated that he was never transferred to a tribunal, nor was he authorised to receive visitors during his stay in prison.  Brief reminder of the situation:  The International Secretariat of OMCT had been informed by La Voix des sans Voix pour les Droits de l'Homme (VSV), a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest of Mr Guy Kasongo Kilembo, journalist at the satirical newspaper "Pot-Pourri".  According to information received, Mr Guy Kasongo Kilembo was arrested by three men in plain clothes presenting themselves as agents of the National Police as he got out of a taxi on Wednesday, 28th of February 2001 at around 13h00, in front of the building of the 30th of June (Interfina) in Kinshasa/Gombe. It is alleged that these men were in possession of an mission order signed by the Commandant Kasongo Kitenge.  Mr Guy Kasongo Kilembo was immediately taken to the dungeon of the Special Services of the National Police, located in the building ex-Kin-Mazière in Kinshasa/Gombe. Mr Guy Kasongo Kilembo was interrogated on articles published in the edition n° 074 of the "Pot-Pourri" (23 February 2001) entitled "Kabila II (already) bewitched ?" and "Gift of invulnerability: Nephew Gaëtan publicly terrorises his escort". It is reported that Mr Guy Kasongo Kilembo has been accused of defamation against the authority.  Mr Guy Kasongo Kilembo was then transfered to the dungeon of the Police Sous-Comissariat located in the ex-hotel Regina in Kinshasa/Gombe. He was allegeldy threatened with the amputation of his two legs if he did not disclose the hiding places of his colleagues at the "Pot-Pourri", notably Mr Damien, Achile Ekele and Gaspard Baïla. Their names are allegedly mentioned on the above-mentioned mission order.  Remarks:  The International Secretariat of OMCT wishes to thank all those institutions, organisations and individuals who intervened on his behalf.  Geneva, March 26, 2001 