Iran:  Release of one human rights defender, while others remain detained!
March 15, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2010 / MarchIran: Release of one human rights defender, while others remain detained!Paris-Geneva, March 15, 2010. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), welcomes the release of lawyer Mohammad Oliaïfar but firmly condemns the ongoing arbitrary detention of Ms. Mahboubeh Karami, a member of the "One Million Signatures” Campaign.
On March 2, 2010, Mr. Mohammad Oliaïfar and Ms. Mahboubeh Karami were arrested. Mr. Oliaïfar was released on March 15, reportedly from Evin prison, and it is unclear whether charges were brought against him. However, Ms. Karami would still be held in Evin, and no information could be obtained on her exact place of detention and on the existence of charges against her. The Observatory recalls that Ms. Mahbouheh Karami was arbitrarily arrested and detained four times over the past three years for her active participation in the “One Million Signatures” Campaign.
The Observatory denounces the ongoing arbitrary detention of Ms. Karami and of dozens of human rights defenders in Iran, amid the current general crackdown on the Iranian civil society. The Observatory is particularly concerned with their physical and psychological integrity.
The Observatory calls upon the Iranian authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Ms. Mahboubeh Karami as well as all human rights defenders presently detained in the country, to guarantee in all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity, and to conform in all circumstances with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights instruments ratified by Iran. 
For further information, please contact:


FIDH: Gael Grilhot / Karine Appy: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39 