Tajikistan:  Utmost concern about the arbitrary closure of the human rights NGO “Amparo”
January 30, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Tajikistan / 2013 / JanuaryTajikistan: Utmost concern about the arbitrary closure of the human rights NGO “Amparo”
TAJIKISTAN: Open Letter to the authorities
about the arbitrary closure of the human rights NGO “Amparo”
Attn. President of the Republic of Tajikistan, H.E. Enomali Rahmmon, Tel: +992 372 21 68 00 
Minister of Justice, Mr. Mengliev Rustam Shomurodovich, Fax: +992
37 221 80 66
Chairman of the Supreme Court, Mr. Nusratullo Abdullaev, Tel: +992
372 33 48 21
Cc. State Adviser of the
President of Tajikistan on Legal Policy, Mr. Juma Dalatov, Tel. / Fax: (+992 37) 2212520
State Adviser of the President of Tajikistan on Social
Development and Public Relations, Mr. Saidmurod
Samadovich Fattoev, Tel. / Fax: (+992 37)
2212520
Paris-Geneva, January 30, 2013
Re: Utmost
concern about the arbitrary closure of the human rights NGO “Amparo”
Excellencies,
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), hereby expresses its utmost concern about the closure
of the Association of Young Lawyers “Amparo”, and calls on the Tajik authorities to overturn the decision and
address the shortcomings of the legislation on civil society organisations,
which currently does not meet international standards for the protection of
human rights.
“Amparo” is a human rights organisation founded
in 2005 and a member of the Coalition Against Torture, very active in
investigating cases of torture and ill-treatment as well as in monitoring and
advocating for the rights of vulnerable groups in Tajikistan. 
On October 24,
2012, a court of the City of Khujand (North of Tajikistan) headed by Judge
Safarali Kurbonov decided to close down “Amparo”, on grounds that the
organisation had breached several of its legal and administrative obligations,
including the provisions of the new Law “On Public Associations”, adopted in
2007.
On
January 15, 2013, the Syghd Regional Court confirmed its closure following an
appeal lodged by “Amparo” on November 28, 2012. 
These rulings
follow a motion filed on June 29, 2012 by the Ministry of Justice of Tajikistan
to liquidate “Amparo”, one day after officials conducted a large audit at the
Khujand offices of the organisation without providing any prior notification
nor presenting any written decision of inspection.
In the said
motion, the Ministry of Justice alleged that “Amparo” had changed its legal
address without re-registering with the local Department of Justice; that it
had created an official website in contravention with the Law “On Public
Associations”; that it was carrying out activities outside the Sughd region
where it was registered; and that it conducted training sessions on human
rights issues for high school students without any proper licence.
It is to be
noted however that all the allegations of the Ministry of Justice appear to be
groundless, as “Amparo” representatives did reportedly inform the Tajik
authorities that the organisation's address had changed once more in 2010, and
as that they have held all their training sessions in the framework of
agreements with the Ministry of Education and/or the local executive
authorities. In addition, no provision of the Law “On Public Associations”
prohibits them from operating a website and, before it was forcibly closed
down, “Amparo” reportedly had an application for country-wide registration
pending with the Ministry of Justice since July 25, 2012.
We strongly
condemn what we consider as an arbitrary closure of the human rights
organisation “Amparo”, as well as the conditions in which the court decision
was issued. 
We urge the Tajik authorities to put an
end to any act of harassment - including at the judicial level - against
“Amparo” and its members, as well as against all human rights defenders in
Tajikistan, and to conform with the provisions
of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has
the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to
strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental
freedoms at the national and international levels”,
- its article 5, which states that “everyone has
the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and
international levels: (a) To meet or assemble peacefully; (b) To form, join and
participate in non-governmental organizations, associations or groups; (c) To
communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental organizations.”
- its Article 6 (b) and (c), which states that
“Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others […] as
provided for in human rights and other applicable international instruments,
freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views, information and
knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms and [...] to study,
discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice,
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other
appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters”.
- and its
Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration”.
In the hope
that the judicial authorities of Tajikistan will overturn the decision of the
Syghd Regional Court and that the authorities will more generally guarantee an
environment favourable to human rights defenders' activities in the country,
We remain,
Souhayr
BELHASSEN                                               Gerald
STABEROCK
FIDH President                                               OMCT
Secretary General 