Nepal:   Alleged torture and ill-treatment with the purpose of extracting a confession inflicted on Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura
March 11, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2011 / MarchNepal:  Alleged torture and ill-treatment with the purpose of extracting a confession inflicted on Mr. Sahaj Ram ThuraNPL 110311
Torture and other forms of
ill-treatment in police custody with the purpose of
extracting a confession/ Fear for safety/ Risk of
impunity
                                               
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in Nepal.
Brief description of the
situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by a reliable source and Antenna International, a member organisation
of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the alleged torture and ill-treatment with
the purpose of extracting a confession inflicted on Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura,
19-year-old and permanent resident of Khajurkhurd VDC-1, Jogambharia, Banke
district. 
According
to the information received, on 20 February 2011 at around 10
am,
Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura was arrested by the Banke District Police Office (DPO)
under the allegation of donation extortion[1].
He was only given an arrest warrant and a detention letter on 22 February 2011.
The following day, on 23 February 2011, he was taken to the office of
the public prosecutor and remanded for the first time for ten days under abduction
and hostage charges. He was again remanded for then days, on 1 March 2011, and he remains currently detained in Banke DPO. Mr. Sahaj
Ram Thura has access to lawyers and he is allowed visits of his family.
It
is reported that, on 21 February 2011 at around 12 am, several unidentified
policemen took Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura to the upper floor of the DPO, Banke,
blindfolded him and started to interrogate him after he was forced to lie on
the floor. During the interrogation, the policemen allegedly kicked on his
chest with their boots. When Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura replied that he did not extort
donation, the policemen reportedly beat with sticks on the soles of his feet
for several times. Due to the alleged acts, he fell unconscious. The policemen
then brought him round by sprinkling water on his face and made him to jump on
the floor for a while before bringing him back to the cell.  
According
to the same information, the same day at around 10 pm, several unidentified
policemen took Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura back to the same room on the upper floor of
the DPO in Banke, blindfolded him and forced him to lie on his back. Six
policemen then caught his hands, his legs and his head in order to restrict his
movements while other policemen poured water into his nose and mouth for about
two to three minutes. Once more, Mr. Sahaj Ram Thure denied any wrongdoing. On
the next day, on 22 February 2011, at around 5 pm, the policemen repeated the
same acts but Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura continued to deny the allegations made
against him. It is reported that due the acts of torture and ill-treatment, he
suffers of chest pain, swollen arms and problems of respiration. He was
reportedly taken to the hospital, on 22 February
2011,
where he was examined and prescribed medicines. 
The
International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern about the
allegations of torture and other forms of ill-treatment inflicted upon Mr. Sahaj Ram Thura in police
custody and fears for his safety as he remains detained under the same police
control.
OMCT recalls that
the authorities are legally bound to effectively ensure the physical and
psychological integrity of all persons deprived of liberty in accordance with
international human rights law, and in particular, the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
OMCT recalls that, in line with their obligations
under the abovementioned treaties, it is incumbent on the competent Nepalese
authorities to consider seriously any allegations of torture and other forms of
ill-treatment, and to undertake a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent
and impartial investigation in this
regard, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and
apply adequate sanctions. 
Finally, OMCT recalls Article 11 of the Convention against Torture which stipulates that “Each
State Party shall keep under systematic review interrogation rules,
instructions, methods and practices as well as arrangements for the custody and
treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, detention or imprisonment
in any territory under its jurisdiction, with a view to preventing
any cases of torture” and
article 15 of the said Convention, “Each State Party shall ensure that any statement which is established
to have been made as a result of torture shall not be invoked as evidence in
any proceedings (…)”.
Action
requested
Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them
to:
i.                    
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Sahaj Rum Thuna; 
ii.                  
Order
his immediate transfer to another detention centre, where he is not at risk of
further torture and ill-treatment; 
iii.                 
Guarantee unconditional access to his lawyer and
family, as well as guarantee that he is examined by independent doctors and
receives adequate medical care if necessary, in accordance, inter alia, with the recommendations of
the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iv.                
Order his
immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent
with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring him
promptly before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee
his procedural rights at all times; 
v.                  
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned facts, in particular the circumstances
of the detention of Mr. Sahaj Rum Thuna and the allegations of torture and
ill-treatment, in accordance with international human rights standards, the result of which must
be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law;
vi.                
Guarantee that no evidence obtained under torture
and other forms of ill-treatment, or threats thereof, be used in court
proceedings against Mr. Sahaj Rum Thuna as stipulated in Article 15 of the UN Convention Against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
vii.               
Ensure that adequate,
effective and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation, is granted to
the victim;
viii.             
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, in
particular ensure that all acts of torture, and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment and punishment are clearly defined in law as offences in accordance
with the provisions set out in Articles 1, 4 and 16 of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and that
they be made punishable with appropriate penalties which take into account the
grave nature of the crimes as required.
Addresses
Ø      Ministry of Home Affairs,
Singha Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: +977 1 4211211 /
4211264, Fax: +977 1 42 11 232
Ø      Inspector General of Police,
Ramesh Chand Thakuri, Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407, Fax: +977 1 4
415 593. Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø      Attorney General, Mr. Yuv Raj
Sangraula, Office of Attorney General Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +977
1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np, info@attorneygeneral@gov.np
Ø      DSP Bishwa Adhikari, Human
Rights Cell, Nepal Police, Kathmandu, Nepal PO. Box. No.: 407, Fax: +977 1
4415593 E- mail: hrcell@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø      Chairman of the National Human
Rights Commission, Mr. Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email:
nhrc@nhrcnepal.org and also complaints@nhrcnepal.org, Fax: +977 1 5547973
Ø      Permanent Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la
Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: +4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int 
Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your
respective country.
***
Geneva, 11 March 2011
Kindly inform us
of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 



[1] Mr. Sahaj Ram Tharu
was reportedly first handed to the police by an acquaintance who accused him of
donation extortion which Mr. Sabaj Ram Tharu has denied. The police then
suspected him to be part of an armed outfit active in the Southern Terai region and which is
involved in abduction and donation extortion. The police subsequently filed a
case against him under abduction and hostage charges. However, according to the
same information, there is no evidence against him. 