Sudan:  Sudan: Woman sentenced to death by stoning
January  4, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2002 / JanuarySudan: Sudan: Woman sentenced to death by stoningVIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN Case SDN 040102.VAW Woman Sentenced to Death by Stoning  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Victims of Torture Group (SVTG), a member of the OMCT network, of the sentencing to death by stoning of a young women named Abok Alfa Akok from Nyala City, Southern Darfur.  According to the information received, on 8 December 2001, Abok Alfa Akok, a Christian woman of 18 years of age from the Dinka tribe, was sentenced to death by stoning by the criminal court in Nyala City, Southern Darfur for the crime of adultery.  The sentence was based on Article 146 of the  Sudan’s 1991Penal Code, which is based upon the government’s  interpretation of the Shari’a (Islamic law), and which states that whoever commits  the offence of adultery shall be punished with: 1. Execution by stoning when the offender is married (muhsan);   2. One hundred lashes when the offender is not married (non-muhsan); 3. Male, non-married offenders may be punished, in addition to whipping, with expatriation for a year.  According to the information received, the lawyer has stated that Abok Alfa Akok has not received a fair trial and an appeal has been submitted against the sentence.    The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned over the physical and psychological integrity of Abok Alfa Akok. OMCT unreservedly condemns the use of such punishments, which clearly violate international human rights standards as embodied in the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Sudan is a signatory and a State party respectively.  Actions requested  Please write to the Sudanese authorities urging them to:  i.	immediately repeal the death by stoning sentence passed on Abok Alfa Akok;  ii.	ensure that the Abok Alfa Akok has a fair and prompt appeal trial;  iii.	take all necessary measures to secure the respect of the rule of law in Sudan which includes the respect of the prohibition of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment and amend the Sudanese legislation as a matter of priority, in order to abolish the death penalty;  iv.	guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Abok Alfa Akok;  v. 	ensure in all circumstances the full respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with national and international standards.  Addresses:  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People’s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Telex: 22385 PEPLC SD or 22411 KAID SD- Fax: +249 11 771 7 24  ·	Mr Ali Osman Yasin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Telex:22459 KHRJA SD or 22461 KHRJA SD (via Ministry of Foreign Affairs) – Fax: +249 11 7740 63  ·	Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Telex: 22459 KHRJA SD or 22461 KHRJA SD – Fax: 249 11 7740 63  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, 4 January 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply 