Intervention to the 59th session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
October 31, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2016 / OctoberIntervention to the 59th session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights59 CADHP_Intervention orale_FR5 pages / 180 KB


WRITTEN INTERVENTION - THE
OBSERVATORY

 
AFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN AND PEOPLES'
RIGHTS 
 
59th ordinary session
 
Banjul, The Gambia
 
October 21 -
November 4, 2016
 
Contribution of the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) 
and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH) 
 
In the framework of their joint programme,

The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders 
 
 
Madam Chairperson, Distinguished
Commissioners and State Delegates,
 
FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, thank the African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) for this opportunity to raise some of the key
issues with respect to the situation of human rights defenders in Africa.
 
While States have the duty to protect human rights
defenders and to ensure that they operate in a safe and enabling environment,
attacks, threats, judicial harassment, restrictive laws, smear campaigns
against the latter continue to perpetuate an environment of hostility for their
activities. 
 
Throughout
the African continent, the space for civil society and human rights defenders
is shrinking, due to three major challenges tied together. First of all, the
lack of alternation of power in some African countries has driven the
authorities to exercise greater control on civil society. In addition, as the
African continent has been undergoing 30 elections, including 18 presidential
elections in 21 African countries this year, human rights violations and
escalation of violence have been increasing, putting civil society
organisations at the forefront of repression. In other countries, issues
related to economic, social and cultural rights remain another major challenge,
fuelling the repression against their defenders.
 
1. Political pressure and ongoing use of the
judicial arsenal to silence dissenting voices in the framework of electoral
contexts
 
In a
constantly growing number of African countries, already known for repressing
dissenting voices, the criminalisation of human rights defenders in relation to
their peaceful activities, including in the framework of electoral contexts, is
highly concerning.
 
Our organisations remain particularly worried by the
human rights situation in Burundi since April 2015, following President Pierre
Nkurunziza’s third term bid. Within the first year of presidency, we estimate
that almost all representatives of human rights organisations have fled the
country by fear of reprisals. Similarly, no media is allowed to broadcast free
and independent information. Those who remain in Burundi face increased
intimidation, harassment, physical attacks and in the most worrying cases,
enforced disappearance.
 
The Observatory is particularly concerned by the
enforced disappearance of Ms. Marie-Claudette
Kwizera, Treasurer of the Iteka League, since December 10, 2015. To date,
Burundian authorities have refused to provide any information about her fate or
whereabouts. 
 
Likewise,
Mr. Jean Bigirimana, journalist for
the Burundian independent press group Iwacu,
who was arrested without a warrant by the National Intelligence Service (NIS)
on July 22, 2016, has been missing ever since.
 
The
Observatory is also extremely concerned by reprisals against human rights
defenders who cooperate with the international human rights system to denounce
rampant violations in Burundi. For instance, in the aftermath of the review by
the United Nations (UN) Committee Against Torture (CAT) of the country’s human
rights crisis, the Government requested to disbar four human rights lawyers who
had participated in the CAT session, at the end of July 2016.
 
In Angola,
although the Observatory welcomes the release and acquittal of Mr. José Marcos Mavungo, who had been
arbitrary detained since March 2015, many of his fellow human rights defenders
remain in a precarious situation, constantly exposed to judicial harassment.
 
Amongst
them, 17 pro-democracy activists jailed for participating to a book club in
June 2015 namely Messrs. Henrique
Luaty Beirão, Nuno
Alvaro Dala, Nelson
Dibango Mendes Dos Santos, Alfonso Joao Matias (“M'banza Hamza”), Sedrick de Carvalho, Fernando
António Tómas, Hitler Chiconda (“Samussuku”),
Italiano Arante Kivuvu,
Benedito Jeremias (“Dito Dali”), Albano Evaristo Bingobingo, José Gomes
Hata, Inocêncio De Brito, Manuel Nito Alves and Ms. Rosa Kusso Conde, Ms. Laurinda
Manuel Gouveia, journalist Mr. Domingos da Cruz as well as Mr. Manuel Chivonde
Baptista Nito Alves, have
been provisionally released on June 29, 2016 but are prevented from leaving the
country and have to appear before the Luanda Provincial Court every month. In that respect, the Observatory
would like to recall the decision of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention on June 29, 2016, which found that the “these individuals were arrested and
detained because of the exercise of their freedom of assembly, opinion and
expression” in violation of Articles 19 and 20 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UDHR) and Articles 19 and 21 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). It also stated that their right to a fair
trial had not been respected and that their deprivation of liberty was
arbitrary.
 
In Chad, Mr. Mahamat
Nour Ibedou, President of the Chadian Convention for Human Rights (Convention tchadienne pour les
droits de l'Homme)
and member of the civil society organisations coalition “It’s Enough” (“Ça suffit”), Mr. Kaina Nadjo, Coordinator of the youth movement “Iyina” (“We are
tired” in local Arabic), Mr. Younouss
Mahadjir, Vice-President of the Union of Chadian Trade Unions (Union des syndicats du Tchad - UST) and
Ms. Céline Narmadji, Spokesperson of
the civil society movement “Enough is Enough” (“Trop c’est trop”) were sentenced on April 14, 2016 to a suspended
four years jail term after being detained for several weeks, on grounds of
planning to organise peaceful demonstrations to protest against Idriss Deby’s
bid for re-election for a fifth mandate.
 
Besides, Dr. Allazam
Albissaty Saleh, Spokesperson a.i. of the “It's Enough” coalition, was
arrested April 4, 2016, and placed in detention at the Am Sinéné prison, on
accusations of “incitement to an unarmed gathering”, “disturbing public order”
and “disobeying a lawful order”. He was subsequently sentenced to four months’
suspended imprisonment and released.
 
In addition, Mr. Assingar
Dobian, Honorary President of the LTDH and FIDH’s representative before the
CEMAC, has been the target of several acts of reprisals, including through his
dismissal as head of the administrative and financial department of the Office national du développement rural
(ONDR) on June 26, 2016, for publicly calling for the respect of human rights
in Chad.
 
In the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), the Observatory welcomes the long-awaited
release on August 29, 2016 of human rights defender Christopher Ngoyi Mutamba, President of the NGO Congo
Culture and Development Synergy (Synergie Congo culture et développement) and Coordinator of the Platform Civil
Society of Congo, who had been arbitrary detained since January 2015, but
deplores the deterioration of his health status while in detention.
 
Besides, while two members of the Filimbi
citizens’ initiative, which promotes youth participation in electoral and
democratic process, i.e. Messrs. Yves Makwambala and Fred Bauma,
also a member of the LUCHA (Lutte pour le
changement) movement, have been provisionally released on August 29, 2016,
after 18 months in detention, charges against them have not been dropped and
their judicial harassment is likely to resume at any moment. In addition, on
September 9, 2016 Mr. Jean de Dieu
Kilima, coordinating member of the collective “Front Citoyen 2016” in
Tshopo, as well as member of the Filimbi citizens’ initiative, who had been
released four days before, was summoned to appear before the Peace Tribunal of
Lemba in Kinshasa, on charges of “attempting to incite disobedience” and
“troubles to public order”. His lawyers challenged the territorial competence
of the Kinshasa Tribunal, alleging that the facts reproached to Mr. Kilima as well
as his arrest took place in Kinsangani, and not in Kinshasa. As of issuing this
written intervention, the proceedings on the question of the territorial
competence were ongoing.
 
Over the past months, threats and
harassment in the DRC have also hit judicial operators, as in June 2016, Mrs. Chantal Ramazani Wazuri, President of
the Lubumbashi Peace Tribunal, was forced, upon order of the General
Administrator of the National Intelligence Agency (Agence nationale de
renseignement - ANR) and in presence of the President of the Lubumbashi
Appeal Court as well as a dozen of elements of the Congolese Republican Guard,
to sign a ready-made judgement aiming to condemn Mr. Moïse Katumbi Chapwe, former Governor
of the Katanga province and candidate to the 2016 presidential election, to
three years in prison with immediate arrest and a fine. After being forced to
sign the judgment, Mrs. Wazuri fled the country and wrote an open letter to the
Congolese Minister of Justice and Human Rights, to the President of the Republic,
and to a number of international organisations, highlighting how she was
threatened and forced to sign the judgement, and requesting the annulment of
her signature, while describing the interference of top executive authorities
in the judicial system of the DRC. The Observatory is highly concerned about
this interference and pressure exercised on the judiciary in the country, and
recalls that an independent judicial system is crucial to function as a
safeguard where the executive power tries to hinder the work of human rights
defenders.
 
2. Economic, social and cultural rights defenders particularly at
risk
 
Throughout
the African continent, our organisations remain concerned by the scale of
attacks against economic, social and cultural rights defenders.
 
In Cameroon, nine members
of the Esu Youth Development Association (EYDA), namely Messrs. Abue Philip
Kpwe, Divine Biame, Cyprian Azong, Bernard Fuh,
Redemption Godlove, Ephraim Kagha Mbong, Emmanuel Wung,
Ivo Meh and Williams Meh, are facing increasing judicial harassment on grounds of “depredation by
band”, in relation to their opposition to land-grabbing undertaken on the land
of the Esu community. If convicted, they face 10 to 20 years in prison. After
being all arrested earlier this year, the first four remain detained to this
day, while proceedings are ongoing before the Mezam High Court in Bamenda. The
last hearing took place on October 12, 2016, while the next one is scheduled
for October 27, 2016. Besides, HRH Fon Kum Achuo II, chief of the village,
is also facing charges for opposing land-grabbing on the community’s land.
 
The
Observatory is also concerned by the continued judicial harassment against several members of the Malen Land
Owners and Users Association (MALOA) in Sierra Leone. For the past three
years, MALOA has been monitoring and denouncing the negative human rights
impact of the activities of Socfin Agricultural Company Sierra Leone Ltd (SAC)
in Malen's district, in particular acts of land grabbing.
In particular, MALOA leaders Mr. Sylvester
Kebbie and James Blango,
together with nine MALOA supporters Messrs. Ibrahim Sengeh, Sumaila Murana, Ishmael Bockarie, Abu
Moiwo, Sao Rogers, Vandy Sumaila, Foday Setua, Foday
Mansaray and Mustapha Sengeh, are still facing judicial harassment
following an alleged shooting incident at the Bamba village in Malen’s district
on January 14, 2015. They are being prosecuted on trumped-up charges of
“destroying growing plants” and “carrying offensive weapons”, although the two
MALOA leaders have denied their presence on the scene. They are due to appear
before the Bo Magistrate court on October 28, 2016.
 
In Mauritania,
latest developments in the continued judicial harassment of members of the
abolitionist movement IRA (Initiative pour la résurgence du mouvement
abolitionniste) have seen the arrest and detention throughout the summer of
Messrs. Moussa Biram, Vice President
of Sbeka’s office, Adballahi Abou Diop,
member of Riadh’s office, Amadou Tidjane
Diop, IRA Vice-President, Adballahi
Matallah Seck, President
of Sebkha’s office, Hamady Lehbouss, adviser to the President and
National Communication Officer, Balla Touré, National Bureau External
Relations Officer, Ousmane Anne,
President of Tevragh Zeina’s office, Jemal Samba Beylil, member of
Riadh’s office, Mohamed Daty, Secretary General of Nouakchott’s
coordination, Ahmed Mohamed Jarroullah, Ousmane Lo, both member of the Executive Bureau, as
well as Khatri Rahel Mbareck, National Peace Coordinator, and Ahmed
Hamdy Hamar Vall, Treasurer. As of October 10, 2016, all were detained in
Zouérat, where they were waiting for their appeal trial hearing, after which
they are expected to be transferred to Bir-Moghrein prison, in the Northern
part of the country. This transfer is a particularly concerning attempt by
Mauritanian authorities to prevent the detainees from accessing their families
and lawyers. The prison is located in a desert and difficult of access region,
where terrorist groups reportedly operate. The Bir-Moghrein prison is also a
particularly rough penitentiary centre, which raises grave concerns for the
health of the detainees, who already suffer medical condition.
 
In addition, another IRA member Mr. Yacoub Inalla, has been recently
arrested, detained and released for holding a speech in which he called for the
respect of fundamental freedoms. He is now facing trial for “inciting
violence”, “violence towards police officers”, “rebellion”, “belonging to an
unregistered organisation” and “disturbing public order and prayer”.
 
3. Restrictions to freedom of
association and assembly, and reprisals against freedom of expression defender
 
The worldwide trend undertaken by some
States to restrict freedom of association and hinder the work of human rights
defenders by enacting an arsenal of restrictive laws has been particularly
spreading across Africa, where authorities increasingly aim to control,
paralyse or even eradicate independent civil society, in blatant
breach of basic human rights principles.
 
The most
recent illustration of this trend of repression occurred over the past few days
in Burundi, as on October 24, 2016, the Ministry of Interior and
Patriotic Training published an order to suspend provisionally a number of
non-profit associations, such as SOS-Torture/Burundi, the Ligue
Burundaise des Droits de l’Homme « ITEKA », the Coalition
de la Société Civile pour le Monitoring Electorale (COSOME), the Coalition
Burundaise pour la CPI (CB-CPI) et the Union Burundaise des
Journalistes (UBJ). A week earlier, on October 19, 2016, the same
Ministry had passed a similar order to permanently remove 5 other NGOs from the
Ministry's List of Associations operating in Burundi, i.e. The Forum pour
le renforcement de la société civile (FORSC) the Forum pour la
conscience et le développement (FOCODE), the Action chrétienne
pour l'abolition de la torture (ACAT), l'Association burundaise
pour la protection des droits humains et des personnes détenues
(APRODH) and the Réseau des citoyens probes (RCP). These two
orders are the latest illustrations of a long series of violations of freedom
of expression and association targeting Burundian defenders, and stem from a
repressive campaign conducted relentlessly by the Burundian government against
its civil society for a year and a half now.
 
In Ethiopia,
where independent human rights work in the country remains almost impossible,
the repression targeting human rights defenders has increased over the past
months. On August 14, 2016, Ethiopian authorities arrested Mr. Tesfa Burayu, Chairperson of the West
Ethiopian Regional Executive Committee of the Human Rights Council (HRCO), at
his home in Nekemte, Oromia. Mr. Burayu, who had been monitoring the Oromia
protests aiming to resist peacefully over a plan to expand the boundaries of
the city of Addis Ababa into the Oromia region, was denied access to his family
and his lawyer, and released on August 17 without charge. Two days earlier, on
August 12, Mr. Abebe Wakene, also a
member of HRCO, was arrested and taken to the Diga district police station in
Oromia. He was eventually released on a bail of 5,000 Birr on August 23, 2016.
In addition, on August 13, Mr. Tesfaye
Takele, human rights monitor in the Amhara region, was arrested in the
North Wollo zone, before being released shortly after due to his very bad
health condition. On July 8, Mr. Bulti
Tesema - another active member of HRCO - was arrested in Nejo, Oromia. He
had been working with HRCO to monitor and document the violent repression of
the protests in Oromia. His whereabouts remained unknown for several weeks
after his arrest, until it was revealed that he had been transferred to the
capital’s Kilinto prison, and charged with terrorist offences. To date, he
remains detained and has not been given access to either his family or his
lawyer.
 
In Rwanda,
independent civil society organisations have become extremely weak as a result
of years of State intimidation and infiltration. On May 28, 2016, Mr. Epimack
Kwokwo, former Executive Secretary
of the Ligue des droits de la personne dans la région des Grands Lacs
(LDGL), subsequently appointed to a position of programme manager within LGDL
as part of a “mediation” that followed the takeover of the organisation by
members closed to the Rwandan authorities, was summoned before the immigration
office in Kigali and informed of his status of persona non grata in
Rwanda and of his immediate deportation to the DRC without being able to warn
his family or collect his personal belongings. 
 
In Sudan, the Observatory denounces the
continued judicial harassment against five human rights defenders working at
the Centre for Training and Human Development in Sudan (TRACKs), namely
Mr. Al Hassan Kheiry, a computer technician, Ms. Arwa Elrabie,
the Administration Manager, Ms. Imani-Leyla Raye, a student volunteer,
Mr. Khalafalla Al-Afif Mukhtar, the Director, and Mr. Midhat
A Hamdan, a trainer, as well as against the Director of Zarqa Organisation
for Rural Development (ZORD), Mr. Mustafa Adam, who had delivered
training for TRACKs. The last three remain in arbitrary detention. All are
being tried on trumped-up charges including “undermining the constitutional
system”, “waging war against the State”, “espionage” and “belonging to a
criminal and terrorist organisation”. Their harassment exposes the very
precarious situation in which the Sudanese civil society is left, when their
work is more crucial than ever.
 
The Observatory also deplores the continued acts of
harassment, both physical and judicial, against LGBTI rights defenders and
their community in Uganda. On August 4, 2016, at 11:30 pm, the police raided at an
event organised at the occasion of Ugandan LGBTI Pride celebrations in
Kampala’s Venom nightclub. Ms. Clare Byarugaba, Equality &
Non-Discrimination Coordinator at Chapter Four Uganda, and two leaders of the
Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG), Messrs. Pepe Julian Onziema and Franck
Mugisha, were arrested together with other activists, and were questioned
at the police station for three hours. They were all released without charges
but reported that during their detention, they were slapped and pushed around
by officers. The other 200 people attending the pride show were locked up in
the building for two hours and humiliated. The police, who sexually assaulted
several of them by touching parts of their body to “confirm their identity”,
particularly harassed Transgender women.
 
Besides, on May 22, 2016, four unknown
assailants scaled the fence of the premises of the Human Rights Awareness and
Promotion Forum (HRAPF), and suffocated the security guard to death. After
breaking into the premises, the assailants ransacked the offices of HRAPF
Executive Director, Mr. Adrian Jjuuko, and of the Deputy Executive
Director, Mr. Edward Mwebaza, and took a number of documents and files,
including copies of the memorandum of association, while leaving other valuable
items such as laptops and other electronic material on the spot. While the
Kampala Metropolitan Police Spokesperson subsequently announced that police
investigators had been sent to the crime scene, no information could be obtained to
date regarding the status of the investigations.
 
In recent months, civil society in Egypt
has also faced an unprecedented wave of attacks by the authorities. Many NGO workers have been detained and ill-treated,
charged with offences under the draconian counter-terrorism law, or subject to
a judicial request to ban them from travel and freeze their assets. Scores of human rights organisations and
defenders have been enlisted in the case known as the “foreign funding case No.
173”, a five-year-old investigation into the funding and
registration of independent human rights groups. In this context, on September
17, 2016, the Cairo Criminal Court ordered the freezing of the assets of
Messrs. Gamal Eid, Director of the Arabic Network for Human Rights
Information (ANHRI), Hossam Bahgat, founder of the Egyptian Initiative
for Personal Rights (EIPR), Abdel Hafiz Tayel, Executive Director of the
Center for the Right to Education (CRE), Moustafa El Hassan, Director of
the Hisham Mubarak Law Center (HMLC), and Bahey Eldin Hassan, Director of
the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies (CIHRS), as well as those of the CRE, the CIHRS and the HMLC.
 
Alongside the judicial harassment of human rights
defenders, authorities are now trying to pass a new NGO law, which would lead
to the eradication of existing human rights groups and prevent the setting-up
of new ones. A handful of the most worrying provisions of this bill include
giving the Ministry of Social Solidarity authority to approve or reject NGOs’
licensing, establishing a security/governmental committee called the
“Coordinating Committee”, which would include General Intelligence Services
(GIS) and representatives of the Interior Ministry, to approve foreign funding
of Egyptian NGOs, to give international NGOs licenses to work and to approve
the opening by Egyptian NGOs of new branches nationally and abroad. The
Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing attempts of Egyptian authorities to
hinder and paralyse the work of civil society.
 
Last but not
least, in Tunisia, on August 3 at around 1am, blogger Lina Ben Mhenni, who has been active
since the 2011 revolution, including by documenting the protests and by
reporting them online, has been arrested together with a member of the “Manich
Msamab” movement, to which she is also part, while they were strolling through
downtown Tunis. A police agent stopped them and required to search their bags.
They were carrying posters and glue from the “Manich Msamah” campaign.
Subsequently, they were arrested and taken to Bab Bhar police station for
allegedly putting up posters and tagged a wall, although the tag was already
there and that they were not tagging or putting up posters at the time of their
arrest. In addition, on September 19, 2016 Ms. Lina Ben Mhenni appeared before
the Médenine Investigating Judge on charges of “insulting a police officer” as
a defendant, although she had initiated the complaint against the official. The
facts date back to August 2014, when Ms. Ben Mhenni was insulted and aggressed
by security agents in Djerba's capital Houmet Souk under the pretext that her
car was not rightly parked. Her parents and her bodyguard (Ms. Lina Ben
Mhenni's name features on a list of persons at risk) were also
aggressed in the course of that evening. As of October 2016, the case remained
pending.
 
4. Impunity
over killings and killing attempts targeting human rights defenders
 
Impunity for
killings and killing attempts targeting human rights defenders is another
worrying trend that maintains civil society in Africa in a climate of fear and
encourages perpetrators to commit further acts of violence against human rights
activists. 
 
In Kenya,
on, July 1, 2016, the bodies of human rights lawyer Mr. Willie Kimani,
his client Mr. Josephat Mwenda and their taxi driver were recovered from the
Ol-Donyo Sabuk River in Machakos Country. They had been missing since June 23,
2016, at around 12 pm, as they were traveling home after filing a complaint
against a police officer in a corruption case. The post-mortem report into
their deaths showed that they were brutally beaten and tortured before being
killed. On July 18, 2016, four officers, Messrs. Frederick Leliman, Leonard
Mwangi, Stephen Chebulet and Ms. Sylvia Wanjiku, denied the charges when they
appeared in front of High Court Judge Jessie Lessit, who remanded them in
custody pending investigation. Their bail application is scheduled to be heard
on October 31, 2016.
 
In Lesotho,
on July 9, 2016, Mr. Lloyd Mutungamiri, a Zimbabwean journalist and
Editor of the Lesotho Times, was shot four times by unknown gunmen upon
arrival to his home at Ha Thamae, in Maseru. At the end of June, he had
published an article about alleged human rights violations committed by
Lieutenant General Tlali Kamoli, the current commander of the Lesotho Defence
Force (LDF).
 
5. Recommendations: 
 
1) In view of the above-mentioned
elements, the Observatory reminds States Parties of their obligation to comply
with all the provisions of the African Charter, in particular those relating to
the protection of human rights defenders. In that regard, States should
immediately and unconditionally:
 
- Implement all the provisions of the 1998
United Nations (UN) Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, especially by
guaranteeing in all circumstances their physical and psychological integrity
and their capacity to operate in a safe and enabling environment;
 
- Release all defenders who are
arbitrarily detained for their activities of promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular freedoms of expression, peaceful
assembly and association;
 
- Develop differentiated measures for the
protection of the most vulnerable groups of human rights defenders such as land
and environmental rights defenders, defenders working in rural areas, woman
human rights defenders or defenders working on LGBTI issues;
 
- Put an end to all acts of harassment -
including at the judicial level - against human rights defenders;
 
- Order immediate, thorough, transparent
investigations into allegations of violations of the rights of human rights
defenders, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
- Refrain from adopting any provisions
that do not comply with international and African standards with respect to the
exercise of the right to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and
association, and abrogate or revise any such provisions that may be in force;
 
- Send a standing invitation to the UN and
ACHPR’s Special Rapporteurs on Human Rights Defenders and facilitate their
country visits.
 
2) The
Observatory also calls upon the ACHPR to:
 
- Highlight
the legitimate work carried out by human rights defenders, and the need for
their protection from harassment and attacks; 
 
- Systematically raise the question of the situation of human rights
defenders as well as denounce and condemn all human rights violations they face
during the examination of the periodic reports of States parties to the ACHPR,
and on the occasion of all visits conducted in a State party;
 
- Denounce
the impunity that prevails with regard to these violations, and urge States to
hold all those responsible to account;
 
- Increase its capacities to respond to urgent situations faced by human
rights defenders;
 
- Ensure the effective implementation of its resolutions, concluding
observations and decisions on communications in order that everyone, including
human rights defenders, be able to effectively enjoy all the rights and
freedoms recognised by the ACHPR, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders;
 
- Continue to strengthen the collaboration with the UN Special Rapporteur
on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders, as well as with the other regional
mechanisms dedicated to the protection of human rights defenders. 