Sierra Leone:  Sierra Leone:  editor in Freetown detained without charge
July 11, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sierra Leone / 2000 / JulySierra Leone: Sierra Leone:  editor in Freetown detained without chargeSierra Leone:  editor in Freetown detained without charge  Case SLE 110700  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sierra Leone.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Forum of Conscience, a member of the OMCT network, of the alleged arbitrary detention of Mr Abdoul Kouyateh, Editor of Wisdom Publications in Sierra Leone.  According to the information received, on May 12th 2000, Mr Kouyateh, Editor of Wisdom Publications in Freetown, Sierra Leone, was taken to the Central Police Station.  He was then transferred to Pademba Road Prisons on Thursday 22nd June 2000.  According to reports, he has not been charged and his duration of his detention has breached the limits imposed by the 1991 constitution.  It is believed that the reason for his arrest is connected to his work as a journalist.  OMCT is gravely concerned for his physical and psychological integrity, as well as that of his family who is without financial support as long as Mr Kouyateh remains in detention and is prevented from carrying out his work.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sierra Leone urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr Abdoul Kouyateh and his family; ii.	order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at  all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of his arbitrary arrest in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President Kabbah, Fax: 00232 22 22 56 15 or 00232 22 232 404  Minister for Information and Broadcasting, Dr. Julius Spenser, Fax: 00232 22 241 757  Geneva, July 11, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 