China:  Incommunicado detention of Mr. Li Ming-Che
April  5, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2017 / AprilChina: Incommunicado detention of Mr. Li Ming-Che
CHN 002 / 0417 / OBS 034
Incommunicado detention / 
Judicial harassment
China
April 5, 2017

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in China.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Taiwan
Association for Human Rights about the incommunicado detention of Mr. Li Ming-Che, Programme Manager at
Wen-Shan Community College in Taiwan and a volunteer with the Taiwan-based NGO Covenants
Watch[1].
 
According to the information received, on March 19, 2017, Mr. Li-Ming
Che was detained after entering China for personal matters from Macau through
the Gongbei Port immigration checkpoint located in Zhuhai, Guangdong Province.
Chinese authorities refused to disclose his fate or whereabouts until March 27,
2017, when they revealed that Mr. Li Ming-Che was being detained at an undisclosed
location and investigated by State security police on suspicion of “endangering
national security”.
 
As of April 5, 2017, neither family members nor lawyers were granted
access to Mr. Li Ming-Che and informed about his detention conditions. Mr. Li Ming-Che’s
suffers from hypertension. Accordingly, the Observatory fears for his psychological and physical integrity.
 
The
Observatory condemns the arbitrary and secret detention of Mr. Li Ming-Che,
which seems to be merely aimed at sanctioning his legitimate and peaceful human
rights activities. In particular, in recent years,
Mr. Li Ming-Che has been sharing the experience of Taiwan’s democratic process
with his Chinese friends online and has been sending them books on human rights
and modern history. In early 2016, he was active online to encourage donations
to support the families of Chinese human rights activists who had been detained
by Chinese authorities.
 
The Observatory urges Chinese
authorities to release immediately and unconditionally Mr. Li Ming-Che and, in
the meantime, to ensure his psychological and physical integrity.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities
of China, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Li Ming-Che as
well as that of all human rights defenders in China;
 
ii. Immediately disclose Mr. Li Ming-Che’s whereabouts and release
him immediately and unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since it only
seems to aim at sanctioning his human rights activities;
 
iii. Guarantee the
access of Mr. Li Ming-Che to his lawyer and relatives;
 
iv. Put an end to all
acts of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr. Li
Ming-Che and all human rights defenders in the country so that they are
able to carry out their work without hindrance;
 
v. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration on
Human Rights and other international human rights instruments signed or
ratified by China.

Addresses:
 
·       Mr. Li Keqiang, Prime Minister
of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 659 611 09 (c/o Ministry of
Foreign Affairs), Email: premier@mail.gov.cn
 
·       Mr. Guo Shengkun,
Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
63099216, Email: gabzfwz@mps.gov.cn
·       H.E. Mr. Zhaoxu Ma,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the United
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 793 70 14, E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn
·       H.E. Mr. QU XING,
Ambassador, Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Brussels, Belgium,
Fax: +32-2-7792895; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn 
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of China in your respective
countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, April 5, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both
members of ProtectDefenders.eu , the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT +41 22 809 49 39 / +41 22 809
49 29  Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80



[1]
Established in 2009, Taiwan-based Covenants Watch monitors the
Taiwanese government in its fulfillment of the obligations attached with human
rights conventions, conducts policy training and advocacy activities and serves
as a platform of collaboration for other human rights groups operating in
Taiwan. 