Nepal:  Nepal: Reported attack and ill-treatment of Mr. Mahanta by Maoist rebels
July 27, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2005 / JulyNepal: Nepal: Reported attack and ill-treatment of Mr. Mahanta by Maoist rebelsCase NPL 270705Attack/Ill-treatment The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Nepal.  Brief Description of the SituationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that on 15th July 25, Mr. B.B. Mahanta, of Namdu Village Development Committee, Ward No. 4, Dolakha, was beaten by four plain clothed but armed unknown persons, believed to be Maoist rebels.  According to the information received, on 15th July, at about 8pm, Mr. Mahanta was asked to go by one of the villagers to a neighbour’s house close to his own. When arrived, four armed men began verbally abusing him, asking him why he was criticising the Maoist party and its policies. He was accused of working against the Maoist party and of supporting other democratic parties. He was then reportedly beaten on his face, head and back, then randomly beaten with a stick and iron chain for nearly half an hour. The four men then left.   Mr. Mahanta suffered severe injuries requiring treatment at the Centre for Torture Victims Nepal (CVICT).  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Mahanta. Action Requested:Please write a letter to the authorities in Nepal urging them to: i.	Guarantee Mr. Mahanta physical and psychological integrity; ii.	Immediately order a thorough and impartial investigation into these events, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards. Addresses:His Majesty King Gyanendra, Narayanhity Royal Palace, Durbar Marg, Kathmandu, Nepal  c/o Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Nepal to the United Nations, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 733 27 22; E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int Mr. Nain Bahadur Khatri, Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@ntc.net.np Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.  Geneva, July 27, 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 