Russian Federation:  Ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Oyub Titiev
March 20, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2018 / MarchRussian Federation: Ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Oyub TitievURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New
information
RUS 001 /
0118 / OBS 004.3
Judicial
harassment /
Arbitrary
detention
Russian
Federation
March 20,
2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in the Russian Federation.
 
New
information: 
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the ongoing judicial harassment and arbitrary detention
of Mr. Oyub Titiev, Head of the
Human Rights Center (HRC) "Memorial" office in Chechnya.
 
According to the information
received, on March 19, 2018, Chechnya’s Supreme Court confirmed Mr. Oyub
Titiev’s pre-trial detention until May 9, 2018, despite arguments from his
lawyers that the extension of his pre-trial detention is baseless. During the
hearing, Mr. Oyub Titiev appeared in cage. 
 
Mr. Oyub Titiev is being prosecuted under
Article 228 of the Criminal Code for allegedly possessing drugs in large
amounts and is being detained at the pre-trial detention center in Grozny. If
convicted, Mr. Oyub Titiev faces a maximum 10-year prison sentence (see
background information).
 
The Observatory recalls that Mr.
Oyub Titiev was stopped in his car by police on January 9, 2018, and held
incommunicado for several hours. The Chechen authorities later stated that
drugs had been “discovered” in his car. Mr. Oyub Titiev denied the allegations
and insisted the bag had been planted by police.
 
The Observatory expresses its utmost
concern over the arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Oyub
Titiev. The harassment of his relatives and lawyers as well as the arson of HRC
"Memorial" premises in North Caucasus clearly suggest that Mr. Oyub
Titiev is being prosecuted under trumped-up charges in a wider context of
harassment against HRC “Memorial” and its members linked to their work in North
Caucasus and aimed at intimidating and silencing them.
 
The Observatory urges the Russian
authorities to immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Oyub Titiev and to
put an end to all acts of harassment against him, all HRC “Memorial” members
and human rights defenders in the North Caucasus. In the meantime, the
Observatory urges Russian authorities to uphold his right to a fair trial and
to guarantee his physical and psychological integrity.
 
Background
information:
 
In
the morning of January 9, 2018, Mr. Oyub Titiev left his home in the village of Kurchaloi,
in the Chechen Republic, to head to a meeting with a friend scheduled at 9am
and subsequently to the office of HRC "Memorial" in Grozny. Mr.
Titiev being more than one hour late for the meeting with a friend whose
identity is not being revealed on purpose, the latter spotted Mr. Titiev on a
road between the villages Kurchaloi and Mairtup, next to the bridge on the
river Khumyk. Next to Mr. Titiev were five-six traffic police officers
inspecting his car. Mr. Titiev gave his friend a sign not to approach him, and
after the both cars left - that of Titiev and the second belonging to the
traffic police - he headed to the Kurchaloi District Department of Internal
Affairs supposing Mr. Titiev would be taken there. Although he was not allowed
to enter the District Department of Internal Affairs, Mr. Titiev's car present
outside and unofficial sources allowed him to assume Mr. Titiev's detention. 
 
Despite repeated calls, the District
Department officially kept denying Mr. Titiev's presence. If Mr. Titiev’s
detention was not officially confirmed by the authorities until seven hours
after his detention when Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Interior of the
Chechen Republic Apti Alaudinov confirmed to the Russian Ombudsman Tatiana
Moskalkova that Mr. Titiev was being kept in Kurchaloi police station. Several
hours later, Mr. Titiev's lawyer confirmed that his client was charged under
Article 228 of the Criminal Code possessing drugs in large amounts.
 
On January 17, 2018, at 3.35 am, the
CCTV camera of the HRC “Memorial” office recorded two young men, wearing masks
and gloves, one of whom was carrying a canister. The arsonists put a ladder to
the roof of the building and climbed to the second floor of the office. The
attackers also attempted to break one of the CCTV video cameras installed on
the building on their way to the window of HRC “Memorial”’s office. The camera
also recorded the rapid departure of the two arsonists. Fortunately, the two
attackers could only access three of the six rooms. The fire brigade arrived
quickly at the scene and extinguished the fire but not before three of the
office’s six rooms were burnt, destroying electronic equipment and documents.
The remains of a melted plastic bottle with the smell of kerosene were found in
the office of HRC “Memorial” Ingushetia office’s Head Mr. Timur Akiev. 
 
Furthermore, on January 15 and 16,
2018, Mr. Oleg Orlov, Chairman of HRC “Memorial” Council, lawyer Petr
Zaikin and journalists who were in Chechnya to investigate the case of Mr.
Titiev were subjected to constant surveillance of local law-enforcement bodies.
For two days, the group was detained five times allegedly for verification of
their involvement with illegal armed groups. 
 
Mr. Titiev’s family members were
threatened by law enforcement authorities and consequently left Chechnya in
late January 2018. Likewise, one of Mr. Titiev’s lawyers, Mr. Aslan Telkhigov, was allegedly forced
to resign from Mr. Titiev’s defence team and to leave Chechnya in late January
2018. 
 
On January 22, 2018, HRC Memorial’s
car, used by one of Mr. Titiev’s lawyers, Mr. Petr Zaikin, was set on fire in neighbouring Dagestan. In addition,
on February 5, 2018, Chechen authorities ordered residents of several private
houses, including Mr. Titiev’s, to leave their house within a week. Houses will
be demolished to build a shopping center.
 
On March 6, 2018, the
Staropromyslovsky District Court in Grozny rejected an appeal filed against the
pre-trial detention order and extended Mr. Oyub Titiev’s pre-trial detention
for another two months, until May 9, 2018, despite the fact that two guarantors
pledged for a “personal vouch”[1].

 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Russia, urging
them to: 
 
i. Take all necessary
measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity and security of
Mr. Oyub Titiev, the staff of HRC “Memorial” in Ingushetia and all human rights
defender in the Russian Federation;
 
ii.
Release Mr. Oyub Titiev immediately and unconditionally, as his detention is
arbitrary since it merely aims at sanctioning his legitimate human rights activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all acts
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against him as well as all
human rights defenders in the Russian Federation, including by putting an end
to all forms of surveillance of their activities by local enforcement
officials, and ensure in all circumstances that
they are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance or
fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Carry out an
immediate, thorough and impartial investigation into the arson attack on
the office of HRC “Memorial” in Ingushetia and on HRC
"Memorial's" car in Dagestan with a view to publishing the results
and bringing those responsible to justice in accordance with international
standards;
 
v. Publicly recognise at the level of the President of the Russian
Federation the crucial role of human
rights defenders as pillars of democracy and watchdogs of the rule of
law and publicly condemn all attacks against human rights defenders,
particularly in the Chechen Republic;
 
vi.
Comply with all the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in particular with Articles 1, 12.1 and 12.2;
 
vii.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by the Russian Federation.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Vladimir Putin, President of the
Russian Federation, Fax: + 7 495 606 3602; + 7 495 625 3581
·    
Mr. Dimitri Medvedev, Prime Minister
of the Russian Federation, Twitter: @MedvedevRussia
·    
Mr. Sergueï Lavrov, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Fax: + 7 495 644 2203
·    
Permanent Mission of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 734 40 44,
E-mail: mission.russian@vtxnet.ch
·    
Embassy of the Russian Federation in
Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26 13. E-mail: amrusbel@skynet.be
·    
Permanent Representation of the
Russian Federation to the Council of Europe, France. Fax: (+33) (0) 3 88 24 19
74. Email: russia.coe@orange.fr
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Russia in your respective countries.
 
 ***
 
Paris-Geneva,
March 20, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·       
Tel and
fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·       
Tel and fax OMCT: +41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809
49 29



[1]                
Personal vouch is a provision in Russian legislation as an alternative
to pre-trial detention. 2018 Presidential candidate Grigorii Yavlinskii, was
personally at the hearing to present his claim for personal vouch. 