Bangladesh:  Bangladesh: acid attacks against women
July 26, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2000 / JulyBangladesh: Bangladesh: acid attacks against womenViolence Against Women   Case BGD 260700.VAW   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.    Brief description of the situation    The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Bangladesh Human Rights Commission, a member of the OMCT network, of three recent acid victims in Bangladesh. OMCT is very concerned about the increase in the number of reports received in the past year about acid burnings in Bangladesh.    According to the information received, Ms. Bhancha Sana was burned by acid outside her house on 20 July 2000 in the village of Ghughumari, in the district of Satkira. Her chest was severely burned in the incident and other parts of her body were injured as well. Ms. Shah Alam had acid thrown on her in the village of Birponiu, in the district of Bogra, on 22 July 2000. She received serious injuries to her face, chest and waist, and minor injuries to her hands and throat. Furthermore, on 24 July 2000, Ms. Fatema Begum was attacked with acid in her hometown at the Nagua Bus Stand in the district of Sadar Kisoregonj. Her head and face are severely injured and also her hands and throat are hurt. With regard to the three above cases, there have been no arrests, nor even accusations, of those responsible for the each attack.    The above are recent examples of a practice which has been occurring with increasing regularity in Bangladesh. These attacks often result from rejected sex proposals or family disputes. Survivors of acid burnings are frequently disfigured and blinded. The threat of these attacks puts all women in Bangladesh in great danger at all times.    The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by the increasing incidents of acid burnings of women and girls. OMCT would like to recall that Bangladesh has ratified the Convention against Torture and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). OMCT stresses that Bangladesh is obligated to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and punish acts of violence whether those acts are perpetrated by the state or private persons and provide protection to victims.    Action requested    Please write to the authorities in Bangladesh urging them to:   i.guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Bhancha Sana, Ms. Shah Alam and Ms. Fatema Begum and provide adequate medical treatment;    ii.guarantee an immediate investigation into the acid burnings of Ms. Bhancha Sana, Ms. Shah Alam and Ms. Fatema Begum, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law;    iii.adopt the necessary measures and exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate, prosecute and punish cases of acid burnings and provide access to remedies for victims;    iv.guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.      Addresses   Justice Sahabuddin Ahmed, Honorable President Peoples Republic of Bangladesh, Bangabhaban, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Fax: 880 2 9566242  Dr. Sheikh Hasina, Honorable Prime Minister, Peoples Republic of Bangladesh, Prime Minister's Secretariat, Gonobhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka-1207, Bangladesh, Fax: 880 2 8113243   Advocate Abdul Matin Khasru, Ministry Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: 880 2 8618557   The Embassy of Bangladesh in your respective countries.     Geneva, July 26, 2000     Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 