Egypt:  Blogger detained by the military for denouncing the repression of the Maspero demonstration
November  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2011 / NovemberEgypt: Blogger detained by the military for denouncing the repression of the Maspero demonstration 
THE OBSERVATORY FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS 
- EUROMEDITERRANEAN HUMAN RIGHTS NETWORK
 
JOINT PRESS RELEASE
 
EGYPT: Blogger detained by the military for denouncing the 
repression 
of the Maspero demonstration
 
Paris-Geneva-Copenhagen, November 3, 2011. The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a 
joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the 
World organisation Against Torture (OMCT)) and the Euromediterranean Human 
Rights Network (EMHRN) condemn the judicial harassment by the military justice 
of two bloggers, Messrs. Alaa Abdel-Fatah and Bahaa Saber, and the continuing 
arbitrary detention of one of them, Mr. Alaa Abdel-Fatah. 

 
On November 3, 2011, the Military Appeal Court confirmed the 
pre-trial detention of Mr. Alaa Abdel-Fatah for a period of 15 days. On October 30, 2011, the Military 
Prosecutor summonsed for interrogation the two bloggers, Messrs. Alaa 
Abdel-Fatah and Bahaa Saber and later ordered the provisional detention of Mr. Alaa Abdel-Fatah 
for 15 days in the appeals prison of Bab El Khalq in Cairo pending further 
investigation and the provisional release of Mr. Bahaa Saber. The two bloggers 
who were interrogated on their involvement in the October 9 demonstration of 
Coptic-Christians held before the Maspero building downtown Cairo, which was 
severely repressed by the military forces, resulting in the death of 27 persons, 
refused to answer questions arguing that the Military Prosecutor did not have 
competence to interrogate civilians. The two are accused of “inciting violence 
against the armed forces” and “assaulting military 
personnel”.
 
The two activists have been publicly criticising the fact that the 
Military Prosecution is in charge of investigating the Maspero clashes, in which 
military police would be involved and opposing the trial of civilians before 
military courts. On October 20, 2011, Mr. Alaa Abdel-Fatah, who was present 
during the October 9 demonstration, signed an article in the newspaper 
al-Shourouk in which he described the acts of violence perpetrated by the 
military and narrated the two days he spent in the Coptic Hospital Mortuary 
after the repression.
 
The Observatory and EMHRN recall that since the Supreme Council of 
the Armed Forces took over the police after January 28, nearly 12,000 civilians 
have been arrested and brought to trial before military tribunals, which fall 
short of minimum standards of fair trial and rights of 
defence.
 
Our organisations call upon the Egyptian authorities to allow the 
conduct of impartial and independent investigations into the “Maspero” killings, 
prosecute those responsible for the serious human rights violations that were 
committed and urge the Egyptian authorities to stop trying civilians before 
military courts, notably human rights defenders. Our organisations call upon the 
military authorities to immediately release Mr. Alaa Abdel-Fatah and stop the 
judicial harassment against Messrs. Alaa Abdel-Fatah and Bahaa Saber, as their 
detention and judicial harassment seem to merely aim at sanctioning their human 
rights activities, and more generally to conform to the United Nations Declaration on 
Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and 
international human rights instruments ratified by Egypt.
 
For further information, please 
contact:
·       FIDH: Karine Appy / Arthur Manet, + 33 1 43 55 25 
18
·       OMCT: Delphine Reculeau, + 41 22 809 49 
39
·       EMHRN: Shaimaa Abou Elkhir, +20 100 1077 
207 