Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Sentencing of three defenders following their participation in peaceful protests against the Letpadaung copper mining project
July 11, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2013 / JulyMyanmar (ex-Burma): Sentencing of three defenders following their participation in peaceful protests against the Letpadaung copper mining project

New
information
MMR
001 / 0613 / OBS 055.1
Sentencing
/ Judicial harassment
Burma
July 11, 2013
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention on the following situation in Burma.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by Burma Partnership and Assistance Association
for Political Prisoners – Burma of the sentencing of Mr. U Aung Soe, a
member of Yangon People’s Support Network, which campaigns for the respect of
rule of law and democracy in Burma and has been involved in the campaign
against the Letpadaung project, along with Messrs. Ko Soe Thu and U
Maung San, two villagers, for their participation in peaceful protests against the Letpadaung copper mining project in
Salingyi Township, Sagaing Region, a joint venture
between the Burmese military's Union of Myanmar Economic Holdings Limited
(UMEHL) and Wan Bao Company which led to the displacement of farming families in 26 villages from
their land, with more than 7,000 acres confiscated in 2010.  
According
to the information received, on July 8, 2013, Shwebo Township Court sentenced Mr.
U Aung Soe to an additional 10 years imprisonment under Sections 505(b) (intent
to cause alarm to the public)[1],
295 and 295(a) (intent to insult a religion), and 333 (voluntarily causing
grievous hurt to deter public servant from his duty) of the Penal Code,
increasing his total sentence to eleven years and six months (see background
information). Messrs. U Maung San and Ko Soe Thu were sentenced to two years’
imprisonment each under Sections 505(b) and 333, making their total sentence to
two years and six months each in prison. 
 
As
of issuing this Urgent Appeal, Messrs. U Aung Soe, U Maung San and Ko Soe Thu
remain detained at the Shwebo prison. Their lawyer appealed the sentence.
 
Since
their initial sentencing on June 1, 2013, the three human rights defenders have
been made to stand trial every few days. On June 24, their hearing was cut
short (to approximately three minutes) due to “security reasons”, whereby the
defendants were made to return to their prison cells in Shwebo prison. While no
further information was given as to the nature of the security risks, it is
believed the hearing was cut short because about 30 farmers planned to attend
the hearing alongside the defendants' family members.
 
It
should be noted that the three human rights defenders did not have a defensive
lawyer present for the entirety of their court hearings. Lawyer U Aung
Thurein Tun made repeated attempts to gain power of attorney but was denied
access to his clients. When he finally was able to meet with the three in
prison to gain power of attorney, it was agreed that he would attend the next
hearing to defend the three. When he showed up at court for the hearing on July
8, Mr. U Aung Thurein Tun learned that the three had already been sentenced. In
addition, when lawyer U Aung Thurein Tun visited the three in prison, he was
photographed by one prison official, two prison wardens, and two plain-clothes
authorities. A total of eight photos were taken of the lawyer. Mr. U Aung
Thurein Tun asked for the names of the plain-clothes authorities but they
refused to reveal that information. All five authorities were present during
the conversation between the lawyer and the clients. The conversation was
recorded by the authorities. All this contravenes the principle of lawyer-client conversation
confidentiality.
 
This is the first time
since the so-called democratic reforms initiated in 2011-2012 that human rights defenders
have been sentenced to such lengthy prison terms. The Observatory expresses its
deepest concern about the sentences against Messrs. U Aung Soe, U Maung San,
and Ko Soe Thu, as they seem to merely aim at sanctioning their human rights
activities. The Observatory therefore calls for their immediate and
unconditional release.
 
Background
information:
 
In 2012, peaceful protests began against the Letpadaung copper mining
project and were heavily repressed by the autorities. In November 2012, the police used smoke bombs to disperse the crowd,
injuring dozens of demonstrators, including monks, and triggering a national
outcry. Activists have been facing harassment since protest began. 
 
On April 25, 2013, villagers in the Letpadaung area tried to plough
their fields but were prohibited by police from entering pursuant to an order
issued under Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code[2].
The police reportedly opened fire on the crowd and arrested without warrant Messrs.
Ko Soe Thu, U Maung San and U Aung Soe. Sagaing Region authorities kept the
whereabouts of the three men secret for over 30 days. Only after a closed-door
court proceeding, during which they were deprived of access to their lawyers,
the whereabouts of the three defenders were revealed. 
 
On June 1, 2013, the Shwebo Township Court sentenced Mr. U Aung Soe to
18 months in prison, Mr. Ko Soe Thu and Mr. U Maung San to six months’
imprisonment on charges under Section 188 of the Penal Code (disobedience of an
order promulgated by a public servant). All of them
were also facing additional charges under Sections 505(b), 295 and 295(a) and
333 of the Penal Code. Their lawyer appealed the sentence.
 
Warrants were also issued for the arrests of eight other human rights
defenders and villagers on charges of “inciting protests”, namely Han Win
Aung, a member of the Political Prisoners Families' Beneficial Network, Thaung
Taik Oo, a member the Yangon Institute of Technology Students Union, as
well as six members of the Yangon People's Support Network: Ko Aung Soe,
Ba Htoo, Thar Kyi, Ko Latt, Thaw Zin and Ko Thu.
 
On May 8, 2013, because villagers had become afraid of police raids, Messrs.
Moe Thway, a member of Generation Wave Youth Force, a network of human
rights defenders that campaigns for civil and political rights, including the
signature of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights by Burma,
and that campaigns against the Letpadaung copper mine project, and have brought
the campaign to national attention, Wai Lu and Wai Hmuu Thwin,
members of Yangon People Support Network, along with Mr. Aung Thu, a member
of the 1988 Student Generation, went to Monywa to calm tensions. They informed
police of their intentions in this regard. While they were there, some local
reporters interviewed Messrs. Moe Thway, Wai Lu and Wai Hmuu Thwin. During the
interview, observed by police from the Special Branch, the three human rights
defenders gave their opinions on the use of Section 144 to keep the villagers
from ploughing their fields, opinions which were perceived as damaging the
police and government's credibility.
 
On June 13, 2013, the Monywa Court issued arrest warrants against
Messrs. Moe Thway, Wai Lu and Wai Hmuu Thwin under Section 505 (b) of the Penal
Code. These arrest warrants are reportedly linked to statements the three human
rights defenders had made about the Letpadaung copper mine project.
 
On June 15, 2013, Mr. Moe Thway received a phone call from Lieutenant
Khin Zaw Latt, Deputy Township Police Commander from the Monywa Police Station
1, who had requested the court to issue the arrest warrants and who summoned
the three human rights defenders to appear at Monywa Police Station 1. In the
morning of June 23, Lieutenant Khin Zaw Latt travelled to Rangoon and went to
Mr. Wai Lu's house with Rangoon police and Special Branch officers. As Mr. Wai
Lu was not present, Special Branch officers were then posted at his house.
 
The
Observatory condemns the arrest warrants and judicial harassment against the above-mentioned
human rights defenders, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning their peaceful
human rights activities. 
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Burma, urging them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Ko Soe Thu, U
Maung San, U Aung Soe, Moe Thway, Wai Lu, Wai Hmuu Thwin, Ko Aung Soe, Ba Htoo,
Thar Kyi, Ko Latt, Thaw Zin, Ko Thu, Han Win Aung and Thaung Taik Oo, as well as of all human rights defenders in
Burma;
 
ii.             
Release Messrs. U Aung
Soe, Ko Soe Thu and U Maung San immediately and unconditionally since their
detention is arbitrary as it seems to only aim at sanctioning their human
rights activities;
 
iii.           
Put an end to any acts
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against them as well as against
all human rights defenders in Burma;
 
iv.            
Publicly express concern
about the repression of human rights activists and of those protesting against
the mining project; 
 
v.             
Comply with all the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular with its: 
-       
Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-       
Article 6(a), which
foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-       
Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
vi.            
More generally, ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, ratify international
and regional human rights instruments and undertake human rights impact
assessment of the Letpadaung mining project with a view to identifying, preventing
and mitigating any adverse human rights impacts linked to the project and
engaging into meaningful consultations of local communities affected by the
project. 
 
Addresses:
 
·      
U Thein Sein, President
of Myanmar, President Office, Office No.18, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Fax: + 95 1 652
624
·      
U Hla Min, Minister for
Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No. 10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Tel:
+95 67 412 079/ 549 393/ 549 663; Fax: +95 67 412 439
·      
U Win Mra, Chairman of
the Myanmar National Human Rights Commission, 27 Pyay Road, Hline Township,
Yangon, Republic of the Union of Myanmar; Fax: +95-1-659668
·      
Dr. Tun Shin, Attorney
General, Office of the Attorney General, Office No. 25, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR;
Tel: +95 67 404 088/ 090/ 092/ 094/ 097; Fax: +95 67 404 146/ 106
·      
U Tun Tun Oo, Chief
Justice, Office of the Supreme Court, Office No. 24, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Tel: +
95 67 404 080/ 071/ 078/ 067 or + 95 1 372 145; Fax: + 95 67 404 059
·      
U Kyaw Kyaw Htun,
Director General, Myanmar Police Force, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No.
10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Tel: +95 67 412 079/ 549 393/ 549 663; Fax: +951 549
663 / 549 208
·      
H.E. Mr. Maung Wai,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative to the
United Nations in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 47, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41
22 732 89 19, +41 22 732 73 77, Email: mission@myanmargeneva.org
·      
Embassy of Myanmar in
Brussels, Boulevard Général Wahis 9, 1030 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 (0)32 2
705 50 48, Email: mebrussels@skynet.be
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Burma in your respective
countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
July 11, 2013
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and
OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims
to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1
43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22
809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] Section 505(b) punishes “Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any
statement, rumour or report […] with intent to cause, or which is likely to
cause, fear or alarm to the public or to any section of the public whereby any
person may be induced to commit an offence against the State or against the
public tranquillity”.


[2] Section
144 grants the Judiciary the power to issue orders: “Such Magistrate may, by
a written order stating the material facts of the case and served in manner
provided by section 124, direct any person to abstain from a certain act or to
take certain order with certain property in his possession or under his
management, if such Magistrate considers that such direction is likely to
prevent, or tends to prevent, obstruction, annoyance or injury, or risk of
obstruction, annoyance or injury, to any person lawfully employed, or
danger to human life, health or safety, or a disturbance of the public
tranquillity, or a riot, or an affray”. In this case the orders issued
under Section 144, which were actually not enacted by the judiciary, prohibit
villagers from access to their farmlands or any form of use of the farmlands. 