Kazakhstan:  Follow-up to the United Nations Committee Against Torture's Concluding Observations on Kazakhstan
February 25, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Reports and Publications / Kazakhstan / 2016 / FebruaryKazakhstan: Follow-up to the United Nations Committee Against Torture's Concluding Observations on Kazakhstan 







On 20 November 2015, under the follow-up
  procedures of the Committee against Torture (CAT), Kazakhstan submitted a
  report providing follow-up information in response to the CAT’s
  recommendations relating to: (a) the effective investigation of allegations
  of torture, (b) the transfer of detention authority to the Ministry of
  Justice ; (c) the Human Rights Commissioner (Ombudsman) and National
  Preventive Mechanism ; and (d) the administration of justice.
In February 2016, the World Organisations
  Against Torture (OMCT), jointly with the Kazakhstan International Bureau for
  Human Rights and Rule of Law (IBHR) and the International Partnership for
  Human Rights (IPHR) submitted an alternative follow-up
  report highlighting how the concerns addressed in the CAT’s concluding
  observation continue to be valid. In particular, it denounces the
  ineffectiveness of investigations into allegations of torture as well as the
  lack of accessible and independent complaint and national preventive
  mechanisms in Kazakhstan. It further includes several case studies showing
  that perpetrators of torture and ill-treatment keep enjoying a high degree of
  impunity for their crimes.



 
25
February 2016FOLLOW-UP TO THE UNITED NATIONS COMMITTEE AGAINST
TORTURE’S CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS ON KAZAKHSTAN (CAT/C/SR.1286 and
CAT/C/SR.1287)[1]The
Committee against Torture (CAT) requested the State party to provide, by 28
November 2015, follow-up information in response to the Committee’s
recommendations relating to: (a) the effective investigation of allegations of
torture; (b) transfer of detention authority to the Ministry of Justice; (c)
the Human Rights Commissioner (Ombudsman) and National Preventive Mechanism;
and (d) the administration of justice, as contained in paragraphs 8, 10, 13 and
15 respectively of the present document.
I. Effective investigation of allegations of torture
Recommendation # 8: (a)              
Establish
an effective, fully resourced, independent and accountable body that is able to
carry out prompt, impartial, thorough and effective investigations, including
preliminary investigations, into all allegations of torture and ill-treatment,
ensuring that such investigations are never undertaken by personnel employed by
the same ministry as the accused persons; (b)              
Ensure
that such an independent body is also empowered to receive and act on
complaints of alleged torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement officials,
including complaints of sexual violence; ensure that persons deprived of their
liberty are able to transmit confidential complaints to such bodies; and ensure
that this body is able to protect effectively complainants from reprisal; (c)              
Provide
the Committee with information on the number of complaints of torture made by
persons deprived of their liberty, the number of claims of acts of torture and
ill-treatment that have been investigated and by which body(ies); the number of
persons prosecuted and under what charges; and the penalties applied for those
found guilty. The
following concerns addressed in the UN CAT’s concluding observations relating
to the effective investigation of torture allegations continue to be valid:Laws and policies concerning the state’s protection of
human rights and prevention of torture and ill-treatment remain to be inconsistently
implemented in practice (point 7).Most allegations of torture and ill-treatment continue
to be referred for preliminary investigation to the same department as that in
which the persons accused of torture are employed (point 8).Comprehensive and disaggregated data on complaints,
investigations, prosecutions and convictions of cases of torture and ill
treatment by law enforcement, security and prison personnel, including in
detention facilities is still absent (point 27).Based on extensive monitoring and work on
individual cases, the NGO Coalition against Torture in Kazakhstan concluded
that investigations continue to be ineffective despite positive legislative
changes pertaining to the procedure of crime reporting and the investigation.
In January 2015, the new criminal and criminal procedure codes entered into
force. According to the new Criminal Procedure Code, crime reporting should
trigger immediate investigation. However, there still remains a provision
allowing law enforcers to subject the information contained in the crime report
to preliminary checks. To perform the checking, the crime report is routinely
referred to the same body whose staff are being accused of torturing the
victim. As a result, the allegations are usually found unsubstantiated and
hence not meriting investigation. Even if an allegation of torture or other
forms of ill-treatment is registered it is often dismissed due to the alleged
lack of evidence. Yet, such investigations or checks are very superficial in
practice consisting typically of interviews only with the alleged perpetrators.
Bodily injuries, if documented, are usually ascribed to accidents or natural
causes. Incarcerated victims are especially vulnerable to retaliation for
complaining about torture. There is no mechanism of transferring such victims
to institutions other than those that are also under the authority of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs.In general, torture
victims prefer not to lodge complaints given these and other problems it might
cause. The NGO Coalition against Torture in Kazakhstan is aware of cases in
recent years where perpetrators of torture or other law enforcement officers
threatened victims with further violence or other reprisals when they wanted to
lodge complaints about torture or other forms of ill-treatment. Many decided
not to complain out of fear for their own or their family’s safety or they
withdrew their complaints at a later stage.Cases brought to the attention of the NGO Coalition
against Torture in Kazakhstan in 2014 and 2015 that have either been dismissed
or indefintely suspended include: (a) cases of deaths in custody under
suspicious circumstances (e.g. the case of Alexey Mamuch-Ogly, 29 year-old, who
died in a prison hospital in April 2014 allegedly of liver cirrhosis after less
than 3 years in prison and whose death certificate did not state the cause of
his death. According to his mother, the cause of death was never investigated
and his medical records file was not shared with her despite her numerous
requests); (b) a case of post-traumatic trauma (the case of Iskander
Tyugelbaev, a 25 year-old prisoner, who fell into a coma after being beaten
during a “planned search operation” in May 2015 at the ОВ-156/18 prison in
Eastern Kazakhstan); and c) other cases of torture or ill-treatment (e.g. the
case of Alexander Albrandt, 52 year-old, Kostanay region. By the time of
writing, the investigation into his allegations of police abuse had been dragging
on for over a year. The Coalition observed that problems associated with
investigations into reports of torture stem from the lack of effectiveness of
the existing investigation mechanism and the prejudiced attitude of
investigatory and regulatory agencies vis-a-vis complaints by suspects, accused
or individuals who are kept in custodial institutions. At the heart of the
problem lies the authorities’ reluctance to expose the law enforcement system
to public criticism and their fear that doing so would increase public distrust
of law enforcement agencies even further. The NGO Coalition documented many
cases where investigations have not been conducted adequately, i.e. where not
all available methods and means were responsively employed throughout the
investigation. In those instances where criminal cases are opened into
allegations of torture, they are investigated by offices of Special Prosecutors
under the Prosecutor General. The Coalition supports the idea that a body other
than the police should investigate complaints of torture but points to the need
for improving the institution of special prosecutors especially in terms of its
public accountability and transparency. Another problem regarding the investigation of
torture is the lack of an accessible and safe complaint mechanism, especially
for persons deprived of or limited in their freedom, including patients of
special institutions for compulsory treatment and temporary isolation
facilities (special detention centres). Detainees are not always aware or
informed of what complaint channels are available to them by law. In many
closed institutions complaint boxes are out of daily or free access of
detainees. Often, detainees report that their complaints do not leave the
institution after they pass them to the administration for mailing. When
detainees complain to an overseeing prosecutor or public monitors they risk
facing even harsher treatment by the guards at the knowledge or consent of the
administration. As a result, many cases of torture go unreported. In prisons,
the prisoners’ despair caused by inhuman treatment or torture – especially
during mass searches to uncover prohibited items – sometimes leads to riots or
massive self-mutilation to draw public attention to what is going on. In written
complaints to the NGO Coalition, prisoners say they do not see any other way of
complaining than that.Conclusion: Kazakhstan has not implemented the
UN CAT’s recommendation no. 8. 
II.  Transfer of
authority over detention facilities to the Ministry of Justice
Recommendation
# 10:The
State party should transfer authority for all detention and investigation
facilities, including prisons, temporary holding facilities (IVSs) and remand
centres (SIZOs) away from the Ministry of Internal Affairs.The
following concern of the UN CAT relating to its recommendation regarding the
transfer of the authority for all detention and investigation facilities away
from the Ministry of Internal Affairs continues to be valid:Authority over the penal correction system remains
with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Places of detention are controlled by
the government ministry with responsibility for the police and internal
security. […] Detention is seen as a tool of the
investigative process or a means to compel prisoners to confess to the charges against them
and thus amplifies the risk of torture and ill-treatment in such places of
detention (point 10).Victor
Akhmetov from Kostanay region was unofficially held in the police department of
the town of Zhetikara for four hours. When he was about to leave he was charged
with an administrative offence (“Disorderly conduct”, Art. 330, part 1 of the
Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Administrative Offences), arrested and
placed in the Special Detention Centre for Administrative Detainees that, like
all other detention facilities, is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of
Internal Affairs. For 7 days in a row he was repeatedly taken to the police
station and beaten to make him “confess” to murdering his mother. His complaint
of torture was dismissed as unfounded, despite the broken jaw he had sustained,
which the investigators said was the result of a private fight.Conclusion: Kazakhstan has not implemented the
UN CAT’s recommendation no. 10. 
III.  The Human Rights Commissioner (Ombudsman) and
National Preventive Mechanism
Recommendation # 13:The mandate of the Office of the Human Rights
Commissioner (Ombudsman) should be broadened to enable it to function
effectively as both the national human rights institution in accordance with
the Paris Principles and as the national preventive mechanism (NPM). The mandate of the National Preventive Mechanism
should be broadened to include monitoring of all places of deprivation of
liberty such as offices of police departments and of the National Security
Service, orphanages, medical social institutions for children with certain
disabilities, special boarding schools, nursing homes, and military barracks
and to examine the conditions and treatment of children in penitentiary and
non-penitentiary institutions.Measures should be taken to improve the ability of the NPM to carry out urgent and
unannounced visits to places of detention upon its request. The State party should consider authorizing the NPM to
publicize its findings and recommendations shortly after undertaking visits
rather than only on an annual basis and to ensure that NPM members and the
public can assess whether their recommendations have been acted upon. The
annual and other reports of the NPM should not be subject to prior review and
approval by the President before publication. The
following concern of the UN CAT relating to its recommendation on the NPM and
the Ombudsman continues to be valid:The
National Preventive Mechanism (NPM) has not always been able to undertake ad
hoc visits due to bureaucratic constraints. The NPM’s mandate still does not
provide for visits to all places of deprivation of liberty, such as orphanages,
medical social institutions for children with certain disabilities, special
boarding schools, nursing homes, elderly homes, and military barracks. The
findings and recommendations of the NPM are only made public in the form of an
annual report that is subject to prior review and approval by the President. The
Office of the Human Rights Commissioner (Ombudsman) is still lacking independence
(point 13). In
2015, the NPM’s Coordination Council extended the monitoring mandate of the NPM
to cover offices in police stations. However, this has not yet been reflected
inlegislation. Also, as before, the
NPM’s mandate still does not provide for visits to all places of deprivation of
liberty as defined in the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture,
including orphanages, medical social institutions for children with certain disabilities,
special boarding schools, nursing homes, homes for the elderly, and military
barracks. In May 2015, the NPM released its first annual report[2]. The report indicates that in 2014, apart from preventive visits, the
NPM made 14 special visits in response to reports of the risk of or actual
torture or other ill-treatment. 12 of these reports came from those detained in
institutions of the penal system under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. As a
result of these ad hoc visits, 4 criminal cases were instituted, 3 of which
were subsequently suspended. The grounds given by investigators included that
there was no evidence to suggest that a crime had taken place at all or that
the suspect had carried out a criminal act. It is noteworthy that with respect to
one of the suspended cases (the case of Alexey Ushenin, see below), the
Coalition submitted a complaint to the UN Committee against Torture precisely
in connection with the lack of an effective investigation of Alexey Ushenin’s
complaint of torture. The case is currently pending with the CAT for a review
on the merits.
On 28 August 2011, for 12 consecutive hours, Alexey Ushenin, then 34
years old, was tortured by a group of police officers in the building of the
Department of Internal Affairs in the city of Uralsk. They tried to obtain a
confession from him that he had engaged in “hooliganism with the use or
attempted use of a weapon”. Police hit Alexey on his hands and feet and bashed his head against the wall. He
was choked with a plastic bag that was pulled over his head until he lost
consciousness, and then he was reanimated with ammonia. Police officers burned
his body with cigarettes including his anus after they had pushed a rubber
truncheon into it. The offices threatened to kill his pregnant wife. Alexey
lost consciousness five times. After this torture, Alexey Ushenin was unable to
move for several days. Both the medical records of the temporary detention
facility and of the investigation-isolation facility where he was placed after
being tortured contained information about injuries. On 31 August 2011, during
the authorization of Alexey Ushenin’s arrest, a judge of Terektinsky District
Court in the village of Fedorivka in West Kazakhstan region ignored the
injuries on his body and his allegations of torture. On 14 September 2011, the
prosecutor’s office of Uralsk initiated a criminal case for aggravated torture
(Art. 141-1, part 2, para. “a” of the Criminal Code of Kazakhstan). On 23
September 2011, the case was referred for additional checks to the financial
police of Uralsk. On 30 September 2011, a forensic medical examination was
conducted, with the participation of an assistant of the city prosecutor, which
confirmed the presence of burn wounds, contusions on the neck, abrasions, and
scars on the abdomen. The expert concluded that “given the localization of the
burn wounds on the anatomical parts of the body, the wounds could have been
self-inflicted by Ushenin”. On 30 December 2011, the case was dismissed “for
lack of evidence”. In protest, Alexey Ushenin attempted suicide by swallowing 8
nails folded in a cross. In response to the West Kazakhstan branch of the
Kazakhstan International Bureau for Human Rights and Rule of Law, a member
organisation of the NGO Coalition, the prosecutor's office of West Kazakhstan
region reported in February 2012 that “the arguments set out in Mr Ushenin’s
appeals about sustaining injuries and burns were refuted by the testimony of
the medical staff, police and detention center officers of SI-170/1 of Uralsk
city, as well as during the confrontation of Mr. Ushenin Alexey with others,
and other collected materials of the criminal case”. During the main trial
Alexey Ushenin repeatedly informed the court that he had signed the confession
under torture, but to no avail. Alexey
Ushenin was sentenced to five and a half years in prison.
The
NPM’s official report, in the Coalition’s view, lacks firmness in its
conclusions. Thus, according to the NPM’s report on its activities in 2014, not
torture – which the report addressed as well – but “poor sanitary conditions,
lack of necessary medicines and poor food”, “the need to make minor or major
repairs of buildings and facilities, or to construct new ones”, and “inadequate
control and supervision by the state authorities” were named as the main problems with regard to the
prevention of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in places of
detention.The NPM has not
proved effective in responding to calls for urgent monitoring in cases of
alleged torture. This is mainly due to the bureacratic process of coordinating
such visits by the Ombudsman. Moreover even when the NPM visited the
institution in response to a complaint, in most cases it did not report any
violations. At the same time, the NGO
Coalition against Torture in Kazakhstan continues to receive many
credible complaints of torture or other ill-treatment from closed facilities.
There have been cases where the Coalition received complaints about torture
shortly after the NPM had visited the institution in response to a complaint, but
failed to report any violations. Indeed, not all regional NPM groups are seen
to be unbiased and many detainees do not see the NPM as a safe and effective
complaint mechanism. The
Coalition sees the NPM as a government-censored mechanism lacking operational
independence. Conclusion: Kazakhstan has only partly
implemented the UN CAT’s recommendation no. 13.
IV.
The administration of justice
Recommendation # 15The State party should undertake a structural reform
of the system of administration of justice with a view to balancing in practice
and ensuring equality of arms between the respective roles of the prosecutor
and the defence counsel in judicial proceedings and ensuring the independence
of the judiciary. The State party should reform the system of prosecution and
subject prosecutors to greater oversight by judges. Defence lawyers should be
allowed to collect and present evidence from the outset of judicial proceedings
as well as to call defence witnesses and should have prompt, effective and
unimpeded access to all evidence in the hands of the prosecution.The following concern of the UN CAT relating to the above recommendation
remains valid today:There continues to be a lack of balance between the
respective roles of the prosecutor, the defence counsel and judges. The
dominant role of the prosecutor throughout judicial proceedings remains in
place. There is a lack of judicial control over the actions of prosecutors and
that judges are overly deferential to prosecutors due to a lack of their
independence from the executive branch. [Defense lawyers continue to lack power to collect and present evidence.] Defendants are not
permitted to attend appeal proceedings in person and investigators can
hand-select state-appointed defence lawyers, which serves as a disincentive for
defending their clients (point 15).






[1] Some of the NGOs who
prepared this document – the NGO Coalition against Torture in Kazakhstan,
Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights (Poland), International Partnership for
Human Rights (Belgium) – received financial assistance from the European
Union and Open Society Foundations that contributed to its production, within
the project “Action for Freedom from Torture in Kazakhstan and Tajikistan”. The contents of the document
are the sole responsibility of the organizations issuing it and can under no
circumstances be regarded as reflecting the positions of the European Union.

[2]http://www.ombudsman.kz/en/publish/docs/doklad_spec/detail.php?ID=2865 