China:  Joint Letter to the Human Rights Council calling for a sustaining attention to human rights violations in China
February 17, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2017 / FebruaryChina: Joint Letter to the Human Rights Council calling for a sustaining attention to human rights violations in China

Geneva, 16 February 2017
 
 
To: Permanent Representatives of Member and Observer
States of the UN Human Rights Council
 
RE: Sustaining attention to human rights violations in
China
 
 
Excellency,
 
After another year marked by enforced disappearances, denial
of due process, and continued efforts to suppress human rights, we call on your
delegation to join with other States to take collective, coordinated action at
the 34th session of the UN Human Rights Council to hold China
accountable for its human rights record.
 
One year ago today, the High Commissioner released a
statement[1]
calling on China to address a wide range of human rights violations. The
concerns he raised were echoed by many States at the March 2016 Human Rights
Council, including through a strong cross-regional statement delivered on
behalf of twelve States.  These States
reiterated the High Commissioner’s call for China to uphold its own laws and
international commitments, and urged China to release lawyers and other human
rights defenders detained for their human rights work.
 
Human rights defenders, their families, and other
activists were encouraged by the strong message of international solidarity
sent by the joint statement. The Chinese Government, however, seems to have
ignored it entirely.  In March 2016,
States at the Council raised concerns about the following trends; a year later,
the reality on the ground remains unchanged, and in some cases has worsened.
 
·      
Arbitrary arrests and ongoing detentions:
After more than 18 months, the lawyers and other human rights defenders
detained in the ‘709 crackdown’ remain the focus of significant pressure.
According to recent counts, eight of them remain in jail awaiting trial.
Twenty-six have been released on bail and most of them, despite their apparent release,
are unable to continue working and are subject to surveillance, threats and
‘soft detention’. 
 
·      
Enforced disappearance and refusal of access to counsel: On 21 November, the Chinese authorities abducted human rights
lawyer Jiang Tianyong who, though disbarred in 2009 for his work, had continued
his work as an active figure within the legal community. His family was
informed of his detention nearly one month later, and despite swift action by
the Special Procedures, Jiang remains in ‘residential surveillance in a
designated location’. The UN Committee against Torture in its 2015 review of
China called for the Government to repeal provisions of the Criminal Law
allowing residential surveillance, calling it ‘de facto incommunicado’ detention.
 
·      
Extraterritorial actions: Gui Minhai, a
Swedish national targeted in a roundup of Hong Kong booksellers, was kidnapped
by state security authorities in Thailand in October 2015 and remains in prison
in China. His family does not know his location, have little if any access to
him, and have not received clarification on any legal proceedings. On 27
January 2017, businessman Xiao Jianhua , a Canadian national, was reported
missing from Hong Kong; although media have said he is on the mainland, his
precise whereabouts are unknown.  
 
·      
Hong Kong: Hong Kong citizens advocating
for democratic institutions and respect for human rights work in an
increasingly challenging environment. Beijing continues to interfere in Hong
Kong’s various institutions, including the courts, and according to media
reports delayed the submission of a follow-up report by the Hong Kong authorities
to the Committee against Torture.
 
·      
The right to a fair trial: The family
and legal representatives of detained human rights defenders remain, in the
vast majority of cases, blocked from visits and information on national
security grounds. Televised ‘confessions’ continued to be aired. This included
a ‘confession’ by lawyer Wang Yu that sought to smear the work of Zhou Shifeng,
head of the Beijing Fengrui Law Firm who was sentenced to seven years in prison
in August 2016. 
 
·      
Freedom of expression: Advocates for peaceful expression
and association, online and off, as well as researchers, writers and
journalists, have come under particular pressure. Non-governmental organizations
estimate that in 2016, police arrested over 100 individuals for exercising
their right to freedom of expression. This included figures well-known for
documenting and disseminating information on human rights violations, such as
veteran activists Huang Qi and Liu Feiyue. Their websites, and others including
one aimed at facilitating peaceful dialogue within China’s diverse Muslim
community, have been effectively shut down. Uyghur
scholar Ilham Tohti continues to serve a life sentence, and Tibetan activist
Tashi Wangchuk has been detained for over a year for requesting Tibetan
language classes in local schools.
 
These actions demonstrate that the Chinese Government
has failed to make progress on almost every point raised at the Human Rights
Council. The facts also stand in marked contrast to China’s rhetoric, which has
emphasized renewed commitment to the multilateral system, including through its
re-election to the Human Rights Council. 
 
We urge your delegation to join with others to take
collective, coordinated action at the upcoming Council session, through a
second joint statement and individual statements, to make clear that systemic
human rights violations in China will not go unnoticed and unchecked.  
 
In addition to
highlighting the inaction on key points from last year’s statement, delegations
should:
 
·      
Insist that China uphold its obligations
to prevent, punish and remedy torture and other cruel, inhumane or degrading
treatment or punishment, including by ordering prompt, impartial, independent
investigations into reports of torture of detained lawyers and human rights
defenders, including Li Heping, Wang Quanzhang and Xie Yang.
 
·      
Urge China to amend or repeal
the Overseas NGO Management Law; any efforts to implement the law in its
current form will – by definition – run counter to international human rights standards
and undermine the independence of civil society.
 
·      
Call for the repeal or revision
of the Counter-Terrorism Law, and speak out against the increasing use of
national security legislation and draft ‘regulations on religious affairs’ to
criminalise and harass those exercising freedom of thought, conscience and
religion and freedom of expression, recognizing the disproportionate impact this
has on Uyghur and Tibetan communities, as well as religious minorities.
 
·      
Denounce the continuing forced
evictions and other violations of human rights, including cultural rights, of
monks and laypersons at Larung Gar, a major site of Tibetan Buddhist teaching
and worship.
 
·      
Call for China to respect the
right of everyone to freedom of movement and residence, and the right of
everyone to leave any country, including his or her own, and to return to his
or her own country; and in this regard to remove all travel bans and other
restrictive measures that have been imposed on individuals for their activities
to promote and protect human rights, and to cease the arbitrary confiscation of
passports, in particular of Tibetans and Uyghurs.
 
In the past, the Chinese Government has openly
expressed its displeasure with critical scrutiny of its human rights record. Such
reactions demonstrate that China is sensitive to international attention.  Public recognition at the Human Rights
Council that China should be bound by its international human rights obligations
will again give hope to thousands of defenders, lawyers, petitioners and others
who seek to promote human rights in the country.  
 
At a time when human rights are increasingly under
threat, the Human Rights Council should ensure that all its members, including
China, ‘uphold the highest standards’ of human rights and ‘fully cooperate’
with the Council and its mechanisms, as required by UN General Assembly
Resolution 60/251. In so doing, the Council will continue to act in accordance
with its founding principles, and in defence of universal human rights
everywhere.  
 
Please be assured, Excellency, of our highest consideration.

 
 
Amnesty International
Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies
CIVICUS World Alliance for Citizen Participation
FIDH, in the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Freedom House
Frontline Defenders
Human Rights in China
Human Rights Watch
Independent Chinese PEN Center
International Campaign for Tibet
International Commission of Jurists
International Service for Human Rights
International Tibet Network
Lawyers Rights Watch Canada
PEN America Center
Students for a Free Tibet
Tibet Justice Center
World Organisation Against Torture, in the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of  Human
Rights Defenders
World Uyghur Congress



[1] http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=17050 