Bahrain:  OMCT calls on the international community to urge Bahrain to put an end to the violent repression of peaceful demonstrations  Geneva, 21 March 2011. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) condemns the ongoing excessive and indiscriminate use of for
March 21, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2011 / MarchBahrain: OMCT calls on the international community to urge Bahrain to put an end to the violent repression of peaceful demonstrations  Geneva, 21 March 2011. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) condemns the ongoing excessive and indiscriminate use of forPUBLIC STATEMENT
BAHRAIN: OMCT calls on the international
community to urge Bahrain to put an end to the violent
repression of peaceful demonstrations
Geneva, 21 March 2011. The World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) condemns the ongoing excessive and indiscriminate use of force
and violence against the protests that have started on 14 February 2011 in
different parts of the country, which led to the death of several persons and
leaving many others injured, and the lack of medical attention to the wounded
persons. 
According to the latest information
received, the situation in Bahrain
has escalated dramatically. On 13 March 2011, security forces
used batons, rubber bullets and tear gas to disperse peaceful protesters who
closed down a highway on the same day as a response to the violent repression of
a protest by the riot police on 11 March 2011. Since 15 March 2011, there are reportedly attacks on several Shia villages by Bahraini
security forces using live ammunition. At least 16 persons have reported to
have died. Moreover, the security forces have taken over several hospitals,
among others the Salmaniya Medical Complex, the country’s main hospital.
Security forces are reportedly shooting at anyone who tries to enter the
occupied medical centres, and do not allow any ambulances out to attend wounded
persons. Moreover, several patients of the hospital are reportedly being
transferred to an unknown place and their patient information hidden. 
OMCT has also been informed about the arrest of several
activists, notably the president of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights, Mr. Nabeel
Rajab, who was detained on 20 March 2011, and released
the same day. He reportedly suffered ill-treatment by the police.
OMCT is deeply concerned about these
recent events, including the introduction, on 15 March 2011, by the King of Bahrain of a three-month state of emergency and the
deployment of troops from Saudi Arabia after the request by Bahrain
to the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). OMCT recalls to the Bahraini authorities
that they have to fulfil their obligations under international law to protect
fundamental rights, such as the right to life and the right not to be subjected
to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, at all
times, even in a public emergency. Security and armed forces currently deployed in Bahrain are bound by
the same obligations. 
The protests that have spread since
14 February 2011 in Bahrain, spurred by the protests in Tunisia and
Egypt, and which have been demanding respect for human rights and an end to
corruption, and economic inequality in the country, have been violently
repressed by the security forces (see OMCT Press release on 16 February 2011). 
In light of the recent events, OMCT calls for an
independent international investigation into these events. 
OMCT also calls on the Bahraini authorities to 

Immediately
put an end to the repression of the peaceful protests and issue clear
instructions to the security forces to refrain from using excessive force
against the protesters in accordance with international standards, including the Basic Principles on the Use
of Force and Firearms and the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement
Officials; 
Guarantee
freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of expression; 
Guarantee
medical attention to the injured persons;
Immediately
release all those who were detained while peacefully demonstrating
and immediately cease torture and ill-treatment; 
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of the
arrested persons; the unconditional access to a lawyer of their choice and
families, as well as guarantee that they are promptly examined by
independent medical doctors and receive adequate medical care; 
Carry out prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigations into the security forces abuses and violence, in particular into the
circumstances surrounding the aforementioned deaths, the results of which
must be made public, in order to bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and to apply penal,
civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; and provide the victims with adequate
compensation, reparation and rehabilitation;
Ensure the respect of human
rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with
national laws and international human rights standards.

Contact: Eric Sottas, +41 22 809 49 39 