Bahrain:  Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Ghada Jamsheer
October 31, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2016 / OctoberBahrain: Continued arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms. Ghada Jamsheer

New information
BHR 002 / 0415 / OBS 030.4
Sentencing
/ Judicial harassment /
Arbitrary
detention / Critical health condition
Bahrain
October
31, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in
the following situation in Bahrain.
 
New information: 
The Observatory has been informed by the Gulf Centre
for Human Rights (GCHR) about the continued arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment of Ms. Ghada Jamsheer, a writer and blogger, Head of the
Women's Petition Committee, an organisation which campaigns for the rights and
dignity of women in the Shari'ah family courts.
 
According to information received, on November 7, 2016, Ms. Ghada
Jamsheer will appear before Manama’s High Criminal Court of Appeal, on charges
of defamation related to messages posted via her Twitter account criticising corruption
in the management of King Hamad Hospital in Bahrain, which is run by members of
the ruling family (see background information).
 
The Observatory recalls that Ms. Ghada Jamsheer, who has been detained
since August 15, 2016, is currently serving a three-month prison term as part
of her ten-month appeal sentence handed down on June 22, 2016, on allegations
of defamation in connection with the same above-mentioned Twitter messages. As of issuing this
Urgent Appeal, Ms. Ghada Jamsheer does not have any legal representation, and
is likely to be representing herself on the day of the hearing.
 
In addition, Ms. Ghada Jamsheer is being held in poor sanitary
conditions in spite of her critical health condition. She is affected with
rheumatoid arthritis, a condition which requires medical treatment to which she
does not have access while in prison, and which cannot be treated under such
sanitary conditions. In that respect, she has requested a hearing before
Manama’s High Criminal Court of Appeal so as to be granted community service
instead of jail term, in order to receive adequate medical treatment.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the arbitrary detention and the continuous
judicial harassment of Ms. Ghada Jamsheer, which seems to merely aim at
sanctioning her human rights activities, and calls upon the Bahraini
authorities to release her immediately and unconditionally, and to drop all
charges against her. 
 
The
Observatory also urges the Bahraini authorities to guarantee in all
circumstances Ms. Ghada Jamsheer’s physical and psychological integrity,
including her access to adequate medical treatment.
 
Background
information:
 
Over the
past years, Ms. Jamsheer has come under permanent surveillance with a 24-hour
presence of plainclothes Public Security officials of the Ministry of the Interior
in front of her home.
 
On September
14, 2014, Ms. Jamsheer was arrested and arbitrarily detained for more than
three months on allegations of defamation, in connection with messages posted
via her Twitter account criticising corruption in the management of King
Hamad Hospital in Bahrain, which is run by members of the ruling family.
Various charges were brought against Ms. Jamsheer based on the above-mentioned Twitter
posts resulting in twelve criminal cases.
 
Hearings in
a total of 12 criminal cases against Ms. Jamsheer have been regularly adjourned
without any reason, in violation of Ms. Jamsheer’s right to be tried within a
reasonable time.
 
On October
29, 2014, the Third Criminal Court acquitted Ms. Jamsheer in one case, fined
her 100 BHD (approx. €210) in another case, and granted bail upon the payment
of 50 BHD pending the decision on the other Twitter cases. However, Ms.
Jamsheer had to wait until November 27 to be released, and was again rearrested
only 12 hours later on new charges of “assaulting two police women” related to
a confrontation that would have taken place during her arrest in September
2014. She was again released on December 15, 2014, and further put under house
arrest until January 15, 2015.
 
On March 14,
2015, Ms. Jamsheer was prevented from leaving Bahrain via Bahrain International
Airport by security authorities, following an order of the Prosecutor General.
She did not receive any written notification about the ban.
 
On May 5,
2015, the Bahrain High Criminal Court sentenced Ms. Jamsheer to a one-year
prison term, suspended for three years on charges of “assaulting a police
officer”.
 
On November
26, 2015, the High Criminal Appeal Court upheld the one-year
sentence, suspended for three years, issued against Ms. Ghada Jamsheer on charges of “assaulting a police officer”. The
Court refused all the requests made by the defense lawyers, which included the
testimony of Ministry of Interior officials and a forensic examination of
whether Ms. Jamsheer could have kicked the police officer as alleged.
 
On June 9,
2015, the Third Lower Criminal Court sentenced Ms. Jamsheer to one year and
eight months imprisonment on charges of defamation in connection with the 2014
“corruption Tweets” (see above). Ms. Jamsheer paid a bail of 400 BHD (approx
1,200 USD) and filed an appeal. 
 
Besides, on
October 1, 2015, the Second Lower Criminal Court held its first hearing against
Ms. Ghada Jamsheer on new charges of “verbal and physical confrontation with a
police woman” also related to the above-mentioned September 2014 incident. The
Court adjourned the hearing to November 11, 2015. On that day, Ms. Jamsheer's
lawyers requested the Court to present evidence and witnesses, and the court
adjourned the hearing to December 28, 2015, and then again to March 31, 2016.
Once more, the hearing was postponed with no date provided for the next
hearing.
 
On January
18, 2016 the Third Criminal Superior Court of Appeal sentenced Ms. Ghada
Jamsheer to two terms of two months in prison each and a 100 Dinars fine
(approx. 241€) on charges of defamation in relation with the above-mentioned
“corruption Tweets”.
 
In addition,
on January 30, 2016, the High Criminal Appeal Court sentenced Ms. Ghada
Jamsheer to 3 months in prison under the same corruption charges. At that time,
Ms. Ghada Jamsheer’s fine amounted to 10,000 Dinars (approx. 24,181€).
 
On March 8,
2016, Ms. Ghada Jamsheer was further sentenced to an additional three months in
prison, under the same charges, amounting to a total of 10 months sentence.
 
On June 22,
2016, the Second High Criminal Court of Appeal sentenced Ms. Ghada Jamsheer in
appeal to ten months in prison for four cases related to the 2014 “corruption
Tweets”.
 
On August 15, 2016, Ms. Ghada Jamsheer was arrested upon her arrival at
Bahrain’s airport in Manama from London. Since then, she has been detained at
the Isa Town Detention Centre for Women. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that on December 29, 2014, UN
experts urged the government of Bahrain to drop charges
against Ms. Jamsheer, as she was sentenced “purely for [her] criticism of
government authorities. [...] Such criticism is not only fully legitimate
according to Bahrain’s obligations under human rights law; it is also essential
to the free and public debate necessary for a healthy civil society”
they added[1].

 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Bahrain urging them
to: 
 
i.   
Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Ghada Jamsheer;
 
ii.  
Release Ms. Ghada Jamsheer
immediately and unconditionally, since her detention is arbitrary as it only
aims at sanctioning her human rights activities;
 
iii.  Immediately provide Ms. Ghada Jamsheer with
the medical treatment she requires;
 
iv.  Put an end to any kind of harassment, including at
the judicial level, against
Ms. Ghada Jamsheer as well as
against all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
v.  
Guarantee Ms. Ghada Jamsheer's
freedom of movement;
 
vi.  Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, in particular its Articles 1, 12(1) and Article 12.2; 
 
vii.Ensure
in all circumstances, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Addresses:

 
• Cheikh
Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
• Cheikh
Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: 00973 17 21 05
75; Email: ofd@mofa.gov.bh
• Cheikh
Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs, Fax: +973
175 31 284
• Lt.
Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Email: info@interior.gov.bh ; Twitter:
@moi_Bahrain; @Khaled_Bin_Ali
• H.E.
Mr. Yusuf Abdulkarim Bucheeri, Permanent
Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22
758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
• H.E.
Ahmed Mohammed Yousif Aldoseri, Embassy of the Kingdom of Bahrain to the Kingdom
of Belgium; Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail: Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
October 31, 2016
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.



[1]     See
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), UN
experts urge Bahrain to drop charges against women activists for government
criticism, December 29, 2014, available at: http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=15460&LangID=E 