Turkey:  New violation of the rights to defence in Turkey. Worrying arbitrary arrests of advocates and defenders of human rights
January 28, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2013 / JanuaryTurkey: New violation of the rights to defence in Turkey. Worrying arbitrary arrests of advocates and defenders of human rights

Joint Press Release
 
Turkey:
New violation of the rights to defence in Turkey. Worrying arbitrary arrests of
advocates and defenders of human rights
 
Paris-Geneva-Brussels-Ankara, January 28, 2013. The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), the Union internationale des avocats (UIA), the Conférence
Internationale des Barreaux de Tradition Juridique Commune (CIB), Human
Rights Association (İnsan Hakları Derneği – İHD) and the Human Rights
Foundation of Turkey (Türkiye İnsan Hakları Vakfı - TİHV) express their deepest concerns following the recent wave of arrests
targeting lawyers engaged in the representation of defendants in politically
sensitive cases or in the representation of victims or the families of victims
of serious human rights violations in Turkey. 
 
On January 18, 2013, at 4 am,
several lawyers were arrested in Istanbul, Izmir, Ankara, Antalya, Hatay, Bursa
and Kocaeli in the framework of an operation allegedly targeting members of the
illegal Revolutionary People's Liberation Party–Front (DHKP-C). These lawyers
belong to the Progressive Lawyers Association (Cagdas Hukukçular Dernegi –
ÇHD), one of the most important associations of lawyers engaged in the defence
of human rights, in particular the fight against police violence[1], as well as the Platform
for the freedom to defend[2]. This operation continued
on January, 21, some of the lawyers having travelled abroad, bringing the list
of lawyers arrested to a total of 14[3].
 
ÇHD's headquarters as well as the law firm “People's Law Office” would
have been searched by the police without the presence of the Prosecutor in
charge of the case and the representative of the Bar Association, in clear
violation of the applicable provisions under Turkish law. Mr. Efkan Bolaç,
charged by the Bar Association to monitor police raids, was himself also
arrested. During the searches, police seized and copied confidential
information held by the lawyers.
 
On
January 21, 2013, several lawyers were referred to the Prosecutor accused of
being “members or leading members of an illegal organisation” in accordance
with Article 7 of the Anti-Terrorism Laws, for “transmitting instructions from
imprisoned leaders of illegal organisations”[4]. This new wave of arrests
is reminiscent of those that took place in November and December 2011, during
which 40 lawyers were remanded in custody in connection with an operation allegedly
aimed at dismantling the Kurdistan Communities Union (Koma Ciwaken Kurdistan
- KCK) – an umbrella organisation said to be the “urban branch” of the armed
Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) intended to organize the Kurdish people that
includes the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK). Today, no fewer than 46 lawyers
face lawsuits related to their participation in the defence of the leader of
the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), Abdullah Öcalan.
 
Several gatherings organized by
lawyers to denounce the arrests were also repressed over the weekend.
 
Our organisations again denounce the recurrent attacks suffered by
Turkish lawyers on the basis of anti-terrorism laws which are being abused. We
particularly deplore the fact that they are systematically identified with their
clients or to the cause defended by their clients. Such assimilation violates
the principles protecting the profession[5]. It also undermines the
rights to defence as enshrined in all international and regional instruments of
protection and human rights ratified by Turkey[6].
 
Our organisations are equally alarmed by the consequences this may have
for the effective defence of both people prosecuted under terrorism charges as
well victims of human rights violations in general, because in such a
repressive environment it is increasingly difficult to represent them. 
 
Recalling the role of lawyers as
agents in the administration of justice, our organisations call upon the
Turkish authorities to guarantee all the procedural rights that should be
accorded to the lawyers arrested and to release them immediately if it appears
that no charges could and should be held against them. Meanwhile, their safety
and integrity must be guaranteed.
 
Finally, we call on the authorities
to put an end to all kinds of harassment against lawyers involved in the
defence of human rights, ensuring in all circumstances respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms. 
 
For further information,
please contact:
• FIDH: Audrey
Couprie / Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
• OMCT: Delphine
Reculeau: + 41 22 809 49 39
• UIA :
Marie-Pierre Lienard : +33 1 44 88 55 61 / mplienard@uianet.org
Romina
Bossa-Abiven : +33 1 44 88 55 66 / rbossa@uianet.org



[1] Almost
2,500 lawyers belong to this association.


[2] The
platform was created in 2012 as a terrorism investigation targeted lawyers. 


[3] Nine
lawyers remain in custody: Mr. Selçuk Kozağaçlı, National President of
ÇHD (Ankara Bar Association) ; Mr. Taylan Tanay, President of the
Istanbul branch (Istanbul Bar Association) ; Mr. Güçlü Sevimli,
member of the Istanbul branch (Istanbul Bar Association) ; Mr. Naciye
Demir, member (Istanbul Bar Association) ; Ms. Şükriye Erden,
member (Istanbul Bar Association) ; Mr. Günay Dağ, member (Istanbul
Bar Association) ; Ms. Ebru Timtik, member (Istanbul Bar Association) ;
Ms. Barkın Timtik, member (Istanbul Bar Association) ; Ms. Nazan
Betül Vangölü Kozağaçlı, member of the Ankara branch (Ankara Bar
Association).
Five lawyers were released: Mr. Efkan Bolaç, former President of
the Istanbul branch and member (Istanbul Bar Association) ; Ms. Gülvin
Aydın, member of the Istanbul branch (Istanbul Bar Association) ; Mr. Serhan
Arıkanoğlu, former President of the Istanbul branch (Istanbul Bar
Association) ; Mr. Zeki Rüzgar, member (Antalya Bar Association)
and Mr. Güray Dag, member (Istanbul Bar Association).
Arrest warrants have been issued against other lawyers, including Ms. Oya
Aslan, member of the national bureau.


[4] The
provisional detention order was dated January 20, though the decision was made
public on January 21, 2013. 


[5] See
in particular the Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers, adopted by the
Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders, held in Havana (Cuba) from 27 August to 7 September 1990.


[6] See in
particular Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights of 1966. 