Congo, Democratic Republic:  'D.R. CongoDemocratic Republic of Congo: the continuing incommunicado detention of Mr. José Mafwata Shamba
November 22, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2001 / NovemberCongo, Democratic Republic: 'D.R. CongoDemocratic Republic of Congo: the continuing incommunicado detention of Mr. José Mafwata ShambaCase COD 020101   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Democratic Republic of Congo.   Brief description of the situation   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by information received from Cojeski, a member of the network, regarding the disappearance of Mrs Aimée Ntabarusha Mungu and her baby.  According to the information received, she was arrested at her home, avenue Mahenge at N  21 in the Commune of Kintambo, on the afternoon of 13th November 2000, by men in uniform.  She was taken to the DEMIAP (Détection Militaire des Activités Anti-Patrie) in Kintambo, before she was taken to the GLM (Groupe Litho Moboti) of Gombe.  Since her arrest, none of Mrs Ntabarusha’s family has understood the reason for her detention.  Until 22 November 2000, the guards of the GLM accepted food destined for Mrs Ntabarusha and her baby.  However, as of 23 November 2000, they have refused to receive food for her and have stated that Mrs Ntabarusha and her child are no longer in the GLM but have been transferred to the Public Prosecutor’s Office (Parquet) of the Military Court.  Further searches for Mrs Ntabarusha were made at the Military Court and the Centre Penitentiaire et de Reeducation de Kinshasa (CPRK), Kinshasa Penitentiary and Reeducation Centre (ex Central Prison of Makala) have proven futile and no one has been able to locate Mrs Aimée Ntabarusha Mungu and her baby.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for their physical and psychological integrity.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Democratic Republic of Congo urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mrs Aimée Ntabarusha Mungu and her baby; ii.	immediately locate their whereabouts and order their immediate release in the absence of valid charges; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  The President Laurent-Désiré Kabila. Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo. Fax (+ 243) 880 02 120   Minister of Justice, Ministère de la Justice, BP 3137, Kinshasa Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo. Fax : (+243) 880 55 21  Minister of Human Rights, Ministre des droits humains, Fax : (+243) 12 20 664  Geneva, January 2, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 