Azerbaijan:  Beginning of the first trial against Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov
July 16, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JulyAzerbaijan: Beginning of the first trial against Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif YunusovNew informationAZE 002 / 0414 / OBS 031.6Arbitrary
detention / Judicial harassment /Deterioration
of health while in detentionAzerbaijanJuly 16,
2015
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Azerbaijan.
 
New
information:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources about the beginning of the first trial against Ms.
Leyla Yunus, Director of the
Institute for Peace and Democracy (IPD) and a member of OMCT General Assembly,
and Mr. Arif Yunusov, husband of Ms. Yunus and Head of the Conflictology
Department of IPD.
 
According to the information
received, on July 15, 2015, a pre-trial hearing was held at the Baku Grave
Crimes Court. Ms. Yunus is accused of large scale fraud (Article 178.3.2), fake
manufacturing or selling of official documents (Articles 320.1 and 320.2),
large scale tax evasion (Article 213.2.2) and illegal business with extraction
of income in large size (Article 192.2.1) while Mr. Yunusov is accused of
large-scale fraud (Article 178.3.2). Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov were placed in a
glass courtroom cage and the interpreter they needed (they are Russian-speaking
persons and the hearing was held in Azeri) sat near the cage.
The lawyer of Ms. Leyla Yunus
filed three petitions. First, to authorise the accused to sit beside her lawyer
so as to ensure the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty and to
fully guarantee the right to be assisted by a lawyer. Secondly, the lawyer
requested permission to videotape and/or record all the hearings following the principle
of publicity of debates. Thirdly, because of the worrying health condition of
Ms. Yunus, the lawyer requested to substitute the current imprisonment for a
house arrest as provided by Article 9.3 of the United
Nations International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights. 
 
During the hearing, the
lawyers of Ms. Yunus argued that her continued detention was life threatening. Ms.
Yunus, who suffers from diabetes and hepatitis C, is in a critical condition
(see background information) and suffers from a medical condition
known as hepatomegaly - a liver enlargement and deterioration. In
order to stop the process of degradation of the liver she is under heavy
medication. The Observatory reiterates that its medical condition is not
compatible with prison conditions and urges the authorities to opt for
alternatives to pre-trial detention.
 
According to the same
information, during the court hearing pause, Ms. Yunus denounced to the
international observers present in the court room that she had been subjected
to ill-treatment on four occasions during her detention. More particularly, she
complained that, on June 20, 2015, she had been hit in the left eye area. 
The lawyer of Mr. Arif
Yunusov filed a petition requesting the authorisation for the accused to sit
beside his lawyer and for all charges against him to be dropped in the absence
of evidence of guilt. The lawyer denounced the poor
conditions of imprisonment at the Investigative prison of the Ministry of
National Security where Mr. Arif Yunusov, who suffers from  insomnia 
high blood pressure, is being detained.
 
The prosecutor asked the
court to reject all five petitions and the judges did so after short
deliberation. The next hearing has been scheduled for July 27, 2015,
in order to start the trial on the merits.
 
The Observatory calls upon
the authorities in Azerbaijan to immediately drop all charges against Ms. Leyla
Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov as their detention seems to only aim at sanctioning
their activities amidst a wave of increasing repression against civil society
organisations and representatives in Azerbaijan. In the meantime, the Azeri
authorities should urgently put an end to their pre-trial detention and change
it for house detention taking into account the critical health condition of both
human rights defenders.
 
Background
information:
 
Ms. Leyla Yunus,
has long fought for human rights and the rights of ethnic minorities in her
country. She has been heading the IPD since 1995. In October 2014, Ms. Leyla
Yunus was awarded the Polish Prize of Sérgio Vieira de Mello, and was among the
three finalists for the Sakharov Prize. She also received the distinction of
“Chevalier de l’Ordre National de la Légion d’Honneur” from the French
government in 2013. She has worked on numerous projects relating to human
rights, political persecution, corruption, human trafficking, gender-based
issues and violations of the right to property. Ms. Yunus and Messrs. Intigam Aliyev and Rasul Jafarov were all members of a group compiling a list of
political prisoners in Azerbaijan.
 
With her husband,
Ms. Yunus has also worked towards reconciliation between Azerbaijan and
Armenia, two countries divided on the conflict in the Nagorno-Karabakh region.
Ms. Leyla Yunus has been involved since 2005 in the “Track II Diplomacy”
Initiative, and initiated the project of a dialogue between Azeri and
Armenians, developed jointly with a regional research centre in Armenia.
 
On
April 28, 2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus was reportedly invited as a witness on the
criminal case against journalist Rauf Mirqadirov, columnist and
press correspondent in Turkey for the independent newspaper Zerkalo, to the
Investigation Department of Serious Crimes of the Office of
Prosecutor General of Azerbaijan. In the evening, however, Ms. Yunus and
Mr. Yunusov were detained at the Baku Heydar Aliyev airports. The authorities
seized their luggages, conducted a search without presenting them any
court order, confiscated their passports and seized a laptop, a video
camera, USB flash drives and paper records, while denying Ms. Yunus
and Mr. Yunusov the right to see their lawyer. Mr. Yunusov was
hospitalised for a pre-stroke condition.
On
April 29, 2014, after being kept awake
the whole night and denied access to toilets, Ms.
Yunus was interrogated in relation to the case against journalist Rauf
Mirqadirov[1].

Ms.
Yunus’ questioning lasted nine hours, and questions all focused on joint
projects between the IPD and Armenian NGOs, as well as on her relations with
journalist Rauf Mirqadirov. Following this questioning, IPD’s premises were
searched and authorities seized all the computers and books belonging to Mr.
Yunusov, along with printed documents, including the business card of an
Armenian historian. Shortly after, IPD’s bank accounts were frozen. Ms. Yunus
and Mr. Yunusov were  released.
On July 30, 2014, Ms. Yunus was arrested again by the
the Prosecutor’s office employees on charges of “treason” (Article 274 of the
Criminal Code), “large-scale fraud” (Article (178.3.2), “forgery” (Article
320), “tax evasion” (Article 213), and “illegal business” (Article 192) and
brought to the department of grave crimes of the General Prosecutor’s Office,
where she had to undergo a six-hour questioning. Informed by telephone, her
husband joined her at the department of grave crimes of the General
Prosecutor’s Office, where he was also questioned. Ms. Yunus and Mr. Yunusov
were both charged, and then placed in pre-trial detention. Mr. Yunusov was
later placed under house arrest, and arrested again on August 5, for violation
of his conditional sentence. Since that date, Mr. Arif Yunusov has been held at
the Investigative Prison of the Ministry of National
Security, the only remaining prison in Azerbaijan which is not subordinated to
the Ministry of Justice. This situation puts him at a high risk of facing
torture and ill treatment and the absence of a proper medical unit in this
prison has been denounced by various international human rights bodies such as
the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) or the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture (CPT).
 
Following international criticism over the conditions
of detentions, the Azeri authorities agreed for Ms. Yunus to be examined on
various occasions since December 2014 by a German doctor, Christian Witt, whose
official results have not been made public so far. Ms. Yunus’ lawyer, who
visited her on February 8, reported that she was preoccupied over the lack of
information about the doctor’s diagnosis, that she was suffering from sight
problems, and that she was continuing to lose weight. Ms. Yunus, who was
previously denied access to medication by the prison authorities, allegedly
lost 16 kilograms since her arrest. 
 
On October 18, 2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus was
transferred to the Investigative Prison of the Ministry of National
Security. Ms. Yunus was held there until October 24, date on which she was
transferred to Kurdakhani prison.
 
On
September 6, 2014, Ms. Leyla Yunus's cell-mate who had previously verbally
harassed her and thrown plates and dishes at her, assaulted Ms. Leyla Yunus.
Ms. Leyla Yunus called for help and when the staff from the prison arrived she
reported the attack and asked to see the prison administration. She wrote three
pages explaining the event and the previous acts of harassment conducted by her
cell-mate. Moreover, she also asked for medicine since she was feeling unwell
after the attack but her demand was unattended. On September 7, 2014, she was
brought before Major Yagubov who announced her that a reprimand had been issued
against her for knocking at the door without any reason and creating unrest
inside the cell. No measure has been taken to either punish the cell-mate nor
to ensure the protection of Ms. Leyla Yunus.
 
Ms. Leyla Yunus was later deprived of her lawyer,
Mr. Javad Javadov, following his criticism of the judicial process against
Ms. Leyla Yunus at an hearing on October 24, 2014. A few days later,
her second lawyer, Mr. Khalid Bagirov, was also removed from the case.
Moreover, her third lawyer, Mr. Alaif Hasanov, has been subjected to
a lawsuit by Ms. Nuriya Huseynova - cellmate of Leyla Yunus – who
accused him of passing information to the media. Mr. Alaif Hasanov was the
first one to speak out about the condition and physical
pressure against Ms. Leyla Yunus via her cell-mate.
 
On
January 5, 2015 and February 2, 2015, the ECtHR communicated on two
applications filed for violations of the rights of Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif
Yunusov .
On
February 18, 2015, the pre-trial detention of Ms.Yunus was extended until July
28, 2015. 
On February 23, 2015, the pre-trial detention of Mr.
Yunusov was extended to August 5, 2015.
 
Action
requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities in Azerbaijan, urging them to:
 
i. Immediately release Ms.
Leyla Yunus and Mr. Arif Yunusov, since their detention is arbitrary and only aim
at sanctioning their human rights activities;
 
ii. Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Leyla Yunus, Mr.
Arif Yunusov and all the human rights defenders in Azerbaijan;
 
iii. Carry out a prompt,
effective and independent investigations into the allegations of ill treatment
against Ms. Leyla Yunus;
 
iv. Put an end to all forms
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Leyla Yunus and Mr.
Arif Yunusov as well as of all human rights defenders in the country;
 
v. Conform with the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
- Article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
- Article 5, which
underscores the right of every individual to form, join, and participate in
non-governmental organizations; and
- Article 12.2, which
provides that the State shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”;
 
vi. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Azerbaijan.
 
Addresses:
 
•
Mr. Ilham Aliyev, President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Office of the
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, 19 Istiqlaliyyat St., Baku AZ1066,
Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 492 06 25, (+994) 412 92 28 68, E-mail:
office@pa.gov.az, office@apparat.gov.az
•
Mr. Zakir Garalov, Prosecutor General of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
Prosecutor’s Office, 7 Nigar Rafibeyli St., Baku, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12
492 06 82, (+994) 12 492 26 63, E-mail: z.qaralov@prosecutor.gov.az,
info@prosecutor.gov.az
•
Mr. Eldar Mahmudov, Minister of National Security, Ministry of National
Security of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Parliament Avenue 14, Baku AZ1006,
Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 493-76-22, E-mail: cpr@mns.gov.az
•
Mr. Ramil Usubov, Minister of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Internal
Affairs of the Azerbaijani Republic, Fax: (+994) 12 492 45 90
•
Mr. Elmar Mammadyarov, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Azerbaijan, E-mail: katiblik@mfa.gov.az
•
Mr. Fikrat F. Mammadov, Minister of Justice in Azerbaijan, Inshaatchilar
Prospekti, 1 Baku, Azerbaijan, e-mail: contact@justice.gov.az; Fax (+994) 12
430 09 81
•
H.E. Mr. Murad N. Najafbayli, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
Azerbaijan to the United Nations in Geneva, Route des Fayards 237, CH-1290
Versoix, Switzerland, Fax: (+41) 22 901 18 44, E-mail:
geneva@mission.mfa.gov.az
•
Embassy of Azerbaijan in Brussels, Avenue Moliere 464, 1050 Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: (+32) 2 345 91 85
 
Please also write to the
diplomatic missions or embassies of Azerbaijan in your respective country as
well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in Azerbaijan.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, July 16, 2015
 
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and
FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims
to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line:
•
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
•
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
•
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
 
 



[1]                  Mr. Mirqadirov, whose press
accreditation was withdrawn with no official reason, had been extradited the
day before from Turkey to Azerbaijan and arrested upon his arrival in Baku. He
was then placed in detention on charges of spying for Armenia. 