Azerbaijan:  Sport For Rights: Joint Statement: Sport for Rights coalition condemns sentencing of journalist Khadija Ismayilova
September  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / SeptemberAzerbaijan: Sport For Rights: Joint Statement: Sport for Rights coalition condemns sentencing of journalist Khadija IsmayilovaAzerbaijan_2015.09.01_Sport_For_Rights_EN2 pages / 619 KB​​​Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. 
JOINT STATEMENT
Azerbaijan:
Sport for Rights coalition condemns sentencing of journalist Khadija Ismayilova
The Sport for Rights coalition strongly condemns the sentencing
of Azerbaijani journalist Khadija Ismayilova to a staggering 7.5 years in jail.
On 1 September, the Baku Court of Grave Crimes convicted Ismayilova on charges
of embezzlement, illegal entrepreneurship, tax evasion, and abuse of office.
Ismayilova was acquitted of the charge of inciting someone to attempt suicide. Sport
for Rights considers the charges against Ismayilova to be politically motivated
and connected to her work as an investigative journalist, particularly her
exposure of corruption among the ruling Azerbaijani elite. 
"We condemn today's verdict in the case of
Khadija Ismayilova, which puts an outrageous yet expected ending to the
grotesque proceedings against her", CPJ
Europe and Central Asia Program Coordinator Nina Ognianova said. "The time for business as usual with
Azerbaijan is over. We call on Baku's counterparts in the international
community to make no further dealings with this highly repressive state until
Ismayilova is unconditionally released and fully acquitted of all fabricated
accusations”.
“Khadija
Ismayilova’s trial failed to meet minimum fair trial guarantees, a pattern that
has been regularly observed by IPHR’s monitors in similar cases in
Azerbaijan", said Brigitte Dufour, IPHR Director. “The
defence’s motions are routinely rejected, which
runs contrary to the principle of equality of arms - a cornerstone of the
right to a fair trial - and indicates that the judges in these trials are
openly siding with the prosecution”.
One of Azerbaijan’s most prominent investigative
journalists, Ismayilova is also among the most courageous, one of very few
willing to report on risky topics such as human rights violations and
corruption. In the months leading to her arrest in December 2014, Ismayilova
was aware she could be targeted, which she linked to her investigations into
the business interests of President Ilham Aliyev’s family. Despite being warned
not to return to the country from trips abroad – during which she spoke at
international organisations on abuses taking place in Azerbaijan – Ismayilova
persisted, speaking out critically until her arrest, and even afterwards, in
letters smuggled out from jail. 
Sport for Rights believes that in jailing Ismayilova,
the Azerbaijani authorities sought to silence her critical voice before the
country faced increased international media attention during the inaugural European
Games, which took place in Baku in June 2015. Sport for Rights has referred to
Ismayilova as a “Prisoner of the European Games” – along with human rights
defenders Leyla and Arif Yunus, Rasul Jafarov, and Intigam Aliyev, who were
also arrested in the run-up to the games.
“For her thorough and fearless investigative
journalism, which has uncovered corruption at the highest levels of power,
Khadija has earned numerous accolades, including PEN American’s 2015 Barbara
Goldsmith/Freedom to Write Award”, said Karin Deutsch
Karlekar, director of Free Expression programmes at PEN American Center. “However, speaking the truth has grave
consequences in Azerbaijan, where independent reporting has been all but
extinguished through farcical trials, imprisonment, murder, and other forms of
severe harassment. We demand that the government cease this unprecedented
witch-hunt against journalists and their family members, and enable Azerbaijani
citizens to freely access a range of news and information”.
The harsh sentencing of Ismayilova is the latest incident
in an unprecedented crackdown being carried out by the Azerbaijani authorities
to silence all forms of criticism and dissent. Less than two weeks before Ismayilova’s
verdict, the same court sentenced human rights defenders Leyla and Arif Yunus to
8.5 and seven years in jail, respectively. Authorities have so far disregarded
the widespread calls for humanitarian release of the couple, who both suffer
serious health problems that continue to worsen in custody. Human rights
defenders Intigam Aliyev, Rasul Jafarov, and Anar Mammadli are also serving
staggering sentences of 7.5 years, six years and three months (recently reduced
from 6.5 years by the appellate court), and 5.5 years, respectively, all on
politically motivated charges.
The situation for journalists is also dire. On 9
August, journalist and chairman of the Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety
Rasim Aliyev died in hospital after being severely beaten the previous day.
Aliyev had reported receiving threats in the weeks leading to the attack, and
the police failed to provide him with protection. This attack followed an
earlier high-level threat against an Azerbaijani journalist, Berlin-based
Meydan TV Director Emin Milli, in connection with his critical reporting on the
European Games. In addition to Ismayilova, journalists Nijat Aliyev, Araz
Guliyev, Parviz Hashimli, Seymur Hezi, Hilal Mammadov, Rauf Mirkadirov, and
Tofig Yagublu are also behind bars on politically motivated charges.
The Sport for Rights coalition reiterates its call for
Ismayilova’s immediate and unconditional release, as well as the release of the
other jailed journalists and human rights defenders in Azerbaijan. The
coalition also calls for the Azerbaijani government to take immediate and
concrete steps to improve the broader human rights situation in the country, particularly
in the context of the upcoming November parliamentary elections. Without independent
media coverage, including critical voices such as Ismayilova’s, the elections
cannot be considered free and fair. Finally, Sport for Rights calls for greater
vigilance by the international community to developments in the country, and
increased efforts to hold the Azerbaijani government accountable to its
international human rights obligations.
Supporting organisations:
ARTICLE 19
Civil Rights Defenders
Committee to Protect Journalists
Freedom Now
Front Line Defenders
Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights
Human Rights House Foundation (HRHF)
Index on Censorship
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH),
within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders
International Media Support (IMS)
International Partnership for Human Rights (IPHR)
NESEHNUTI
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
PEN American Center
People in Need
Platform
Polish Green Network
Solidarity with Belarus Information OfficeWorld
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory
for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders 