Egypt:  Egypt: Arbitrary arrest and suspicious death in detention of Mr. Ashraf Youssef
May 30, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2005 / MayEgypt: Egypt: Arbitrary arrest and suspicious death in detention of Mr. Ashraf YoussefCase EGY 300505 Arbitary Arrest / Suspicious death in detention  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Egyptian Organisation for Human Rights (EOHR), a member of the OMCT network, of its suspicions over the circumstances of the death of Mr. Ashraf Youssef, in Menouf, Menoufiyya in Egypt.  According to the information received, Mr. Ashraf Youssef was arrested on 29 April 2005 in Menouf. He was suspected of ordering the al Azhar and Abdel Moneim Riyadh bombings, which occurred in April and May respectively. Upon arrest, Mr. Youssef was prevented from meeting with his lawyer and his lawyer was barred from attending his interrogation. In violation of the Criminal Procedures Code and the Constitution, the place of his arrest was not clearly specified and he did not contact his family from the time of his arrest until his death on 11 May 2005. According to information received, officials attributed Mr. Youssef’s death to him being disturbed and repeatedly banged his head against the walls.  According to the information received, the Public Prosecutor’s Office ordered an autopsy, the results of which are still pending.   The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern over the death of Mr. Ashraf Youssef, notably given the serious allegations that he was subjected to ill-treatment and torture during his detention. OMCT calls on the authorities to immediately order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of his arrest, and death detention, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial, apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law, and award adequate reparation to his family.   Action requested Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to:  i. Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the arrest, the allegations of torture, and the death of Mr. Ashraf Youssef, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  ii. Guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victim’s family;  iii. Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, His Excellency Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg, Fax:+202 390 1998  Minister of the Interior, His Excellency General Habib al-Adeli, Ministry of the Interior, Al-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 579 2031  Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr Faruq Sayf al-Nasr, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 795 8103   Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Maher 'Abd al-Wahid, Dar al-Qadha al-'Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 577 4716  Ambassadeur Gabr, Naéla, Av. Blanc 49 (2ème), CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 738 44 15  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.  Geneva, May 31st, 2005.  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 