India:  ? Indian expert body joins States and civil society in asking torture Convention ratification
November  1, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / India / 2017 / NovemberIndia: ​ Indian expert body joins States and civil society in asking torture Convention ratification   Geneva, 1
November 2017 – India’s highest legal expert body joined many other voices urging
the world’s largest democracy to ratify the United Nations Convention Against
Torture without further ado.
Ratifying the Convention
Against Torture will allow India to “secure an individual’s right to life and
liberty,” said in a report published on Monday the Law Commission of India, an
advisory body of India’s Ministry of Law and Justice. What is more, to enshrine
in national legislation the country’s obligations under the Convention, the
Indian Government should enact the Prevention of Torture Bill, 2017”. 
Yesterday’s recommendation
follows the litigation a former Law Minister of the Government of India filed
before the Supreme Court asking the State to fulfill the Constitution’s promise
of safeguarding human dignity and preventing torture[1]. During Supreme Court
hearings in April 2017, the Chief Justice reportedly said that the adoption of
domestic legislation in line with the Convention Against Torture would be in
India’s national interest and a matter of protecting its reputation worldwide.
At the moment, India faces difficulties in extraditing criminals from foreign
countries because it does not have a law criminalizing torture. 
“We could not agree more that
it is about time India formally commits to fighting torture,” said Gerald
Staberock, OMCT Secretary General. “It will help turn theory into practice.” 
India has been repeatedly
criticized, most notably by the UN Human Rights Council in the context of the
Universal Periodic Review and by civil-society organizations, including OMCT,
for having signed the Convention Against Torture in 1997 without ratifying it.
Unlike in its neighboring Pakistan, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Nepal, and
Bangladesh, the 1,2 billion inhabitants of India do so far not benefit from the
Convention’s protection against torture and other forms of ill-treatment. This
is has proven to be a recurring problem for Indians where each year more than 1,500
people die in prison, more than 34,600
cases of rape are reported and an estimated
135,000 children are trafficked for sex and domestic slavery, as
recurrently documented by OMCT’s member organizations in the country. 
About OMCT 
OMCT is short for the World
Organisation Against Torture – in French, as the organization created in 1985
is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. 
On top of protecting human
rights defenders and promoting NGO participation before the CAT, OMCT works
for, with and through an international coalition of over 200 non-governmental
organizations – the SOS-Torture network – fighting torture, summary executions,
enforced disappearances, arbitrary detentions, and all other cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment in the world. 
For more information, please
visit: www.omct.org 
For our latest campaign
#HumansAgainstTorture: www.joinhat.org. https://vimeo.com/omct, Instagram. 
As coordinator of civil-society presence at the CAT, OMCT: 
-
communicates ahead of time with national NGOs warning them that their countries
will be reviewed in an upcoming session, 
-
builds the reporting capacity of NGOs on the Convention Against Torture through
legal trainings in their home countries; 
-
provides administrative, logistical and financial support to NGOs to enable
their programmed attendance of CAT sessions and private briefings; 
-
provides technical, information-gathering and editorial support to effective
country reporting; 
-
moderates the NGO private briefing sessions reserved for NGOs to jointly bring
their concerns to the Committee; 
-
recommends visibility opportunities for advocacy messaging during CAT sessions;

Contacts
Please contact lb@omct.org for
media inquiries or OMCT communications, nb@omct.org and cbb@omct.org about our
programme favoring civil-society participation before the CAT, and sa@omct.org
for joining our SOS-Torture network.



[1] India’s Constitution Article 21 says
« No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
according to a procedure established by law ». 