China:  Sentencing of human rights lawyer Jiang Tianyong to two years’ imprisonment
November 22, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2017 / NovemberChina: Sentencing of human rights lawyer Jiang Tianyong to two years’ imprisonment

URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

New
information
CHN
001 / 0117 / OBS 002.1
Sentencing
/
Arbitrary
detention / Torture
China
November 22,
2017
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
China.
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the sentencing of human
rights lawyer Jiang Tianyong, a
leader of the China Human Rights Lawyers Group[1]
and an outspoken supporter of detained rights lawyers from the ‘709
crackdown’[2].        
 
According to
the information received, on November 21, 2017, Changsha
Intermediate People’s Court, Hunan
Province, found Mr. Jiang Tianyong guilty of “inciting
subversion of State power” (Article 105 (2) of the Criminal
Law), and
sentenced him to two
years’ imprisonment and three years of deprivation of political rights, on the basis
of a confession that was likely coerced. In convicting Mr. Jiang,
the court said he had “attacked” and “vilified” the Government, judicial
authorities, and China’s political system in online postings and interviews
with foreign media. The court also cited as “evidence” of criminal behaviour his
attendance at trainings overseas, applications for funding from so-called
“anti-China forces”, and establishing with other lawyers the China Human Rights
Lawyers Group. The court specifically mentioned his advocacy in support of ‘709
crackdown’ victims, including Zhou
Shifeng, claiming it “severely harmed” national security and social
stability. Mr. Jiang said in court that he would not appeal his conviction.
 
Mr. Jiang’s conviction took place exactly one year
after he was kidnapped from a train station by Chinese police. He was forcibly
disappeared, denied access to a lawyer, and likely tortured (See background
information).
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the sentencing and arbitrary detention of Mr. Jiang Tianyong, and urges the Chinese authorities to immediately and unconditionally
release him as his detention appears to be only aimed at
sanctioning his legitimate human rights activities.
 
The Observatory further recalls that another human rights lawyer, Mr. Wang Quanzhang, has been held in incommunicado pre-trial detention for more than two
years as
part of the ‘709 crackdown’[3].
 
Background
information:
 
On November 21, 2016, Mr. Jiang Tianyong went missing
as he was meant to board a train to Beijing from Changsha in Hunan Province,
where he had met the wife and lawyers of Mr. Xie Yang, a ‘709 crackdown’ human rights lawyer detained at
Changsha City Detention Centre[4].
Mr. Jiang’s family members and lawyers immediately reported his disappearance
to the authorities. However, the police refused to file a missing person case. 
 
On
December 16, 2016, Chinese authorities finally confirmed through media reports
that Mr. Jiang Tianyong had been taken into custody by public security
officers, and given a nine-day administrative detention for “fraudulent use of another
person’s ID”. They also specified that on December 1, 2016, he was placed under
“compulsory criminal measures” for “illegally possessing documents classified
as State secrets” (Article 282 of the Criminal Law) and “illegally
disseminating State secrets to overseas [sources]” (Article 111) and other
unnamed “crimes”. If convicted under Article 111, Mr. Jiang was facing life
imprisonment.
 
On December
23, 2016, Mr. Jiang’s family members received a notification from the Changsha City Public
Security Bureau, informing that he had been put under
residential surveillance at an unknown “place designated by the police”, a form
of extrajudicial secret detention, on suspicion of “inciting subversion of
State power”.

 
On December 29, 2016,
Changsha Public Security Bureau rejected the request of his defence lawyer to
meet him.
 
In early March 2017, State-run media
reports claimed that Mr. Jiang had “fabricated” stories of Mr. Xie
Yang’s alleged torture, and broadcasted clips of an interview with Mr. Jiang. Mr.
Jiang’s family-hired lawyers were repeatedly denied visits to meet with him, on
the grounds that such contact would “endanger national security”, “hinder the
investigation”, or “leak State secrets”, even after State-run media had been
allowed to meet Mr. Jiang. 
 
Mr. Jiang remained held
incommunicado until May 31, 2017, when he was formally arrested. Since then, he
has been detained at the Changsha No. 1 Detention Center. 
 
During his trial on August 22, 2017
before Changsha Court, during which serious violations of several basic fair
trial rights were reported, Mr. Jiang publicly confessed that he had attended
trainings abroad that encouraged him to reject China’s political system.
Despite being partially broadcasted online, the trial hearing was held behind
closed doors and Mr. Jiang’s supporters and international observers were denied
entry into the courthouse. Moreover, Mr. Jiang was represented by a
Government-appointed lawyer after authorities refused to let him meet with the
lawyers hired by his family and then claimed he had “dismissed” them.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities of China asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Jiang
Tianyong, Mr. Wang Quanzhang as well as that
of all human rights defenders in China;
 
ii. Release Messrs. Jiang Tianyong and Wang Quanzhang immediately and unconditionally as their detention is arbitrary since it
only seems to aim at punishing them for their human rights activities;
 
iii. Immediately
disclose Mr. Wang Quanzhang’s whereabouts;
 
iv.
Carry out an immediate, thorough, impartial, and transparent
investigation into the above-mentioned allegations of torture in
order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal,
and sanction them as provided by law;
 
v.
Put an end to all forms of harassment -
including at the judicial level - against Mr. Jiang
Tianyong, Mr. Wang Quanzhang and all human rights defenders in the
country so that they are able to carry out their work without hindrance;
 
vi. Comply
with all the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with its Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2;
 
vii.
Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human
rights instruments signed or ratified by the People’s
Republic of China.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Mr. Li Keqiang, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 659 611 09 (c/o Ministry of Foreign
Affairs), Email: premier@mail.gov.cn  
·    
Mr. Guo Shengkun, Minister of Public
Security of the People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 63099216, Email: gabzfwz@mps.gov.cn 
·    
H.E. Mr. Zhaoxu Ma, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the United Nations in
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 793 70 14, E-mail: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cn
·    
H.E. Mr. QU XING, Ambassador,
Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Brussels, Belgium, Fax:
+32-2-7792895; Email: chinaemb_be@mfa.gov.cn
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of the People’s Republic of China
in your respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris,
November 22, 2017
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by OMCT and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to prevent
or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and
FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 /
+ 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18
/ +33 1 43 55 18 80
 



[1] The China Human Rights Lawyers Group
is a network of rights lawyers in China founded on September 13, 2013. In 2016,
it had a membership of 315 lawyers. Mr. Jiang Tianyong’s licence was revoked in
2009 for defending or supporting many high-profile human rights defenders.
Since then, Mr. Jiang has taken an active role in organizing Chinese human
rights lawyers to provide legal counsel to victims of rights abuses and
criticized authorities’ abuses of legal rights. 


[2] The term “709” refers to the start
of the crackdown on July 9, 2015. About 300 rights lawyers and ­activists were
detained, interrogated or threatened in one of the harshest crackdowns on human
rights and civil society in decades. For more information, see the Joint
Statement issued on January 15, 2016.


[3] For more information, see
Observatory Urgent Appeal CHN
003/0917/OBS 101, issued on September 19, 2017.


[4] For more information, see https://www.nchrd.org/2016/09/xie-yang/ 