Nepal:  Nepal - arbitrary arrest and disappearance of Mr. Bishwa Acharya, 25 year old student
November  3, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2005 / NovemberNepal: Nepal - arbitrary arrest and disappearance of Mr. Bishwa Acharya, 25 year old studentCase NPL 031105Arbitrary arrest / disappearance  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Nepal.   Brief Description of the SituationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the disappearance of Mr. Bishwa Acharya, 25 years old, college student from Sonpur Village Development Committee, Kaudia, Dang.  According to the information received, on 25th October 2005, at around 11.55am, Mr. Acharya was in Narayanpur, VDC Narayanpur in Dang to make a phone call. About 40 Royal Nepal Army personnel arrived in an Army truck and arrested, without a warrant or cause for arrest, Mr. Acharya. A number of people witnessed the incident. Since, his whereabouts are unknown.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Acharya.  Action Requested: Please write a letter to the authorities in Nepal urging them to: i.	Immediately locate the whereabouts of Mr. Acharya and guarantee his physical and psychological integrity; ii.	Order the immediate release of Mr. Acharya in the absence of valid legal charges, and if such charges exist, to ensure that they are given prompt and fair trials, in which their procedural rights are guaranteed at all times; iii.	Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses:  His Majesty King Gyanendra, Narayanhity Royal Palace, Durbar Marg, Kathmandu, Nepal  c/o Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Nepal to the United Nations, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 733 27 22; E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int Mr. Nain Bahadur Khatri, Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@ntc.net.np  Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.  Geneva, 3rd November, 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 