Cambodia:  Release Tep Vanny, arbitrarily detained for two years
August 15, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Cambodia / 2018 / AugustCambodia: Release Tep Vanny, arbitrarily detained for two years
PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY
Cambodia: Release Tep
Vanny, arbitrarily detained for two years
Paris-Geneva, August
15, 2018 - Land rights defender Tep Vanny must be immediately and
unconditionally released, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, an FIDH-OMCT partnership, reiterated today, on the two-year
anniversary of her detention. Ms. Tep Vanny is currently incarcerated at Prey
Sar’s Correctional Centre 2 (CC2) prison in Phnom Penh.
“The prolonged and arbitrary detention of Tep Vanny reflects the severe
repression that human rights defenders and civil society members continue to
face in Cambodia. The international community must demand that Cambodian
authorities immediately and unconditionally release Tep Vanny and cease all
acts of harassment against her,”
said FIDH Secretary-General Debbie Stothard.
Tep Vanny has worked tirelessly to protect the rights of members of the
Boeung Kak community and played a key role in the ‘Black Monday’ campaign,
which called for the release of fellow human rights defenders. She has been
arbitrarily detained since August 15, 2016, when she was arrested for
participating in a peaceful ‘Black Monday’rally[1].
On
August 22, 2016, she was convicted of ‘insulting of a public official’ (Article
502 of the Criminal Code), and sentenced to six days in prison. However, after
serving her prison sentence, Ms. Tep Vanny remained behind bars because
authorities resurrected outstanding charges against her, related to previous
protests in which Tep Vanny had taken part.
On
September 19, 2016, Ms. Tep Vanny was sentenced, along with three other Boeung
Kak Lake community activists, to six months in prison on charges of ‘insulting
of a public official’ and ‘obstructing of a public official’ (Articles 502 and
504 of the Criminal Code), in a case related to a November 2011 protest that
called for a resolution to the Boeung Kak land dispute.
On
February 23, 2017, Tep Vanny was convicted on charges of ‘intentional violence
with aggravating circumstances’ (Article 218 of the Criminal Code), and
sentenced to a further 30 months in prison for having participated in a March
2013 protest that called for the release of fellow activist Yorm Bopha.
In
both cases, Tep Vanny’s appeals were rejected by the Court of Appeal and the
Supreme Court. All cases against Tep Vanny were based on trumped-up charges and
featured various infringements to her right to a fair trial. 
“Tep Vanny is a courageous woman and determined human rights defender
who did not commit any crime and should not have spent a minute behind bars.
She must be immediately released and compensated for the arbitrary detention
and judicial harassment to which she has been subjected,” said OMCT General Secretary Gerald Staberock.
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human
rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.
For more
information, please contact:

OMCT: Delphine
     Reculeau: +41 228 09 49 39; mgi@omct.org
FIDH: Samuel
     Hanryon: +33 6 72 28 42 94 - shanryon@fidh.org
     - @Sam_hanryon / Maryna Chebat: +33 6 49 10 83 65 - mchebat@fidh.org
     - @MS_Chebat 

 
 
 




[1]                       See the urgent appeal KHM 002 / 0816 / OBS
077.4 of the Observatory published on February 9, 2018 