Iran:  Arbitrarily detained defender Kaboudvand in hunger strike must be immediately released
June  3, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2016 / JuneIran: Arbitrarily detained defender Kaboudvand in hunger strike must be immediately released​















PRESS
RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
Paris-Geneva,
June 3, 2016. The ongoing judicial harassment against the arbitrarily
imprisoned human rights defender Mr. Mohammad-Seddiq Kaboudvand in Iran must
stop and he must be released immediately, said today the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
 
According
to the information received, on May 29, 2016, Mr. Mohammad-Seddiq Kaboudvand,
the imprisoned President of Human Rights Organisation of Kurdistan, lost
consciousness as a result of a drastic fall in his blood pressure following
three weeks of hunger strike. His family members reported that his health
conditions were grave and expressed great concern about his extreme loss of
weight and his deteriorating heart and prostate conditions. Mr. Kaboudvand was
transferred to the hospital on May 22, but demanded to be returned to prison
after doctors tried to force-feed him. On May 25, after his health conditions
deteriorated, he was hospitalised again. Doctors at the hospital said he might
suffer a heart attack if he continued his hunger strike. 
 
Mr.
Kaboudvand started his hunger strike on May 8, 2016 to protest against the
“fabricated charges” that have recently been brought against him in a new case,
and to demand the implementation of Article 134 of the 2013 Islamic Penal Code
in his case, which would reduce his current prison sentence by six months.
Although he has agreed to receive medical care, on June 2 he vowed to continue
his hunger strike until his demands are met. 
 
Mr. Kaboudvand has been serving a prison
sentence totalling 10.5 years since July 1, 2007: 10 years for founding and
administering the Human Rights Organisation of
Kurdistan and six months for his work as a journalist and editor of the weekly Payam-e
Mardom-e (Message of People of) Kurdistan.
 
Mr. Kaboudvand has faced frequent
harassment during the past nine years in arbitrary detention. On April 17,
2014, he was severely beaten along with a large number of other prisoners of
conscience, and suffered severe injuries including three broken ribs, two
broken toes and kidney bleeding[1]. He has also suffered from various diseases and
health problems while in prison, including a heart attack, dizziness and loss
of consciousness, and prostate and kidney problems[2] and has gone on hunger strike several times in
protest against his treatment.  
 
In addition, the authorities appear
to be intent on preventing Mr. Kaboudvand’s release. On July 28, 2015, the
Prosecutor of Tehran rejected outright the request of Evin prison’s governor
who had recommended Mr. Kaboudvand’s “conditional release”. Moreover, he is
facing new charges of “gathering and collusion to take
action against national security” and “spreading propaganda against the State” that would prolong his imprisonment by up to six
years. It has to be noted that Mr. Kaboudvand has been summoned
to the Prosecutor’s Office three times since early March 2016 and the
interrogators threatened him with five more years in prison.
 
The reasons cited for the new
charges included: issuing a message of congratulations for the liberation of
the Syrian town of Kobane from the control of ISIS forces, writing a letter to
the leader of the pro-Kurdish People’s Democratic party (HDP) in Turkey on
peace with the Turkish government, and his ongoing work on his academic
dissertation about “the violation of rights of prisoners in Iran”. Mr. Kaboudvand
rejected all the charges, pointing out that his dissertation is about “Turkey
and minorities” and has nothing to do with Iran.
 
On May 24, Mr. Kaboudvand was
taken to Branch 28 of the Islamic Revolution Court at a day’s notice and faced
a brief trial without his lawyer for the charge of “spreading propaganda
against the State”. The court has not issued its verdict yet. He told his
family that he might face another trial, possibly for the charge of “gathering
and collusion to take action against national security”.
 
The Observatory recalls that the
authorities have already pursued a similar tactic of fabricating new charges
against several prisoners of conscience, including human rights defenders, and
condemned them to new prison sentences to prevent their release, including
notably Messrs. Behnam Ebrahimzadeh, member of the Committee to Pursue
the Establishment of Labour Unions (CPELU) and a child rights activist, Reza
Shahabi-Zajaria, Treasurer of the Syndicate of Workers of United Bus
Company of Tehran, and Mehdi Farahi-Shandiz, a member of the CPELU and
of the Teachers Association of Iran (TAI).
 

The Observatory also recalls that the United Nations Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention in an opinion adopted at its 65th
session (November 14-23, 2012) found Mr. Kaboudvand’s detention to be arbitrary
and called on the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to “release him
forthwith and accord him an enforceable right to compensation”. 
 
The
Observatory urges the Iranian authorities to guarantee the physical and
psychological integrity of Mr. Kaboudvand, and to
release him immediately and unconditionally since his detention is arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning his
legitimate human rights activities. The Observatory
more generally urges the Iranian authorities to put an end to all harassment -
including at the judicial level - against all human rights defenders in Iran.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders.
 
For more information, please contact:
·    
FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey
Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·    
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41 (0)
22 809 49 39



[1]       See The Observatory Press Release, May 7, 2014


[2]       See Joint public statement, Amnesty
International, FIDH & LDDHI, 17 July 2012 