Switzerland:  Letter to the Swiss Confederation regarding the visit of Mr Bush
February  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionAssistance to victims  / Urgent Interventions / Switzerland / 2011 / FebruarySwitzerland: Letter to the Swiss Confederation regarding the visit of Mr Bush
Madame
Micheline Calmy-Rey
President of the Swiss Confederation
Head of the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of the Swiss
Confederation
Geneva, February 1, 2011
                                                                                                          
 
Re:         Switzerland’s obligations under the United Nations Convention
Against Torture (UNCAT) in the event of an upcoming visit of Mr George W Bush
or other US officials against whom there is credible information about their
responsibility for acts of torture
 
Your Excellency,
We are writing to you
regarding the visit of former US President George W Bush
on February 12, 2011, to Geneva which was widely reported
in the media in Switzerland. The World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) - comprised of the largest network of anti-torture
organizations - would like to share with you its pre-occupation about upholding
Switzerland’s obligations under international law, notably the UN Convention
against Torture (UNCAT), in this regard. We would like to draw your particular
attention at Switzerland’s obligation under both
international and domestic law to initiate criminal investigations against any
person present in its jurisdiction where there is reason to believe that he/she
committed, authorized, participated in or was otherwise complicit in acts of
torture.  
Torture and other forms of
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment are prohibited under all
circumstances and can never be justified whether in times of peace or war. As a
state party to various human rights treaties, such as the UN Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the UN Convention Against Torture (UNCAT),
Switzerland has a positive legal obligation to investigate any allegation of
torture with the aim of bringing those responsible to justice. Article 5
paragraph 2 UNCAT requires it to establish jurisdiction over the crime of
torture also when committed outside of its jurisdiction when the offender is
present in its jurisdiction. Where there is reliable information available that
the person present on its jurisdiction may be responsible for an act of torture
Article 7 UNCAT obliges the state party to submit the case to its competent
authorities for prosecution’ unless it decides to extradite the alleged
offender. These obligations apply to acts of torture wherever they have been
committed and irrespective of whether they were committed in times of peace or
in the context of an armed conflict. 
Acts of torture, cruel and
inhuman or degrading treatment, however, may in addition incur criminal
responsibility under the Geneva Conventions as grave breaches when committed in
the context of an international armed conflict, or as serious breaches of
common article 3 in the case of non-international armed conflict. If torture
and ill-treatment are part of a planned policy and widespread or systematic
they may also trigger criminal responsibility as a crime against humanity as
reflected in the Rome Statute for an International Criminal Court. The
jurisdiction over acts torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment should
an offender find himself under Swiss jurisdiction may thus derive from
international human rights, international criminal and international
humanitarian law. 
While we note that the
specific crime of torture as defined in the UN Convention Against Torture has
not been as such incorporated into the domestic law of Switzerland its
constituent conduct is criminalized also under the Swiss criminal code which
also provides the necessary jurisdictional basis for investigations and
prosecutions should the offender be present on its soil even if for a
transitory period of time.[1]  
With this in mind we would
like to draw your attention to two areas of particular concern: 
It is well documented that the United States engaged in interrogation
policies and practices euphemistically described as ‘enhanced interrogations’.
These were further regularized in a number of so-called legal memos that sought
to redefine the scope of the absolute prohibition of torture.[2]
President Obama had to issue executive orders on his first day in office to end
these authorizations and to ensure compliance with the full scope of legal
obligations not to engage in acts of torture as well as equally prohibited acts
of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.[3] The
scope of authorized abusive interrogation techniques included a wide array of
physical and psychological abuse against persons deprived of liberty that
amount to torture and other forms of prohibited cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment. The existence of this policy has been publicly acknowledged and
defended by former senior government officials and has been approved at the
highest level of government.[4] Indeed,
in September 2006, then-President Bush acknowledged the existence of a secret
detention program run by the Central Intelligence Agency, in which detainees
were held in complete isolation in various locations outside the United States and subjected to
“enhanced interrogation techniques,” including water-boarding. These detainees
were also withheld from the International Committee of the Red Cross which
finally had an opportunity to interview the men after years in detention, and
concluded that they had been tortured.[5] In this
regard, the OMCT notes also the recent admissions by former President Bush
contained in his own biography released in November 2009.[6] In
various parts of the book reference is made to the enhanced interrogation
techniques including specific accounts of having authorized such interrogation
techniques in relation to so-called high-value detainees. This includes
explicit references on at least two occasions on the authorization of practices
of ‘water-boarding’ in which the prisoner is bound to an inclined board, feet
raised and head slightly below the feet, material wrapped over the prisoner’s
face and water poured over them creating a terrifying fear of drowning. The
OMCT has been confronted with water-boarding as an obvious form of torture in
many parts of the world. It is important, however, to underline that many of
the other techniques employed do equally qualify as torture as defined under
international law, especially as they were used in combination and against
persons held outside the protection of the law. Moreover, it is important to
bear in mind that other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment are
equally prohibited and can engage criminal responsibility under international
law. The OMCT would be willing to provide further information on any of these
points should it be required.
Second, the OMCT remains
pre-occupied about the impunity in relation to the practice of secret detention
and extraordinary renditions. Extra-ordinary renditions and secret detentions
resulted in multiple human rights violations, including torture, cruel and
inhuman or degrading treatment, prolonged arbitrary detention and enforced
disappearances and also constitute crimes under international law. These
violations have been documented by the Council of Europe Inquiry led by Swiss
Senator Dick Marty into Alleged Secret Detentions and Unlawful inter-state
Transfers[7], the
European Parliament Temporary Committee[8] and the
joint global study of four independent mandate holders of the UN Human Rights
Council on secret detention.[9] These
reports provide compelling information on the practice of extra-ordinary
renditions, secret detention and torture. A number of court cases and investigations
do provide further evidence of these violations. The policy of secret detention
itself was acknowledged by President Bush when fourteen so-called ‘high-value
detainees’ from unacknowledged CIA detention sites outside the United States were transferred to the US.
A significant amount of
evidence is located within other jurisdictions, including in Europe, which can be accessed
through mutual legal assistance schemes or is contained in official reports in
the United States itself. The OMCT draws attention
to criminal convictions of CIA officials in the courts of Milan for the
extra-ordinary rendition of Mr Hassan
Mustafa Osama Nasr, alias Abu Omar, to
Egypt, investigations that resulted in demands for arrest warrants of CIA
officials by the prosecuting authorities in Germany concerning the abduction,
torture and arbitrary detention of German citizen Khaled Al Masri, a case that
is also now pending against the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia at the
European Court of Human Rights for an alleged failure to conduct independent
investigations into these crimes[10].
Preliminary investigations are conducted in Spain against officials of the
administration of President Bush and the lawyers who authored legal memos on
enhanced interrogations, an investigation started in Poland regarding the detention,
torture and ill-treatment and enforced disappearances of a victim by members of
the CIA.[11]  Decisions of the UN Committee Against
Torture, the UN Human Rights Committee on cases of extraordinary rendition of
two individuals from Sweden to Egypt provide further account
of these practices.[12] In Canada, too, judicial inquiries
such as the Maher Arar Inquiry have revealed a body of credible information
about extra-ordinary renditions and torture.[13]  
Until today the United States have failed to take any
credible steps to assume its responsibility under international law, including
the UN Convention Against Torture, to investigate those responsible for
committing, authorizing, participating or otherwise being complicit in such
violations. To the contrary it has been stated that an investigation launched
in the US will only look into
interrogations in which individual interrogators exceeded the ill-treatment
authorized in the various legal memos government lawyers had crafted.[14]
Moreover, where civil proceedings have been initiated by those subjected to
torture and enforced disappearances and other serious human rights violations
they have been frustrated and undermined through the invocation of notions of
state secrecy, special circumstances related to national security or foreign
policy considerations.[15] As
leaked cables now appear to confirm, pressure has also been exercised to
prevent investigations and legal cases in other European jurisdictions.[16] We
would like to recall in this regard that state authorities, including the
executive branch of government, would have an obligation to support and not to
impede criminal investigations into acts of torture, cruel and inhuman or
degrading treatment or enforced disappearances should they be initiated in Switzerland or elsewhere.
In light of the
overwhelming body of available information there can hardly be doubt that there
are grounds that were to trigger Switzerland’s obligation to submit cases for
investigations into the crime of torture against anybody present on its soil
who has authorized, participated or was complicit in the above practices. This
would have to include also former President G Bush who had the overall control
as commander in chief and as all information suggests authorized, knew and
acquiesced into the practices that constitute the crime of torture. Switzerland would also have to take
measures against any offender present on its territory to secure his presence
for such criminal investigations and proceedings. In this regard, the OMCT
considers that neither officials nor former Heads of States can enjoy immunity
for the crime of torture under the UN Convention Against Torture, nor can
superior orders or the memos drafted by government lawyers and that sought to
immunize officials from prospective prosecution under US domestic law, shield them
from responsibility under international law. 
Your Excellency,
Switzerland has played a vital role
in building up a framework of international human rights, international
humanitarian and international criminal law over the last sixty years. The OMCT
with its network of anti-torture organizations around the world has seen first
hand the dramatic effect of torture in context of counter-terrorism over the
last years and their knock-on effect on human rights protection around the
world. It is now the impunity in the face of well documented violations of
international human rights law and crimes under international law that
threatens the rule of law.  
We therefore respectfully
ask your government to uphold the rule of law and its obligations under
international law in ensuring effective investigations into torture whenever
there is reliable information that a person present on its jurisdiction has
committed the crime of torture. It is indeed a fundamental tenet of the rule of
law and also of criminal law that it applies to all equally irrespective of
origin or status. The prohibition of torture is a higher norm of international
law (ius cogens) owed to all states (erga omnes) who should take
actions bringing them to an end. We therefore kindly ask you to address the
continuous impunity for acts of torture and enforced disappearances and absence
of any remedies and reparations. 
We remain at your disposal
should you require further information on any of the issues addressed. 
We thank you in advance for your attention and
consideration.
Yours sincerely,
 
Yves Berthelot                                                                                                              Eric
Sottas
President                                                                                                                         Secretary-General
 
Cc
Madame
Simonetta Sommaruga , Federal Department of Justice and Police
Monsieur
Daniel Zappelli, General Prosecutor of the Canton and Republic of Geneva
Monsieur
Beyeler Erwin, General Prosecutor of the Swiss Confederation
 
 


[1]
Article 6 of the Swiss Criminal Code. Also written response of the government
of Switzerland
to the list of issues on the occasion of the examination of its sixth report,
CAT/C/CHE/Q/6/Add.1, 3
 March 2010.
[2]
See http://www.aclu.org/human-rights_national-security/documents-delivered-responsive-torture-foia;
See also Karen Greenberg (ed.), The Torture Papers, Cambridge 2005.
[3]
The White House, Executive Order: Ensuring Lawful Interrogations, 22 January 2009,
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/EnsuringLawfulInterrogations/
[4]
See amongst others the report of the Inspector General of the Central
Intelligence Services in 2004 released on August 24, 2009 which provides a
detailed account of the CIA’s detention, interrogations, and renditions
programmes and describe abusive techniques, including water-boarding, mock
executions, and threats to kill and rape detainees family members and a range
of other abuses, CIA Inspector General, Special Review, Counter-Terrorism
Detention and Interrogation Activities, (September 2001-October 2003) (2003 –
7123-IG), 7 May 2008, available at
http://media.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/nation/documents/cia_oig_report.pdf?hpid=topnews
[5] ICRC report available at http://www.nybooks.com/media/doc/2010/04/22/icrc-report.pdf; Statement of George W
Bush, September 6, 2006. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/09/06/washington/06bush_transcript.html?pagewanted=all
[6]
See George W. Bush, Decision Points, November 2009. Admissions of having
authorized water-boarding were affirmed in subsequent interviews, see as http://today.msnbc.msn.com/id/39976132/ns/40085897.
[7]
Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly, Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights,
Alleged Secret Detentions and Unlawful Inter-state Transfers, Council of Europe
Doc 10957, 12 June 2006 and Doc 11302 rev, 11 June 2007.
[8] Report of the Temporary
Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the
transportation and illegal detention of prisoners (2006/2200 (INI)). 
[9]
Joint study on global practices in relation to secret detention in the context
of countering terrorism of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention and the
Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, UN Doc A/HRC/13/42, 26
January 2010.
[10]
See
http://www.soros.org/initiatives/justice/focus/national-security/news/el-masri-european-court-20101014
[11]
The Polish Prosecution Services recognized victim status to a person subjected
to ‘enhanced interrogations’ within the investigation to one of the ‘high-value’
detainees allegedly held in Poland, see www.interights.org/documentbank/index.htm?id=609.
[12]
UN Committee Against Torture, Views of 20 May 2005, Agiza versus Sweden
Communication No.233/2003, UN Doc CAT/C/34/D/223/2003 (2005) and UN Human
Rights Committee, View of 10 November 2006, Alzery v Sweden, UN Doc.
CCPR/V/88/D/1416/2005.
[13]
Reports of the Canadian Commission of Inquiry into actions of Canadian
officials relating to Maher Arar, 12 December 2006, www.ararcommission.ca
[14]
Statement of the Attorney General regarding a Preliminary Review into the
Interrogation of Certain Detainees, 24 August 2009, http://www.justice.gov/ag
[15]
See, e.g. Arar v. Ashcroft, 585 F 3d 559, 574-82 (2nd Cir. 2009);
Rasul v Myers, 563 F 3d 527, 532 n5 (DC Cir.2009); Mohammed v Jeppesen, Inc.,
614 F 3d 1070 (9th Circ 2010).
[16]
See
http://ccrjustice.org/wikileaks-us-government-interference-justice-and-accountability-spain-0 