Brazil:  Killing of Mr. Raimundo dos Santos Rodrigues
September  8, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Brazil / 2015 / SeptemberBrazil: Killing of Mr. Raimundo dos Santos Rodrigues
 URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

BRA 001 / 0915 / OBS 071
Killing
Brazil
September
8, 2015
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Brazil. 
Brief
description of the information:
The
Observatory has been informed by Justicia Global about the attack against Mr. Raimundo
dos Santos Rodrigues and his wife, which resulted in the death of the
former. They were both members of the Advisory Council of the Biological
Reserve of Gurupi (Conselho Consultivo da Reserva Biológica do Gurupi –
ReBio Gurupi)[1]. Mr.
Raimundo dos Santos Rodrigues had been denouncing environmental crimes
committed by landowners and logging industries, such as the illegal logging in
Pindaré Valley (Vale do Pindaré) in Maranhão, for which he received numerous
threats. Raimundo dos Santos Rodrigues was one of the advisors for the Chico Mendes
Institute for Biodiversity Conservation (Instituto Chico Mendes de
Conservação da Biodiversidade – ICMBio), which works on environmental
crimes and defends the Amazon biodiversity. 
According to the information received, on August 25, 2015, Mr. Raimundo
dos Santos Rodrigues and his wife were ambushed while returning to their home
in Bom Jardim, in the state of Maranhão. Mr. dos Santos Rodrigues was shot
twelve times and also attacked with a machete and died as a result of the
injuries he sustained. The widow was also shot and she continues to receive
treatment at the Municipal Hospital of Açailândia in Maranhão.
The attack
follows a series of death threats which Raimundo dos Santos Rodrigues reported
to the National Agrarian Ombudsman (Ouvidoria Nacional Agrária) in November
2014. However, no action was taken.
Two other
members of the Advisory Council of ReBio Gurupi
have also been receiving threats from loggers for over a year. The two names are
allegedly on a list of members of the Advisory Council who are targets for
killing, which also included Mr. dos Santos Rodrigues.
The killing
of Raimundo dos Santos Rodrigues and attempted killing of his wife occurred in
a context in which land and environmental rights defenders, in particular
indigenous rights defenders, in Brazil are increasingly at risk as a result of
their human rights work. 
According to
the Comissão Pastoral da Terra, in the first semester of 2015, 23 people were
killed in land conflicts; only one of those deaths did not take place in the
Amazon region. In Maranhão, during 2014, five human rights defenders were
killed, five suffered attempted killings and 51 were threatened to death. In
2015, three other human rights defenders were killed, besides Mr. Dos Santos
Rodrigues and three suffered attempted killings. 
The
Observatory condemns in the strongest terms the murder of Mr. Raimundo dos
Santos Rodrigues and attempted killing of his wife, as well as the death
threats against other members of the Advisory Council of ReBio Gurupi which seem to be related to their human
rights activities. It urges the authorities to adopt measures to ensure the
effective protection of human rights defenders at risk in Brazil, and notably
land rights defenders, and to conduct an immediate,
thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the above-mentioned
events.
Actions
requested:

Please write to the authorities in Brazil, urging them to:

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of
Mr. Raimundo dos Santos' widow, of all ReBio Gurupi members and human rights
defenders in Brazil;
ii. Carry
out an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the above-mentioned
events in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law;
iii.
Conform to the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998,
especially:
-       
Article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-       
Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration”.

iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Brazil.

Addresses:
·      
H.E. Ms. Dilma Rousseff, President of the Federative Republic of Brazil, Palácio
do Planalto, Praça dos Três Poderes, 70150-900, Brasilia DF, Brazil. Mr. Gilberto José Spier
Vargas, Secretary for Human Rights,
Secretariat for Human Rights of the Presidency of the Republic, Setor Comercial Sul - B, Quadra 9, Lote C,
Edificio Parque Cidade Corporate, Torre A, 10º andar, Brasília, Distrito
Federal, Brasil - CEP: 70308-200. Email: direitoshumanos@sdh.gov.br;
snpddh@sdh.gov.br.
Twitter: @DHumanosBrasil
·      
Ms. Izabella Mônica Vieira
Teixeira, State Minister of the Environment, Ministry of the
Environment, Esplanada dos Ministérios - Bloco B, CEP 70068-900 - Brasília/DF,
Brazil. FAX: 2028-1756. Email: gm@mma.gov.br Twitter: @mmeioambiente
H.E. Ms. Regina Maria Cordeiro Dunlop, Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of Brazil to the United Nations in Geneva, Chemin Louis-Dunant 15
(6th Floor), 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 910 07 51, Email: delbrasgen@itamaraty.gov.brH.E. Mr. André Mattoso Maia Amado, Ambassador, Embassy of Brazil in
Brussels, Avenue Louise, 350 B-1050, 1050
Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 640 81 34, Email: brasbruxelas@beon.be
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Brazil in your respective
country.

***
Paris-Geneva, September 8, 2015

Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in
your reply.

The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of
human rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of
need.

To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·    
E-mail:  Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·    
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·    
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]            ReBio Gurupi is well-known for
their work to promote the preservation of the Amazon rainforest and the rights
of the members of the Brejinho Rio das Onças II Community (Comunidade
Brejinho Rio das Onças II), who have suffered harassment and intimidation
by landowners of the region and logging industries who have been trying to force
the local communities out of their own lands. 