International Conference: Children, torture and other forms of violence. Tampere, Finland: 27 November - 2 December 2001
April 20, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Events / 2001 / AprilInternational Conference: Children, torture and other forms of violence. Tampere, Finland: 27 November - 2 December 2001 The World Organisation against Torture (OMCT) in partnership with the Mannerheim League for Child Welfare and with the support of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE     Children,       torture and other forms of violence:       Facing the facts, forging the future    27       November – 2 December 2001       Tampere, Finland First       announcement and......CALL       FOR PAPERS Aim of the conference Cross-cutting themes Sub-themes Who should attend? Working languages Why attend? The approach Venue Transportation Accommodation Weather Social Events Dates to remember Contacting us     Aim of the conference The aim of the conference is to propose a programme of action with concrete, realistic and measurable goals aiming at the long term elimination of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment, arbitrary arrests, summary executions, forced disappearances or other more subtle forms of violent repression against children.  Reasons behind the conference: cross-cutting themes OMCT children’s rights programme has now been running for 10 years and has denounced, documented and acted on several thousands of cases of child torture all around the world. The first decade of the children’s rights programme has revealed specific needs and actions that need to be taken at national, regional and international levels:  During the last five years OMCT has documented around 2.300 cases of torture, summary executions, forced disappearances and arbitrary arrests of children worldwide. The scale of the abuse is not only huge but is on the increase. The growing figures can be attributed partly to a better reporting of violations but in some countries are definitely the consequences of the worsening of children’s conditions. Furthermore, there is a great deal of work to be done before the exact level of abuse can be accurately estimated and assessed.  1. Interpretation of torture within the framework of the Convention on the rights of the child Definitions of and protection from torture and other forms of ill-treatment at both the international and national levels have been interpreted with reference to adults’ rather than from a children’s perspective. The almost universally ratified Convention on the Rights of the Child has strongly contributed towards the changing of attitudes in some respects, but prompt action now would assist this process enormously. 2. Absence of a specific UN mechanism to address violence against children OMCT, through its network, brings to light on a daily basis cases of violence perpetrated against children by the state or with its acquiescence. On several occasions, the national justice system has remained inactivate or, if there is an investigation, the pace and the procedures of the investigations reveal deficiencies and a lack of impartiality in the system. This results in the multiple violations of the rights of children who are neither protected from violence nor guaranteed the right to redress and reparation. This cycle of violation and impunity is likely to be perpetuated at the international level where there is no specific mechanism to address violence against children. 3. International UN Study on Violence against Children In September 2000, the Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended, on its discussion day on state violence against children, that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to undertake a major international study on violence against children. Such a study should, inter alia, explore the different types of violent treatment of which children are victims, identify their causes, the extent of such violence, and its impact on children, and put forward recommendations for action, including effective remedies and preventative and rehabilitative measures. The conference will provide a forum for a thorough discussion on the study, its scope, methodology, timeframe and the involvement of civil society.  Conference sub themes  1. Interpretation of torture within the framework of the Convention on the rights of the child 2. Establishment of an international mechanism to address violence against children 3. Prevention of torture and violence against children 4. Juvenile justice systems and child institutions 5. The right to redress, reparation and compensation. Rehabilitation and reintegration of child victims 6. Domestic violence, sexual violence and child trafficking related to it 7. Child bonded labour, slavery and child trafficking related to it  Who should attend? The international conference will combine the skills, resources and experiences of, UN mechanisms and specialised agencies, regional mechanisms, experts on the rights of the child, human rights activists, decision makers and doctors and psychologists specialised in medical and psychological counselling and rehabilitation of child victims of torture and violence. The number of participants is restricted, to provide maximum networking and participation opportunities.  Working languages The working languages of the conference will be English, French and Spanish; Russian translation will be provided.  Why attend? 2001 is a particularly suitable year to put the issue of children’s rights on the international agenda. The Special Session of the UN General Assembly on Children, the Thematic Discussion Day of the Committee on the Rights of the Child on violence against children in September 2001 and the Yokohama Conference on sexual exploitation of and trafficking in children in December 2001 are creating a worldwide awareness and a momentum which OMCT will contribute to and build on. The conference will try to mark and strengthen the process of mainstreaming children’s rights and especially violence against children within the existing mechanisms and set the basis for a possible new mechanism addressing violence against children. Furthermore, on the occasion of the day devoted to the thematic discussion on state violence against children in September 2000, the Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended that the existing UN mechanisms having a direct or indirect mandate on children’s rights, organise a workshop, the aim of which would be to increase the exchange of expertise and strengthen collaboration amongst them. OMCT firmly believes that this conference could provide the ideal opportunity for the star of this exchange and collaboration.  The conference approach The conference will have a multidisciplinary and holistic approach, focusing on preventive measures, causes of torture and ill-treatment, denunciation, advocacy, assistance to victims, redress, rehabilitation and reintegration. In particular, the incorporation of a gender perspective is fundamental to the process of gender mainstreaming. With regard to this conference, the gender mainstreaming will involve the assessment of the implications of any planned action for girls and boys, including legislation, policies and programmes, in all areas and at all levels.  Venue The city of Tampere was founded in 1779. With a population of 195,000, Tampere is the third-largest city in Finland and a dynamic centre of industry, culture, research and education. Thanks to its central location – a two-hour drive from Helsinki - and excellent services, Tampere is a very popular congress city. The city, situated between two beautiful lakes, has a distinct air of natural peace. In the evening, the city comes alive and visitors can choose from a whole host of theatres, concerts, bars and restaurants.   Transportation SAS - Scandinavian Airlines has been appointed as the Official Airline for International Conference. SAS offers delegates and accompanying persons special flexible and favorable conference fares to Finland. To obtain SAS conference fares kindly contact your nearest SAS office and quote the reference number: FI 0143. SAS offers a special flexible conference fare on both business and economy class. Please note that spouse fares are also available. For further information about SAS Official Airline and your nearest SAS office kindly visit www.scandinavian.net/congress/congress.asp.  If you travel to Scandinavia with SAS and want to see more of Scandinavia SAS is furthermore offering SAS Visit Scandinavia Air Pass for travel within and between Scandinavia/Finland. Also Air Passes valid for travel to the Baltic region and Europe are available; see more information and conditions on www.scandinavian.net    Accommodation Guests will be accommodated in different hotels, providing comfortable and inexpensive accommodation, located at a walking distance from Tampere Hall, the conference venue. To avail of specially negotiated conference rates, early booking is essential.   Weather November is the ideal time for committed participants and hard workers. The weather can be cold and rainy and therefore warm clothes are advised.  Social events A lively programme of social and cultural events is planned to allow a maximum enjoyment for participants and to provide valuable time to network with colleagues from around the world.  Dates to remember Registration deadline: 31 August 2001 Submission of papers: 1 October 2001 International Conference: 27 – 30 November 2001 OMCT statutory matters: 1 December 2001    For       further information please contact:       Ms Roberta Cecchetti       Children’s Rights Programme Manager       World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)       P.O. Box 21       CH - 1211 Geneva 8, Switzerland       tel. +41-22-809 4939 fax +41-22-809 4929       web site: www.omct.org    Ms Leena Sulonen       Managing Director       Tampere Conference Service Ltd.       P.O. Box 630       FIN-33101 Tampere, Finland       tel. +358-3-366 4400 fax +358-3-222 6440       web site: www.tampereconference.fi       With the       support of the European Union  and the       Government of Finland 