Bahrain:  Bahrain: arbitrary arrests and detention during the month of September
October 12, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2000 / OctoberBahrain: Bahrain: arbitrary arrests and detention during the month of SeptemberCase BHR 121000 And Child Concern BHR 121000.CC  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned over the situation in Bahrain, particularly the continuing arbitrary arrests and detention, including a number of children (see case BHR 121000.CC hereunder), that have taken place during the month of September and in the last few days.  According to information received from the Bahrain Human Rights Organisation (BHRO), a member of the OMCT network, on 2 October 2000, the security forces attacked Karzakkan and arrested Ibrahim Ahmed Shehab Al-Fardan, 19, Hussain Isa Abdulla Al-Fardan, 23, Nasr-Din Isa Abdulla Al-Fardan, 18 and Hamid Hassan Abdul-Rasool, 30. The latter have been released but the others are still reportedly detained.  In the same period, Mohammed Abdul Hassain Saleh Al-Shehabi, was detained as he returned from Saudi Arabia across the causeway linking the two countries. Mr. Al-Shehabi was detained and transferred to Budaya Police Stations. On 3 October 2000, he was reportedly seen at the police station in an exhausted condition bearing marks of torture. He was reportedly detained two times before.  According to BHRO, Police and intelligence officers mounted scores of dawn raids around the country in a continuation of the crackdown policy against all forms of peaceful dissent. Some of those known to have been detained after dawn raids on 1 October 2000 were: Seyyed Jaffer Mossa Nasser, 22, from Markh; Hussain  Sdaif, 22, from Sitra; Bader Al-Sabbagh, 23, from Sanabis; Yousif Al-Romi, 25, from Manama. The dawn raids conducted in Daih and Sanabis on 25 September resulted in the arrest of several people including Mohammed Salman Hussain, Saleh Al-Sheikh, and Ali Yousif.  It is noted that a number of other people were summoned ahead of a rally organised by the ruling family at Abo-Subh Beach in Duraz on 2 October 2000.  On 18 September 2000, dawn raids were reportedly conducted in Karranah. Abdul Amir Al-Basri, 28, and Hassan Ali Ahmed Aman, 32 were arrested. The security forces ransacked the houses of both citizens. Also on 18 September, several detained teenagers were dragged out by the security forces and were forced to act as if they were burning tyres (with balaclavas put on for the act) while being filmed by an interior ministry crew. This was seen as a warning to the residents of the area ahead of the rally organized by the ruling family at Duraz Beach.  On 5 September 2000 it was reported that security forces attacked several houses In Bilad al-Qadim and arrested Saeed Ali Hassan Khalaf, 22, and Hussain Ali Al-Arnoot, 19. From Daih, they arrested Omran Seyed Sharaf Seyed Alawi, 19, who was arrested on his return from Syria across the causeway linking Bahrain to Saudi Arabia. A brother of the later, Abdul-Samad, has been in detention for three years without trial.  On 3rd September, the following persons were arrested: Abdul Monem Ahmed Al-Najjar, Ahmed Ali Hassan Abbas and Mohammed Ali Hassan Abbas. Also on the first week of September 2000, BHRO reported that security forces raided several houses in Daih and arrested Mohammed Ya'aquob, 22 and Mohammed Mushaima'a, 19. Several arrests were made in Arad: Ayman Jasim Radhi, Hasan Ali Hassan Al-Folath, Mohammed Abdul Hussain Mohammed Sadiq, Jasim Ahmed Abdulla Al-Daroghah, Abbas Ahmed Abdul Hussain.  Mohammed Saeed Al-Maqabi, 32, From Barbar, who was arrested on 21 August, was tortured severely and was suspended upside-down and left for a prolonged period until he fainted. He was then transferred to hospital for one week and then released. He used to work as a chauffeur in Al-Qudstravel Company, which was closed by the security police in relation with the arrest of Mr. Al-Maqabi.  It is further reported by BHRO, that the families of political detainees and prisoners are facing hostile treatment from the prison authorities. For example, the wife of Mohammed Redha Al-Sayyed Ali, 29, who was sentenced in December 1998 to 40 years imprisonment, is subjected to harsh treatment whenever she asks for a visit to her husband. Similarly, the family of Yousif Abdul Baqi (one of three people on a death row since 1997) have been denied visit to their son and every time were turned away and the family (from Sitra) of Jalal Ibrahim, 22, who had been in detention for more than 4 years, were been prevented from visiting their son.   Sheikh Hamid Habib Ashor, who has been in detention for more than four years, has been denied his right to receive treatment for his eyes. According to the information received, he is losing his sight following ill treatment and torture during detention period.  BHR 121000.CC  According to information received from the BHRO, on 2 October 2000, when the security forces attacked Karzakkan, they also arrested Fadhil Abbas Al-Ashori, 17.  In the first week of September 2000, when the security forces raided several houses in Daih, they also arrested Hussein Fakher, 16 and Mahmoud Al-Khair, 17. Similarly, the arrest of Ayman Jasim Radhi Hussein, 17, was made in Arad.     Action Requested  Please write to the authorities in Bahrain urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times;  iii.	order the immediate release of the minors and commit the security forces to apply arrest on minors just as a measure of last resort;  iv.	put an immediate end to the use of arbitrary detention of people by the police and abrogate the 1974 State Security Law and all national laws which are not in compliance with international human rights standards; v.	take all necessary measures to comply with the special needs of the above-mentioned minors;  vi.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, particularly the Convention on the Rights of the Child.   Addresses  His Highness Hamad Bin Issa Al Khalifa, Office of His Highness the Amir, P.O. Box 555, The Amiri Court, Rifa'a Palace, Bahrain. Fax : + 973 668884. Telex : 8666 Qasar BN; 8500 Qasar BN  His Excellency Al-Shaikh Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa, Prime Minister, P.O. Box 1000, al-Manama, Bahrain. Telex : 9336 PROM BN or 7889 PMPO BN. FAX: + 973 533033.  His Excellency Al-Shaikh Mohammed Bin Khalifa Al Khalifa, Minister of Interior, P.O. Box 13, al-Manama, Bahrain. Fax : + 973 276765 or 290526 or 754303. Telex : 9572 PSMKT BN OR 8333 ALAMAN BN  Geneva, October 12, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 