Sudan:  Sudan: three members of International Islamic organisation Monazmat Aldawa Al Islamiya have been arbitrarily arrested
June 12, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2002 / JuneSudan: Sudan: three members of International Islamic organisation Monazmat Aldawa Al Islamiya have been arbitrarily arrestedCase SDN 120602 Arbitrary arrest / Incommunicado detention / Disappearance  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that during June 10th and 11th, 2002, three members of International Islamic organisation Monazmat Aldawa Al Islamiya (MDI - the Organisation of Islamic Call) were arbitrarily arrested by Sudanese security officers in Khartoum, Sudan.  According to the information received, at 9 pm on June 10th, 2002, 62 year-old Dr. Alamin Mohamed Osman, the MDI Secretary General, was arbitrarily arrested at his house in Almanshiya.  Security officers told him that he was being arrested by order of the Vice President Ali Osman M. Taha. No charges have reportedly been brought against him.  Dr. Alamin is reportedly being detained at the Security Headquarter offices in Khartoum. OMCT is gravely concerned for his physical and psychological integrity, notably since he suffers from hypertension and diabetes.  According to the report, Dr. Alamin is being held on suspicion of belonging to the banned People’s National Congress (PNC), which was established during 2000 following a split in Sudan’s ruling party in December 1999.  Hassan Al Turabi, the head of the PNC, has reportedly been under house arrest since March 2001.  Several Islamists, who had previously backed the Government, now reportedly support Mr. Al Turabi.   According to the information received, two other members of MDI were also arrested by the authorities: Abd Alaziz fadl Almuola, the organisation’s Administrative Manager, was reportedly arrested at his home on June 10th, 2002, and Salah Babiker Asmali, the organisation’s Finance Manager was arrested on June 11th while he was in his office. Both men are thought to have been arrested on suspicion of belonging to the PNC and being supporters of Mr. Al Turabi. The whereabouts of both of these men remain unknown.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Dr. Alamin Mohamed Osman, particularly since he suffers from hypertension and diabetes, and that of Abd Alaziz fadl Almuola and Salah Babiker Asmali, given that their whereabouts remain unknown, giving rise to fears that they may be being subjected to torture or other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.  Furthermore, OMCT condemns the Sudanese authorities’ use of arbitrary arrests as a way of stifling political opposition in Sudan.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	immediately locate the whereabouts of Abd Alaziz fadl Almuola and Salah Babiker Asmali and take all necessary measures to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity along with that of Dr. Alamin Mohamed Osman; ii.	order that these persons be released immediately in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events and guarantee that those responsible are brought to trial and that the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions are applied as provided by law; iv.	put an immediate end to the harassment of members of the political opposition; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights laws and standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 787676 / 783223. ·	His Excellency Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 779383. ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the diplomatic representatives of Sudan in your country.  Geneva, 12th June, 2002 