Sri Lanka:  Harassment and intimidation faced by Mrs. Sandya Ekneligoda, wife of the disappeared journalist, Mr. Prageeth Ekneligoda
April 24, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2012 / AprilSri Lanka: Harassment and intimidation faced by Mrs. Sandya Ekneligoda, wife of the disappeared journalist, Mr. Prageeth Ekneligoda​Case LKA 090210.1Follow-up of urgent appeal LKA 090210
Harassment and intimidation 
The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information and requests
your URGENT
intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.
New information
The International Secretariat of
OMCT has been informed by a reliable source about the harassment and
intimidation faced by Mrs. Sandya Ekneligoda, the wife of
disappeared journalist Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Ekneligoda, after
returning from Geneva, Switzerland, where she attended a side event at the 19th session of the
United Nations Human Rights Council[1].
OMCT recalls that Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda, a journalist working for the
LankaeNews Website, has remained disappeared since 24 January 2010, two days before the presidential
election and shortly after he wrote articles supporting the presidential
opposition candidate.
According to the information
received, on 26 March 2012, a day after returning from Geneva, Mrs. Sandya
Ekneligoda attended a hearing at the Homagama Magistrate’s Courts (Colombo district), in
connection with her husband’s disappearance. The hearing was an inquiry
following Mrs. Sandya Ekneligoda’s plea to the High Court to summon Mr. Mohan
Peiris, Advisor to the Cabinet of Ministers and former Attorney General, to
courts to give evidence in relation to a statement he had made in Geneva, in
November 2011, to the UN Committee against Torture in which he had said that
her husband had not disappeared, but was living abroad. 
According to the same information
received, during the aforementioned court hearing, Mr. Shavindra Fernando,
Deputy Solicitor General, appearing for the Attorney General’s department,
questioned Mrs. Sandya Ekneligoda at length on matters related to her
participation in the 19th session of the Human Rights Council,
notably who invited her and who paid for her expenses. He reportedly also asked
her why she did take the matter up internationally, including why she
complained before the UN. Although the defense objected to the line of
questions, the questioning allegedly lasted approximately an hour while there
was little said about Mr. Mohan Peiris’ statement on Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Ekneligoda’s disappearance. Furthermore, Mr.
Shavindra Fernando reportedly stated that the certified copy of the transcript
of Mr. Mohan Peiris’s statement provided by the UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights could not be taken as a true copy and that it was
not proper to summon Mr. Mohan Peiris, as he had made the statement about the
disappeared journalist’s whereabouts as an official representative of the
Government. 
OMCT is gravely concerned about the harassment and intimidation faced by
Mrs. Sandya Ekneligoda, in particular with the line of questioning in relation
to her participation in the 19th session of the Human Rights Council
and to the case of her husband brought at the international level. OMCT urges
the competent authorities to guarantee her safety at all times. 
OMCT also reiterates its call on the competent
authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the disappearance of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Ekneligoda, in accordance with international human rights
standards, the result of which must be made
public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as
provided by law. 
Background information
OMCT had earlier been informed
about the disappearance of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara
Eknaligoda.
According to the information
received, on 24 January 2010, Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Eknaligoda
disappeared after he left LankaeNews Website office. The last person who heard
from him was reportedly Mr. Gamini Perera, who usually drove him home. However,
that day, Mr. Eknaligoda allegedly called him on the phone and told him that he
had arranged an alternative transport and that he was at Koswatte. 
According
to the same information, on 25 January 2010, Mr. Eknaligoda’s wife went along
with Mr. Perera to the Homogama police station and tried to register her
husband’s disappearance, but the Officer-in-Charge (OIC) informed her that the
station was unable to register the complaint without a previous instruction by
a higher officer and advised her to register with the Koswatte police. Only
after Mr. Eknaligoda’s wife insisted did the officer agree to register the
incident.
Only
once, on 28 January 2010, were Mr. Eknaligoda’s family and
neighbors reportedly questioned on Mr. Eknalidoga’s disappearance by an officer
from Homagama police station and two officers pretending to be from the
Criminal Investigation Division (CID). However, to date, no information has
been provided about the status of the investigation. 
It
is noteworthy that, after Mr. Eknaligoda disappeared, the LankaeNews Website
was blocked by the authorities, until after the election. Furthermore, on 28
January 2010,
its premises were searched at night by a large number of unidentified persons.
Mr.
Eknaligoda had previously been victim of an unresolved abduction. On 27
August 2009,
he had been reportedly taken away, blindfolded, and then chained in a cell by
two men who were allegedly responding to instructions from someone referred to
as a “higher officer”. Mr. Eknaligoda had been reportedly released when the two
men were told by the “higher officer” that he wasn’t the right target.
Action
requested
Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka urging them to: 
i.              
Immediately locate the whereabouts of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Ekneligoda; 
ii.            
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mrs. Sandya Ekneligoda and
her family;
iii.           
Put an end to all forms of
harassment and intimidation against Mrs.
Sandya Ekneligoda and her family;
iv.          
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the disappearance
of Mr. Prageeth Ranjan Bandara Ekneligoda, the results of which must be made
public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as
provided by law; 
v.            
Ensure that an effective remedy be granted to
the victim concerned and his family; 
vi.          
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø           
Mr. Mahinda
Rajapakse, President, Socialist Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka, C/- Office of
the President,Temple Trees 150, Galle Road,Colombo 3, Sri Lanka, Fax: +94 11
472100 / +94 11 2446657, Email: secretary@presidentsoffice.lk 
Ø           
Mr. Mahinda
Balasuriya, Inspector General of Police (IGP), New Secretariat, Colombo 1, Sri
Lanka, Fax: +94 11 2 440440, E-mail: igp@police.lk 
Ø           
Secretary,
National Police Commission, 3rd Floor Rotunda Towers, 109 Galle Road, Colombo
03, Sri Lanka,Tel/Fax: +94 11 2 395960, E-mail: polcom@sltnet.lk 
Ø           
Attorney
General, Attorney General's Department, Colombo 12, Sri Lanka, Fax: +94 11 2
436421 
Ø           
Secretary,
Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka, No 108 Barnes Place, Colombo 07 
Sri Lanka,Tel: +94 11 2 694 925 / 673 806, Fax: +94 11 2 694 924 / 696 470,
E-mail: sechrc@sltnet.lk
Ø           
Permanent
Mission of Sri Lanka to the United Nations in Geneva, Rue de Moillebeau 56,
1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 734 90 84, Email: mission.srilanka@ties.itu.int 
Please also write to the
diplomatic representations of Sri Lanka in your respective countries.
***
Geneva, 24 April 2012
Kindly inform
OMCT of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your
reply



[1] Mrs. Sandya Ekneligoda was one of the speakers during a side event
titled “Rule of Law and human rights violations in Sri Lanka:
Perspectives from women, minorities and families of disappeared” that took
place on 19th
March 2012. She was invited to share her
perspective as the wife of disappeared journalist Mr. Prageeth Ekneligoda and
as a women human rights defenders who has been engaging with various Sri Lankan
legal institutions and governmental officials as well as international bodies
to search for her husband while also advocating more broadly for
democratisation in Sri Lanka and on the plight and aspirations of families of
disappeared. 