Kyrgyzstan:   Violent unrest - Call to respect and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms
April  8, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2010 / AprilKyrgyzstan:  Violent unrest - Call to respect and protect human rights and fundamental freedomsGeneva, 8 April 2010. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its utmost concern about the recent violent unrest in Kyrgyzstan, during which protesters were killed by security forces, and urges those currently exercising control in Kyrgyzstan to uphold human rights and fundamental freedoms under any circumstances.
According to the information received, on 6 April 2010, security forces strongly repressed the peaceful demonstration organised by the opposition to demand the release of Bolot Sherniyazov, deputy head of the Ata Meken Socialist Party, who had been detained in Talas, a city in northwest Kyrgyzstan, when he went to the provincial administration building to obtain official permission for a kurultai, a political gathering that was planned for 7 April 2010. Government forces reportedly used tear gas to disperse demonstrators. Authorities arrested protesters and charged them with "attempting to overthrow the government" and with "organising mass disturbances". Other opposition leaders were also detained in Bishkek and in Osh.
On 7 April 2010, opposition demonstrations were held throughout the Republic to protest against the current regime. Security forces reportedly violently repressed, including shooting with live ammunition, protests when people started marching toward the presidential office, in the capital Bishkek. At least 40 people were reportedly killed.
Tensions between the Governemnt and the opposition had intensified during the past weeks following increased Government repression. According to the latest information received, an interim Government composed of Kyrgyz political opposition members has been formed. The exact location of President Kurmanbek Bakiev remains unclear.
OMCT reiterates its call on those currently exercising control in Kyrgyzstan to respect and protect human rights and fundamental freedom under any circumstances. Furthermore, OMCT urges the competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the abovementioned facts to examine whether the use of force by security forces was consistent with national law and international standards, including the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms, and the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials, and then identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.
For further information, please contact:
OMCT: Eric Sottas: Tel: + 41 22 809 49 39 