Viet Nam:  Conviction of Mr. Cu Huy Ha Vu is a travesty of justice and he must be immediately and unconditionally released
April  7, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2011 / AprilViet Nam: Conviction of Mr. Cu Huy Ha Vu is a travesty of justice and he must be immediately and unconditionally released
OPEN 
LETTER to
HE 
Nguyen Minh TRIET
President 
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
HE 
Nguyen Tan DUNG
Prime 
Minister of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
HE 
Ha Hung CUONG
Minister 
of Justice of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
HE 
Vu DUNG
Permanent 
Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations and other International 
Organisations in Geneva
With 
copies to:
Hon. 
Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations
Hon. 
Navanethem Pillay
United 
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Paris-Geneva, 
April 7, 2011
Subject: 
Conviction of Cu Huy Ha Vu is a travesty of justice and he must be immediately 
and unconditionally released 
Your 
Excellencies,
The 
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of 
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation 
against Torture (OMCT), and the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights (VCHR) are 
writing to you to lodge our strongest protest against the conviction on April 4, 
2011 of Mr. Cu Huy Ha Vu, who was sentenced by the Hanoi People’s Court 
to seven years of imprisonment and three years of house arrest for “propaganda 
against the Republic Socialist Republic of Vietnam” under Article 88 of 
Vietnam's Criminal Code. 
Mr. 
Ha Vu, a lawyer, has been a peaceful defender of cultural, environmental and 
civil and political rights and has consistently used the courts to seek justice 
for those whose rights have been violated by the Government and private actors. 
Recently he had initiated two lawsuits against the Prime Minister, the first 
filed in July 2009 targeted the latter for signing Decision 167 in November 
2007, which allowed controversial bauxite mining operations in Vietnam's Central 
Highlands. On October 21, 2010, Mr. Ha Vu filed a second lawsuit against the 
Prime Minister for signing Decree 136 in 2006, which prohibits class-action 
petitions. He was arrested two weeks later. 
The 
charges brought against him are utterly politically motivated and are based on 
deeply flawed legislations that are routinely used to silence legitimate and 
peaceful critics. In particular, Article 88 has repeatedly been denounced by the 
United Nations Human Rights Committee as incompatible with international law and 
in violation of the rights to freedoms of opinion and expression and the right 
to participate in public affairs[1]. 

Mr. 
Ha Vu was denied his right to a fair and public hearing by a competent, 
independent and impartial tribunal, as guaranteed by Article 14 of the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Viet Nam has 
ratified. Ten documents relating to his indictment were not made public at the 
trial on April 4, despite the request of the defendant’s lawyers, in violation 
of Article 214 of the Criminal Procedure Code and undermining the right to a 
defense. One of Mr. Ha Vu ‘s four lawyers, Tran Vu Hai, was expelled from court 
by the Presiding Judge, Nguyen Huu Chinh, for demanding the disclosure of these documents. 
The 
trial was closed to the public, and supporters of Mr. Ha Vu who gathered 
peacefully outside the Hanoi People’s Court were stopped and dispersed by public 
security officers. Among them, two activists, Messrs. Pham Hong Son and 
Le Quoc Quan, were arrested and detained for several 
hours.
This 
case is sadly yet another example of the on-going repression of fundamental 
rights in Viet Nam, and human rights defenders in particular have borne the 
brunt of such repression. Criminalising the peaceful expression of democratic 
ideals and legitimate actions to seek redress for rights violations makes a 
mockery of justice and the Rule of Law.
Our 
organisations recall that Viet Nam stated in its national report submitted in 
February 2009 to UN Human Rights Council for the Universal Periodic Review 
process that “the people are both the ultimate objective and driving force of 
any social and economic development policy, and protecting and promoting human 
rights are always the Government’s consistent policy”. Viet Nam’s Permanent 
Deputy Foreign Minister Pham Binh Minh also announced in February 2011 your 
Government’s intention to seek membership in the Human Rights 
Council.
The 
conviction of Mr. Ha Vu clearly contradicts your Government’s adherence to human 
rights. 
Given 
the illegitimate charges against Mr. Ha Vu and the unfair manner in which his 
trial was conducted, the Observatory and the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights 
call on your Government to immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Ha Vu and 
overturn his conviction.
More 
generally, the Observatory and the Committee call upon the Vietnamese 
authorities to put an end to all forms of harassment against human rights 
defenders in Viet Nam, and to comply fully with the provisions of the United 
Nations Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and 
Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and 
Fundamental Freedoms and international human rights instruments ratified by Viet 
Nam.
We 
express our sincere hope that you will take these considerations and requests 
into account.
Sincerely,




Souhayr 
Belhassen
FIDH 
President 

Eric 
Sottas
OMCT 
Secretary-General

Vo 
Van Ai
VCHR 
President






[1]               See Human Rights Committee 
Conclusions, CCPR/CO/75VNM, July 
2002.


If you want to unsubscribe from this mailing list, 
please reply to this message and add "unsubscribe" in the "subject" line.Si 
vous voulez vous désinscrire de cette liste de diffusion, répondez simplement à 
cet e-mail et ajoutez "désincription" dans la ligne du sujet de l'e-mail.Si 
usted desea que sea anulada su inscripción a esta lista de difusión, por favor 
simplemente responda a este E-mail y agregue la palabra "desinscripción" en el 
espacio del tema (subject) del E-mail. 