25th session of the Human Rights Council: Statement delivered during the interactive dialogue with the UN Special Rapporteur on torture
March 10, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / 2014 / March25th session of the Human Rights Council: Statement delivered during the interactive dialogue with the UN Special Rapporteur on tortureStatement1 page / 296 KB
Please
check against delivery
HUMAN
RIGHTS COUNCIL
25th session (3 – 28
March 2014)
Item 3: Interactive dialogue with
the Special Rapporteur on Torture 
Oral statement delivered by The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
a
non-governmental organisation in general consultative status
Mr
President, Mr Special Rapporteur, 
The World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) wishes to thank Mr Mendez for the
presentation of his report to this Human Rights Council focusing on the exclusionary
rule, which is an integral part of the absolute prohibition of torture and
other forms of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment. 
OMCT
welcomes this timely report and the conclusions that specifically stress that
the exclusionary rule applies to all proceedings of any kind, whether judicial
proceedings and by executive agencies, and that the rule concerns all
information extracted by torture and ill-treatment anywhere in the world. 
In its
daily work, OMCT witnesses how confession is one of the driving causes of
torture and ill-treatment worldwide. It is a massive problem although
experience has shown that under torture or threat thereof, a person will say or
do anything solely to avoid the pain. 
In any
event, any information or evidence obtained under torture and ill-treatment
must be excluded from all proceedings as stressed by the Special Rapporteur, to
avoid providing an incentive to torture by creating a marketplace for torture
at home and abroad. Judges and prosecutors have a crucial role to play in
ensuring compliance with the rule and overcoming the mismatch between the
frequent abuse of detainees for confessions and the rare occasion that torture
evidence is effectively excluded. 
Mr
Special Rapporteur, 
In view
of your upcoming visit to Mexico, OMCT wishes to draw your attention to the
principle of “procedural immediacy”, which has been used in Mexico. The
principle establishes that the first statements of a detainee (rendered before
the Public Ministry) prevail over the following statements made, even if
torture is evident. 
OMCT full
heartedly supports the clarification that the exclusionary rule, the duty to
prevent and principle of state responsibility, cover equally the sharing,
receipt and use of information outside criminal processes. We call on States to
review their procedures regarding secret evidence, intelligence sharing and
ensure that the dramatic accountability gap over intelligence agencies, that
continues to be brought before this Council, is finally taken seriously.
Mr
President,
OMCT
wishes to take this opportunity to urge States to accept outstanding country
visit requests by the Special Rapporteur on torture, as well as to cooperate
fully with him, including by responding promptly and comprehensively to his
urgent appeals, and implement his recommendations. 
Finally,
OMCT calls on this Council to reaffirm its strong commitment to the absolute prohibition
of torture and ill-treatment by renewing the mandate of the Special Rapporteur
on torture. 