Philippines:  Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Margarito J. Cabal, in Northern Mindanao
May 16, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2012 / MayPhilippines: Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Margarito J. Cabal, in Northern Mindanao
Case PHL 160512
Alleged extrajudicial killing/ Risk of 
impunity
The 
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 
requests your URGENT intervention in 
the following situation in the Philippines.
Brief description of the 
situation
The 
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Alliance for the 
Advancement of People’s Rights (KARAPATAN), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the 
alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Margarito J. Cabal, a 47-year-old 
government employee 
(utility worker) of the 
municipality of Kibawe, Bukidnon province, and an anti-dam 
activist, on 9 May 2012, in Northern Mindanao. 
According to the 
information received, on 9 May 2012, at around 6:30 pm, Mr. Margarito J. Cabal had just returned from his work 
in Kibawe town to his rented home in Palma village[1] 
(Bukidnon province) on his motorcycle, when his was shot many times by two 
unidentified individuals riding in tandem on a red STX model motorcycle with no 
plate number. According to eyewitness accounts, the driver was wearing a helmet 
and a black jacket while the gunman was wearing a ski mask, a dark jacket and 
denim pants. Mr. Margarito J. Cabal was then taken by neighbours to the nearest 
hospital but he was declared dead on arrival. He reportedly sustained three 
gunshot wounds on the chest, and one at the back from a 45 caliber pistol. 

In April 2012, 
Mr. Margarito J. Cabal reportedly informed his colleagues about a police car 
suspected to be “tailing” him and, on 6 May 
2012, men, onboard a 
motorcycle, were seen near the victims’ boarding 
house.
According to the 
same information received, Mr. Margarito J. Cabal was known for his opposition 
to the establishment of a hydro-electric mega dam, called Pulangi V project, of 
the first Bukidnon Electric Cooperative (FIBECO). If allowed to operate, the 
Pulangi V project will submerge 22 villages in Bukidnon and Cotabato, including 
indigenous peoples’ land and small farms. Mr. Margarito J. Cabal was a member of 
Save Pulangi Alliance, a coalition of people in Bukidnon and Cotabato resisting 
the project. Mr. Margarito J. Cabal was reportedly also suspected by state 
authorities of having “connections with the left” because of his trips in the 
hinterland villages of the Kibawe municipality. Since mid-March 2012, Kibawe 
villages have been subjected to military operations of the 8th 
Infantry Battalion. Soldiers reportedly targeted leaders and members of the 
peasant group Nagkahiusang Mag-uuma sa 
Kibawe (NAMAKI), claiming that the group has links to the New People’s 
Army, the armed 
group of the Communist Party of the Philippines. The NAMAKI is reportedly one 
of the local groups strongly opposed to the dam project. 
The 
International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the circumstances 
surrounding the killing of Mr. Margarito J. Cabal and urges the competent 
authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and 
impartial investigation into the circumstances surrounding his 
killing, in accordance with 
international human rights standards, such as the UN Principle on the Effective 
Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, 
the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible 
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil 
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law.
OMCT is also 
gravely concerned about the safety of Mr. 
Margarito J. Cabal’s family, 
and calls on the competent authorities to guarantee, in all 
circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity.
Actions 
Requested
Please write to the 
authorities in the Philippines urging them 
to:
i.                     
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and 
psychological integrity of Mr. Margarito J. Cabal’s family; 
ii.                   
Carry 
out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into 
the circumstances of 
the killing of Mr. Margarito J. Cabal, in accordance with international human 
rights standards, inter alia, with the UN Principle on the Effective Prevention 
and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, 
the result 
of which must be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a 
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or 
administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iii.                  Ensure that 
adequate, effective and prompt reparation, including adequate compensation, is 
granted to the victim’s family;
iv.                 Guarantee the respect of human rights and the 
fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and 
international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      
H.E. 
Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Republic of 
the Philippines, Malacaang Palace, JP Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, 
Philippines, Fax: (+632) 742-1641 / 
929-3968, E-mail: corres@op.gov.ph / opnet@ops.gov.ph
Ø      
Sec. 
Teresita Quintos-Deles, Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process, Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process 
(OPAPP), 7th Floor Agustin Building I, 
Emerald Avenue, Pasig City 1605, Fax:+63 (2) 638 
2216, E-Mail Address: 
osec@opapp.gov.ph
Ø      
Ret. 
Lt. Gen. Voltaire T. Gazmin, Secretary, Department of National Defense, Room 301 DND Building, Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, E. de los Santos Avenue, Quezon City, Fax:+63(2) 911 
6213, Email: osnd@philonline.com
Ø      
Atty. 
Leila M. De Lima, Secretary, Department of Justice, Padre Faura St., Manila, Direct Line 521-8344; 5213721, Trunkline 523-84-81 loc.214, Fax: (+632) 
521-1614, Email: doj.delima@gmail.com
Ø      
Hon. 
Loretta Ann P. Rosales, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC Bldg., UP Complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: (+632) 929 
0102, Email: chair.rosales.chr@gmail.com

Ø      
Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the United 
Nations in Geneva, 47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19 32, Email: mission.philippines@ties.itu.int
Please also 
write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 16 May 2012. 
Kindly inform us 
of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your 
reply. 