Join us for a side event on land and environmental rights defenders in danger!
November 29, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Events / 2013 / NovemberJoin us for a side event on land and environmental rights defenders in danger!

You can
download the flyer
for the side event here.
 
You can
also download an overview
of recent cases of land and environmental rights defenders in danger here.













Join us for a side event on
 

 
Land and environmental rights
  defenders in danger
 

 
Date: Tuesday 3rd December 2013
Time: from 1.30 to 3pm
Place: UN Palais des Nations, Room
  XX
 
Human rights defenders play a
  critical role in exposing and ensuring accountability for business-related
  human rights violations. Despite
  this, around the world, there is an increase in attacks, judicial harassment,
  restrictions, surveillance, intimidation and reprisals against defenders who
  work on land and environment issues associated with business activities. 
 
This side event will pay special attention to challenges engendered by the
  increasing criminalisation or repression of those peacefully denouncing adverse human
  rights impacts of corporate projects, discussing the role of both States and
  companies.
 
Calling upon States and all other
  stakeholders to give full recognition to the legitimate role and important
  work carried out by defenders, the event will be an opportunity to explore ways to improve the security of these
  advocates at extreme risk as well as to prevent and combat impunity for such attacks and violations. 
 





Panellists

 
Jorge Luis Morales, lawyer and
  member of the Verapaz Union of Peasant Organisations (UVOC), Guatemala
 
Samuel Nguiffo, Secretary
  General of the Centre for Environment and Development (CED), Cameroon
 
Pavel Sulyandziga, Chair of the
  UN Working Group on Business and Human Rights
 
Harriet
  Berg, Minister-Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Norway in Geneva
 





Moderator

 
Debbie
  Stothard,
  Coordinator for the Alternative ASEAN Network on Burma (Altsean), Malaysia
  and FIDH Secretary General
 
Submit questions through Twitter
  using #LandRightsHRD
Live webcasting will be available at http://ishr.ch/webcast 
 
 
Interpretation, sandwiches and
  refreshments will be provided
 

                                                                                           
 





The event is
  co-sponsored by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), Peace
  Brigades International (PBI), the Center
  for International Environmental Law (CIEL), EarthRights International
  (ERI), Friends of the Earth International, Global Witness, the International
  Land Coalition, the International
  Union for Conservation of Nature National Committee of the
  Netherlands (IUCN NL), the International Service for Human Rights (ISHR)
  and the Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development
  (Forum-Asia). Contact Delphine Reculeau of OMCT for further information: +41 22 809 49 39 / dr@omct.org. 