Greece:  Greece : arbitrary arrest and detention of tourists
November 26, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2001 / NovemberGreece: Greece : arbitrary arrest and detention of touristsCase GRC 261101 Arbitrary detention/Fair trial    The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Greece.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source, of the arbitrary arrest and detention of 12 British and  two Dutch plane-spotters in Greece.  According to the information received, 12 British tourists, one of whom is a woman, and two Dutch tourists were arrested by the Greek authorities on November 8th. The holiday-makers, who were in Greece as part of an organised tour in which they were seeking to engage in plane-spotting, were arrested at an airshow in Kalamata, for allegedly taking photographs of military aircraft at an off-limits military base. The group deny taking photographs in a restricted military zone - a charge which carries a maximum 20-year prison sentence.   The group of tourists includes: Paul Coppin (45 - Touchdown Tours boss - organised the week-long trip); Lesley Coppin (51 - wife of Paul Coppin); Peter Norris (52); Antoni Adamiak (37); Steven Rush (38); Andrew Jenkins (32); Christopher Wilson (46); Wayne Groves (38); Graham Arnold (38); Michael Keane (57); Gary Fagan (28); and Michael Bursell (47). The Names of the two Dutch men are not currently known.  The Greek authorities launched an investigation which unveiled notebooks and photographs reportedly detailing two other military bases and aircraft, including a Greek base in Megara and a NATO base at Araxos, which has lead to the tourists being accused of espionage. Plane-spotting is reportedly not a very well-known hobby in Greece. A further charge of "tresspassing at an airfield which no civilian could approach," may also be held against them. The Greek authorities claim the men were warned on several occasions not to take photographs of restricted military facilities.   According to the information received, the 13 men are being held in a prison in Nafplion, while the woman, Mrs. Coppin, is being held in the high-security Korydallos women's prison near Athens. According to reports Mrs. Coppin, who is a 51-year old grandmother who suffers from asthma, is being held in a cell with 14 other Greek women. She was reportedly strip-searched and humiliated following her arrest. She was detained incommunicado for several days following her arrest.  Mrs. Coppin received a half-hour visit by three Greek Foreign Ministry officials - Foreign Minsitry Secretary General Lena Koutsibou, Diplomatic Cabinet Head Dimitris Paraskevopoulos and Ministry Spokesman Panos Beglitis on Friday November 23rd, 2001. During the visit, Mrs. Coppin admitted to having been treated well during her detention, and preferred to stay in a cell with other women, despite offers to have her moved to her own cell.  Another hearing has been planned for Tuesday 27th November 2001, at which time the group will also face charges of having taken photographs, notes and plane numbers at a restricted military base in Megara, near Athens. It is thought that some of the detainees may be released at this time, but others may be sentenced to lengthy prison terms.   The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the Greek authorities' arrest and detention of the persons in question, primarily because there is a chance that several of their number may face lengthy prison terms if sentenced with espionage. OMCT fears that the trial of these persons may become a political rather than legal issue. OMCT is also gravely concerned about the fact that the detainees have been detained incommunicado for several days since they were arrested, and have not been sufficiently informed about thier cases by the authorities, having instead to rely on information from relatives concerning their trial.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Greece urging them to:  i.    order the afore-mentioned persons’ immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; ii.  intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure that those detained be allowed to meet with their relatives; iii. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  · Mr. Costas Simitis Prime Minister, Maximou, Athens, Greece, Fax: +30 1 7241776, email: mail@primeminister.gr  · Mr. George Papandreou, Foreign Minister, Athens, Greece Fax: +30 1 36 81 433, E-mail: gpap@mfa.gr  · Mr. Dimitris Reppas, Minister of Press and Information, Athens, Greece Fax: +30 1 36 06 969  · Professor Mihalis Stathopoulos, Minister of Justice, Athens, Greece Fax : +30 1 77 55 835  · Mr. Mihalis Hrysohoidis, Minister of Public Order, Athens, Greece, Fax: + 30 1 6917944  Please also write to the embassies of Greece in your respective country.  Geneva, November 26, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 