Brazil:  Killing of human rights defender Ms. Marielle Franco
March 16, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Brazil / 2018 / MarchBrazil: Killing of human rights defender Ms. Marielle Franco
URGENT APPEAL -
THE OBSERVATORY
BRA 001 / 0318 / OBS 031
Killing
Brazil
March
16, 2018
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Brazil. 
 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by Justicia Global about the killing of
councillor and activist Ms. Marielle Franco. Well-known for her social
work, Ms. Franco was elected to the city council of Rio de Janeiro in 2016 and
presided over the women’s commission. In her capacity, Ms. Franco has spoken
against police brutality and grinding poverty as well as in support of victims
of shoot-outs with drug gangs in the favelas. In February 2018, she was chosen
to be a rapporteur of the commission overseeing the deployment of federal
security forces in Rio’s favelas. Ms. Franco was an outspoken critic of the
decision of Brazilian President Michel Temer to deploy the army in poor neighbourhoods
of Rio de Janeiro after a spike in violent crimes during carnival and in order
to contain the escalating violence since the 2016 Olympic Games. 
  
According
to the information received, on March 14, 2018 evening, Ms. Franco and her
driver, Mr. Anderson Pedro Gomes, were shot dead by two unidentified attackers
on a downtown street in Rio de Janeiro, as they were returning from an event
encouraging black women’s empowerment in Brazil. Initial findings indicate that
a car pulled up alongside hers and that thirteen shots were fired from inside
the car into the vehicle carrying the councillor and her driver. A press
officer seated in the back of the car was injured. 
 
The
Observatory believes that Ms. Franco was targeted as a result of her continued
engagement against police violence. Specifically, on March 10, 2018, she
denounced the heavy-handed tactics of police officers when searching residents
of gang-controlled slums. On March 13, 2018, she tweeted about the killing of
Mr. Matheus Melo, a 23-year-old man in the Jacarezinho favela whose family had
blamed the military police for the killing. She said “One more homicide of a young man who may be coming in for the PM's
account... How many more will have to die for this war to end?” She later
added “We must speak loudly so that
everybody knows what is happening in Acari right now. The 41st Military Police
Battalion of Rio de Janeiro is terrorizing and violating Acari residents. This
week two youths were killed and tossed in a ditch. Today, the police walked the
streets threatening residents. This has always happened and with the military
intervention things have gotten worse”.
 
Rio’s
head of public security, Richard Nunes, said there would be a “full
investigation” into the killing of Ms. Franco and her driver. Brazil’s public
security minister, Raul Jungmann, said federal police would help investigate
her killing. 
 
The
Observatory condemns in the strongest terms the murder of Ms. Marielle Franco
which seems to be only aimed at punishing her human rights activities. It urges
the authorities to adopt measures to ensure the effective protection of human
rights defenders in Brazil, and to conduct an
immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the
assassination of Ms. Marielle Franco in order to identify all those
responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as
provided by the law.
 
Actions
requested:

Please write to the authorities in Brazil, urging them to:

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of
human rights defenders in Brazil;
 
ii. Carry
out an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the assassination
of Ms. Marielle Franco in order to identify all those responsible, bring
them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the
law;
 
iii.
Conform to the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998,
especially its Article 1 and 12.2;

iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Brazil.

Addresses:
 
·      
H.E. Mr. Michel Temer,
President of the Federative Republic of Brazil, Email: casacivil@presidencia.gov.br,
agendainternasg@presidencia.gov.br,
gabinetepessoal@presidencia.gov.br
Twitter: @MichelTemer 
·      
Mr. Torquato Jardim,
Minister of Justice, Email: chefiadegabinete@mj.gov.br, agenda.ministro@mj.gov.br,
Twitter: @JusticaGovBR 
·      
Mr. Raul Jungmann,
Minister of Public Security, Email: gab.mesp@mj.gov.br
·      
Mr. Gustavo do Vale
Rocha, State Ministry for Human Rights, Email: direitoshumanos@sdh.gov.br;
snpddh@sdh.gov.br,
gustavo.rocha@presidencia.gov.br,
chefia.gabinetedoministro@mdh.gov.br
Twitter: @DHumanosBrasil
·      
H.E. Ms. Maria Nazareth
Farani Azevêdo, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
in Geneva, Fax: +41 22 910 07 51, Email: delbrasgen@itamaraty.gov.br
·      
H.E. Mr. Antonio José
Vallim Guerreiro, Ambassador of Brazil in Brussels, Fax: +32 2 640 81 34,
Email: brasemb.bruxelas@itamaraty.gov.br

Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Brazil in your respective
country.

***
Paris-Geneva, March 16, 2018

Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in
your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European
Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.
 

To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·    
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·    
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22
809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·    
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1
43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 