Tajikistan:  Torture still widespread in Tajikistan 20 years after the country acceded to anti-torture treaty
February 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionReports and Publications / Tajikistan / 2015 / FebruaryTajikistan: Torture still widespread in Tajikistan 20 years after the country acceded to anti-torture treaty

The Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture) came
into force in Tajikistan on 10 February 1995. By acceding to the treaty, the authorities
of Tajikistan pledged to protect everybody under their jurisdiction from
torture and other forms of ill-treatment, to reflect in law and practice the
principles enshrined in the Convention, to cooperate with the Committee against
Torture and to implement its recommendations. 
 
But
twenty years later, torture and impunity for it remain widespread in the
country. From 2011 to 2014, members of the NGO Coalition
against Torture in Tajikistan documented more than 100 cases of men, women and
children who were allegedly subjected to torture or other ill-treatment. Perpetrators
were brought to justice only in exceptional cases. The human rights groups
jointly issuing this statement believe that many victims of
torture did not file complaints for fear of reprisals.
 
Heightened international
attention to torture in Tajikistan in recent years and thorough study of the situation
by international human rights bodies and mechanisms including the Committee
against Torture and the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Special Rapporteur on
torture) resulted in the issuing of
a set of recommendations to the authorities.
 
On the twentieth
anniversary of the treaty entering into force in Tajikistan, the human rights
groups jointly issuing this public statement published a briefing, entitled
“Tajikistan needs to do more to end torture,” which provides an up-to-date
overview of the current situation of torture or other forms of ill-treatment,
including in the army.
 
Noteworthy positive steps
taken by Tajikistan in recent years include introducing an article on torture
in the Criminal Code (Article 143) with a definition of torture that is in line
with that contained in the Convention against Torture. As a result, by 2014, four
criminal cases under this article were opened; and the courts ordered
compensation to the families of two men who had died as a result of torture.
 
The briefing identifies
serious gaps and weaknesses in the legislative and institutional frameworks. It
highlights practices that continue to facilitate widespread torture and virtual
impunity for the perpetrators in Tajikistan. Among other issues, it focuses on
the lack of sufficient legal safeguards accessible to detainees in pre-trial
detention and the need to routinely implement existing ones; the lack of an
independent mechanism to investigate torture allegations; and the need for
regular, independent, unannounced and unrestricted visits to inspect detention
facilities across Tajikistan.
 
Among
dozens of cases of ill-treatment documented by NGOs in Tajikistan in recent
years is the case of Samandar Jalolzoda. The young man was reportedly
suddenly grabbed by police officers and dragged into a police car as he was
waiting for his grandfather on a street in his home town of Panjakent in the
evening of 4 December 2014. When the grandfather walked up to the police car
asking why they had detained his grandson, an officer started the car abruptly
and allegedly hit him with such impact that he fell over and sustained bleeding
injuries. Police took Samandar Jalolzoda to Panjakent City police station,
where officers reportedly hit him with a water bottle and kicked him in an
office on the third floor. Thanks to an intervention by Samandar Jalolzoda’s
father, police let his son walk free the same evening without charges. On 5
December, Samandar Jalolzoda wrote a complaint about the police ill-treatment,
which his parents personally delivered to Sugd Regional Prosecutor's Office the
same day. A forensic medical expert examined Samandar Jalolzoda on 10 December
and recorded injuries to his body. On 7 January 2015, Panjakent City
Prosecutor's Office informed Samandar Jalolzoda that no criminal case would be
opened into his allegations of ill-treatment. A complaint prepared by his lawyer
against this decision is currently pending with Sugd Regional Prosecutor's
Office.
 
It is clear that
Tajikistan must do more to eradicate torture. The authorities should mark the
twentieth anniversary of the Convention against Torture’s coming into force by
ensuring that the case of Samandar Jalolzoda is investigated thoroughly,
impartially and independently and that anyone found to be responsible for
ill-treating him is brought to justice. In addition, the authorities should act
on the recommendations included in the briefing “Tajikistan needs to do more to
end torture” as a matter of urgency.

 
 

For further information, please contact:
The NGO Coalition against Torture in Tajikistan: notorture.tj@gmail.com
Anne Sunder-Plassmann, International Partnership for Human Rights
(IPHR): +49-40-38631458, anne.sunder-plassmann@iphronline.org 
 Nicole Buerli, World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT): +41-22-809 49 26, nb@omct.org    
 This statement is submitted by the coalitions against
torture in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, the Helsinki
Foundation for Human Rights (Poland) and International Partnership for
Human Rights (Belgium) – the initiators – together with Amnesty
International and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
initiators of this statement have received financial
assistance for its production from the European Union. The document’s contents
are the sole responsibility of the organizations issuing it and can under no
circumstances be regarded as reflecting the position of the European Union 