India:  Arbitrary arrest, harassment and threats against the human rights defender Soni Sori and members of her family
March 23, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / MarchIndia: Arbitrary arrest, harassment and threats against the human rights defender Soni Sori and members of her family
IND 001 / 0316 / OBS 024
Arbitrary
arrest / Ill-treatment
Harassment
/ Threats
India
March 23, 2016

The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in India.

Description of the
situation:

The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about the arbitrary arrest, judicial harassment and threats
against Ms. Soni Sori, woman human
rights defender and tribal activist, and members of her family. Ms. Sori fights
for the land rights of indigenous population in the state of Chhattisgarh,
which are affected by the conflict between Maoists and government security
forces, and is committed to bring to justice high-ranking police officials from
Bastar district, allegedly involved in a case of extra judicial killing.

According to the information received, on
February 20, 2016, three unidentified men attacked Ms. Soni Sori while she was
travelling home, and threw a chemical substance on her face, which resulted in
severe burning and her hospitalisation. The attackers threatened to pursue
their attacks on her daughter if she continued her work on the case of extra
judicial killing in which several members of the police force are involved.

On March 10, 2016, at approximately 10.30
a.m., Mr. Ajay Markam, Ms. Soni Sori’s brother-in-law, was
arbitrary arrested in his home in the district of Dantewada by the Jagdalpur
police. In detention, the police officers and the Chief Superintendent
interrogated him regarding the attack of February 20 on Ms. Soni Sori and
threatened to charge him for organizing the assault. They released him in the
morning of March 12. Previously on March 1 and 9, 2016, the police had already
summoned him for questioning and during the interrogation the officers
physically and verbally abused him. 

On
March 11, 2016, following the arrest of Mr. Ajay Markam, Ms. Soni Sori’s father
as well as other members of her family went to the Inspector General of the
Bastar Police to seek information about his situation and his whereabouts and
share their concerns regarding his arbitrary detention. In response, the
Inspector General threatened the family members to keep him in detention and
claimed in addition that the whole family would face consequences for Ms. Soni
Sori’s work in defence of human rights.

On
the same day at 4 p.m., Ms. Dhani Markam, Ms. Soni Sori’s sister and
Mr. Markam’s wife, was also arrested and detained for questioning at the same
Jagdalpur police station as her husband. She was released later that same
night, after having been verbally abused and threatened. 

The Observatory firmly condemns the
on-going harassment against Ms. Soni Sori and other members of her family,
as it clearly aims at sanctioning her legitimate human rights activities
and calls upon the Indian authorities to immediately and unconditionally put
an end to all acts of harassment against her and her family, as well as against
all human rights defenders in the country.

The Observatory equally calls upon the
Indian authorities to conduct a prompt, independent and thorough investigation
on the aforementioned act of violence against Ms. Soni Sori in order to
identify the genuine perpetrators.

Actions requested:

Please write to the authorities of India
asking them to:

i. Put an end to any form of harassment against Ms. Soni Sori, her family
and all human rights defenders in India;ii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Ms. Soni Sori, her family, as well as of all human rights defenders in
India;iii. Conduct a prompt, independent and thorough investigation on the
aforementioned act of violence against Ms. Soni Sori in order to identify the
perpetrators, bring them before an independent, just and impartial tribunal and
apply to them all the necessary administrative and/or criminal sanctions
foreseen by law;iv. Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the UN Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
- Article 1, which states that “everyone
has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to
strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms at the national and international levels”;
- Article 12.2, which provides that the
State shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”;
v. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
India.

Addresses:

-       
Mr. Shri Nanredra Damodardas Modi, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s
Office, Room number 152, South Block, New Delhi, India. Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857.
E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
-       
Mr. Raj Nath Singh, Union Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs,
104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979
-       
Justice Rajendra Mal Lodha, Chief Justice of India, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg,
New Delhi -1, India. Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
-       
Justice K. G. Balakrishnan, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission
of India, Manav Adhikar Bhawan Block-C, GPO Complex, INA, New Delhi - 110023,
India. Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.in
-       
Mr. A. K. Parashar, Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National Human
Rights Commission, Faridkot House, Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001, India.
Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
-       
Ms. Mamata Banerjee, Chief Minister, Chief Minister of West
Bengal, 325, Sarat Chatterjee Rd, Shibpur, Howrah, West Bengal
711102, Telephone: +91 33 2214-5555, 2214-3101, Fax: +91 33 2214-3528
 E-mail: cm@wb.gov.in 
-       
H.E. Mr. Dilip Sinha, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the United
Nations (Geneva), Rue du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 906 86
96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
-       
Embassy of India in Brussels, 217 Chaussée de Vleurgat, 1050 Brussels, Belgium,
Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869

Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of India in your respective country. 