Saudi Arabia:  Incommunicado detention of Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz and Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani and ongoing arbitrary detention of other 7 women's rights defenders
June 21, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2018 / JuneSaudi Arabia: Incommunicado detention of Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz and Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani and ongoing arbitrary detention of other 7 women's rights defendersURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New
information
SAU
003 / 0518 / OBS 073.2
Incommunicado
detention / 
Arbitrary
detention /
Judicial
harassment 
Saudi
Arabia
June
21, 2018
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Saudi Arabia.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by ALQST about the incommunicado detention of
journalist Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz and
women’s rights defender Ms. Mayya
Al-Zahrani, as well as of the ongoing
arbitrary detention of human rights defenders Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza
al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh,
Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha'al
and Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi, founding member of the Saudi Civil and
Political Rights Association (ACPRA),
all women’s rights defenders
 
According to
the information received, on June 6, 2018, Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz was arrested
following a police raid on her home in Riyadh and taken to an unknown location
where she has been held incommunicado ever since. Ms Abdulaziz is a journalist
who has been vocal on the ongoing wave of arrest which is targeting many human
rights defenders, including numerous women since May 15, 2018, ahead of the entry into force on June 24, 2018 of
the Royal Decree that will allow women to drive (see background information).
 
Ms. Mayya
Al-Zahrani subsequently published on her blog a letter written by Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz
prior to her arrest[1] and
criticised Ms. Abdulaziz’s arrest. On June 9, 2018 Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani was in
turn arrested from her home in Khobar. At the time of publication of this
Urgent Appeal, Ms. Mayya Al-Sahrani has had no access to her lawyer and no
further information about Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani’s whereabouts could be gathered.
 
The
Observatory further recalls that Ms. Aziza al-Youssef,
Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha'al and Mr. Ibrahim
al-Mudaimeegh remain detained in Dahban prison in
Jeddah, while Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi remains detained incommunicado in an
unknown location since his arrest. While pro-governmental media outlets
reported that they have been arrested under vague accusations of “suspicious
contacts with foreign entities” and “financial support to enemies overseas”, no
formal charges have yet been reportedly pressed against them (see background
information). Moreover, they are reportedly all detained in solitary
confinement, without access to their lawyers and they could only speak with
their families once or twice since their arrests.
 
The
Observatory expresses its utmost concern over this wave of arrests and
arbitrary detentions, which only seems to aim at sanctioning peaceful and
legitimate human rights activities in particular in defence of women’s human
rights.
 
The
Observatory urges Saudi authorities to immediately disclose Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz,
Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani and Mr. Mohamed
al-Bejadi’s whereabouts and to ensure that all detained human rights defenders
have unhindered access to their family and lawyers. Furthermore, the
Observatory urges Saudi authorities to release the above-mentioned human rights
defenders immediately and
unconditionally, and to put an end to all acts of harassment against them as well
as all human rights defenders in Saudi Arabia. 
 
Background information: 
 
On May 15,
2018 at 2pm, Saudi police forces raided the home of Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul,
arrested her in her bedroom and transferred her to Al-Ha'ir prison, and then to
Dahban prison in Jeddah[2].

 
On the same
day, women's rights activist and psychoanalyst Madiha al-Ajroush was also arrested. Through her clinical practice,
Ms. al-Ajroush has offered help and psychotherapy to several victims of
domestic violence as well as refugee children in camps in Lebanon and Jordan.
She was released from Dahban prison in Jeddah on May 24, 2018. 
 
Within the
same context, the authorities arrested prominent women’s rights activist Aziza
al-Youssef, from her home. She was one of the first to call for women to be
allowed to drive, and has been notably active in defending women’s rights,
workers’ rights and civil and political rights. She tried to set up a refuge
for battered women and girls who are not accepted back from government social
care institutions by their families, but the authorities turned down her
application. Pressure had mounted on Ms. al-Youssef over the past year, and she
was increasingly called in for questioning. The authorities prevented her from
commenting on the Royal Decree allowing women to drive – which she, together
with other women’s rights activists, had brought about.
 
On the same
day, the authorities arrested Ms. Aisha
al-Mana, Dean of Al Mana College and one of Saudi Arabia’s earliest
feminists. She took part in the 1990 campaign against the ban on women driving,
in which she and some other women drove their cars, and wrote a book on the
topic, entitled The Sixth of November. She was previously imprisoned and
threatened by the authorities. Ms. Aisha al-Mana was released on May 23, 2018.
 
Ms. Hessah Al-Sheikh, one of the leading
campaigners of the right of women to drive, and Ms. Walaa Al-Shubbar, a defender of victims of domestic violence as
well as campaigner against the male guardianship system, were also arrested on
the same day, together with Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, an active supporter of
women’s right to drive. On May 24, 2018, Ms. Hessah Al-Sheikh and Ms. Walaa
Al-Shubbar were released from Dahban prison in Jeddah.
 
Authorities
also proceeded on May 15, 2018 to the arrest of Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha'al, a philanthropist who was listed as a
board member in the application for an NGO to protect women survivors of
violence, as well as of Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh, a former member of
the Saudi Council of Ministers’ Commission of Experts. Mr. al-Mudaimeegh has
handled pro bono defence in some of the most sensitive cases in the country,
and took on the cases of several members of the ACPRA. He defended human rights
activists Ms. Al-Hathloul and Messrs. Waleed Abu al-Khair, Mohamed
al-Oteibi, Abdullah al-Atawi, Essam Koshak, Essa
al-Nukhaifi and many other prisoners of conscience. He has also spoke out
against Israeli crimes toward the Palestinian people and on other human rights
issues, which led authorities to force him to close down his Twitter account in November 2017. On May
5, 2018, Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh went to the airport on his way to get
medical treatment abroad but found himself unexpectedly prevented from
travelling, and when he tried to ascertain the reason for the travel ban he was
met with personal abuse and threatened with arrest for asking why he had been
banned from travelling. He continued to be harassed and threatened until being
arrested on May 15, 2018.
 
In addition, on May 24, 2018, Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi was arrested after
police forces raided his house in Buraidah at 11pm and took him to an unknown
place. 
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities in Saudi Arabia asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances
the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Nouf
Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani, Ms. Eman al-Nafjan,
Ms. Aziza al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Ms. Aisha al-Mana, Ms. Madiha
al-Ajroush, Ms. Hessah Al-Sheikh, Ms. Walaa Al-Shubbar, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah,
Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha'al and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh as well as all human rights defenders in
Saudi Arabia;
 
ii. Immediately disclose Ms.
Nouf Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani and Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi’s whereabouts;
 
iii. Ensure all detained human rights defenders have
unhindered access to their family and lawyers;
 
iii. Immediately and
unconditionally release Ms. Nouf Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya
Al-Zahrani, Ms. Eman al-Nafjan, Ms. Aziza al-Youssef, Ms.
Loujain al-Hathloul, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha'al and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh, as well as all detained human rights defenders in Saudi
Arabia, as their detention is arbitrary since it only aims at punishing
them for their legitimate human rights activities;
 
iv. Put an end to all forms of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms.
Nouf Abdulaziz, Ms. Mayya Al-Zahrani, Ms. Eman al-Nafjan,
Ms. Aziza al-Youssef, Ms. Loujain al-Hathloul, Ms. Aisha al-Mana, Ms. Madiha
al-Ajroush, Ms. Hessah Al-Sheikh, Ms. Walaa Al-Shubbar, Mr. Mohammed al-Rabiah, Mr. Mohamed al-Bejadi, Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Mesha'al and Mr. Ibrahim al-Mudaimeegh and all
human rights defenders in the country so they are able to carry out their work without
unjustified hindrance and fear of reprisal;
 
v. Comply in all circumstances with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular its Articles 1,
6(c) and 12.2;
 
vi. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and instruments.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
His Majesty, King Salman
bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia and Custodian of the two Holy
Mosques, Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11 403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa; Twitter: @KingSalman
·    
His Excellency, Mohammad
Bin Salman Al Saud, Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, Fax: (via Ministry of the
Interior) +966 11 403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Waleed bin Mohammad
Al Samaani, Minister of Justice, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Fax: + 966 11 405
7777; Email: info@moj.gov.sa
·    
His Royal Highness
Prince Abdulaziz Bin Saud Bin Naif Bin Abdulaziz, Minister of Interior, Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. Fax: + 966 11 401 1111 / + 966 11 401 1944 / + 966 11 403
1125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Adel bin Ahmed El
Jubeir, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: + 966 11 403 0645 ; Email: info@mofa.gov.sa
·    
H.E. Abdulaziz Alwasil,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the United
Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 758 00 00. Email: saudiamission@bluewin.ch
·    
H.E. Abdulrahman bin
Soliman Al-Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Saudi Arabia in Brussels, Belgium.
Fax: +32 2 6468538. Email: beemb@mofa.gov.sa
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Saudi Arabia in your respective
countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
June 21, 2018
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of human
rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·       E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·       Tel
and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80
·      
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49
39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 



[1] The letter is available here:
https://hanaalkhamri.blogspot.com/2018/06/read-letter-from-recently-arrested.html


[2] This is not her first arrest. In November 2014, Saudi
authorities arrested Ms. al-Hathloul after she drove herself from Abu Dhabi to
the Saudi border. She was held at a juvenile detention centre for 73 days
before being released in February 2015. The authorities detained her again in
June 2017 when she arrived at Dammam airport but released her after several
days. 