Colombia:  International organisations request that attention be paid to the case against David Ravelo
March 10, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2014 / MarchColombia: International organisations request that attention be paid to the case against David Ravelo

On 11th of February last year, the follow up of the
demand for annulment of the judicial process against the human rights defender David Ravelo Crespo, member of the
Regional Corporation for the Defense of Human Rights in Magdalena Medio
(CREDHOS), from the city of Barrancabermeja, was filed before the High Court of
Bucaramanga (Santander). In a number of occasions, the International NGOs and
networks who have signed below have reiterated concerns regarding a series of
irregularities throughout the proceedings which resulted in the conviction of
Mr Ravelo and his 220 month prison sentence.
 
David Ravelo Crespo has been detained since the 14th
of September 2010, when he was accused of an aggravated homicide committed in
1991. We believe that in a legal system, it is of fundamental importance that
certain legal guarantees relating to due process and the right to a fair trial
are respected. According to objections these guarantees have been repeatedly
violated during the legal process against David Ravelo. For this reason we
question the conviction of David Ravelo and reiterate that David Ravelo has not
received the rights and guarantees according to national and international legal
norms. Consequently we believe that the case against David Ravelo has been
corrupted, therefore he should be released from detention and receive a fair
and impartial trial that provides all the guarantees that have been denied.
 
Since Mr. Ravelo Crespo has been detained, national
and international bodies have highlighted his case and the lack of compliance
with national and international standards of due process. On 4 September 2013,
the presented an Amicus Curiae[1] in
the case of David Ravel Crespo before the Superior Court of Santander
(Colombia). Amongst other considerations the amicus curiae, concludes that the
Judiciary should declare the process invalid and that David Ravelo should be
absolved because “the conviction of Mr Ravelo was contradictory to the weight
of evidence that in this case showed his innocence“.[2]
 
According to defense lawyers, these irregularities
have undermined the defense of Mr. Ravelo Crespo and the integrity of the
subsequent conviction. Among these irregularities, lawyers denounce the
legitimacy of the prosecutor who led the investigation: Prosecutor William
Pacheco Granados, from the Prosecutor’s Office no. 22 of the National Counter
Terrorism Unit. Mr Pacheco Granados was previously a lieutenant in the National
Police in Armenia (Quindío, Colombia) and was investigated by the Inspector ́s
General Office (Procuraduría[3]). He
was subsequently removed from his post by this authority as a result of his
alleged involvement in the disappearance of William Hurtado Parra in Armenia in
1991.[4]
 
Furthermore the defense team for David Ravelo argues
that current legal process is equivalent to a reformulation of previous charges
that David Ravelo has already been cleared of, such as the claim that as a
member of the Armed Revolutionary Forces of Colombia, he ordered the
assassination of Nuñez Cala. We reiterate that David Ravelo was imprisoned for
27 months between 1993 and 1995 accused of rebellion, he was tried and cleared
of all charges in the first and second stage of proceedings and furthermore he
later won compensation from the state for arbitrary detention.[5]
 
As International NGOs and Networks we urge that the
Colombian authorities order that David Ravelo be released immediately as well
as the admission and processing in a transparent and effective way of the
Cassation appeal put forward by Mr. Ravelo ́s defense team. We also urge that
all irregularities that have been mentioned since the detention of David Ravelo
be investigated and sanctioned according to Colombian Law and relevant
international legal standards.
 
Signed: 
-       
ABColombia, (Plataforma de organizaciones de Reino
Unido).
-       
ASK! - Grupo de Trabajo Suizo por Colombia, (Suiza)
-       
Brigadas Internacionales de Paz -PBI, (Organización
Internacional).
-       
Colombian Caravana UK Lawyers Group, (Reino Unido).
-       
Cooperacció, (Estado Español).
-       
DKA, (Austria).
-       
Frontline Defenders, (Irlanda).
-       
Iniciativa Solidaria Internacionalista, (Estado
Español).
-       
Justicia por Colombia, (Estado Español).
-       
Kolko – Derechos Humanos en Colombia, (Alemania).
-       
MISEREOR, (Alemania).
-       
Observatorio para la Protección de los Defensores de
Derechos Humanos OMCT / FIDH, (Organización Mundial Contra la Tortura – OMCT y
Federación Internacional para los Derechos Humanos - FIDH).
-       
Oficina Internacional de Derechos Humanos –Acción
Colombia - OIDHACO, (Plataforma de organizaciones europeas).
-       
Paz Christi, (Alemania). 
-       
Protection International, (Bélgica). 
-       
Taula Catalana per la Pau i el Drets Humans a
Colòmbia, (Estado Español). 
-       
United Steelworkers, (Estados Unidos). 
-       
Washington Office on Latin America – WOLA, (Estados
Unidos).



[1] An amicus curiae (literally “friend of the court”)
refers to presentations made by an unrelated third party regarding some point
of law or other related matter in order to assist in the resolution of the
matter before the court. 


[2] Bar Human Rights Committee of the Bar of England and
Wales (BHRC), Amicus Curiae before the High Court of Santander in relation to
the trial and sentence dictated First Criminal Court of the Specialised
Circuit-Attached- (Providencia n o 151, radicado: 2011-0049-01 del 16 de
noviembre de 2012. Causa contra David Ravelo Crespo), Paragraph 72. 


[3] Autonomous body which controls and monitors the public
function of state employees


[4] The Inspector General ́s Human Rights Delegate:
Resolution 15 of 10 July 1992, Resolution 017 of 22 November 1993 and
Resolution 2117 of 15 March 1994.


[5] La
Sandunga Films: En medio del Magdalena Medio, 2012 