Sri Lanka:  Release of Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen Mahesan, but arbitrary detention of Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari continues
March 19, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2014 / MarchSri Lanka: Release of Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen Mahesan, but arbitrary detention of Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari continues​













New Information
LKA 001 / 0314 / OBS 019.1
Release /
Harassment / 
Slander / Arbitrary detention
Sri Lanka
March
19, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the release of Mr. Ruki
Fernando, a human
rights adviser to the human rights organisation INFORM, based in Colombo, and
Rev. Praveen Mahesan, former Director of the Centre for Peace and
Reconciliation (CPR) based in Jaffna.Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen MahesanCredit: http://www.srilankabrief.org/
 According
to the information received, on March 19, 2014, at about 1.30 am, Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen
Mahesan were released without being charged after appearing in the Colombo
Magistrate Court.
 
The Observatory welcomes
the release of Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen
Mahesan and thanks all the individuals, institutions, and organisations who
intervened in their favour.
 
However, the Observatory
regrets that the two human rights defenders were detained for three days
without access to legal counsel, and remains deeply concerned about the ongoing
detention of Ms. Balendran
Jeyakumari, in retaliation for campaigning against enforced
disappearances (See background information).
 
The Observatory is also
deeply concerned over
the statement made by the Representative of the Permanent Mission of
Sri Lanka to the United Nations in Geneva on March 18, 2014, which accused Mr. Ruki Fernando, Rev. Praveen Mahesan and Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari of
“terrorist connections” with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). The statement was made
in response to concerns raised by several NGOs against the detention of the
three defenders during the 25th session of the UN Human Rights
Council, which is currently taking place in Geneva, Switzerland.
 
On March 18, 2014, the Ministry of Defence
posted on its website a statement stating that Mr.
Ruki Fernando and Rev.
Praveen Mahesan had been taken into custody for questioning under the
Prevention of Terrorism Act because of their alleged connections with a
hard-core LTTE cadre. The statement was subsequently removed from the website.
 
Moreover, on March 19, 2014, the two
defenders were vilified in an editorial in the State-run newspaper Daily
News, in which they were accused of “defending the human rights of
terrorists” and of having established links with “a known terrorist who not only escaped from an IDP camp, but attacked
a law enforcement officer by discharging a firearm in broad daylight recently”.
The article further said: “what these NGO con-artistes want, it seems,
is on the one hand to exploit a normal law enforcement arrest for the purpose
of making a case against Sri Lanka at the UN HRC as a resolution on Sri Lanka
is currently being discussed at the 25th session of the UN Human
Rights Council, and on the other to make sure that nobody can be arrested for
terrorism related issues - thereby granting impunity for potential acts of
terrorist subversion”[1].
 
The Observatory recalls that this is not the first time that human rights
defenders in Sri Lanka have been falsely accused of treason and of having links
with the LTTE. Such false accusations have often been made following their
participation to UN Human Rights Council sessions and in response to
resolutions on Sri Lanka adopted by the Council[2].
 
The
Observatory expresses its deepest concern about the harassment and smear
campaign against Mr. Ruki Fernando, Rev. Praveen
Mahesan and Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari, which merely aim at
undermining the legitimacy of their peaceful activities, and calls upon the
authorities of Sri Lanka to guarantee in all circumstances their physical and
psychological integrity.
 
Background information:
 
On
March 16, 2014, at around 10.30 pm, Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen Mahesan were
arrested by a specially appointed unit of the Terrorist Investigation Division
(TID) as they were visiting the heavily militarised area of Kilinochchi, North
of Sri Lanka, in order to investigate into the arrest on March 13, 2014 of
human rights defender Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari and her 13-year old daughter
Vithuskaini, who have been campaigning against enforced disappearances. They
were also arrested and interrogated by the TID. While Vithuskaini was
subsequently placed under the care of Probation and Child Care Service, Ms.
Jeyakumari continues to be held in Boosa detention centre under the Prevention
of Terrorism Act (PTA), under which a person can be held without charge for up
to 18 months.
 
Mr.
Ruki Fernando and Rev.
Praveen Mahesan were brought to the Kilinochchi police station, which initially
denied that the two defenders were detained there, before confirming the
arrest. The officer in charge (OIC) of the Kilinochchi police, Mr. Kumara, in
particular confirmed the arrest and further stated that “Ruki Fernando and Rev.
Praveen behaved in a suspicious manner as they visited some families of those
who have lost their family members”. Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen
Mahesan were reportedly questioned separately for three hours by around 15 TID
officers at the Kilinochchi police station.
 
At around 1.30 am, Mr.
Ruki Fernando and Rev.
Praveen Mahesan left Kilinochchi police station handcuffed and blindfolded, accompanied with TID officers, before being questioned in Vavunia
police station until 7.00 am on March 17, 2014.
 
On March 17, 2014, at 11 am, TID officers
visited Mr. Ruki Fernando's parents to inform them about his arrest. Mr.
Fernando’s parents were issued with a Notice of Arrest stating that he was arrested by the TID on
alleged acts of terrorism on March 16, 2014, in Kilinochchi. At 1.30pm, TID
Director informed one of the lawyers that they were both brought to Colombo and
were being held at the TID headquarters.
 
Later in the day, police media spokesman SSP
Ajith Rohana announced that Mr. Ruki Fernando and Rev. Praveen were first
detained at the Kilinochchi police station under the PTA, before being
transferred to Vavuniya and then to Colombo for further questioning. They would
reportedly be charged with “attempting to create ethnic discord among
communities and to promote separatism”. 
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Sri
Lanka, urging them to:
 
i.       
Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ruki Fernando, Rev. Praveen Mahesan and Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari as well as of all human rights defenders in Sri
Lanka;
 
ii.     
Release Ms.
Balendran Jeyakumari
immediately and unconditionally since her detention is arbitrary and only
aims at sanctioning her human rights activities;
 
iii.    
Repeal
the above-mentioned slandering statements formulated by high Sri Lankan
officials and publicly affirm the legitimacy of the work of human rights defenders;
 
iv.    
Put
an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr. Ruki Fernando, Rev. Praveen Mahesan and Ms. Balendran Jeyakumari and more generally against all human rights
defenders in Sri Lanka and ensure that they are able to carry out their
peaceful and legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
v.      
Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially
regarding the following Articles:
-       
Article
1: everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels; 
-       
Article
5 (a): For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,
at the national and international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully;
-       
Article
12.2: the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights [...]; 
 
vi.    
Ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Sri Lanka.
 
Addresses:
 
·       President Mahinda
Rajapakse, Presidential Secretariat, C/ Office of the President, Temple Trees
150, Galle Road, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka, Fax: (+94) 11 472100 / (+94) 11 2446657
/ (+94) 11 243 0590, Email: lalith@icta.lk 
·       D.M. Jayaratne, Prime
Minister of Sri Lanka, No. 58, Sir Ernest De Silva Mawatha, Colombo 07,
Sri Lanka. Fax no: (+94) 112 575454. Email: slpm@pmoffice.gov.lk 
·      
Mr. Sarath Palitha Fernando, Attorney General,
Attorney General's Department. Colombo 12, Sri Lanka. Fax: (+94) 11 2 436421. 
·      
Justice Priyantha R.P. Perera, Chairman, Human
Rights Commission of Sri Lanka. No: 165 Kynsey Road, Borella, Colombo 8, Sri
Lanka. Fax: (+94) 11 2 694924. Email: sechrc@sltnet.lk
·       H.E. Mr. Ravinatha P. Aryasinha, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the United Nations in Geneva, 56 rue
de Moillebeau, 1211 Geneva 19. Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 73 49 084. E-mail: mission@lankamission.org
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Sri Lanka in your
respective country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, March 19, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.

 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1
43 55 18 80
 



[1] http://www.dailynews.lk/editorial/defending-human-rights-terrorists 


[2] See for instance Observatory
Urgent Appeal LKA 002 / 0312 / OBS 028, issued
on March 28, 2012. 