Bahrain:  Summoning of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR)
March  2, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2015 / MarchBahrain: Summoning of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR)Bahrain_020315 AR4 pages / 145 KBNew Information
BHR 001 / 0812
/ OBS 048.13
Judicial harassment
Bahrain
March 2, 2015
The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Bahrain.
New
information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about
the summoning of Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR),
Director of the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) and FIDH Deputy Secretary
General[1], to Hamad Town police station.
On February 26, 2015, Mr. Rajab received a summoning order
to the Hamad Town police station for accusations of “inciting hatred towards
the regime”. On March 1, 2015, Mr. Rajab went to the police station where he
was interrogated about a speech he made in February 2011. Mr. Rajab has denied
all accusations, and his lawyers called for the accusations to be dropped.
According to procedure, the police is in charge of collecting evidence and
submitting it to the Public Prosecution, which will decide whether to press
charges against Mr. Rajab. 
The Observatory is highly concerned about the new summoning
of - and potential new charges against - Mr. Rajab, who was already sentenced
to six months imprisonment on January 20, 2015, and whose hearing in appeal is
due to take place on March 4, 2015 (see background information). 
The Observatory recalls that accusations of “incitement
hatred towards the regime” are contrary to international human rights law, and
in particular to the right to freedom of expression. The Observatory considers
that Mr. Rajab has been targeted because of his legitimate human rights
activities. 
Therefore,
the Observatory urges the Bahraini authorities to put an end to all acts of
harassment – including at the judicial level – against Mr. Rajab, and to comply
with relevant international standards, in particular the United Nations (UN)
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on
December 9, 1998, as well as international human rights instruments ratified by
Bahrain.
Background
information:
On
January 20, 2015, the Third Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab to
six months imprisonment on charges of insulting public institutions via Twitter
(see below). Mr. Rajab's lawyers appealed the sentence and paid a bail of 200
Bahraini dinars, so that he is not imprisoned until the appeal is issued.
According to the Criminal Procedure Code, sentences issued by lower criminal
courts can be suspended with a bail posted, upon the agreement of the judge.
However, a travel ban against Mr. Rajab is still in force pending the appeal[2].
The hearing in appeal is due to take place on March 4, 2015.
On
November 2, 2014, the Third Lower Criminal Court Jaber Al
Jazar
had ordered Mr. Rajab's release but barred him from leaving the country, and
announced that the verdict would be issued on January 20, 2015.
Previously, on October 1, 2014, Mr. Nabeel Rajab had
been summoned by the General Directorate of Anti-corruption and Economic and
Electronic Security of the Criminal Investigation Department on the charge of
“insulting a public institution” via Twitter. The investigation concerned
certain tweets he published on Twitter, which the CID alleged were insulting the Ministry of Interior, pursuant to Article
216 of the Bahraini Penal Code, punishable by up to three years imprisonment.
The CID decided to detain Mr. Rajab overnight before presenting him to the
Public Prosecution on October 2 for further investigation. The Public
Prosecution decided to keep Mr. Rajab under arrest for 7 days, pending further
investigations. On
October 9, 2014, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was brought again before the Public
Prosecution Officer in Manama and informed that the Ministry of Defence had
filed a complaint regarding the same tweet, which was the subject matter of the
previous investigation. The interrogation lasted about 40 minutes.
Mr. Rajab reiterated his previous position denying
all allegations against him and stressing that he was only exercising his
freedom of expression in regard to a matter forming part of a large public
debate and an open discussion in the local press, social networks and even in
Bahraini officials’ public statements. On the same day, the Public Prosecution
ordered the continued detention of Mr. Nabeel Rajab and decided to refer the
case for trial before the Third Lower Criminal Court. On October 19, 2014, the
Third Lower Criminal Court started the trial against Mr. Nabeel Rajab. The
hearing was postponed to October 29 and then November 2 for the verdict.
In a previous case, on July 9, 2012, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was
arrested[3]
after he had tweeted the following on
June 2: "Khalifa, leave the residents of Al Muharraq, its Sheikhs and
its elderly. Everyone knows that you are not popular here, and if it wasn't for
the subsidies, they wouldn't have gone out to welcome you. When will you step
down?".
On the same day, the 5th Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr.
Rajab to three months imprisonment for allegedly libelling the residents of Al
Muharraq through tweets posted on his twitter account. On August 23, 2012, Mr.
Nabeel Rajab was acquitted by the Higher Appeal Court.
However, on August 16, 2012, the Lower Criminal Court had
also sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab to three years imprisonment for three cases
related to his participation in peaceful gatherings in favour of fundamental
freedoms and democracy:
- The first case related to charges of “participating in an
illegal assembly” and “calling others to join”, in relation to a protest
organised on March 31, 2012 in Manama to denounce the detention of the founder
of GCHR, former President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), and
former MENA Director at Front Line, Mr. Abdulhadi Al Khawaja.
- The second one related to charges
of “involvement in illegal practices and incitement to gatherings and
calling for unauthorised marches through social networking sites” for a protest
in Manama on January 12, 2012.
- The third one on related to charges of “participating in
an illegal assembly” in relation to several protests that took place in Manama
in February 2012.
The Court thus sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab to one year
imprisonment for each of these three cases.
In December 2012, the Appeals Court reduced the sentence to
two years imprisonment. Mr. Nabeel Rajab completed his sentence and was
released on May 24, 2014.
Actions
requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to: 

Put an end to any act of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and against all
human rights defenders in Bahrain;


Guarantee the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Nabeel Rajab and all human rights defenders in Bahrain;


Conform in any
circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General
Assembly, in particular: 

            - its Article 1,
which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in association           with others, to promote the protection
and realization of human rights and   fundamental
freedoms at the national and international levels” ;
-         
its Article 6 (c) which states
that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others to
study, discuss, form and hold opinions on the observance, both in law and in
practice, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and, through these and
other appropriate means, to draw public attention to those matters” ;
-         
and its Article 12.2 which states
that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by
the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”.
vi.    Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Bahrain. 


Addresses: 
·        
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of
Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 587
·        
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Tel: +973 172 27 555; Fax : +973 172 12 6032 
·        
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of
Justice and Islamic Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; Fax: +973 175 31 284 
·        
Lt. Gen. Cheikh Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior,
Tel: +973  17572222 and
+973 17390000. Email: info@interior.gov.bh
·        
Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United
Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39,
1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your
respective countries.
***
Paris-Geneva,
March 2, 2015
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, a FIDH and
OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims
to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
To contact the Observatory,
call the emergency line:

E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org 

·        
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55
18 80 

Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22
809 49 29




[1]               Mr. Rajab is also a member of the
Advisory Committee of Human Rights Watch's Middle East Division  and Chair of CARAM Asia. 


[2]               At first, the
judge decided to release Mr. Rajab without measures restricting his movement.
But after a motion of the prosecution providing “evidence” that Mr. Rajab plans
on travelling, the judge decided to keep him in probation and banned him from
leaving the country before the next court hearing. Mr. Rajab and his lawyer
were not shown the so-called “evidence” brought by the prosecution, and were
not given the right to challenge this decision.


[3]              
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nENlacyy3Sw&feature=youtu.be 