Item 6 - UPR Outcomes Russia: Oral statement
September 20, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2018 / SeptemberItem 6 - UPR Outcomes Russia: Oral statement




Human Rights Council
39th session 20 September 2018
 

 
Thank you Mr.
President
 
OMCT welcomes the
report of the working group on the UPR of Russia.
 
Less than 2 months ago
the UN Committee against Torture concluded its 6th periodic review
of Russia's obligations under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Although the Committee noted a
few very modest positive steps, it deplored that the Russian authorities failed
to fully implement almost all of its key recommendations.
 
For example, torture is
not codified as an independent crime and the definition of torture included in
domestic law is not in conformity with the Convention. The Committee expressed
deep concern about the practice of torture and ill-treatment in Russia,
including as a means to extract confessions, as well as about the downright
failure to conduct prompt, impartial and effective investigation into torture
complaints, leading to widespread impunity.
 
Therefore, OMCT calls
on the Russian authorities to fully implement all the recommendations of the
Committee against Torture.
 
Mr. President, OMCT is
also deeply concerned about the harassment of human rights defenders and
journalists, in particular in Chechnya.[1]
On 23 August 2018 Chechnya's leader, Ramzan Kadyrov threatened that human
rights defenders will no longer be able to work in or visit Chechnya, publicly
stating that “Chechnya will be forbidden for them, like for terrorists.”
 
OMCT asks the highest
Russian authorities to condemn Kadyrov's statements and guarantee the liberty,
safety and freedom of movement of human rights defenders everywhere in Russia,
in accordance with international human rights standards.
 
Finally, OMCT urges the
Russian Federation to approve pending visit requests by UN special procedures
mandate holders and extend a standing invitation to all special procedures
mandate holders. Russia should also ratify the Optional Protocol to the UN
anti-torture convention and create a national preventive mechanism in
accordance with the Optional Protocol.
 
Thank you Mr.
President.




[1]For the online version, please add a link to
the alternative report by OMCT and independent Russian journalists. 