Malaysia:  Malaysia: violation of the rights to movement, association and opinion and the harassment of Dr. Ustaz Badrul Amin
November 20, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2001 / NovemberMalaysia: Malaysia: violation of the rights to movement, association and opinion and the harassment of Dr. Ustaz Badrul AminCase MYS 110401.7 Follow-up of Case MYS 110401 Harrassment / Violation of the rights to movement and association and opinion   Geneva, November 20th, 2001  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Malaysia.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source of the violation of the rights to movement, association and opinion and the harassment of Dr. Ustaz Badrul Amin in Malaysia.  According to the information received, despite the fact that Dr Badrul Amin was released from detention on November 13th, 2001, he is reportedly living under strict restrictions imposed on him by the police. He has been placed under "restricted residence" in Gombak District, Selangor, where his house is situated, and is required to report to the nearest police station every week. He is not authorized to receive mail by the post, or to join public gatherings, or to be involved in any political activities. He is reported as saying that he feels subjected to heavier controls now than when he was in detention camp. The day he was released, he was warned that any participation in political activities would cause him to be thrown back into the detention camp.  As a result, Dr. Badrul Amin is considering not to run for re-election in the Keadilan Party’s Supreme Council, in spite of his nomination as one of the 20 members of this council.  The International Secretariat condemns the restrictions imposed on Dr. Badrul Amin by the Malaysian authorities, despite him having been officially released and discharged on November 13th. These restrictions amount to continuing violations of his rights to the freedom of association, opinion and of movement. Although OMCT welcomes his release, the conditions that have been imposed upon Dr. Badrul Amin following this release are unacceptable, and are designed to make it impossible for him to continue leading his political activites, in blatant violation of his fundamental human rights.  Brief reminder of the situation  The Keadilan leader Dr. Ustaz Badrul Amin was released November 3rd, 2001, from the Kamunting Detention Camp after having been sentenced to a two year detention order June 13th under the ISA.  He had been detained for 287 days prior to his release.  According to the information received, an officer at the Kamunting Detention Camp had phoned the family of Dr. Badrul Amin to announce his release, but had given no reason as to why he had been discharged.  Dr. Badrul Amin had been detained together with nine other Keadilan and reformasi activists under the ISA in April for alleged involvement in a militant attempt to overthrow the government (see Urgent Appeal Case MYS 110401).   Dr. Badrul Amin was arrested along with five other activists on April 10th, 2001 : Mr. Mahd. Ezam Mhd. Noor ; Mr. Chua Tian Chang ; Mr. N Gobala Krishnan (NY Secretary); Mr. Haji Saari Sungip; and Mr. Hishamuddin Rais. This was followed on April 11, 2001, by the arrest of Mr. Raja Petra Kamaruddin (Free Anwar Campaign website executive director), also under the auspices of the ISA.  Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Malaysia urging them to:  i.	put an immediate end to the persecution and harassment of Dr. Badrul Amin, along with all other opposition political activists in Malaysia;  ii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses:  ·	Ybhg Tan Sri Musa Hitam, Chairperson Malaysian Human Rights Commission, C/o Kementerian Luar Negeri, Wisma Putra, 50602 Kuala Lumpur Fax : 603-2425043 Email: humanrights@humanrights.com.my   ·	Datuk Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, Home Minister, Jalan Dato Onn, 50502 Kuala Lumpur Fax-603-2301051   ·	Tan Sri Norian Mai, Inspector General of Police, Ibupejabat Polis Diraja Malaysia, Bukit Aman, 50560 Kuala Lumpur Fax: 603-22731326  Please also write to the embassies of Malaysia in your respective country.  Geneva, November 20th, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 