Kyrgyzstan:  Mounting pressure on human rights defenders as the Constitutional referendum approaches
December  9, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2016 / DecemberKyrgyzstan: Mounting pressure on human rights defenders as the Constitutional referendum approaches
Bishkek-Paris-Geneva, December 9, 2016. In the
run-up to the Constitutional referendum scheduled on December 11, 2016, women
human rights defenders Tolekan Ismailova and Aziza Abdirasulova are subject to
increasing pressure, verbal attacks and surveillance. The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT partnership) calls the Kyrgyz
authorities to ensure the physical integrity and security of human rights
defenders and to stop harassment of critics of the referendum. 
 
On
December 8, 2016, Head of FIDH member organisation "Centre for Human
Rights "Kylym Shamy" Aziza
Abdirasulova was hospitalised for urgent treatment following revelation of
facts of wiretapping and mounting media harassment.
Persecution of Aziza Abdirasulova
and Tolekan Ismailova, Head of FIDH member "Bir Duino
Kyrgyzstan", intensified during the retrial of human rights defender
Azimjan Askarov. Condemned to life
imprisonment in 2010 in judicial proceedings considered as unfair by the United
Nations Human Rights Committee[1],
Azimjan Askarov is being retried – only at the appeals level - since October
2016. 
 
As
the verdict of Azimjan Askarov approaches, mounting pressure on Tolekan
Ismailova, Askarov's public defender, and Aziza Abdirasulova, defense witness
in the retrial, has resulted in increased surveillance and regular hounding in
media and social networks. 
 
“We regret the inability of the
Kyrgyz authorities to protect human rights defenders”, deplored FIDH Director of Operations Marceau
Sivieude: “Moreover, in the majority of
cases, current and former decision-makers incite public hatred towards leading
human rights defenders, which increased in the context of the upcoming
constitutional referendum”.
 
Our
organisations recall that Tolekan Ismailova and Aziza Abdirasulova are
regularly victims of verbal attacks, acts of harassment and slandering
campaigns[2].
 
“Intimidation and persecution of human rights
defenders place them at increased risk and serve to obstruct their legitimate
human rights activities. We call upon the Kyrgyz authorities to guarantee their
protection and to ensure that they are able to carry out their work without hindrances”, declared
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
Beside
strengthening the power of the executive and weakening the independence of the
judiciary, the proposed constitutional amendments introduce a set of “highest
values” that may be used to curtail universal human rights and freedoms. The
amendments would also delete part of Article 41 of the Constitution which
require the national authorities to restore the rights of Kyrgyz citizens in
the case of violation established by international mechanisms. This
constitutional provision was the legal basis for the retrial of human rights
defender Azimjan Askarov[3].

 
The
initiative to hold a constitutional referendum introducing major changes into
the fundamental law was made public in the mid-summer, leaving citizens only
roughly four months to debate. Our organisations are also alarmed by the recent
reports of Facebook users being summoned by the security services for
criticizing the authorities. 
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.



[1]
See Joint Press Release, April 25, 2016. 


[2]
See Observatory Press Releases, September 12 and September 26, 2016.


[3] For more information, see https://www.fidh.org/en/region/europe-central-asia/kyrgyzstan/resolution-on-the-upcoming-constitutional-referendum-in-kyrgyzstan 