Cambodia:  Land rights activist Yorm Bopha released on bail, but harassment continues
November 22, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2013 / NovemberCambodia: Land rights activist Yorm Bopha released on bail, but harassment continues

Geneva-Paris,
November 22, 2013. The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH), welcomes the release on bail today of prominent land rights activist Yorm Bopha but calls upon
the Cambodian authorities to put an end to the prosecution against her and to
ensure that human rights defenders are able to work without any fear
of reprisals.
 
Today,
Ms. Yorm Bopha, a 29-year old land rights
activist from the Boeung Kak Lake community in Phnom Penh, was released
from prison following a ruling by the Supreme Court
of Cambodia in Phnom Penh, which ordered her
release on bail and sent her case back to the Appeals Court for further
investigation and a retrial.
 
“We
welcome the decision of the Supreme Court to release Ms. Yorm Bopha on bail. However,
she should never have been detained at the first place”, OMCT Secretary
General Gerald Staberock said today. “Her retrial is hanging over her
head like a sword of Damocles and is likely to deter her future activities. Accordingly, all charges against her should now be
dropped”, he further urged.
 
Ms. Yorm
Bopha has been actively involved in her community’s struggle against forced
evictions and emerged at the forefront of a campaign for the release of
thirteen of her fellow activists (the “Boeung Kak 13”) who were arrested,
charged, convicted and imprisoned as a result of a peaceful land rights
demonstration in May 2012. 
 
She was
arrested on September 4, 2012 and sentenced to three years in prison on
December 27, 2012 after being found guilty on bogus charges of
assault. Her prosecution was widely perceived as related to her activism. Her
conviction was upheld on appeal on June 14, 2013 when the original custodial
sentence of three years was reduced to two on the grounds that she did not
directly commit violence. It was alleged by the court that she and her husband
masterminded the assault of two suspected thieves. 
 
The facts
and circumstances of her arrest, as well as a thorough examination of the
charges and evidence produced against her, clearly suggest that the prosecution
of Ms. Yorm Bopha was carried out in retaliation for her activities as a
high-profile land and housing rights advocate. The judicial process was marred
by significant irregularities and her fundamental rights have been repeatedly violated.
 
“Ms.
Yorm Bopha’s prosecution represents a gross
miscarriage of justice and is yet another blow to the credibility of Cambodia’s
judicial system. It can now only be hoped that the judiciary reasserts its
independence and orders the unconditional release Ms. Yorm Bopha at the Appeals
Court hearing”, FIDH
President Karim Lahidji said.
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of
Cambodia to ensure that
all human rights defenders are able to work without any fear of
reprisals. It also calls on the authorities to conform to the United Nations Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international
human rights instruments ratified by Cambodia.
 
For
further information, please contact:
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: + 41
     22 809 49 39FIDH: Arthur Manet
     / Audrey Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 