Uganda:  Dismissal of charges against Mr. Gerald Kankya
July  3, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uganda / 2015 / JulyUganda: Dismissal of charges against Mr. Gerald KankyaNew informationUGA 001 / 0215 / OBS 010.1Dismissal of chargesUgandaJuly 3, 2015
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in
the following situation in Uganda.
New information:
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources about the dismissal of charges against Mr. Gerald
Kankya, Executive Director of the Twerwaneho Listeners Club (TLC), which,
since 2006, has been working to combat unlawful evictions from public community
land[1].
According to the
information received, on July 1, 2015, the Fort Portal Magistrate’s court
dismissed charges related to grievous assault against Mr. Kankya, following the
failure by the prosecution to produce any evidence of Mr. Kankya's guilt.
The Observatory recalls
that Mr. Kankya has been the target of a constant judicial harassment for
several months now. Indeed, on March 24, 2015, in a separate case, Mr. Kankya
was arrested and briefly detained on accusations of assaulting a journalist.
The case was similarly dismissed by the Fort Portal Magistrate's court on May
20, 2015[2].
The Observatory welcomes
the decision of the Magistrate's court and thanks all the persons, institutions
and organisations who intervened in his favour. Furthermore, the Observatory
calls upon the Ugandan authorities to ensure the protection and a favourable
environment for human rights defenders operating in the country.
Background information:
On January 23, 2015, at
2:30 p.m. in Fort Portal town, Messrs. Gerald Kankya and Simon Amanyire
were attacked by approximatively 30 men wearing Queen Mother Best Kemigisa
Nursery, Primary and Vocational Schools traffic reflectors jackets, armed with
clubs and allegedly commanded by the District Police commander Mr. Geoffrey
Kahebwa and another police officer. As the two defenders were on their way to
their offices, the group of men started moving towards them allegedly on
instructions of the District Police Commander. 
After they were
violently wrestled to the ground, the attackers attempted to steal important
office files in their possession, including a document compiling cases on land
grabbed by the Queen Mother Best Kemigisa project as part of the petition
addressed to the President of Uganda. The attackers were allegedly each
promised 20,000 Uganda shillings (approximately EUR 6) and were offered an
extra 50,000 Ugandan shillings (approximately EUR 15) if they obtained the
documents.
According to the medical
examination carried out after the assault at Fort Portal Regional referral
hospital, which qualified the attack as “grievous harm”, Mr. Kankya suffers from
bruises on the left knee, bruises on the left hand, injuries in the mouth, a
broken incisor tooth and sprained right hand thumb.
On January 24, 2015, Mr.
Kankya was examined by a doctor at the request of the local police in order to
be able to file a complaint. 
However, several police
officers refused to record a complete statement, arguing that they were under
strict orders not to record any statement from a member of TLC on charges
related to assault. They also refused to accept the medical report obtained by
Mr. Kankya.
Mr. Kankya was further
informed that three of the alleged perpetrators had filed a complaint against
him for “grievous assault”.
The trial on charges of
“grievous assault” which opened on March 24, 2015, was reported several times
due to the lack of witnesses and evidence and as the police file was missing.
The Observatory wishes to thank all of the individuals
and organizations that have taking action as a response to the urgent appeal
and have written to the Ugandan authorities on behalf of Mr. Gerald Kankya. No further action is
currently required on your part concerning this case.
***
Paris-Geneva, July 3, 2015
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, a FIDH
and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and
aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. 
To contact the
Observatory, call the emergency line:
·        
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·        
 Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33
1 43 55 18 80
·        
 Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41
22 809 49 29



[1]       TLC broadcasts weekly programs on
human rights education, performs capacity building to enhance the ability of
human rights defenders to perform their activities in the region, provides
civic education, monitors and documents human rights violations, and challenges
unlawful government actions in courtLately, TLC in partnership with local
leaders and 25 victims of illegal evictions petitioned the President of Uganda
against the Queen Mother Best Kemigisa Nursery, Primary and Vocational School
project. TLC reportedly sent out over 1000 messages to members of parliament,
Ministers and citizens informing them of the alleged land grabbing, and calling
on them to appeal to the President not to go forward with the launching of the
project.


[2]      See
the Observatory's press release on May 27, 2015. 