Ireland:  OMCT welcomes principled stand on re-opening landmark torture case
December  3, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / Ireland / 2014 / DecemberIreland: OMCT welcomes principled stand on re-opening landmark torture casePR_OMCT_Ireland_re-opening landmark torture case1 page / 358 KB
PRESS
RELEASE
Ireland:
OMCT welcomes principled stand on re-opening landmark torture case
Geneva, 3 December 2014. The World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), the principal global civil society coalition against
torture, today welcomes the Irish Government over its decision to seek the
re-opening of the 1971 case on UK torture techniques in Northern Ireland.
‘This is
courageous, principled and significant’, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary
General in a comment by the leading global coalition against torture. 
The OMCT
considers that the case can bring justice and truth to those subjected to this
treatment and that it comes at a crucial moment of time when the prohibition of
torture, cruel and inhuman treatment remains challenged globally when fighting
security threats.
In 1971 the
European Court of Human Rights seized by the Irish Government had held that the
‘so-called five techniques’, including hooding and other stress and duress
techniques used by the UK security forces in the midst of the ‘troubles’ in
Northern Ireland amounted to prohibited cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. 
Many in the
anti-torture movement have for long felt that such techniques should have been
considered as torture, or would at the very least qualify as such under
international law today. Following media revelations[1]
based on previously classified information it is now suggested that the UK
authorities used treatment amounting to torture and about having misled the
court at the time. The Irish Government is reported to seeking the formal reopening
of the case.
Bringing
the case to the European Court of Human Rights 40 years ago had a clearing
effect on the debate on torture and cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment in
Europe at the time. It fostered the global cause against torture, including the
UKs own anti-torture policies drafted since. 
‘Just like
40 years ago we need a ruling that clears all ambiguity over how much cruelty
is torture. Re-opening such a case also reminds us of the force of the
inter-state complaint procedure under the European Court of Human Rights that
has unfortunately been long forgotten’, the OMCT noted 
For further information, please contact:
OMCT, +41(0) 22 809 49 39, omct@omct.org



[1] http://www.rte.ie/news/player/prime-time/2014/0604/ 