Israel:  Several attacks targeting anti occupation groups including 3 arbitrary detentions, a physical assault and restrictions to freedom of expression
September  6, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2018 / SeptemberIsrael: Several attacks targeting anti occupation groups including 3 arbitrary detentions, a physical assault and restrictions to freedom of expression

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
ISR 001 / 0918 / OBS 110
Arbitrary detention / Harassment /
Physical
assault /
Restrictions
to freedom of expression
Israel
September 6, 2018

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Israel.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about several recent
incidents targeting anti occupation groups, including the arbitrary detention
of Mr. Avner Gvaryahu, Executive Director of the Israeli anti-occupation
organisation Breaking the Silence[1],
and Mr. Achiya Schatz, Communications Director of the organisation, as
well as Mr. Michael Sfard, human rights lawyer and legal advisor of
Breaking the Silence; the assault of six members of Ta’ayush[2];
and the restrictions to freedom of expression against the non-profit Barbur
Gallery. 
 
According
to the information received, on August 31, 2018, Israeli Border Police arrested
Messrs. Avner Gvaryahu, Achiya Schatz and Michael Sfard near the illegal
outpost of Mitzpe Yair in the West Bank, and took them to Hebron police
station. 
 
Their
detention took place while the three human rights defenders were leading an
educational tour of South Hebron Hills to see the reality of the occupation and
show their support to the six Ta’ayush activists that were violently attacked a
few days before in the outpost of Mitzpe Yair. The delegation of about 120 people,
coming from all over Israel, was cut short when security forces blocked them
from their regular lookout point near Mitzpe Yair outpost. 
 
Messrs.
Avner Gvaryahu, Achiya Schatz and Michael Sfard were released from detention
later the same day, after spending three hours in detention. They were summoned
for questioning on October 14, 2018. The three were detained for entering a
closed military area. The order closing the area was issued the morning of
their arrest for the purpose of preventing the tour, and was shown to the
delegation only after their arrival. The participants were not given the
opportunity to leave the area before the arrest began. The order was not
enforced against the settlers living in the Mitzpe Yair outpost. In the West
Bank, under the current military regime, arbitrary or false arrest by the
Israeli military forces targeting Palestinian civilians is common and routine.
 
Furthermore,
on August 25, 2018, six members of Ta’ayush were documenting illegal
construction in the unauthorized Jewish settlement of Mitzpe Yair in the South
Hebron Hills when 10 settlers attacked them and broke their cameras. Four were
evacuated to Soroka Medical Center in Be'er Sheva, suffering from bruised ribs,
arms and ankles, and have since been released from the hospital.
 
 Finally, on August 30, Jerusalem’s
Magistrate Court ruled that the non-profit Barbur Gallery will have to vacate
its premises by February 2019, after the gallery hosted a lecture by Breaking
the Silence in February 2017. Since then, the municipality of Jerusalem, owner
of the premises, was pushing to move out its legitimate occupants. 
 
The Observatory emphasises that attacks and campaigns
against human rights organisations have been ongoing for some time in Israel
and the OPT and that the above incidents are just recent illustrations of the
closing civil society space. 
 
The Observatory urges the Israeli authorities to end
any act of harassment against all human rights defenders in Israel and the OPT
and to carry out an immediate, thorough, impartial, and transparent
investigation into all attacks targeting human rights defenders, including
those described in this Urgent Appeal.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Israel asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all human
rights defenders in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory;
 
ii. Put an
end to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Messrs. Avner Gvaryahu, Achiya Schatz and Michael Sfard, as
well as against all human rights defenders in Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to
carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear of
reprisals;
 
iii. Carry out
a transparent, impartial, immediate and thorough investigation into the
physical attack against the six members of Ta’ayush in order to identify all
those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them
as provided by the law; 
 
iv.
Guarantee in all circumstances the freedom of expression of all human
rights defenders and human rights organisations in Israel and take action to
ensure that no organisation faces reprisals for their legitimate human rights
activities;
 
v. Comply with
the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular Articles 1, 5(b), 6, 12.1
and 12.2 ;
 
vi. More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms throughout Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory in accordance
with international human rights instruments.
 
Addresses:
·    
Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime
Minister of Israel – Minister of Foreign Affairs; Fax: + 972 267 055
55 / 972-2-5303367; Email: b.netanyahu@pmo.gov.il, pm_eng@pmo.gov.il
·    
Mr. Avigdor Liberman, Minister
of Defense; Fax: +972 369 169 40; Email: aliberman@knesset.gov.il
·    
Ms. Ayelet Shaked; Minister of
Justice; Fax: +972 262 886 18; E-mail: sar@justice.gov.il
·    
Mr. Shai Nitzan, State
Attorney; Email: state-attorney@justice.gov.il
·    
H.E. Ambassador Ms. Aviva Raz
Shechter, Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations in Geneva,
Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 716 05 55. Emil: mission-israel@geneva.mfa.gov.il
·    
H.E. Ambassador Simona Frankel;
Embassy of Israel in Belgium and Luxembourg, Fax: +32 2 373.56.17; Email:
web@brussels.mfa.gov.il
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Israel in your respective countries.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, September 6, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH
and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·    
E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·    
Tel
and fax FIDH +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·    
Tel
and fax OMCT +41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / +41 22 809 49 29
 



[1]       Breaking the Silence was established in
2004 by veterans of the Israel Defense Forces and intends to give serving and
discharged Israeli personnel means to confidentially report on their
experiences in the Occupied Territories, as well as educate the Israeli
population on the living conditions in this area. 


[2]       Ta’ayush is an Israeli-Palestinian
anti-occupation group. For more than 15 years,
Ta’ayush activists have accompanied Palestinian farmers and shepherds in the
South Hebron Hills when they go out to farm or herd their flocks, especially on
Saturdays because of harassment and violence by settlers. 