Thailand:  Women human rights defenders at heightened risk of attacks and intimidation
July  3, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2017 / JulyThailand: Women human rights defenders at heightened risk of attacks and intimidationThailand_WHRD report_CEDAW20 pages / 562 KB





Publication of a joint report
 
Bangkok-Geneva-Paris,
July 3, 2017 - Women human rights
defenders (WHRDs) in Thailand are at heightened risk of attacks and
intimidation since the May 22, 2014 coup d’état, the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership), said today.
 
In harm’s way: Women human rights defenders in
Thailand, a new
report jointly released today by the Observatory, Protection International
(PI), and the Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development (APWLD),
documents the pattern of repression of WHRDs in Thailand, especially rural
women.
 
The report
is released ahead of Thailand’s review by the UN Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women on July 5, 2017. The Committee oversees State
parties’ compliance with their legal obligations under the Convention on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).
 
“The
all-male Thai military junta has created an increasingly hostile environment
for women human rights defenders. To fulfil Thailand’s obligations under the
CEDAW, the junta must take immediate steps towards combating discrimination and
protecting women who work to defend human rights,”
said FIDH Vice-President Guissou Jahangiri.
 
The report highlights serious concerns over the ruling National
Council for Peace and Order (NCPO)’s failure to ensure protection for WHRDs.
Under the NCPO, WHRDs have faced an array of abusive practices, including
violent acts and threats of violence, intimidation, judicial and online
harassment, and denial of justice. This has resulted in their deprivation of
the exercise and enjoyment of women’s human rights and fundamental freedoms
guaranteed by the CEDAW.
 
“Despite
their courage, women human rights defenders are exposed to unique challenges,
which are reinforced by a wider context of gender inequality. In Thailand, the
situation is exacerbated by the NCPO’s policies and actions that prevent women
human rights defenders from carrying out their activism,”
said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
Thailand
was previously reviewed by the CEDAW Committee in 2006. Several UN human rights
bodies, including the UN Human Rights Committee (CCPR), the UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), and the UN Committee against
Torture (CAT) have continued to make recommendations to the Government
regarding the protection of human rights defenders. However, the critical situation
of WHRDs in Thailand has yet to be specifically addressed at the international
level.
 
The full Observatory
joint report is available online in English here.
 
Ahead of the
CEDAW review of Thailand, FIDH and its Thai member organization Union for Civil
Liberty (UCL) also submitted a joint shadow report that documents how women
prisoners in Thailand are disproportionately affected by poor detention
conditions. Such conditions include overcrowding, detention in prisons located
far from their families, punishment practices, lack of adequate sanitation
facilities, and deprivation of adequate healthcare and nutrition.
 
Women have a
host of gender-specific needs that are often neglected in a penitentiary system
that is controlled by men and caters to the majority male population.
Discrimination in accessing gender-specific services and maintaining family
links constitute discrimination within the meaning of Article 1 of the CEDAW.
 
In
addition, with 113 women prisoners per 100,000 of the national female
population, Thailand has one of the highest incarceration rates of women in the
world. Women are disproportionately affected by the imposition of harsh
penalties, including the death penalty, for drug-related crimes. In June 2017,
81% of the women prisoners in Thailand were incarcerated for drug-related
offenses, a percentage that is higher than the 70% of the male prison
population incarcerated for drug-related offenses.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of this
program is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European
Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.
 
For more
information, please contact:
• FIDH: Samuel Hanryon (French,
English): +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris) / Andrea Giorgetta (English): Tel:
+66886117722 (Bangkok)
•
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau (French, English): +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva) 