Nepal:  Death threats after filing a torture compensation case
July  5, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2012 / JulyNepal: Death threats after filing a torture compensation case
NPL 050712
Death threats after filing a
torture compensation case/ Fear for the physical and psychological integrity/
Risk of impunity
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in Nepal.
Brief description of the
situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by Advocacy Forum (AF), a member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture
Network, about the death threats received by Mr. Dev Lal Mukhiya, a 36-year-old marble paver, and his wife Ms. Ram Biraji Devi Mukhiya, 37 years old,
permanent residents of Goth Koyelpur VDC-5 in Dhanusha district (about 123 km
south east from the capital Kathmandu) for having filed a torture compensation
case against a police officer. OMCT is gravely concerned about their safety and
physical and psychological integrity. 
According to the information received, on 16 June 2012 at about 12:30 pm, Mr.
Dev Lal Mukhiya
received a phone call from an unknown person who told him that he needed a
marble paver for his new house. Mr. Dev Lal Mukhiya was asked to meet this
person on the same day near Kalanki temple, at Kalanki, Kathmandu. There, three
individuals were reportedly waiting for him in a taxi and he was taken to a
village, near a river below Thankot in Kathmandu district. Two other
individuals followed the taxi on a motorbike. When they arrived in the village,
he was taken out of the taxi and the five individuals started to ask him why he
had filed a torture compensation case against their friend, referring to the
case that his wife, Ms. Ram Biraji Devi Mukhiya, had filed under the Torture
Compensation Act (1996) against Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police Dev Kumar
Raut alias Deep Kumar before the District Court of Dhanusha, on 22 March 2012 (see background information). 
According
to the same information, Mr. Dev Lal Mukhiya was asked whom he had asked for
support before filing the case. The individuals then reportedly started to beat
him randomly all over his body. They allegedly said “We give you a week’s time
to withdraw the case” and then kept kicking and punching him with their fists
until he fell unconscious. When he woke up, he was reportedly again beaten for
about half an hour while being asked why he had filed a case against a police
officer and was told to withdraw the case within one week or face consequences.
They stopped beating Mr. Dev Lal Mukhiya when his phone started to ring. 
Later,
on 2 July 2012, Ms. Ram Biraji Devi Mukhiya received four threatening phone calls
from an unknown caller with the number 977 9817728411. The caller allegedly
verbally abused her and threatened to kill all her family members if she did
not withdraw the aforementioned case. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT
expresses its deep concern about the safety and physical and psychological
integrity of Ms. Ram Biraji Devi Mukhiya and Mr.
Dev Lal Mukhiya. OMCT urges the competent
authorities to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity at all
times, notably by immediately putting in place adequate protection measures for
them, and by suspending the policemen believed to be responsible for the
allegations of torture and ill-treatment, pending an investigation. 
OMCT recalls that Nepal is a State party
to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, which both prohibit torture and ill-treatment. In line with their
obligations under these treaties, it is incumbent on the competent authorities
to consider seriously any allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and to
undertake a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
investigation in this regard, in order to identify all those responsible, bring
them to trial and apply adequate sanctions. 
OMCT also recalls that victims of torture
and ill-treatment must be ensured the right to an effective remedy for the
human rights violations suffered as well as the right to full redress,
including compensation and rehabilitation.
Background information
According to the information received, on 8 March 2012, Ms. Ram Biraji Devi Mukhiya was
arrested without any arrest warrant at her house by Assistant Sub-Inspector of
Police Dev Kumar Raut alias Deep Kumar who was accompanied by two unidentified armed
policemen and a man called Ramprit Chaudhary. Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police
Dev Kumar Raut was reportedly looking for Ms. Ram Biraji Devi Mukhiya’s
brother-in-law because of a land dispute with Mr. Ramprit Chaudhary. When Ms. Ram
Biraji Devi Mukhiya informed them that her brother-in-law did not live in the
same house and asked them why they came back to her house (Assistant
Sub-Inspector of Police Dev Kumar Raut and Mr. Ramprit Chaudhary reportedly already
came to her house on 7 March 2012 to ask the same question), Assistant
Sub-Inspector allegedly got angry and verbally abused her. He then arrested her
and took her to the Area Police Office, Chorakoila where she was reportedly
punched on the left side of her forehead and slapped several times on her left
cheek. She was later released when her husband, Mr. Dev Lal Mukhiya, came to
the police station. He brought her to the Janakpur Zonal Hospital for medical
treatment. On 22 March 2012, she filed a torture compensation file against
Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police Dev Kumar Raut before the Dhanusha District
Court. 
Action requested
Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them
to:
i.              
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Ram Biraji Devi
Mukhiya and Mr. Dev Lal Mukhiya, their family
members and the lawyers working on the case; 
ii.             
Immediately put in place adequate protection measures for Ms. Ram Biraji Devi
Mukhiya and Mr. Dev Lal Mukhiya, as well as
their family members; 
iii.           
Carry out a prompt, effective,
thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the aforementioned
facts, in particular the
allegations of torture and ill-treatment and the death threats, in accordance
with international human rights standards, the result of which must be made public,
in orderto bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iv.           
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to the victims concerned;
v.             
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards, in
particular ensure that all acts of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment and punishment are clearly defined in law as offences in accordance
with the provisions set out in Articles 1, 4 and 16 of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and that
they be made punishable with appropriate penalties which take into account the
grave nature of the crimes as required (which is not the case under the 1996
Torture Compensation Act);
vi.           
Ensure the respect of human
rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with
national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Home
Affairs, Mr. Bijaya Kumar Gacchedar, Ministry of Home Affairs, Singha Darbar,
Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: + 977-01-4211208 / + 977-01-4211214, Fax: + 977-1-4211257 / 4211286, Email: gunaso@moha.gov.np
Ø Inspector General of Police, Rabindra Pratap
Shah, Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box No.: 407, Fax: + 977 1 4 415 593, Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø Attorney General, Mr. Mukti Nath Pradhan, Office
of Attorney General Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977 1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np,    info@attorneygeneral@gov.np , socialjus@gmail.com 
Ø DSP Bishwa Adhikari, Human Rights Cell, Nepal Police, Kathmandu, Nepal PO. Box No.: 407,
Fax: + 977 1 4415593 E- mail: hrcell@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission,
Mr. Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@nhrcnepal.org ; 
complaints@nhrcnepal.org  Fax: + 977 1 5547973
Ø Head of the Human Rights Unit, Office of the
Prime Minister and Council of Ministers, Singh Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: +
977-01-4211000, P. O. Box: 23312, Email: info@opmcm.gov.np 
Ø Permanent Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la
Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: + 4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@bluewin.ch

Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your
respective country.
***
Geneva, 5 July 2012
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply. 