Cambodia:  Refusal to release on bail Mr. Mam Sonando
December 17, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2012 / DecemberCambodia: Refusal to release on bail Mr. Mam Sonando


URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
KHM 005 / 1212 / OBS 117
Denial of bail / 
Ongoing
arbitrary detention
Cambodia
December
17, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Cambodia. 
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Cambodian Center for Human
Rights (CCHR), the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association (ADHOC)
and the Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights
(LICADHO) of the refusal to release on bail Mr. Mam Sonando, Director and owner of the independent FM station 105 (Beehive
Radio) and President of the non-governmental organisation Democrats'
Association[1].
Mr. Mam Sonando is an outspoken critic of the
Government's human rights record, including serious and systematic violations
of land and housing rights.
 
According to the information received, on December 14, 2012, the Court
of Appeal in Phnom Penh delivered its decision not to grant release on bail to
Mr. Mam Sonando pending his appeal, on the grounds that his
temporary release, even under house arrest, would threaten social order, would
be unacceptable due to the seriousness of the case and the length of the
sentence, and would put the witnesses who testified against him in danger of
harassment. At the trial, Mr. Mam Sonando, who is 71
years old and whose health is deteriorating, protested his innocence and
insisted that he would be present at his appeal hearing.
 
The
Observatory recalls that on October 1, 2012, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court
sentenced Mr. Mam Sonando to 20 years’ imprisonment and a fine of 10 million
riels after being found guilty on charges of insurrection
and inciting people to take up arms against the State under six articles under the
Penal Code, in the framework of a long-running land conflict
with a private company in Kratie province[2].
 
Mr.
Sonando’s arrest also followed his reporting over Beehive Radio of a complaint lodged at the International Criminal
Court (ICC) arguing that land-grabbing in Cambodia amounts to a crime against
humanity. A public call for his arrest was then issued by Prime Minister Hun
Sen in a nationwide televised speech the day after the report.
 
On October 12, 2012, Mr. Mam Sonando filed for appeal of
the verdict, but the Municipal Court failed to send the case file to the Appeal
Court within the ten days required by law, hence delaying proceedings. Mr. Mam
Sonando's lawyer submitted the bail motion to the Appeal Court on behalf of his
client on December 5, 2012. The request was made under Articles 306 and 307 of
the Criminal Code of Procedure 2007. 
 
The Observatory reiterates its demand on the Cambodian authorities for
the immediate and unconditional release of Mr. Mam
Sonando, as his detention seems to merely aim at
obstructing his human rights activities and appears to be a result of him
exercising his right to freedoms of expression and association.
 
Background information:
 
Mr.
Mam Sonando holds both Cambodian and French citizenships. The Beehive Radio
Station, which he runs,
regularly broadcasts reports that are critical of government policies. 
 
Mr. Mam Sonando was
abroad when the arrest warrant was issued and he returned to Cambodia on July
12, 2012. He was arrested on July 15, 2012 at his home in Phnom
Penh and the next day was placed under detention on remand. 
 
The charges against Mr.
Sonando stem from accusations by the Government that Mr. Sonando was
responsible for instigating villagers inhabiting an area of farmland in Kratie
province marked for development by the Russian company Casotim, which has been
granted a 15,000-hectare economic land concession. On May 16, the Government
sent in hundreds of armed security personnel, supported by helicopter, to evict
the villagers, killing Heng Chantha, a 14-year-old girl, during the crackdown.
Government officials later justified the operation by claiming the villagers,
some of whom are members of the Democrats Association, were part of an attempt
to secede from Cambodia. 
 
On June 22, 2012, Mr.
Sonando was in the Hague, the Netherlands, to cover the presentation of a
communication to the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) containing allegations of crimes against humanity committed by the
Cambodian Government. The communication was submitted by the Khmer People Power
Movement (KPPM), which is headed by prominent critic of the government Sourn
Serey Ratha. On June 22, the ICC acknowledged in writing the receipt of KPPM’s
communication. Mr. Sonando’s report on KPPM’s communication to the ICC was
broadcast by Beehive Radio on June 25. A day later, on June 26,
Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen urged in a nationally broadcasted public
speech that Mr. Sonando be arrested for masterminding “a plot to overthrow
the Government and attempting to establish a State within a State”. No
evidence has been presented to substantiate this claim. 
 
On July 16, 2012, he was
formally charged by the Phnom Penh Municipal Court under six articles under the
Penal Code[3].
Each of these charges carries long prison terms. The presiding judge denied Mr.
Sonando’s application for bail, ignoring the fact that Mr. Sonando voluntarily
returned to Cambodia despite the serious accusations levelled against him,
which seems to indicate he has no intention to flee.
 
Mr. Sonando has been
imprisoned twice before. In 2003, he served two weeks in prison after being
charged with giving "false" information and inciting people to commit
crimes and to discriminate, in connection to a telephone call made to a program
broadcast by Beehive radio in January 2003. In 2005, he was again
arrested and imprisoned for three months on charges of incitement and
defamation for giving an interview over the radio in which criticism of a
border treaty between Cambodia and Vietnam was discussed.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Cambodian authorities urging them to:
 
i.      Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Mam Sonando, as well as of all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
ii.     Release Mr. Mam Sonando immediately and unconditionally, since his
detention is arbitrary as it only aims at obstructing his human rights
activities and appears to be a result of him
exercising his right to freedoms of expression and association;
 
iii.   Put an end to acts of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against Mr. Mam Sonando and all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
iv.    Comply with all the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular:
·      
its Article 1, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with
others, to promote the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
·      
its Article 6.a, which
states that "everyone has the right individually and in association with
others to know, seek, obtain, receive and hold information about all human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including having access to information as to
how those rights and freedoms are given effect in domestic legislative,
judicial or administrative systems",
·      
Article 12.1, which
foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”,
·      
and its Article 12.2
which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration.”
 
v.     Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other
international human rights instruments ratified by Cambodia.
 
Addresses:

 
·      
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime Minister, Office
of the Prime Minister, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: +855 23 36 06 66 /
855 23 88 06 24 (c/o Council of Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / cppparty@gmail.com 
·      
Mr. H.E. Ang Vong Vathna, Minister
of Justice, No 240, Sothearos Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: 023
364119. Email: moj@cambodia.gov.kh
·      
Mr. Sar Kheng, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior, 275 Norodom Blvd, Phnom Penh,
Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: + 855 23 212708. Email: moi@interior.gov.kh
·      
Mr. Hor Nam Hong, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Foreign Affairs, 161 Preah Sisowath Quay, Phnom Penh, Kingdom
of Cambodia, Fax: + 855 23 21 61 44 / + 855 23 21 69 39. Email: mfaicasean@bigpond.com.kh
·      
Ambassador Mr. Sun Suon, Permanent
Mission of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva, Chemin de Taverney 3, Case
postale 213, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 788 77 74. Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh; cambodge@bluewin.ch 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
representations of Cambodia in your respective countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, December 17, 2012
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal
in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·      
 Email:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
 Tel
and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29
·        Tel and fax FIDH: +33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80



[1] The Democrats' Association works to
educate the Cambodian people about their civil and political rights, and is
registered with the Ministry of Interior.


[2] See Observatory Press Release,
October 2, 2012.


[3] Article 28 defines the crime of
instigation of felony or a misdemeanor (felony is punishable by life
imprisonment or by more than five years but no more than 30 years, while a fine
may also be imposed in addition to imprisonment; a misdemeanor is punishable by
imprisonment between six days to five years, while a fine may also be imposed
in addition to imprisonment); Articles 456 and 457 define the crime of
insurrectionary movement (punishable by imprisonment from seven to 15 years);
Article 464 defines the crime of inciting people to take up arms against state
authority (punishable by imprisonment from 15 to 30 years if effective);
Article 504 defines the crime of obstruction of public officials (punishable by
imprisonment from six months to one year and a fine from one million to two
million Riels); Article 609 defines the crime of unlawful interference in the
discharge of public functions (punishable by imprisonment from one to three
years and a fine from two million to six million Riels).







​ 