Indonesia:  Indonesia: killing and destruction in Ambon
June 30, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Indonesia / 2000 / JuneIndonesia: Indonesia: killing and destruction in AmbonIndonesia : killing and destruction in Ambon   Case IDN 300600  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Ambon/Moluccas, Indonesia.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat expresses its grave concern about the violence occurring in Ambon/Moluccas. OMCT has received information from a reliable source about attacks in Ambon/Moluccas by Muslim fighters on Christian residents.   According to the information received, on June 19, 2000, the village of DUMA/Galela, on the island of Halmahera, in the northern region of Moluccas, was invaded by Muslim fighters. In the course of this attack, 176 residents were killed and 137 people were injured, including women, children and the elderly. It was also reported that 10 women and twenty children were abducted by the forces. The village was completely destroyed in this attack, with 292 houses being burned to the ground. Another reliable source sent OMCT a list of those killed in this attack.  It was also reported that on June 12, 2000, the Muslim fighters attacked towns on the edges of Ambon (Galala and Hative Kecil). In this attack, six people were killed and 16 were injured.  Additionally, it was reported that thirty houses and the Catholic church were burned down. According to the information received, there was another attack on June 21, 2000, in the village of Tantui, which is where the Brimob Police Headquarters is located. As a result, the Catholic church was burned down as well as much of the property of the Police Headquarters.  Most of the residents were able to flee before they were attacked on this occasion. On June 27, 2000, it was reported that attacks against Christians continue in the neighborhoods of Ahuru, Karang Panjang, Phon Pule/Diponegoro, Urimessing and Tanah Lapang Kecil.  According to the information received, the police charged with protecting the Christians have run out of ammunition and have been threatened by the Muslim fighters. Because of this fact, the Christians are completely defenseless against these attacks. The effect of these attacks has been to cleanse the entire area of Christians and Christian influence. These attacks have led to a large number of internally displaced persons. There are also reports that Muslim fighters continue to arrive in Ambon from the outside, despite President Wahid’s order that no more outsiders enter Ambon.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Indonesia urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity and safety of the population and specifically the Christian people in Ambon; ii.	issue immediate orders to government security forces to stop the violence in Ambon;  iii.	guarantee immediate protection for the large numbers of internally displaced persons in Ambon; iv.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into these allegations, identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President Abdurrahman Wahid, President of the Republic of Indonesia, Istana Negara, J1. Veteran, Jakarta Pusat, Indonesia, Fax : +62 21 526 8726 / 380 5511 Dr. Juwono Sudarsono, Ministero f Defense and Security, (Menteri Pertahanan dan Keamanan, J1. Medan Merdeka Barat No. 13-14, Jakarta Pusat 10110, Indonesia, Fax :+62 21 381 4535 / 384 5178 Gubernur, Jalan Raya Pattimura nomor 1, 91274 Ambon, Maluku, Indonesia, Phone : +62 911 52321, Fax +62 911 41611  Diplomatic representatives in your country.  Geneva, June 30, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 