Malaysia:  New developments regarding obstacles faced by COMANGO in its enjoyment of the right to freedom of association
February 11, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2014 / FebruaryMalaysia: New developments regarding obstacles faced by COMANGO in its enjoyment of the right to freedom of association​













New information
MYS 001 / 0114 / OBS 003.1
 Obstacles to freedom of association
Malaysia
February
11, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Malaysia.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about new developments regarding obstacles faced by the Coalition of Malaysian NGOs
in the UPR Process (COMANGO) in its enjoyment of the right to freedom of
association[1].  
According
to the information received, on February 11, 2014, members of COMANGO found that the passage
declaring that COMANGO was an illegal organisation had been removed from the
statement published on January 8, 2014 on the Home Ministry official website. 
 
The Observatory expresses
dismay over the Home Ministry’s failure
to issue a new statement to restore COMANGO’s legal status.
 
The
Observatory recalls that on January 8, 2014, through a media statement, the Secretary General of
the Home Ministry of Malaysia declared COMANGO an “unlawful organisation” because most of its 54 members were “non-Islamic” and
allegedly lacked official registration. It
was believed that this declaration followed COMANGO submission to the second cycle of the United
Nations (UN) Human Rights Council Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of Malaysia, which took place in October 2013.
 
The Observatory regrets the decision by the Home
Ministry to restore COMANGO’s legal status without making a public announcement
either to COMANGO or to the media, contrary to its statement declaring the
coalition illegal last January. Accordingly, the Observatory calls upon the
authorities of Malaysia to clarify COMANGO’s current status and to publicly
retract the Home Ministry’s statement
declaring COMANGO as an unlawful organisation, in conformity with international human rights standards.
 
Background information:
 
Under Section 5 of the Societies
Act 1966, only the Home Minister has the power to issue an order that declares
a society to be unlawful if it is used for purposes prejudicial to or
incompatible with the interest of the security of Malaysia, public order or
morality.

Among the
reasons given in the January 8 media statement by the Secretary General to
declare COMANGO unlawful was that organisations that wish to organise legitimate
activities in the country must be registered with the Registrar of Societies
(ROS) under Section 7 of the Societies Act 1966. The statement added that any
organisation which failed to adhere to the regulations could be penalised under
Section 41(1) (b) of the Societies Act 1966. The statement noted that only 15
of the 54 organisations that form COMANGO were registered under the Societies
Act 1966 and that COMANGO itself was not registered with the ROS. 
 
To ban COMANGO, the Secretary
General also claimed that the
coalition “champions
rights that deviate from Islam”. COMANGO rejected the Secretary General’s
accusation and said that its work was in conformity with the Federal Constitution, human rights principles, and
Malaysia’s human rights commitment as a UN member State. The Secretary General also stated
that many of the endorsees of the report prepared by COMANGO for the UPR of
Malaysia were not Islam-based organisations.
 
The Observatory recalls that the right to freedom of association makes no
distinction between formal and informal groups and is applicable to both types.
Defenders should have the right to form groups in order to carry out legal
human rights activities without the obligation to register as legal entities, in
accordance with Article 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and Article 5 of the UN Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders. As a result, outlawing COMANGO for failing to register under
the Societies Act 1966 is equivalent to a serious violation of the right to
freedom of association.
 
Moreover, the Observatory notes
that the Government of Malaysia has engaged with COMANGO many times since it
submitted its first report to the UN Human Rights Council in 2008. Throughout this period, the status of COMANGO was never
questioned. COMANGO was also invited to participate in several consultations
with Malaysia’s
representative to the ASEAN Inter-Governmental Commission on Human Rights
(AICHR), and with AICHR itself. In September and October 2013, COMANGO met with
members of the Malaysian Government delegation before and during Malaysia’s
review in Geneva.
 
Action
requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Malaysia, urging them to:
 
i. Publicly retract the Home Ministry’s statement
declaring COMANGO an unlawful organisation and affirm
the legitimacy of the work of human rights organisations and defenders in
Malaysia;

ii. Ensure in all circumstances that COMANGO as well as all human rights defenders in Malaysia
are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and
fear of reprisals;
 
iii. Conform to the provisions of the UN Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the
right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive
for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at
the national and international levels”, as well as
- its Article 12.2, which provides that the State
shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of his or her rights”; 
 
iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Malaysia.
 
Addresses:

·      
Dato'
Sri Mohd Najib bin Tun Abdul Razak,
Prime Minister, Prime Minister’s Office Malaysia, Main Block, Perdana Putra
Building, Federal Government Administrative Centre, 62502 Putrajaya, Selangor,
Malaysia. Fax: + 60 3 8888 3444,
Email: ppm@pmo.gov.my 
·      
Mr.
Ahmad Zahid Hamidi,
Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Blok D1 & D2, Kompleks
D, Pusat Pentadbiran Kerajaan Persekutuan, 62546 Putrajaya, Malaysia. Fax: +60
3 8889 1613 /8889 1610, Email: webmaster@moha.gov.my
·      
 Tan Sri Hasmy Agam, Chairman
of the Human Rights Commission of Malaysia (SUHAKAM), Tingkat 11, Menara TH
Perdana, Jalan Sultan Ismail, 50250 Kuala Lumpur, 50250 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia;
Fax: +60 3 2612 5620; Email: humanrights@suhakam.org.my; hasmyagam@suhakam.org.my 
·      
H.E. Mr. Mazlan Muhammad,
Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations in
Geneva, International Centre Cointrin (ICC), Bloc H (1st floor), Route de
Pré-Bois 20, 1215 Geneva 15, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 710 75 01. Email: malgeneva@kln.gov.my
·      
Embassy of Malaysia in Brussels, 414 A avenue de Tervueren,
1150 Woluwe-Saint-Pierre, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 50 49. Email: malbrussels@kln.gov.my
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or
embassies of Malaysia in your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in Malaysia.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, February 11, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail:
     Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax
OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·       Tel and fax
FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1] Organisations in COMANGO include organisations registered
under the Societies Act 1966, the Companies Act 1965, unincorporated
associations, and civil society coalitions. 