Vacancy Announcement: Human Rights Officer / Human Rights Defenders Programme
May 17, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Links / 2017 / MayVacancy Announcement: Human Rights Officer / Human Rights Defenders ProgrammeHuman Rights Officer / Human Rights Defenders Programme2 pages / 313 KB





Human Rights Officer /
Brussels The World
Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), the largest international coalition of non governmental organisations
fighting against torture, summary executions, forced disappearance
and all other forms of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. The OMCT is
also a leading organisation defending human rights defenders worldwide
and a member of ProtectDefenders.eu, the EU Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society. The OMCT is
seeking to recruit a
FULL TIME HUMAN RIGHTS OFFICER for its Human Rights Defenders Programme
based in its Brussels Office (OMCT Europe). The position
should be filled as
soon as possible. RESPONSIBILITIES The
incumbent will work under the
supervision of the Director of OMCT Human Rights Defenders Programme and the Head
of OMCT Brussels Office. Responsibilities of the position include: Protection
and Advocacy Grants Management - To coordinate
OMCT emergency support to human rights defenders (HRDs) at risk as well as
subgranting and advocacy grants to local human rights organisations worldwide.
This role will involve:· Managing
emergency grants to HRDs at risk, including screening grants applications
and assessing the eligibility and needs of applicants;· Overseeing
grant-related expenses and ensuring that expenditures are properly tracked,
documented and recorded;· Managing the
documentation and reporting on grants beneficiaries during the lifecycle of
the grants as well as related follow-up on measures implemented and impact
on the security of beneficiaries;· Taking part
in field missions to verify and follow up grants allocated. Advocacy
Support - To conduct case
advocacy for HRDs towards and liaise with European Union and United
Nations institutions as well as other regional mechanisms for an effective
policy for the protection of HRDs; - To write or
supervise urgent interventions in cases involving HRDs and disseminate them and
support protection advocacy for defenders under threat; - To liaise with
OMCT Network organisations; - To represent
OMCT / the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders by
participating in relevant seminars, meetings, missions and conferences; - To assist with
other activities of OMCT Human Rights Defenders Programme / the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders in support to OMCT Geneva and
Brussels offices. QUALIFICATIONS - University degree in
law, international relations, political or social sciences or related field. - At least three
years of practical experience in international human rights work, including
through internships. Field experience or previous work at the EU or UN level is
an asset, as is work on human rights defenders. - Excellent practical
knowledge and understanding of international human rights law, human rights NGOs,
UN procedures, EU institutions and regional mechanisms for the protection
of human rights. - Demonstrated commitment
to human rights and the rule of law. - Excellent interpersonal,
communication and management skills managing conflicting demands,
meeting deadlines and adjusting priorities. - Ability to adapt to
multidisciplinary work in the environment of a multicultural team and to
engage with partners in different countries. - Ability to take
initiatives and prioritise with minimum supervision. - Excellent oral and
written communication skills in two of the following languages (English,
French or Spanish) with working knowledge in the remaining language. Fluency in
Russian would be an asset. - Skills in the use
of software applications and database management and secure communication
is an asset. APPLICATIONS OMCT is an
equal opportunities
employer. Applications
comprising a cover letter
and a CV with at least two references should be addressed to OMCT International
Secretariat, by email to hd@omct.org.
No phone calls please. Only shortlisted
candidates will be notified. Deadline for
the applications:
June 4, 2017. 