Korea, (South) Republic of:  Ongoing and unprecedented judicial harassment of members of KCTU and affiliated unions
July 13, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Korea, (South) Republic of / 2016 / JulyKorea, (South) Republic of: Ongoing and unprecedented judicial harassment of members of KCTU and affiliated unions
New
information
KOR 002 /
1215 / OBS 108.3
Arbitrary detention / Judicial
harassment
South Korea
July 13, 2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in South
Korea.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing and
unprecedented judicial harassment of members and officers of the Korean
Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU) for their participation in a rally that
took place in November 2015.
 
According to the information received, as of July 12,
2016, six KCTU officers and members of KCTU-affiliated unions remain in police
custody awaiting the outcome of their trials or appeals and facing
unprecedented harsh sentences, after they were indicted on charges related to their
participation in a demonstration against proposed labour law reforms on
November 14, 2015 in Seoul (see background information). 
 
In addition
to these six detainees, 14 other members of KCTU or affiliated unions were also
indicted in relation to the November 2015 demonstration and have been released
on bail or with suspended sentences.
 
The six who
are currently in police custody at the Seoul
Detention Center are:
Ms. Tae-sun Bae, Executive Director of KCTU’s Organisation Department, who was
arrested on January 11, 2016, and indicted on February 5, 2016 on charges of
“Special Obstruction of Public Duty Injuring Public Officials”, “Special
Destruction of Public Goods”, “Special Obstruction of Public Duty”, and
“Obstruction of General Traffic”. Prosecutors are asking for a six-year prison
sentence. Ms. Bae’s sentencing hearing is scheduled for July 19, 2016 at 11:00
am in Seoul Central District Court Room #423.Mr. Sung-deok Cho, Vice-President of the Korean Public
Service and Transport Workers Union (KPTU), who was arrested on January 13,
2016, and indicted on February 4, 2016 on “Special Obstruction of Public Duty
Injuring Public Officials”, “Special Destruction of Public Goods”, “Special
Obstruction of Public Duty”, “Obstruction of General Traffic” and “Failure to
Observe Dispersion Order”. Prosecutors are asking for a five-year prison
sentence. Mr. Cho’s sentencing hearing is scheduled for July 21, 2016 at 10:00
am in Seoul Central District Court Room #506.Mr. Hyun-dae Lee, Director of KCTU’s Organisation
Department, who was arrested on January 13, 2016 and indicted on March 14 on
charges of “Special Obstruction of Public Duty”, “Harbouring a Criminal”,
“Special Destruction of Public Goods” and “Obstruction of General Traffic”. On
April 25, 2016 his request for bail was rejected, and now prosecutors are
seeking a five-year prison sentence and a 500,000KRW fine (about 400 EUR). Mr.
Lee’s sentencing hearing is scheduled for July 21, 2016 at 10:00 am in Seoul
Central District Court Room #513.Mr. Jun-seon
Park, also Director of KCTU’s Organisation
Department, who was arrested on December 24, 2015, and indicted
on January 18, 2016 on charges of “Special
Obstruction of Public Duty”, “Harbouring a Criminal” and other minor crimes. On
June 2, 2016 he was convicted and sentenced to one year in prison. Mr. Park’s
lawyers have until July 26, 2016 to finish filing an appeal, after which a
hearing will be scheduled.Mr. Sang-gyun Han, President of KCTU, who was arrested on
December 10, 2015, and was sentenced on July 4, 2016 to a five-year prison term[1]. On July 8 Mr. Han filed an appeal, and on
July 11 prosecutors also filed an appeal seeking a longer prison term against
him[2]. Both the prosecution and the defence will
have to submit their formal justifications for seeking appeal before July 21,
2016, and the appeal hearing will be scheduled afterwards.Mr. Jae-shik Lee, member of KPTU and Chair of the “Gumi Local”, was
convicted on May 12, 2016 to 10 months in prison for “Special Obstruction of
Public Duty” and other crimes. The prosecution has filed an appeal before the
Seoul High Court seeking a harsher sentence, and the Court is schedule to
decide on this appeal on July 21. 
Of the remaining 14 indicted KCTU members and
officers, three are out on bail while they await the results of their
trials:  
Mr. Jae-seung
Byeon, member of KPTU, charged with
a violation of the Act on Assemblies and Demonstrations.Mr. Jeong-uk
Yang, Chair of the Emergency
Committee of the Ulsan Nam-ku Branch of the Korean Government Employees' Union
(KGEU), charged with “Obstruction of Traffic” and other crimes.Mr. Ji-ho
Yang, member of KCTU, charged with
“Special Obstruction of Public Duty”, and other crimes. The 11 others have all been convicted to prison time
for various charges related to “Special Obstruction of Public Duty”, and have
been released on suspended sentences:
Mr. Jae-geun Choi, member of the Korean Metal Workers' Union
(KMWU), sentenced to a one-year prison term suspended for two years.Mr. Young-chul Choi, member of the Korean
Federation of Construction Industry Trade Unions (KFCITU), sentenced to
a one and a half-year prison term suspended for two years.Mr. Hyung-chang Jang, Department Executive Director of KFCITU,
sentenced to a one and a half-year prison term suspended for three years.Mr. Young-hyun Jeong, General
Secretary of the
Korean Plant Construction Workers Union (KPCWU)
Ulsan Branch, sentenced to a one and
four months prison term suspended for two years.Mr. Beom-jin
Kang, member of KFCITU, sentenced to a four-month prison term suspended for
two years.Mr. Ki-hong Kim, member of KFCITU and former Secretary of
KPCWU Ulsan Branch, sentenced on June 15, 2016 to a one and a half-year prison
term suspended for three years.Mr. Kyung-do Kim, member of KMWU, sentenced to an eight-month prison term
suspended for two years.Mr. Geum-ju Lee, member of KMWU, sentenced to a one-year prison term suspended
for two years, one year of probation under supervision, and 80 hours of
community service.Mr. Nam-guk Lee, member of KMWU, sentenced to a one-year prison term suspended
for two years.Mr. Jeong-soo Nam, Executive
Director of KCTU’s Education & Publications Department, sentenced to a one and a half-year prison
term suspended for three years.Mr. Myung-hun
Park, member of KFCITU, sentenced on July 13, 2016 to a one-year prison
term suspended for two years.

In addition to the 20 KCTU members and
officers who have already been indicted, Ms.
Young-joo Lee, Secretary General of KCTU, currently has an arrest
warrant out against her for participating in the November 2015 demonstration.
Ms. Lee has taken refuge at the KCTU headquarters in Seoul since December 2015
in order to avoid being arbitrarily detained by the police.
 
The Observatory condemns the ongoing repression and
judicial harassment of the above-mentioned labour leaders and union members, in particular the continued detention of Ms. Tae-sun Bae, Mr. Sung-deok Cho, Mr. Hyun-dae Lee, Mr. Jae-shik Lee, Mr. Jun-seon Park, and Mr. Sang-gyun Han, which
seem simply aimed at deterring the peaceful human rights activities of labour
unions and workers' rights organisations in the country.
 
Background information:
 
On November 14, 2015, ahead of the rally organised
by KCTU against proposed labour law reforms in Seoul, the police allegedly took pre-emptive measures against
the peaceful demonstration, mobilising some 20,000 officers from 248 squadrons, 19 water
cannons, 679 buses, and 580 capsicum spray devices. Altercations between the police and demonstrators
ensued. The police fired water cannons and tear gas
directly at peaceful marchers. Dozens of civilians and police officers were
injured, including a farmer named Baek Nam-gi, who was struck by the jet of a
water cannon and remains unconscious seven months later. To this day, police
have neither issued an apology nor opened an investigation into the violent
actions of the police. On the other hand, the police launched an inquiry where over
1,500 civilians were reportedly investigated and 538 KCTU members were summoned
as suspects. Ultimately, the above-mentioned 20 KCTU members and officers were
indicted.
 
The Observatory is concerned by the ongoing attempts
by the South Korean authorities to curtail freedoms of association, peaceful
assembly, and expression, particularly for trade union and workers’ rights
activists. The Observatory recalls that the South Korean authorities have the
responsibility under international law to ensure the protection of human rights
in general and of rights related to freedoms of expression, assembly and
association in particular.
 
Actions requested:
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of
South Korea to:

Guarantee
the physical and psychological integrity of all KCTU members and officers, as
well as all peaceful protesters and human rights defenders in South Korea; Immediately
and unconditionally release Ms. Tae-Sun Bae, Mr. Sung-deok Cho, Mr. Sang-gyun
Han, Mr. Hyun-dae Lee, Mr. Jae-shik Lee, and Mr. Jung-seon Park, as their detention is arbitrary since it only aims
at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities; Put
an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against all
above-mentioned trade unionists as well as all human rights defenders in South
Korea; Ensure
in all circumstances that all human rights defenders in South Korea are able to
carry out their legitimate activities including the organisation of peaceful
assemblies without any hindrance or fear of reprisals; v. Conform with the provisions
of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by
the United Nations General Assembly, in particular its Articles 1, 5(a) and 12; vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international
human rights standards and international instruments ratified by South Korea.

Addresses:

Mrs. Park Geun-hye, President of the
Republic of Korea, Fax: +82 2770 1690Mr. Hwang Kyo-ahn, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Korea, 77Fax: + 82-2-720-35 71Mr. Kim Hyun-Woong, Minister of Justice of
the Republic of Korea, Fax: 02-503-7118Mr. Yun Byung-se, Minister of Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Korea, Fax: +82-2-2100-7999National Human Rights Commission of Korea,
Fax: +82-2-2125-9718. E-mail: nhrc@humanrights.go.krH.E. Choi Kyoung-lim, Permanent Mission of
the Republic of Korea to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22
748-0003. Email: geneva.korea@mofa.go.kr.H.E. Chong-ghee Ahn, Ambassador of the
Republic of Korea to the Kingdom of Belgium, Fax : + 32 (0)2 675 5221/(0)2 662
2305 Please write to the authorities of South
Korea and the diplomatic representations of South Korea in your respective
countries urging them to take the actions above.


[1]
For more information see
Observatory, ETUC, ITUC and TUAC Joint Press Release published on July 4, 2016.


[2]
Prosecutors had originally
sought an eight-year prison sentence against Mr. Han. For more information see
Observatory Urgent Appeal KOR 002 / 1215 / OBS 108.2, June 15, 2016. 