Syrian Arab Republic:  Renewed calls for Bassel Khartabil’s release on 4th anniversary of detention
March 17, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2016 / MarchSyrian Arab Republic: Renewed calls for Bassel Khartabil’s release on 4th anniversary of detention

  
(17 March 2016)  Syria’s authorities should reveal
the whereabouts of Bassel Khartabil, a software
developer and free speech activist, and release him immediately, 31 organizations said on the
fourth anniversary of his detention. 
 
On 15 March 2012, Military
Intelligence arrested Khartabil
and held him in incommunicado detention for eight months before moving him to ‘Adra
prison in Damascus in December 2012. During this time he was subjected to
torture and ill-treatment. He remained in ‘Adra until 03 October 2015, when he
managed to inform his family that he was being transferred to an undisclosed
location. Since then his whereabouts remain unknown and there are serious
concerns for his life.
 
Based on unconfirmed information that the family
received from some local sources, there are fears that he may have been
tried and sentenced to death by a Military Field Court in the Military Police
headquarters in Al-Qaboun, Damascus. These courts are notorious for conducting
closed-door proceedings that do not meet minimum international standards for a
fair trial. 
 
Since
his detention, many human rights groups have campaigned for his release. On 21
April 2015, the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention declared his
detention a violation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, and called for his release, yet the Syrian authorities refuse to free
him.
 
A Syrian of Palestinian parents, Khartabil is a
34-year-old computer engineer who worked to build a career in software and web
development. Before his arrest, Khartabil used
his technical expertise to help advance freedom of speech and access to
information via the internet. He has won many awards, including the 2013
Index on Censorship Digital Freedom Award for using technology to promote an
open and free internet, and was named one of Foreign Policy magazine’s Top
100 Global Thinkers of 2012 “for insisting, against all odds, on a peaceful
Syrian revolution.”
 
The
signatory organizations express concern at his on-going arbitrary detention and
enforced disappearance and believe that it is a direct result of his peaceful
and legitimate work for the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
expression. 
 
The
groups call on the authorities in Syria to:
Immediately
     disclose the whereabouts of Bassel Khartabil and grant him access to a
     lawyer of his choice and to his family;Ensure that
     he is protected from torture and other ill-treatment;Immediately
     and unconditionally release him;Release all
     detainees in Syria held for exercising their legitimate rights to freedom
     of expression and association.
 
Co-signed:
 
1.     Arabic Network for Human
Rights Information (ANHRI)
2.     Association for Progressive
Communications (APC)
3.     Amnesty International
4.     CIVICUS: World Alliance for
Citizen Participation
5.     Electronic Frontier
Foundation (EFF)
6.     English PEN
7.     Euromed Rights (EMRHN)
8.     Front Line Defenders (FLD)
9.     Gulf Center for Human
Rights (GCHR)
10.  Human Rights Watch (HRW)
11.  Humanist Institute for
Cooperation with Developing Countries 
(HIVOS)
12.  Iraqi Network for Social
Media (INSM)
13.  International Civil Society
Action Network (ICAN)
14.  International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), within the Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders
15.  International Service for Human
Rights (ISHR)
16.  Iraqi Association for the
Defence of Journalists’ Rights (IJRDA)
17.  International Media Support
(IMS)
18.  Index on Censorship
19.  Jordan Open Source
Association (JOSA)
20.  Lawyers Rights Watch Canada
21.  Metro Centre to Defend
Journalists in Iraqi Kurdistan
22.  No Peace Without Justice
(NPWJ)
23.  PAX for Peace
24.  PEN International
25.  Reporters Without Borders
(RSF)
26.  Samir Kassir Foundation
27.  Sisters Arab Forum for
Human Rights (SAF)
28.  Syrian Center for Media and
Freedom of Expression
29.  The Day After
30.  Tunisian Initiative for
Freedom of Expression
31.  World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT), within the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders 