Position paper 2008 relating to substantive and other aspects of attacking the root cause of violence
June 18, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Statements / Bulgaria / 2009 / JunePosition paper 2008 relating to substantive and other aspects of attacking the root cause of violencePosition paper 2008 relating to substantive and other aspects of attacking the root cause of violence15 pages / 172 KB As part of a wider project funded by the European Union and other donors, from 23 to 27 June 2008, OMCT hosted its second international seminar in Geneva on “Addressing the economic, social and cultural root causes of violence through the UN Special Procedures System”. This seminar is an important element of OMCT’s three-year project on “Preventing Torture and Other Forms of Violence by acting on their Economic, Social and Cultural Root Causes.”    The OMCT project, now in its second year, focuses on developing concrete measures to address the economic, social and cultural root causes of violence, particularly torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including violence against women and children.    This document contains expert papers and NGO case studies developed during the 2007 OMCT Special Procedures Seminar. We believe that this information is very relevant to the UN Special Procedures System, and its Mandate Holders.   During the five-day seminar, 14 NGO representatives from around the world focused on developing concrete recommendations to address the root causes of violence in specific cases. The substantive framework for the discussions was provided by presentations from two invited experts (reproduced in Section I): Mr. Yves Berthelot, member of the OMCT Scientific Council and former Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Europe, and Mr. Pierre de Senarclens, Professor of International Relations at the University of Lausanne, also a member of OMCT’s Scientific Council and former Human Rights Director of UNESCO.    Participants also submitted case studies highlighting specific links between violations of economic, social and cultural rights and violence in their countries (summarised in Section II). Seminar participants met and discussed these issues with mandate holders responsible for Human Rights Defenders, Adequate Housing, Minority Issues, Indigenous People, the Right to Food and the Human Rights of Migrants.   The European Union, through the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights, provides substantial support for this project, which is also generously supported by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), the Karl Popper Foundation, the Interchurch Organisation for Development Cooperation and the Foundation for Human Rights at Work. 