Syria: Mr. Haytham Al-Maleh prevented from leaving the country
February 18, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2004 / FebruarySyrian Arab Republic: Syria: Mr. Haytham Al-Maleh prevented from leaving the countryURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  SYR 001/0204/OBS 013 Restriction to freedom of movement Syria February 18, 2004  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the OMCT and the FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Syria.  Brief description of the situation:  The Observatory has been informed that on February 11, 2004, the Syrian authorities prevented Mr. Haytham Al-Maleh, Director of Human Rights Association in Syria (HRAS), from leaving the International Airport of Damascus.  According to the information received, Mr. Haytham Al-Maleh was on his way to the Emirates "on a family visit" when he was prevented from leaving the country. Reportedly, this prohibition to travel follows a speech that Mr. Al-Maleh made in front of the Human Rights Committee of the German Parliament on the International Day of Human Rights, concerning the human rights conditions under the law of emergency in Syria. Mr. Al-Maleh had previously addressed this issue in two public seminars which took place in Damascus and Alsoowaydaa, in Syria.  According to the same sources, Mr. Haytham Al-Maleh had not been allowed to leave Syria for several months until he received an official invitation from the German Parliament. At that point, the Syrian Ministry of the Republic Presidential Affairs asserted that Mr. Haytham was not banned from leaving the country.  The Observatory is seriously concerned about the situation of human rights defenders in Syria. In another case on February 13, 2004, the Observatory denounced in a press release, new acts of harassment and intimidation against Mr. Akhtam Naisse, the President of  the Committees for the Defense of Democratic Liberties and Human Rights in Syria (CDF).   The Observatory calls on the Syrian authorities to end acts of harassment against Mr. Haytham Al-Maleh, to guarantee, in all circumstances, his freedom of movement, and to stop all acts of repression against Syrian human rights defenders.  Actions requested:  Please write to Syrian authorities urging them to:  i.	end the harassment directed towards Mr. Haytham Al-Maleh, Mr. Anwar Al-Bunni and Ms Razan Zaitouneh, and all human rights defenders in Syria, and ensure that they are allowed to carry out their work without hindrance;  ii.	ensure the implementation of the provisions on the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN general Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular article 1, which states that "every person has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national and international level", as well as its article 11, which provides "Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to the lawful exercise of his or her occupation or profession";  iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international instruments ratified by Syria.     Addresses:  President Bashar al-Assad, Presidential Palace, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Telegrams:President al-Assad, Damascus, Syria, Telexes: 419160 prespl sy  Major General Ali Hammud, Minister of the Interior, Ministry of the Interior, Merjeh Circle, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Telegrams: Interior Minister, Damascus, Syria,  Faxes: + 963 11 222 3428, Telexes: 411016 AFIRS SY  Nasser Qaddur, State Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Al-Rashid Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: + 963 11 332 0686  His Excellency Toufik Salloum, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Arab Republic of Syria, 72 rue de Lausanne, CH1202 Genève, Switzerland, Fax : 0041 22 738 42 15  Please also write to the embassies of Syrian Arab Republic in your respective country.   Paris - Geneva, February 18, 2004  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 