Press Release - Three Human Rights Defenders selected as Finalists for the  2019 Martin Ennals Award
October  1, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / 2018 / OctoberPress Release - Three Human Rights Defenders selected as Finalists for the  2019 Martin Ennals Award

PRESS RELEASE
 Geneva, Wednesday 24 October 2018
Three Human Rights
Defenders
selected as Finalists
for the 
2019 Martin Ennals
Award
Geneva - The main award of the human rights movement. Honouring Martin Ennals,
Amnesty International Secretary-General from 1968 to 1980, the Martin Ennals
Award  is chosen by ten leading human
rights organizations (See Below). Laureates are selected because they have
demonstrated a deep commitment to human rights, often working under threat of
imprisonment, torture, or worse. The international recognition provided by the
Award, on top of raising their profile and their work, often provides
significant protection.
The 2019 Martin
Ennals Award will be presented on 13 February 2019 at a ceremony hosted by the
City of Geneva, which for many years has strongly supported the Award.
Ms Eren Keskin
(Turkey)
Eren Keskin is a lawyer and human rights activist. For more than thirty
years, she has struggled for fundamental rights and freedoms in Turkey,
especially for the Kurds, women and the LGBTI+ community. Within the context of the worsening human rights situation in Turkey,
Keskin is once again at the centre of intimidation attempts.  As part of a solidarity campaign to support
the Özgür Gündem newspaper, Keskin held the title of “editor-in-chief” of the
newspaper from 2013 to 2016, when it was closed by the authorities. On 30 March 2018, she
was convicted and sentenced to 12.5 years in jail for having published articles
deemed to have “degraded” the Turkish nation and “insulted” the Turkish president. She is currently free while the case is
appealed.
She stated: “To
defend human rights is not easy in our territory.  I am being prosecuted
with 143 charges for my solidarity with an opposition newspaper in the context
of freedom of expression. International awards and solidarity have
“protective” characteristics and reassure those of us in repressive societies.
It also it gives us a morale boost and helps our motivation for the struggle.
Thank you for not forgetting us. Your solidarity and protection mean so much. 
Mr Marino Cordoba
Berrio (Colombia)
A member of the
Afro-Colombian ethnic group, he led his community as they faced the loss of their land to powerful
commercial interests, notably in logging and mining. After successfully working
towards the legal recognition of their community’s land rights, much of his
community was driven out by force in 1996. Constant threats and attacks drove
him to seek asylum in the United States in 2002 where he built a network of
supporters. He returned to Colombia in 2012 and worked to ensure a role for
ethnic communities in the peace agreement, notably as a member of “Ethnic
Commission for Peace and the Defense of Territorial Rights ” that provides
input as the peace agreement is implemented. He has regularly received death threats and is under constant armed
guard.
He stated,   “We
have historically been excluded politically, socially and economically, also affected
by war, providing measures of overcoming is a primary responsibility of the
State. I believe in the power of my mind and my hands as a determinant to do
what is right, therefore the justice that is applied to my people is crucial
for their survival. It is also in our hands to promote those changes so this
effort involves exposing my own life.”
Mr Abdul Aziz Muhamat
(Papua New Guinea/Australia)
Abdul Aziz Muhamat (Aziz), from
Sudan, is a compelling and tireless advocate for refugee rights. Seeking asylum, he has been held in Australian immigration detention on Manus
Island, Papua New Guinea since October 2013, when his boat was intercepted by
the Australian authorities. Aziz has seen friends die. He has been shot at by
local police. He was also sent to a local prison for refusing to eat in protest
at the cruelty and suffering being inflicted on others. Aziz is one of the
primary public voices among the men held on Manus Island. Despite the isolated
location, he has exposed the harsh conditions there through podcasts and media
interviews. He has paid a price for this as he is seen as a “ring leader” by
both the PNG and Australian authorities.
He stated:   “My
work to expose this cruel system helps preserve my self-respect and inherent
human dignity. It helps me fight for the rights of every refugee around the
universe, which I’ll do until my last breath. It is not always easy when living
under conditions of fear and persecution. Yet even under the most crushing
state machinery, courage rises up again and again, for fear is not the natural
state and I will do everything to keep going.”
The main award of the human rights movement. The Martin Ennals
Award for Human Rights Defenders (MEA) is a unique collaboration among ten of
the world’s leading human rights organizations to give protection to human rights defenders worldwide. The Jury
is composed of the following NGOs: 


-      
Amnesty International, 
-      
Human Rights Watch, 
-      
Human Rights First, 
-      
FIDH - Int’l Federation for Human Rights, 
-      
World Organisation Against Torture, 
-      
Front Line Defenders,
-      
International Commission of Jurists,
-      
Brot fuer die Welt
-      
International Service for Human Rights, 
-      
HURIDOCS. 

Electronic version with Bios, Photos, and Video: https://www.dropbox.com/sh/9er8martw4in4v4/AABrAZMj0ERaifcJRRVVs7mTa?dl=0
Password: 11ekmcaam@22
For further information, please contact:
Michael Khambatta +41 79 474 8208
khambatta@martinennalsaward.org or visit www.martinennalsaward.org 