Sudan:  Sudan: mass arrests and risk of torture of members of the Four and Zaghawa tribes
April 25, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2003 / AprilSudan: Sudan: mass arrests and risk of torture of members of the Four and Zaghawa tribesCase SDN 250403 Arbitrary arrests and detention / Torture / Risk to personal integrity  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Organisation against Torture, a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrests, detention and use or further risks of torture of members of the Four and Zaghawa tribes in Sudan.  According to the information received, the National Security Agency and Military Intelligence services have carried out a series of arbitrary arrests and detentions in Darfour and Khartoum, specifically targeting members of the Four and Zaghawa tribes. On April 8th, 2003 the National Security Agency arrested seven men in Kubkabia, south of the town of Al Fasher in Northern Darfour. The men that have been detained include: Adam Mohamed Ahmed Mohamed Girba (trader); Mohamed Karama (trader); Khalil Mohamedain (farmer); and Mohamed Ibrahim Tyrab (farmer) from the Four tribe - as well as: Omer Hussain Ali (teacher); Adam Haroon Noor (teacher) and Youseif Hussam (trader) from the Zaghawa tribe. The men have reportedly been transferred to Shala prison neak Alfashir.  During the first week of April 2003 the Military Intelligence arrested two men from the Four tribe in Zalengi: Adam Ahmed Abu Jamal and Abd Al Gader Salim Barakat. During the same time period the Military Intelligence arrested four men in AL Jenaina in Western Darfour: Abd Al Rahman Ahmed (trader, Zaghawa tribe), Mohamed Hashim Abd Al Rahman (trader, Zaghawa tribe), Mohamed Seid Ahmed (employee with the Department of Zaka and Tax Office) and Seid Bashara (trader, Zaghawa tribe). It has been alleged that Abd Al Gader Salim Barakat has been subjected to torture during detention, and there are serious concerns that the other detainees may also be subjected to ill-treatment or torture. OMCT has previously intervened on several occasions concerning the mass arrests of members of the Four and other tribes in Sudan, several of whom have been subjected to torture during detention.  OMCT is gravely concerned by this most recent wave of arbitrary arrests that has been carried out by the National Security Agency and the Military Intelligence services. OMCT is particularly concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the afore-mentioned detainees. OMCT calls for their immediate release, unless there are valid legal charges against them that are in line with international law, and if this is the case, for their procedural rights to be guaranteed at all times. OMCT calls upon the Sudanese government to launch prompt and impartial investigations into all allegations of ill-treatment and/or torture, in order to bring the perpetrators of these acts to justice and to provide adequate reparation to all persons have been injured during these events.   Separately, OMCT deeply regrets the lack of a resolution on Sudan during the 59th session of the UN Commission on Human Rights, which brings about the end to UN human rights monitoring in the country, at a time when massive and widespread violations of human rights continue unabated.   Background information   Darfour in Western Sudan has experienced a marked increase in arbitrary arrests, detention, and torture and ill-treatment, particularly targeting members of the Four and Zaghawa tribes. Since May 2002, over 75 people have been killed, many others injured, livestock and homes destroyed, and villages depopulated and/or displaced. The Sudanese government claims that these attacks are the result of "tribal conflict" resulting from competition for limited resources. The attacks are reportedly carried out by members of the militia from the Gangawied group of twenty-eight Arab states against Four, Massaleet, and Zaghawa villages. The Four and Massaleet leaders have identified the leaders of the militia attacks, but the government has not reportedly taken any action against the perpetrators. The Four leaders claim that the attacks are a part of a government strategy to change the demography of the region, citing the depopulation of 59 Four villages.  In direct response to these attacks, a group of individuals from the Four and Zaghawa tribes have taken up arms and created the Sudan Liberation Army/Movement (SLA/M). This rapidly growing group reportedly states as its aim the liberation of all of Sudan and the restoration of democracy and civil rights.  Many of its members are thought to be hiding in the mountains of the Jebel Marra region of Darfour.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the aforementioned persons ; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  §	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 24911 783223 §	Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: +24911 788941  §	Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: +24911 779383 §	Mr. Yasir Sid Ahmed, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 24911 779173 §	His Excellency Ambassador Mr Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax : +4122 7312656. E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country. Geneva, April 25th, 2003 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 