Bangladesh:  Enforced disappearance of Messrs. Al Mukaddas and Mohammad Waliullah
May 23, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2012 / MayBangladesh: Enforced disappearance of Messrs. Al Mukaddas and Mohammad Waliullah
Case BGD 230512
Enforced
disappearance/ Fear for the safety 
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Bangladesh.

Brief description of the situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by ODHIKAR, a member of
OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the enforced disappearance, since 5 February
2012, of Messrs. Al Mukaddas, 22
years old from Khana Kuniary village (Pirojpur District), and Mohammad Waliullah, 23 years old from
West Shoilo Jalia village (Jhalkathi District), both students at the Islamic
University, Kustia. 
According
to the information received, on 5 February 2012 at approximately 1:00 am, Messrs.
Al Mukaddas and Mohammad Waliullah were arrested by around eight members of
RAB-4 (Rapid Action Battalion[1]) and
Detective Branch of Police (DBP) from Savar, while travelling on a bus from
Dhaka to Kustia. In the vicinity of Nabinagar (Savar), a white microbus
reportedly approached the bus and the aforementioned eight individuals in
uniform entered the bus and forcefully took Messrs. Al Mukaddas and Mohammad
Waliullah. When the driver asked them where they were taking the two
passengers, a DBP member allegedly responded that there were charges against
them and that they would be released after interrogation. The whereabouts and
fate of Messrs. Al Mukaddas and Mohammad Waliullah have remained unknown since
then. 
According
to the same information received, Mr. Al Mukaddas’s uncle and Mr. Mohammad
Waliullah’s brother searched for them at different locations, including at the
bus company, after being informed of their disappearance. They subsequently
inquired about their fate at the RAB-4 office but they were reportedly told
that nobody was arrested on 5 February 2012. They filed a General Diary at
Darus Salam Police Station and Ashulia Police Station, in Dhaka (on 6 and 8
February 2012). On 12 February 2012, they also filed a habeas corpus writ (writ
no. 1536/ 2012) to the Bench of Justice Abdul Awal and Justice Akram Hossain in
the High Court Division of the Supreme Court. On 15 February 2012, the Court
ordered nine individuals, including the Secretary of the Ministry for Home
Affairs, Inspector General of Police (IPG), Director General (DG) of RAB and
the Deputy Commission (DC) of Detective Branch (DB) to provide an explanation on
the fate of Messrs. Al Mukaddas and Mohammad Waliullah within three weeks. However,
three weeks later, the nine individuals reportedly informed the Court that they
could not gather information about the whereabouts of Messrs. Al Mukaddas and
Mohammad Waliullah. The Court subsequently requested them to provide the list
of the calls made from the cell phones of Messrs. Al Mukaddas and Mohammad
Waliullah, but they allegedly only submitted a list of some numbers written by
hand. The Court rejected the document and ordered them to submit the original
call list on 14 April 2012. Since then, the nine individuals have failed to
provide the document. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned
about the safety of Messrs. Al Mukaddas and Mohammad Waliullah and urges the competent authorities of Bangladesh to immediately locate and
disclose their whereabouts. OMCT
recalls that the authorities in Bangladesh have to fulfil their obligations
under international human rights law to protect the right to life, the right to
liberty and security of a person and the right not to be subjected to torture
or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. 
OMCT also calls on the competent authorities to ensure that an
investigation into the enforced disappearence of Messrs.
Al Mukaddas and Mohammad Waliullah is
carried out promptly, effectively, thoroughly, independently and impartially, in accordance with international human rights
standards, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those
responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply
penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law. 
Action requested
Please
write to the authorities in Bangladesh urging them to:
i.              
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of Messrs. Al Mukaddas and Mohammad
Waliullah; 
ii.             
Guarantee, in all circumstances,
the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs. Al Mukaddas and Mohammad Waliullah; 
iii.           
Grant Messrs. Al Mukaddas and Mohammad Waliullah prompt and unrestricted
access to a lawyer of their choice and their families, as well as guarantee
that they are examined by an independent doctor and receive adequate medical
care, in accordance, inter alia, the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners;
iv.           
Order their
immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent
with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before
an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural
rights at all times;
v.             
Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the enforced
disappearence of Messrs. Al Mukaddas and
Mohammad Waliullah, in accordance with international human rights standards,
the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible
before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil
and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;
vi.           
Ensure
that an effective remedy, including the right to full redress with compensation
be granted to the victims concerned;
vii.          
Ensure
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.

Addresses
Ø Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime
Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban,
Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
Ø Ms. Sahara Khatun, Minister
for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4,
Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: mediacell@homemin-bd.org
Ø Barrister Qamrul Islam,
Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice
and Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
Ø Mr.Hasan Mahmud Khandaker, Inspector General of Police, Police
Headquarters, Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Email : ig@police.gov.bd 
Ø Ambassador Mr. Abdul
Hannan, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United
Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22
738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
Please also
write to the embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 23
May 2012
Kindly inform
us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] The Rapid Action Battalion (RAB) was established in 2004 as a force to
assist the police in combating crime. It is made up of members of the armed
forces and the police. 