Saudi Arabia:  Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against Ms. Israa Al-Ghomgham
August 22, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2018 / AugustSaudi Arabia: Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against Ms. Israa Al-Ghomgham
URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

 
SAU 006 / 0818 / OBS 105
Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassment
/ 
Threat of being sentenced to death
Saudi Arabia
August 22, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Saudi Arabia.
 
Description of the
situation:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary detention and judicial harassment
against Ms. Israa Al-Ghomgham, a human rights activist, from the region
of Qatif, a eastern coastal city with a Shia majority. 
 
According to the
information received, on August 15, 2018, the Saudi public prosecution called
for sentencing Ms. Israa Al-Ghomgham to the death penalty during the first
court session before the Specialized Criminal Court (SCC) in Riyadh -set up to
try terrorism cases- against her and five other activists[1]
following 32 months of arbitrary detention. The Public Prosecution accused the
six defendants of “participating in protests in the Qatif region,” “incitement
to protest,” “chanting slogans hostile to the regime,” “attempting to inflame
public opinion,” “filming protests and publishing on social media,” and
“providing moral support to rioters”, charges that do not correspond to any
codified crime. The Public Prosecution called for the death penalty based on
the Islamic law principle of ta’zir,
in which the judge has discretion over the definition of crimes and sentences.
During this hearing, Ms. Israa Al-Ghomgham had no access to legal
representation. The next hearing is scheduled for October 31, 2018. 
 
Ms. Israa Al-Ghomgham had
taken part in peaceful pro-democracy demonstrations since 2011, during the Arab
Spring, documented mass demonstrations in the Eastern provinces, and called
many times for the respect of freedom of assembly and expression, the release
of prisoners of conscience and human rights defenders and expressed her
opinions on social media platforms. 

Ms. Israa
Al-Ghomgham was arbitrarily arrested on December 6, 2015, after the Saudi
authorities launched a raid at her home, arbitrarily arresting her and her
husband. They have been detained in Dammam’s al-Mabahith prison until now.
 
The Observatory condemns in
the strongest terms the arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Ms.
Israa Al-Ghomgham and urges the Saudi authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release her as well as the other human rights defenders
arbitrarily detained, as her criminalisation only seems to aim at sanctioning
her for her peaceful and legitimate human rights activities. 
 
Calling for the death
penalty sentence constitutes an extremely dangerous precedent as it is the
first time the death penalty is called for against a female human rights
defender in the country, raising fears about possible harsh reprisals against
other women human rights defenders arbitrarily detained. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the
authorities in Saudi Arabia, urging them to:
 
i.      
Immediately and
unconditionally release Ms. Israa Al-Ghomgham and end all forms of harassment,
including at the judicial level, against her and all detained human rights
defenders in Saudi Arabia, as their detention is arbitrary since it only aims
at punishing them for their legitimate human rights activities;
ii.     
Ensure Ms. Israa
Al-Ghomgham have unhindered access to her family and lawyers and respect in all
circumstances her right to a fair trial;
iii.   
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Ms. Israa Al-Ghomgham as well as of all detained human rights defenders in
Saudi Arabia; 
iv.   
Comply in all
circumstances with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular its Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2;
v.    
More generally, ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and instruments ratified
by Saudi Arabia.
 
Addresses:
 
• His
Majesty, King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia and Custodian
of the two Holy Mosques, Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11 403 3125;
Email: info@moi.gov.sa; Twitter: @KingSalman
• His
Excellency, Mohammad Bin Salman Al Saud, Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, Fax:
(via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11 403 3125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
• H.E.
Waleed bin Mohammad Al Samaani, Minister of Justice, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
Fax: + 966 11 405 7777; Email: info@moj.gov.sa
• His
Royal Highness Prince Abdulaziz Bin Saud Bin Naif Bin Abdulaziz, Minister of
Interior, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Fax: + 966 11 401 1111 / + 966 11 401 1944 /
+ 966 11 403 1125; Email: info@moi.gov.sa
• H.E.
Adel bin Ahmed El Jubeir, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: + 966 11 403 0645 ;
Email: info@mofa.gov.sa
• H.E. Abdulaziz Alwasil, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia to the United Nations Office in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 758 00
00. Email: saudiamission@bluewin.ch
• H.E. Abdulrahman bin Soliman Al-Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Saudi Arabia in
Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 6468538. Email: beemb@mofa.gov.sa

Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Saudi Arabia in
your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies
in Saudi Arabia.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, August 22, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency
line:
·         
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org  
·         
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43
55 18 80
·         
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 




[1]           Ahmad bin
Hussien Al-Matrood, Ali bin Ahmad Aweesheer, Mousa bin Jaafar al-Hashem (Israa
Al-Ghomgham’s husband), Khalid Bin Abed allah al-Ghanem and Moujtaba bin Ali
al-Mazayan 