Syrian Arab Republic:  Syria : Aktham Naisse detained in very harsh conditions
April 23, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2004 / AprilSyrian Arab Republic: Syria : Aktham Naisse detained in very harsh conditionsPRESS RELEASE  Syria : Aktham Naisse detained in very harsh conditions and accused of undermining the objectives of the Revolution   Paris - Geneva, April 22, 2004 - The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint program of FIDH and OMCT, is extremely concerned over the situation of Mr. Aktham Naisse, president of the Committees for the Defence of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria (CDF), who was arrested last Tuesday April 13, 2004 in Latakia, and has been detained by the military security services since then.  According to the latest information received from CDF, Mr. Naisse was brought before the State security Court in Damascus on April 22, 2004 and accused of « undermining the objectives of the Revolution: the Arab Unity, Liberty and Socialism », thus being a criminal against the Arab Republic of Syria.  The Observatory is gravely concerned about the health condition of Aktham Naisse which deteriorated considerably after he had a cerebral stroke during the first week of his detention that resulted in the paralysis of the right side of his body.   M. Naisse, already diabetic and in need for a strict medical treatment before his stroke,  spent a few days in the military hospital of Tishrin, near Damascus, before being transferred to Saidnaya prison two days ago, where he cannot receive the necessary medical treatment.  Aktham Naisse is being held in Saidnaya prison, well-known for the very harsh conditions of detention imposed on political prisoners, where he is isolated in an individual cell, in the section for ordinary criminals.   The Observatory welcomes the constitution of a group of lawyers from Syria and other Arab countries to support and organize the defence of Aktham Naisse.  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders urges the Syrian authorities to:  - guarantee Mr. Akhtam Naisse's physical and psychological integrity, and grant him access to necessary medical care while in detention;  - immediately proceed to the unconditional liberation of Aktham Naisse; - put an end to any kind of harassment against human rights defenders and conform with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 9 December 1998;  - conform with the provisions of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human rights instruments ratified by Syria.   Press Contact :  - FIDH : Driss El Yazami, secrétaire général de la FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18. - OMCT : + 41 22 809 49 39. 