Belarus:  Ales Bialiatski freed after almost three years behind bars
June 26, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2014 / JuneBelarus: Ales Bialiatski freed after almost three years behind barsParis-Geneva, June 26, 2014. The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of FIDH and OMCT,
welcomes the release on June 21, 2014 of Ales Bialiatski, President of the
Human Rights Center “Viasna” and Vice-President of FIDH, after almost three
years spent in jail.
 
On June 21, 2014, Ales Bialiatski was granted an amnesty by the
Belarusian authorities and released the same day. He was arrested on August 4,
2011 on politically motivated charges of “fiscal evasion”, and sentenced three
months later to four and a half years of imprisonment in a penal colony of high
security. He was subjected to especially harsh detention conditions. He was
repeatedly denied the right to receive visits from his wife, food parcels and other
inmates were forbidden to communicate with him, thus imposing years of de facto
solitary confinement.
 
“It is a great joy to see Ales
released, after nearly three years of intensive campaign to get him out of jail”
said Karim Lahidji, FIDH President. “His liberation should pave the way
for the effective guarantee of the right to promote and protect human rights in
Belarus”, he added. 
 
“We are very happy to welcome
back our colleague Ales. His release today does not change the fact that his
detention was arbitrary and that he had to suffer under conditions of
imprisonment underlying the political nature of the case. The international
community needs to stay vigilant about the situation of human rights and of
those defending the rights of others in Belarus”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT
Secretary General.
 
Despite
the amnesty, Ales Bialiatski will be subjected to travel restriction measures
(known as “preventive control” measures in Belarus) for a yet unknown period of
time. On June 23, 2014, the human rights defender had to sign a document
acknowledging that he would have to report to a district police department once
a month, that he would not commit more than three administrative offences in a
year, and that he would not travel out of Belarus for longer than a month. 
 
The Observatory welcomes the amnesty of Ales Bialiatski and
thanks all the persons, institutions and organisations who intervened on his behalf.
It remains however concerned that the above-mentioned travel restrictions
measures intend to hinder his human rights activities and calls for their
revocation. Furthermore, the Observatory further urges the Belarusian
authorities to stop immediately all acts of harassment and intimidation against
human rights defenders in Belarus and ensure in all circumstances that they
are able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrance and
fear of reprisals. 