Philippines:   A Considerable Step Forwards thanks to the President Arroyo: The Anti-Torture Bill was signed!
November 13, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2009 / NovemberPhilippines:  A Considerable Step Forwards thanks to the President Arroyo: The Anti-Torture Bill was signed!PUBLIC STATEMENT  The Philippines: A Considerable Step Forwards thanks to the President Arroyo: The Anti-Torture Bill was signed! Copenhagen - Geneva, 13 November 2009. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims (IRCT) welcome the signing yesterday by President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo of the Act Penalizing the Commission of Acts of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment, prescribing Penalties Therefore and for Other Purposes. The signing of the Act is a considerable step forwards in preventing and eradicating all forms of torture and ill-treatment in the Republic of the Philippines. OMCT and IRCT, along with national, regional and international NGOs and other stakeholders, had urged President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo to sign without delay the Act that had recently been adopted by the Philippine Senate and House of Representatives[1]. Both organisations particularly wish to congratulate its member organisations in the Philippines, members of the Government and all those stakeholders who have been involved in drafting the Act and supporting the process of its adoption. We also thank the President for taking such a significant decision in support of the fight against torture. By enacting the Bill criminalising torture and other forms of ill-treatment the Philippines has made important progress towards implementing the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 23 years after having ratified the Convention. OMCT and IRCT now call on the competent authorities to take prompt measures to fully and effectively implement this Act, including by approving the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of the Act in accordance with the Convention against Torture. Contacts:  IRCT – Sune Segal, Head of Communications, Tel. +45 36 93 87 12, Email: sse@irct.org OMCT – Alexandra Kossin, Coordinator, Tel. +41 (0) 22 809 49 39, Email: omct@omct.og     [1] See IRCT –OMCT joint letter addressed to the President on 27 October 2009. Furthermore, participants in the Asian Regional Seminar on addressing the economic, social and cultural root causes of torture and other forms of violence organised in Manila from 26 to 30 October 2009 by OMCT and the Philippines Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA) in cooperation with the Commission on Human Rights of the Philippines also issued an appeal on 30 October to the President. 