India:  Attacks against relatives of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, MASUM District Human Rights Monitor in Murshidabad
March 31, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / MarchIndia: Attacks against relatives of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, MASUM District Human Rights Monitor in Murshidabad 

New
information
IND 004 / 1114 / OBS 091.4
Physical attacks / Threats / 
Harassment
India
March 31, 2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
India. 
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM)
of attacks against relatives of Mr. Ajimuddin
Sarkar, a District Human Rights
Monitor for MASUM in Murshidabad district (West Bengal, India). Mr. Sarkar is a
renowned human rights defender who has been instrumental in denouncing numerous
cases of human rights violations in Murshidabad district. 

 
According
to the information received, at midnight on March 23, 2016, Mr. Rafikul Islam
and his accomplices[1] used sharp weapons and
firearms to attack the house of Mr. Abdul Majid Seikh, Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s
brother, in the village of Bardhanpur Choyapara, Raninagar, Murshidabad. The
attack occurred while everyone in the house was asleep. During the attack, the
perpetrators shouted threats against Mr. Ripon Seikh, Mr. Masudul Hossain and
Mr. Sahidul Islam, Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s nephews. The group also loudly
insulted the women inside the house. Although the Raninagar police station was
phoned and informed of the attack that night, they did not intervene.
 
The
next morning at 6 am, as Mr. Ripon Seikh, Mr. Abdul Majid Seikh’s son, exited
his house, Mr. Rafikul Islam and his group attacked him with daggers, pistols
and bombs. Mr. Ripon Seikh was hit in the back with a dagger and fell down
bleeding. At that moment, Mr. Kabil
Seikh and Mr. Habil Seikh, two
cousins of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, tried to help Mr. Ripon Seikh and were both
attacked and severely injured. The attackers then fled and eyewitnesses of the
incident brought the injured to Godhanpara Block Primary Centre, who were
transferred to the Baharampur New General Hospital due to their serious
condition. On March 25, 2016, Mr. Ripon Seikh was released from the hospital
but he is still under medical treatment. As of issuing this Urgent Appeal,
Messrs. Kabil Seikh and Habil Seikh remained at Murshidabad Medical College and
Hospital in critical condition.

On March 24, 2016, Mr. Ripon Seikh’s grandmother registered a complaint with
the Raninagar police station, but a copy of the First
Information Report (FIR) was only provided to the family on March
25, 2016 evening after several requests were made. Raninagar police
registered one case based on this complaint against Mr. Piarul Islam, Mr.
Nijarul Islam, Mr. Rafikul Islam, Mr. Panjatan Sk, Ms. Hema Bibi, Ms. Adora
Bibi and Mr. Hamida Bibi[2].
As of issuing this Urgent Appeal, the Raninagar police had still not arrested
any of the accused persons, and Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s family remains concerned
for their safety.
 
Moreover,
on March 24, 2016, the Raninagar police registered another criminal case[3]
based on a complaint lodged by Ms. Hema Bibi (Mr. Rafikul Islam’s wife and one
of the accused persons in above-mentioned attack) against Messrs. Abdul Majid
Seikh, Ripon Seikh, Sahidul Islam, Masidul Seikh, Alamgir Kabir, Babu Seikh and
Makil Islam, who are all close relatives of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar. On March
30, 2016, they all surrendered in court of the Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Lalbagh, and were released on bail.
 
The
Observatory expresses its deep concern following the above-mentioned attacks
and acts of harassment against Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s relatives, which seem to
be retaliation for his work as District Human Rights Monitor for MASUM in
Murshidabad district. In particular, it is noteworthy that one of the
assailants, Mr. Amzad Hossian, is the son of Mr. Nasiruddin Sarkar, who is the
Pradhan of Malibari I Gram Panchayet, against whom MASUM has made complaints
for misappropriation of public money.
 
The
Observatory recalls that this is not the first time that Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s
relatives have been targeted as retaliation for his human rights work[4].
 
The Observatory also recalls that Mr.
Ajimuddin Sarkar faces recurrent
acts of intimidation and judicial harassment by the police, which seem to be
aimed at punishing him for his legitimate and peaceful human rights activities (see
background information).
 
Accordingly,
the Observatory calls on the Indian authorities to carry out an immediate,
thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the above-mentioned
attacks against Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s
relatives, and to guarantee in all circumstances their physical and
psychological integrity.
 
Background information:
 
On November 21, 2014, law enforcement
agents from the Raninagar police station arrested Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar at
his place of residence and transferred him to the ACJM Court, Lalbagh. Mr.
Sarkar was reportedly arrested pursuant to an arrest warrant for a pending
criminal case under the Passport Act. 
 
On May 20, 2014, Mr. Sarkar had filed an
application before the ACJM Court, Lalbagh, expressing his concern that he had
been falsely implicated in an unknown criminal case by the police and the BSF,
and requesting more details about such case. However, until his arrest six
months later, Mr. Sarkar did not receive any information about the status of
said criminal case, neither did he receive any summons from the police nor the
court.
 
Mr. Sarkar was reportedly assaulted, abused and mistreated by the police
during his arrest as well as in custody. On November 22, 2014, Mr. Sarkar was
admitted to Lalbagh Sub-Divisional Hospital and subsequently referred to Berhampore New General Hospital on November 27, 2014, for medical treatment following the injuries suffered in custody. On
November 28, 2014, he was taken to Kolkata for advanced medical treatment. On
November 29, 2014, he underwent psychiatric counselling; the medical report
stated that he had several injuries such as a suspected fractured rib, as well
as post-traumatic stress, a tear on a ligament on his left leg, a feeling of humiliation, intense anxiety, fear and a
feeling of sadness and helplessness. He suffered from insomnia and his doctors
expressed their concern that the attack could have long-term effects on his
psychological health. Mr. Sarkar went to Calcutta Medical College and Hospital
for further treatment on December 3, 2014.
 
On November 23, 2014, Mr. Sarkar’s
son filed a complaint to the local Police Superintendent Murshidabad urging the
police to carry out an investigation into the beatings his father had been
subjected to while in police custody. However, to this date, no information
could be obtained regarding any enquiry or investigation following the
complaint.
 
On
September 22, 2015 at 10.27 a.m., Mr. Sarkar was abducted in Sekhpara
(Murshidabad, West Bengal) by five to seven police officers from the Islampur
police station who were not wearing uniforms. At the time of the incident, Mr.
Sarkar was talking with victims of torture and their family members when the
police officers arrived in a car and started beating and insulting him. The
officers then placed him inside the vehicle and took him away. 
 
On
September 23, 2015, at 1.38 p.m., Mr. Sarkar was taken before the Additional
District and Sessions Judge (2nd Court)[5]
in Berhampore-Murshidabad and a criminal case was opened against him under
Sections 376, 511, 323, 506 and 400 of the Indian Criminal Code and under
Sections 8 and 12 of the Act for Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
Act. During his detention he was slapped, kicked and pounded on the chest as
well as verbally abused. He was not given access to his medication and was
denied food at night. He was then obliged to walk barefoot and was brought
before the Court in this condition. At 6.15 p.m. on the same day, a petition
for bail was rejected and Mr. Sarkar was then transferred to the prison Berhampore
Central Correctional Home. A Criminal Revision at Calcutta High Court (CRR No.
404/2016) was filed to quash the criminal proceeding against Mr. Sarkar at
Islampur police station.
 
Two other cases against Mr. Sarkar, namely the
“Raninagar police station case No. 364/2013” (under section 12 of Passport Act
read with section 109 of Indian Penal Code) and the “Domkal police station case
No. 1243/2014” (under section 308 of the Indian Penal Code), are also ongoing[6]. A
Criminal Revision at Calcutta High Court (CRR No. 2671/2015) was filed to quash
the criminal case pending against Mr. Sarkar at Raninagar police station.
 
MASUM has filed several complaints regarding
the harassment of its members and has been regularly sharing information with
the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC). Regarding previous incidents with
Mr. Sarkar and other MASUM members, the Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders
at the NHRC called MASUM and informed them that they had taken up the case and
sought a report from the relevant police and civil administration, but up to
this date no documents have been shared with MASUM and no appropriate action
has reportedly been taken. 
 
On September 22, 2015, immediately following Mr.
Sarkar's abduction, MASUM filed a brief complaint with a request for urgent
measures from the NHRC and contacted the Focal Point of the NHRC on Human
Rights Defenders. However, as of issuing this Urgent Appeal, no actions had reportedly been taken over the
allegations of police abuse upon Mr. Sarkar.
 
On
November 27, 2015, Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar was granted bail[7]
in relation to the first criminal case, but was not released on that day as the
other case was still pending against him. 
 
It
is only on December 8, 2015 that Mr. Sarkar was finally released on bail
pursuant to the second case, since the de facto complainant filed an
affidavit stating that she did not bring any allegation of rape against Mr.
Sarkar and she had no knowledge of the related criminal case against him.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities in India, urging them to:
 
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, his relatives as
well as of all members of MASUM and all human rights defenders in India;
 
ii. Carry out an immediate,
thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the above-mentioned
attacks against Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar’s
relatives, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them
before an independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law;
 
iii.
Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against Mr. Ajimuddin Sarkar, his
relatives and all members of MASUM as well as against all human rights
defenders in India so that they are able to carry out their work without
hindrances;
 
iv.
Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998,
especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
v.
More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
India.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
Mr. Nanredra Damodardas Modi, Prime Minister of India. Fax: +
91 11 2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·      
Mr. Raj Nath Singh, Union Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry of
Home Affairs of India. Fax: +91 11 2309 2979
·      
Mr.
Justice T.S. Thakur, Chief Justice of India. Fax: +91 11 233
83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·      
Mr. Justice
H.L. Dattu, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission
of India. Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: covdnhrc@nic.in; ionhrc@nic.in
·      
Mr. A. K. Parashar, Focal Point on
Human Rights Defenders, National Human Rights Commission, India. Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·      
Miss Mamata Banerjee, Chief Minister
of West Bengal. Fax: +91 33 2214-3528. E-mail: cm@wb.gov.in 
·      
H.E. Mr. Ajit Kumar, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax:
+41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·      
Embassy of India in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
mission or embassy of India in your respective country.



[1] Mr. Rafikul Islam’s accomplices
include his brothers Mr. Mejarul Seikh and Mr. Panjaton Seikh; his wife, Ms.
Hema Bibi; Mr. Piarul Islam; Mr. Nasiruddin Seikh; Mr. Santu Seikh; Mr. Nur
Islam; and Mr. Amzad Hossian, who is the son of Mr. Nasiruddin Sarkar, the
Pradhan of Malibari I Gram Panchayet. All are believed to also be engaged in
different illegal activities such as extortion, theft, violence against women,
and smuggling. Despite official complaints lodged by local residents regarding
these illegal activities, the local police have undertaken no action against
these individuals for these crimes. Mr. Rafikul Islam is a local leader of the
Indian National Congress Party and his wife, Ms. Hema Bibi, is a member of
Malibari l Gram Panchayet (local self government) as a candidate of the Indian
National Congress Party.


[2]
The case is registered as “Raninagar police station case no. 123/2016” under sections
323 (hurt) / 341(wrongful restraint) / 326 (causing grievous hurt by dangerous
weapons) / 506 (criminal intimidation) and 34 (common intention) of the Indian Penal Code, 


[3] The case is registered as “Raninagar police station case no.
125/2016” under sections 448 (criminal trespass) / 323 (hurt) / 325 (causing
hurt by dangerous weapons) / 427 (causing mischief) / 34 (common intention) of
the Indian Penal Code.


[4] See Observatory Urgent Appeal ​IND 001 / 0514 / OBS 041, issued on May 15,
2014.


[5] This Court is a designated Special
Court for the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act (NDPS
Act) and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO Act).


[6] For more information on the cases,
see Observatory Urgent Appeal IND 004 /
1114 / OBS 091.3, issued on January 8, 2016.


[7] No charge sheet was filed against
him in relation to that case. 