Greece:  Ongoing crackdown on civil society providing humanitarian assistance to migrants and asylum seekers
April 27, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Greece / 2016 / AprilGreece: Ongoing crackdown on civil society providing humanitarian assistance to migrants and asylum seekers
GRE 001 /
0416 / OBS 036
Judicial harassment / Threats 
Restrictions
to freedom of association
Greece
April 27, 2016
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Greece. 
Description of the situation:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing crackdown
on civil society actors providing humanitarian assistance to migrants and
asylum seekers arriving in the Greek islands, even including judicial
harassment against several groups and NGOs acting to protect migrants' rights, of Team Humanity Denmark.
According to
the information received, on January 14, 2016, Mr. Salam Kamal-Aldeen, Iraqi-Moldavian citizen living in Denmark who
volunteers at Team Humanity Denmark[1],
Mr. Mohammad Abbassi, a Danish volunteer at Team Humanity Denmark and
Messrs. Manuel Blanco, José Enrique and Julio Latorre,
three Spanish volunteers at the NGO “Professional Emergency Aid” (PROEM-AID)
were arrested by the Hellenic Coast Guard (HCG) during a rescue operation, on
charges of “violations of the migration and weapons’ law”[2].
The HCG searched and confiscated their boat, along with its rescue equipment
and Mr. Aldeen’s cell phone. The five volunteers were arrested and detained in
a police cell, without being informed of their rights, without being provided
with any interpretation nor any possibility of communicating with their
embassies[3].
The same day, the five were brought handcuffed before the Prosecutor and
Investigating Magistrate at the Mytilene Courthouse. They were informed that
they were given two days to prepare their defence and brought back to custody
in a police station. On January 16, Mr. Aldeen was again brought before the
Investigating Magistrate to provide his defence statement, and was further
questioned. After hearing the defence statement, the Investigating Magistrate
and the Prosecutor jointly agreed to release him under the following
conditions: a) a prohibition to leave the country, b) the obligation to report
weekly to the police station of his residence and c) a bail of 10,000 Euros to
be paid within one month. The four other activists were released on the same
day on a bail of 5,000 Euros. The five defendants face charges of up to ten
years of imprisonment. Though Mr. Aldeen has challenged the preventive
measures, at the time of publication of this appeal, he remained under the
aforementioned restrictions pending the end of the investigation.
Moreover,
during the month of February, in the Idomeni border area between Greece and
Macedonia, more than 60 volunteers from several countries (i.e. Germany,
Switzerland, the Netherlands, Austria, Spain, U.K., Czech Republic), operating
within the framework of Aid Delivery Mission (ADM)[4],
were subjected to verbal harassment by the police, including threats of arrest,
and an arbitrary house search by armed policemen and trained dogs without a
mandate and no further explanations on the reasons. During that search, nothing
illegal was found. On April 12, 2016 three activists from the NGOs Shorba Crew
and ADM on their way to serve at a tea tent were brought to the Evzoni[5]
police station by the special police anti-criminality unit (OPKE) and no
information was given to them on the reason for their arrest. Their car was
searched, they were bodily searched (a female member of the group was forced to
take off her clothes), and were asked to provide their biometric data
(fingerprints and photographs)[6].
On January
28, 2016, a joint Ministerial Decision was published on the official Government
Gazette – The Greek Republic, prohibiting all independent, unregistered
volunteer activities conducted in Lesvos and putting
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and other civil society actors under
state control and massive profiling, at both organisational and individual
level[7].
This Ministerial Decision set up a committee meeting every week to register,
classify and co-ordinate all civil society actors operating in Lesvos. The
committee shall also deal with the registration, identification and
certification of all NGOs and independent volunteers, proceed to the evaluation
of their work and control the organisation of their actions (Paragraph 7.2).
The committee’s approval is a necessary requirement for the inclusion of any
civil society entity into the Registry and the consequent possibility to carry
out their work in a legal way. 
Any
unregistered entity conducting human rights work to support migrants and asylum
seekers may face charges of complicity in a “criminal organisation”. Suspicion
of this offence legitimises the use of practices incompatible with the right to
privacy, such as phone tapping, record of conversations, video surveillance
outside of the home, even at the stage of preliminary investigation, without
the need to notify suspects.
Finally, on February 21, 2016 a last minute amendment
was made to a Law voted by the Greek Parliament[8],
in violation of several provisions of the Parliament’s Rules of Procedures[9]. The
new provision assigns the supervision and coordination of services[10]
provided to migrants and asylum seekers to the Greek Army and Minister of
Defence, in newly established army-run facilities. This provision has led to a
coordinated effort to stop civil society activities in camps that are not run
by the army, through extensive threats of arrest and prosecution[11]. Moreover, several journalists and NGOs,
including the Hellenic Action for Human Rights “Pleiades”’, are often not allowed access to army-run facilities[12]. The Greek Council for Refugees (GCR)[13] and
Amnesty International have been exceptionally granted access some detention
centres and described the living conditions in such camps as inhumane[14].

The
Observatory strongly condemns this crackdown on civil society actors in Greece,
calls on the Greek authorities to put an end to the ongoing attempts to
criminalise NGOs and volunteers working in the country in the field of
humanitarian assistance to migrants and asylum-seekers or otherwise prevent
them from carrying out their work and urges them to lift the ban on civil
society activists and journalists to enter army-run camps. 
Moreover,
the Observatory calls upon the Greek authorities to repeal, or at least amend,
the joint Ministerial Decision on registration, approval and state control of
NGOs and volunteers in Lesvos, as well as Article 96 of the Law 4368/16
establishing the supervision of humanitarian assistance by the military, in
order to put its legislation in line with international human rights standards
ratified by Greece.
Finally, the Observatory calls upon Greek authorities
to put an end to the judicial harassment against Mr. Salam Kamal-Aldeen and the
four other prosecuted volunteers, as it only seems to be aimed at sanctioning
their legitimate human rights and humanitarian activities.
Actions
requested:
Please
write to the authorities in Greece, urging
them to:
      i.        
Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Salam Kamal-Aldeen and other
activists, as well as of all human rights defenders and humanitarian activists
in the country;
    
ii.        
Put an end to all acts of harassment
- including at the judicial level - against Mr. Salam Kamal-Aldeen and other
volunteers, including
members of ADM, as well as against all human rights defenders in Greece
so that they are able to carry out their work without hindrances;
     iii.        
Undertake a thorough, impartial and transparent
disciplinary and criminal investigation into reported acts of violations of
human rights defenders’ procedural rights, in order to identify all those
responsible, bring them before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
and prosecute them according to the law;
    iv.        
Repeal the joint Ministerial
Decision on registration and state control of NGOs and volunteers, and Article
96 of the Law 4368/16 in order to put its legislation in line with
international human rights standards ratified by Greece;
     v.        
Conform with the provisions of the
UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of
the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially: 
Article
1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of
human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
levels”; and
Article
12.2, which provides that “"the State shall take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”; and
    vi.        
More generally, ensure in all
circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with international
and regional human rights instruments ratified by Greece.
Addresses:
·     Prime Minister of Greece, Mr. Alexis Tsipras, Email: mail@primeminister.gr
·       Alternate Minister of Immigration
Policy of Greece, Mr. Giannis Mouzalas, Fax: +30 213 136 4418, Email:
gram.anaplypourgou@ypes.gr
·       Alternate Minister for Citizens
Protection of Greece, Mr. Nikolaos Toskas, Fax: +30 210 692 9764, Email:
minister@mopocp.gov.gr
·       Deputy Permanent Representative of
Greece, Mr. Ioannis Tsaousis, First Counsellor, Permanent Mission
of Greece to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 732 21 50; Email: grdel.gva@mfa.gr
·      
Ambassador of Greece, H.E. Eleftheria Galathianaki, Embassy
of Greece in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: (+32) 2 545 5585, Email: gremb.bru@mfa.gr
·       Permanent Representative of Greece, H.E. Papastavrou Andreas, Permanent Representation to the European Union (EU), Fax: +32 2 5515651, 5127912
Email: mea.bruxelles@rp-greece.be
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Greece in your respective
country.



[1]                 The Danish NGO “Team Humanity”
has been collaborating with the Hellenic Coast Guard (HCG) on several rescue
operations since September 2015. Following media coverage, Mr. Aldeen has
become a prominent figure of migrant support. Pictures of him while rescuing migrants
at sea are on worldwide media, making him, for instance, the cover of the last
Human Rights Watch’s World Report 2016.


[2]                 The accusations were as
follows: the attempted “felony of illegal transport from abroad to
Greece of third country nationals, who do not have a right to enter the Greek
territory” and the offence of “carrying illegally a weapon”, since their
rescue equipment included also a
small knife, which is used in case of a victim’s entanglement in ropes and in
similar cases.


[3]                
They were nonetheless granted access to a lawyer.


[4]                 ADM is a group of Dutch
volunteers operating in Idomeni on the Greek-Macedonia border, who prepares
approximately 6.000 meals per day for refugees, distributes aid, performs for
children in camps, visits and supports detained migrants, among which many
children, in the area close to the borders.


[5]                
Evzoni is a locality at the border between Greece and the Republic of
Macedonia.


[6]                
See https://www.facebook.com/aiddeliverymission/posts/270656483267197?pnref=story


[7]                 The General Secretariat of
Aegean and Island Coordinating Committee produced two forms, one called “Organisation profile”
(asking for personal details
of all volunteers working with the organisation naming their source(s) of
income, affiliation with other groups active in Greece, proposed place of
action and type of voluntary work, proposed analytical program/action
description) and another “Personal profile” (requesting
information on professional
capacity, previous actions, date of arrival and departure,
affiliation/cooperation with organisation(s) already active in Greece, proposed
voluntary action in Greece, curriculum/action description, proposed place of
action and type of voluntary work), that all civil society
organisations and independent volunteer providing support to asylum-seekers on
the Greek islands will have to complete in order to register with the police
and be able to carry out their work.


[8]                 See Article 96 of
the Law on “Measures on precipitating the Government’s work and other
provisions”, No. 4368/16 (21 A'/21.02.2016).


[9]                 For instance, the
obligation of having the text of any proposed provision pass through the
scrutiny of the Scientific Committee of the Parliament, for an assessment of
e.g. its rationale, related justification and its compatibility with the
Constitution. The last minute introduction of Article 96 in the text of the law
did not allow for such procedure to take place.


[10]               
Services include housing, food, transportation and medical support, as well as
the coordination of all social
institutions and NGOs involved in providing a humanitarian response to the
arrival of asylum-seekers and migrants in Greece.


[11]                The
army and Greek authorities indeed started threatening volunteers and NGOs
working in non official camps with prosecution for “violating the migration
law”, as they have been doing with volunteers at sea.


[12]                See Pleiades’ Press Release, February 28, 2016. The NGO Pleiades
is an NGO registered in Greece since 2009 operating in the field of human
rights and carrying out sensitization campaigns, strategic litigation and
offering pro bono high quality legal, medical, social and psychological
support as well as educational and cultural services to vulnerable social
groups whose rights are being threatened or violated. It cooperates at regional
and international level with inter-governmental institutions such as the
Council of Europe and several United Nations mechanisms and bodies.


[13]               
GCR is an NGO founded in 1989 to support refugees and asylum seekers in Greece,
is an implementing partner of UNHCR and works closely with Greek ministries. It
also has Special Advisory Status in the UN Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC). GCR’s work concentrates on providing legal, material, psycho-social
assistance and vocational counseling to asylum seekers and refugees.


[14]                See GCR’s Press Release on the
detention centre VIAl, Chios, of 31 March 2016, Pleiades’ Report on living conditions at the Malakasa Camp,
April 5, 2016 and Amnesty International’s reports on the conditions in Moria Camp on Lesvos and VIAL centre
on Chios, of April 7, 2016. A delegation of the Council of Europe’s Committee
for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(CPT) carried out an adhoc visit to Greece from 13 to 18 April 2016. The
conclusions are not public yet and will be discussed with Greek authorities. 