Azerbaijan:  Several human rights defenders free at last, while others remain behind bars
March 18, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2016 / MarchAzerbaijan: Several human rights defenders free at last, while others remain behind bars

Paris-Geneva,
March 18, 2016 - The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT) welcomes the release yesterday
of human rights defenders Rauf Mirqadirov, Rasul Jafarov, Anar Mammadli and
Hilal Mammadov, and calls on the Azeri authorities to release those still
detained, including Khadija Ismayilova and Intigam Aliyev.
 
On March 17,
Rasul Jafarov, founder of the "Sport for Rights" campaign, was
released by presidential pardon decree just a few hours after the European Court of Human
Rights issued a judgment in his case, condemning Azerbaijan
for violating his right to personal liberty. Messrs. Anar Mammadli, Head
of the Election Monitoring and Democracy Studies Center (EMDSC), and Hilal
Mammadov, Chief Editor of the newspaper Tolyshi sado (The Voice
of Talysh), were also included in the presidential decree, along with 12
other political prisoners. Earlier in the morning, Rauf Mirqadirov,
former correspondent of the Zerkalo newspaper in Turkey, was released by
the Baku Court of Appeals, which commuted his six-year prison sentence into a
suspended five-year sentence. Mr. Mirqadirov had been arbitrarily detained
since April 2014 on trumped-up charges of "State treason".
 
"We
are so relieved that many of those fighting for freedoms in Azerbaijan are now
free. We nonetheless regret that independent journalist Khadija Ismayilova and
prominent human rights lawyer Intigam Aliyev are still unjustly detained, and
call for their immediate and unconditional release", FIDH Honorary
President Souhayr Belhassen said today.
 
"While we rejoice for those being
released yesterday, we note that many others are yet to be released”,
said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock. "Others like our colleague Leyla
Yunus, Head of the Institute for Peace and Democracy and OMCT General Assembly
member, and her husband Arif Yunusov, do not figure on the list of those
pardoned, which prevents them from accessing life-saving medical treatment in
Berlin".
 
The
above-mentioned human rights defenders were all arrested between April and
December 2014 as part of a crackdown of Azeri authorities on civil society,
while Azerbaijan was chairing the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe. Throughout 2015, the Observatory has tirelessly mobilised for their
release, in particular through a fact-finding mission in Azerbaijan, a series
of trial observations, and sustained advocacy before intergovernmental
organisations such as the Council of Europe. In June 2015, after a heated
debate and the adoption of a series
of amendments, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe had passed a landmark
resolution calling for the release of human rights defenders
and all political prisoners. On October 2015, Council of Europe Secretary
General Thorbjørn Jagland had suspended
the Council's participation in a Baku-based Joint Working Group on Human Rights,
echoing a recommendation of the Observatory. Eventually, in December 2015, the
Secretary General decided to launch an enquiry
under the rarely used Article 52 of the European Convention on Human Rights
to investigate Azerbaijan's persistent violation of the Convention.
 
The
Observatory calls on the Azeri authorities to release Ms. Khadija Ismayilova and Mr. Intigam
Aliyev immediately and unconditionally, to drop all charges against Mr.
Rauf Mirqadirov, and to lift the travel ban on Leyla and Arif Yunus, so
they can benefit from required medical care abroad. The Observatory more
generally calls on the Azeri authorities to conform in any circumstances with
the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, as well as international and
European standards such as the European Convention on Human Rights.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in
1997 by FIDH
and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations
of repression against human rights defenders. 