Bahrain:  Death threats against Messrs. Mohammed Al-Maskati, Nabeel Rajab and Yousef Al-Mahafdha
December  7, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2011 / DecemberBahrain: Death threats against Messrs. Mohammed Al-Maskati, Nabeel Rajab and Yousef Al-Mahafdha

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
BHR 009 / 1211 / OBS 136
Death threats
Bahrain
December 7, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in Bahrain.
 
Description of the situation :
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the death 
threats made by a former official from the State Security Services against Mr. 
Mohammed Al-Maskati, President of the Bahrain Youth Society for Human 
Rights (BYSHR), Mr. Nabeel Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for 
Human Rights (BCHR) and FIDH Deputy Secretary General, and Mr. Yousef 
Al-Mahafdha, a member of BCHR.
 
According to the information received, on December 5, 2011, Mr. Adel 
Fleifel, a former official from the State Security Services who is close to the 
Prime Minister, threatened by twit Messrs. Mohammed Al-Maskati, Nabeel Rajab and 
Yousef Al-Mahafdha. Mr. Adel Fleifel wrote to Messrs. Al-Maskati and 
Al-Mahafdha: “do not think that because now I'm not in the Ministry of Interior, 
I will shut up about you”. He then added “Maskati and Nabeel Rajab your future 
death and hell”. Addressing to the three human rights defenders, he finally 
wrote “Will not be silent about you”[1]. 

 
Mr. Fleifel is known for his participation in grave human rights 
violations and for inciting to hatred against the Shia community in Bahrain. He 
allegedly participated in acts of torture against the opposition in the nineties 
and called for the repression by the military of the February 14 protest 
movement. Last week, during Shia celebration Maharam, on December 2 and 3, 2011, 
Mr. Adel Fleifel publicly called for attacks against the Shia population. On 
several occasions, including recently, Messrs. Mohammed Al-Maskati, Nabeel Rajab 
and Yousef Al-Mahafdha denounced the role played by Mr. Adel Fleifel in the 
above-mentioned human rights violations. The three human rights defenders will 
file a complaint at the police.
 
The Observatory condemns the above-mentioned death threats, which 
merely seem to aim at intimidating Messrs. Mohammed Al-Maskati, Nabeel Rajab and 
Yousef Al-Mahafdha for their human rights activities. Furthermore, the 
Observatory is deeply concerned that this campaign is fuelling, among the public 
opinion, hostility towards human rights defenders and organisations monitoring 
human rights violations.
 
Furthermore, other members of BYHRS have also been harassed recently. 
On December 2, Mr. Yousef Abdul 
Rasool, a member of the Board of Directors of BYHRS, was subjected to 
harassment and interrogated by security forces in Bahrain International Airport 
as he was returning from a human rights training session organised in Beirut 
with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). In October 
and November 2011, the authorities attempted to arrest Mr. Ahmed Abbas, a member of the 
BYSHR, in relation to the monitoring and documentation of human rights 
violations in the village of Nuwaidrat. Mr. Ahmed Abbas has since then been forced to remain 
in hiding to continue his human rights 
work.
 
The Observatory condemns these acts of harassment, which seem to 
merely aim at sanctioning Messrs. Yousef Abdul Rasool and Ahmed Abbas for their 
human rights activities and preventing them from carrying out such activities. 
The Observatory recalls that several human rights defenders remain in arbitrary 
detention or subjected to judicial harassment and calls for the release of all 
human rights defenders arbitrarily detained and the end of judicial harassment. 

 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Bahrain urging them to: 

 
i.         
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Messrs. Mohammed Al-Maskati, Nabeel Rajab, Yousef Al-Mahafdha, 
Yousef Abdul Rasool and Ahmed Abbas, and all human rights defenders in 
Bahrain;
 
ii.       
Make a public statement to recognise the positive role of human 
rights defenders and call death threats and slandering campaigns to an 
halt;
 
iii.      
Order an immediate, effective, thorough and impartial investigation 
into the above-mentioned events, the result of which must be made public, in order to identify all 
those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal 
and apply to them the penal sanctions provided by the law;
 
iv.     Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the judicial 
level - against Messrs. Mohammed Al-Maskati, Nabeel Rajab, Yousef Al-Mahafdha, 
Yousef Abdul Rasool and Ahmed Abbas, as well as all human rights defenders in 
Bahrain;
 
v.       
Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 
1998, in particular its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the 
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the 
national and international levels”, Article 11, which states that “everyone has 
the right, individually and in association with others, to the lawful exercise 
of his or her occupation or profession”, Article 12(1) that provides “everyone 
has the right, individually and in association with others, to participate in 
peaceful activities against violations of human rights and fundamental 
freedoms”, as well as Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take 
all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually or in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; 
 
vi.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Addresses: 
 
·         
Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 
587
·         
Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: 
+973 172 27 555; fax: +973 172 12 6032
·         
Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic 
Affairs, Tel: +973 175 31 333; fax: +973 175 31 284
·         Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 
chemin Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, 
Switzerland. Fax: + 41 22 758 96 
50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
 
***
Paris-Geneva, December 7, 2011 
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the 
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in 
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency 
line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29



[1] See 
https://twitter.com/ADEL_FELAIFIL. 