Lebanon:  Serious concern about the health of Mr. Sany Kumar, detained in Roumieh prison
July 15, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Lebanon / 2010 / JulyLebanon: Serious concern about the health of Mr. Sany Kumar, detained in Roumieh prisonOPEN LETTER

Michel Suleiman
President of the Republic
Presidential Palace, Baabda
Fax: (+961) 05-922400
 
Geneva, 15 July 2010


Your Excellency,
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest Network of NGOs fighting against torture and all other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the world, is writing to you to voice its serious concern regarding the situation of Mr. Sany Kumar, a young Indian national currently detained in Roumieh prison for illegal entry in Lebanon. OMCT is preoccupied that, despite his alarming health condition, Mr. Sany Kumar has not been transferred yet to a hospital.
According to the information received by the Lebanese Center for Human Rights, a member of OMCT SOS Torture Network, Mr. Sany Kumar sustained severe injuries, including multiple bone fractures, following a scooter accident, a few months ago. He underwent several surgeries at Hayat Hospital in Beirut, and was about to start his rehabilitation at home when he was transferred to Roumieh prison, by the end of June 2010, pending his judgement for illegal entry in Lebanon. He is currently detained in an overcrowded and dirty cell with no adequate medical assistance. These conditions have caused a serious deterioration of his health.
Indeed, Mr. Sany Kumar has reportedly developed several infections and would be about to lose the mobility of his legs. Since a few days, he has been vomiting repeatedly and he seems completely dehydrated.
Your Excellency, in light of the aforementioned, OMCT urges you to take all necessary measures to ensure that Mr. Sany Kumar is promptly transferred to a hospital in order to receive adequate medical care and treatment.
OMCT recalls that Lebanon is legally bound to effectively ensure the physical and psychological integrity of all persons deprived of liberty in accordance with international human rights law, and in particular, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
We hope that the concerns expressed in this letter will receive the attention they deserve and we would welcome your prompt response on these matters.
Yours sincerely


Eric Sottas
Secretary General, OMCT 
Cc:

Saad Hariri, Prime Minister, Grand Serail, Beirut, Fax: (+961) 01-983060
Dr. Ibrahim Najjar, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, Adlieh, Beirut, Fax: (+961) 01-612564
Ziad Baroud, Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior, Sanayeh, Beirut, Fax: (+961) 01-751622 