Bangladesh:  Human Rights Committee Concluding observations on the initial country report
March 29, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionReports and Publications / Bangladesh / 2017 / MarchBangladesh: Human Rights Committee Concluding observations on the initial country report Human Rights Committee
              Concluding
observations on the initial report of Bangladesh*
1.  The
Committee considered the initial report of Bangladesh (CCPR/C/BGD/1) at its
3339th and 3340th meetings (see CCPR/C/SR.3339 and 3340), held on 6 and 7 March
2017. At its 3363rd meeting, held on 22 March 2017, it adopted the present
concluding observations.            
           A.     Introduction
2.  The Committee welcomes the submission of the
initial report of Bangladesh and the information presented therein, and
regrets that it was 14 years overdue. It expresses
appreciation for the opportunity to engage in a constructive dialogue with the
State party’s high-level delegation on the measures taken by the State party since
the entry into force of the Covenant to implement its provisions. The Committee
is grateful to the State party for its written replies (CCPR/C/BDG/Q/1/Add.1) to the list of
issues (CCPR/C/BDG/Q/1), which were supplemented
by the oral responses provided by the delegation. 
           B.     Positive aspects
3.  The
Committee welcomes the following legislative and institutional measures taken
by the State party since the entry into force of the Covenant in 2000:
     (a)         Adoption of the Domestic Violence
Prevention and Protection Act, in 2010;
     (b)        Adoption of the National Women
Development Policy 2011, especially the framework for efforts to promote
women’s participation in decision-making positions contained in the policy;
     (c)         Adoption of the Prevention and
Suppression of Human Trafficking Act, in 2012;
     (d)        Adoption of the Persons with
Disabilities Rights and Protection Act, in 2013;
     (e)         Adoption of the Torture and Custodial
Death Prevention Act, in 2013.
4.  The
Committee also welcomes the ratification of, or accession to, the following
international instruments by the State party:
     (a)         The International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,
in 2011;
     (b)        The Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities, in 2007.
          C.     Principal matters of concern and
recommendations 
National
human rights commission
5.  The Committee is concerned that the National
Human Rights Commission (NHRC) may not have a broad enough mandate to
investigate all alleged human rights violations, including those involving
State actors such as the police, military and security forces. It is further
concerned that the NHRC lacks sufficient financial and human resources to
fulfil its mandate (art. 2).
6.  The
State party should broaden the mandate of
the NHRC and allow it to investigate all alleged human rights violations,
including those committed by State military and security actors. The State
party should also provide the NHRC with sufficient financial and human
resources to allow it to impartially and independently fulfil its mandate in
line with the Paris Principles (General
Assembly resolution 48/134, annex). 
Domestic
applicability of the Covenant and right to an effective remedy
7.  The
Committee is concerned that not all of the rights protected by the Covenant
have been given full effect through domestic law and that some domestic
legislation contains provisions contrary to the rights in the Covenant. It is also
concerned at the lack of information on cases which demonstrate that domesticcourts are upholding the rights in the Covenant (art. 2).
8.  The State party should adopt domestic
legislation enabling the implementation of all of the rights in the Covenant
and undertake a comprehensive review of its legislation to bring
conflicting provisions in line with the Covenant. The State party should also raise
awareness about the rights in the Covenant and domestic law giving effect to
these rights among judges, lawyers and prosecutors to ensure that rights
guaranteed in the Covenant are upheld by the courts. It should also consider
acceding to the First Optional Protocol to the Covenant, which establishes an
individual complaint mechanism.
Counter-terrorism
9.  The
Committee is concerned about the use of unclear terminology in counter-terrorism
legislation such as in the Special Powers Act of 1974, which grants the State broad powers of arrest and detention for the
vague term “prejudicial acts”,
and the broad definition of “terrorist act” in the Anti-Terrorism Act of 2009,
which can lend itself to arbitrary and abusive implementation. The Committee is
concerned that the Anti-Terrorism Amendment Bill (2012) which amended the
Anti-Terrorism Act of 2009 increased the penalty for financing terrorism to
allow for a maximum punishment of the death penalty. It is further concerned
by reports that these laws are used to stifle speech of journalists and human
rights defenders (arts.
6, 9, 14 and 19).
10. The State party should
ensure that:
(a)    its counter-terrorism legislation is in full
conformity with the Covenant; 
(b)    acts of
terrorism are defined in a precise and narrow manner, and that legislation
adopted in that context is limited to crimes that would clearly qualify as acts
of terrorism; 
(c)    the death
penalty is not imposed for offences, such as the financing of terrorism, which
do not constitute the “most serious crimes” within the meaning of article 6 (2) of the Covenant; and 
(d)    counter-terrorism measures are
not used to restrict freedom of expression and opinion of journalists and human rights defenders.
Non-discrimination

11. While
noting that pursuant to article 28 of the Constitution the State will not discriminate against citizens on the
limited grounds of “religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth,” the
Committee is concerned that the Anti-Discrimination Bill of 2015 has not yet
been adopted, and that discrimination continues to occur against certain groups,
such as:
     (a)         Discriminatory provisions against women
continue to exist in law, and laws and Constitutional provisions protecting
women are not enforced due in part to patriarchal attitudes in the State party
towards women and girls; 
     (b)        Attacks on places of worship of
religious minorities, extortion, intimidation, harassment of, and land grabbing
from, religious minorities;
     (c)         Lack
of legal recognition of indigenous peoples, reported discrimination and
restrictions on the civil and political rights of indigenous peoples, in
particular as it relates to land rights and participation in political and
decision making processes; 
     (d)        Persistence of a caste based system
resulting in limited employment and housing opportunities for people from
so-called lower castes who experience extreme poverty, social stigma and
marginalization;
     (e)         Criminalization under section 377 of the
Penal code of consensual sexual acts between same sex couples which are termed
“unnatural behaviour,” stigmatization, harassment and violence against lesbian,
gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons, barriers to assistance in seeking
employment of “hijras” who are considered as transgender persons by the
administration of invasive and humiliating medical examinations to prove
transgender status (arts. 2, 3, 26 and 27).
12. The State party should ensure that the Anti-Discrimination
Bill of 2015 protects against direct and indirect discrimination in the public and private sphere
based on a comprehensive list of grounds for discrimination, including colour,
descent, caste, national or ethnic origin, religion, sexual orientation and
gender identity, disability and other status, and provide for effective
remedies in case of violations. The State party should also accelerate the
adoption of this bill and ensure its effective implementation.  It should also develop education campaigns for
schools, government officials and the general public to promote tolerance and appreciation for diversity and non-discrimination. Furthermore, the State party should:
     (a)         Undertake legislative reforms
to eliminate direct and indirect discriminatory legislative provisions against
women, implement existing legislative protections for women and girls, end
entrenched patriarchal attitude in society through educational campaigns on the
equality of women, and ensure that the application of religious personal status laws do
not violate the right to non-discrimination of women and girls; 
     (b)        Protect
the safety and security of persons belonging to minority religious groups and
ensure their ability to fully enjoy their freedom of religion and to worship
without fear of attack; 
     (c)         Recognize
the legal status of indigenous peoples, facilitate the reporting of violations
of the rights of indigenous peoples, investigate such cases, prosecute
perpetrators and compensate victims, resolve land disputes through the
implementation of the Chittagong Hill Tracts Land Dispute Resolution Commission
Act 2001 (amended in 2016) and through the use of an independent land
commission, and include indigenous persons in political and decision making
processes;
     (d)        Take
measures to end the de facto caste systems, and ensure that individuals from so-called
lower casts are not relegated to caste based employment and have equal access
to all rights guaranteed under the Covenant, without discrimination; 
     (e)         Decriminalize
consensual sexual acts between same sex
couples, provide protection to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT)
persons from violence and harassment by ensuring that all cases are promptly
investigated, prosecuted, and punished with appropriate sanctions, and
eliminate barriers to employment and violations to the dignity of “hijras”.
Early
marriage and harmful traditional practices
13. The
Committee is concerned that the State party has one of the highest rates of
early marriage in the world, with 32% of girls married before the age of 15 and
66% of girls married before the age of 18. It is also concerned that early
marriage is prevalent in refugee camps where 90% of families have at least one
married family member under the age of 18. The Committee notes efforts by the
State party to reduce early marriage through the approval of a Child Marriage Restraint
Bill in 2016, but remains concerned that marriage below the age of 18 will be
permitted in “special circumstances.” The Committee is further concerned at the
continuation of harmful traditional practices such as the imposition of the
payment of dowries on the families of girls (arts. 2, 3, 24 and 26).
14. The State party should take immediate measures to sharply reduce early marriage and prevent dowry
practices, including through the implementation of legislation preventing early
marriage and dowry practices and by carrying out campaigns to publicize the
legislation outlawing such practices, and inform girls, their parents and
community leaders of the harmful effects of early marriage. The State
party should amend the Child Marriage Restraint Bill to
maintain the legal minimum age of marriage for girls at 18 years, in accordance
with international norms, without any exceptions. 
Voluntary termination of pregnancy and
sexual and reproductive health
15. The Committee is concerned that abortion
is criminalized except when the life of woman is in danger, which prompts women
to resort to unsafe abortions, endangering their health and leading to a high
rate of maternal mortality. The Committee notes that while the State party
allows for “menstrual regulation,” the procedure is not widely available and
women requesting the procedure reportedly are often refused. It is also concerned at the high
rate of adolescent pregnancy connected to early marriage and resulting in maternal mortality (arts. 3, 6, 7, 17, and 26).
16. The State party should: 
(a) Revise its legislation to provide for additional exceptions to the legal ban on abortion,
including in cases of rape, incest, fatal foetal impairment, and for therapeutic
reasons, and to ensure that women are not denied
medical services and are not prompted by legal obstacles, including criminal
provisions, to resort to unsafe abortions that put their lives and health at
risk; 
(b) Increase education and awareness-raising programmes
on the importance of using contraceptives and on sexual and reproductive health
rights.
Violence
against women
17. While noting the
existence of laws and national action plans to prevent violence against women,
the Committee is concerned at the lack of consistent implementation of these
laws, in particular in light of the reportedly high rates of domestic and
sexual violence against women and girls in the State party. Of particular
concern are acid attacks, rape, gang rapes, dowry related violence,
fatwa-instigated violence, sexual harassment, and sexual violence against
indigenous women related to land grabbing in the Chittagong Hills Tract, and
sexual and gender based violence and domestic violence against Rohingya refugee
women and girls in refugee camps (arts. 3, 6, 7 and 27).
18. The State party should
redouble its efforts to prevent and combat all forms of violence against women.
It should ensure the consistent implementation of the
existing laws and national action plans on violence against women. It should
intensify awareness-raising measures among the police, the judiciary,
prosecutors, community representatives, women and men on the gravity of sexual
and gender based violence and domestic violence and its detrimental impact on
the lives of victims. The State party should ensure that cases of violence
against women, including indigenous and refugee women, are thoroughly
investigated, that perpetrators are prosecuted and, if convicted, punished with
appropriate sanctions, and the victims are provided with full reparation. It
should also ensure the availability of a sufficient number of shelters with
adequate resources for victims.
Extra-judicial
killings and enforced disappearances
19. The Committee is
concerned at the reported high rate of extra-judicial killings by police
officers, soldiers and Rapid Action Battalion (RAB) force members and the reported
enforced disappearances, as well as the excessive use of force by State actors.
The Committee is further concerned by the lack of investigations and accountability
of perpetrators, leaving families of victims without information and redress. It
is further concerned that domestic law does not effectively criminalize enforced
disappearances, and that the State party does not accept that enforced
disappearances occurs (arts.2, 6, 7, 9, 10, and 16). 
20. The State party should:
     (a)        Take
immediate measures to protect the right to life of all persons; 
     (b)        Revise
its legislation to limit the use of force by law enforcement officials, the
military and special forces, incorporating international standards, including
the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement
Officials, and ensure accountability for violations;
     (c)         Effectively
criminalize enforced disappearance; 
     (d)        Investigate
all cases of arbitrary killings, enforced disappearances, and excessive use of
force, prosecute and if convicted punish the perpetrators with appropriate
sanctions, and provide full reparation to the victims. In case of
disappearances, the State party should establish the truth about the fate and the
whereabouts of the victims and ensure that victims of enforced disappearance
and their relatives are informed about the outcome of the investigation;
     (e)         Provide
in its next periodic report information on: (i) the number of investigations
conducted; (ii) convictions secured and (iii) disaggregated information on
penalties that have been imposed on perpetrators. 
Torture
and ill treatment
21. The
Committee notes information provided by the State party that there are
currently no ongoing investigations into cases of torture in the State party
and is concerned at this fact in particular in light of information that
torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement or military personnel is
widespread in the State party during interrogations, to extract confessions.
The Committee notes reports that this practice continues despite the existence
of the Torture and Custodial Death Prevention Act of 2013, and is further
concerned at reports that law enforcement officials are requesting to repeal
this law and are seeking safeguards from prosecution on torture charges (arts.
7, 9 and 10).
22. The State party should put an end to the
practice of torture and ill-treatment. It should enforce the Torture and
Custodial Death Prevention Act of 2013 and ensure that no immunity provisions
in other laws supersede the protections in this Act. The State party should
establish an independent complaint mechanism with the authority to investigate
all reported allegations of, and complaints about, torture and ill-treatment. It
should further ensure that alleged perpetrators of those crimes are prosecuted
and that the victims are provided with full reparations. 
Death
penalty
23. The Committee is concerned at
the high number of cases in which the death penalty is imposed in the State
party and the fact that it can be handed down for crimes that do not meet the
threshold of the “most serious crimes” within the meaning of
article 6 (2) of the Covenant, such as smuggling or the adulteration
of food under the Special Powers Act of 1974, the production, manufacture or
consumption of intoxicant materials under the Intoxicant Control Act of 1990,
and in certain cases spying under the Official Secrets Act of 1923 (arts. 6, 7 and 14).
24. The State party should give
due consideration to abolishing the death penalty and acceding to the Second
Optional Protocol to the Covenant, aiming at the abolition of the death
penalty. If the death penalty is maintained, it should consider introducing a
moratorium on its application and, in any event, undertake legislative reform
to ensure that the death penalty is provided only for the most serious crimes,
understood to be intentional killings, and that pardon or commutation of the
sentence must be available in all cases, regardless of the crime committed. The
State party should also ensure that, if the death penalty is imposed, it is
never in violation of the Covenant, including in violation of fair trial
procedures.
Prisons
25. The
Committee is concerned at the poor conditions of detention in the State party’s
prisons, particularly with respect to overcrowding, unsanitary conditions, and
extortion of inmates and their relatives by prison guards to enjoy basic
rights. It is further concerned by the high number of deaths in prison over the
last five years, all of which are attributed by the State party to natural
causes or to suicide, while reports indicate that at least some of these deaths
can be attributed to poor prison conditions, negligence by the authorities,
lack of access to treatment, and, in some cases, death as a result of injuries
sustained by torture while in police custody (arts. 6, 7, 9 and 10).
26. The
State party should continue to strengthen its efforts to improve conditions of
detention by taking practical measures to reduce overcrowding, particularly by
promoting alternatives to detention, ensuring that bail determinations are made
promptly and that persons on remand are not kept in custody for an unreasonable
period of time. It should also increase efforts to guarantee the right of
detainees to be treated with humanity and dignity and ensure that conditions of
detention in all of the country’s prisons are compatible with the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson
Mandela Rules). 
Freedom
of opinion expression and association
27. The
Committee is concerned at limitations on the rights of journalists, bloggers,
human rights defenders and civil society organizations in the State party to exercise
their right to freedom of opinion, expression and association, in particular:
     (a)         Lack of police protection, registration
of complaints, investigations and prosecutions of incidents of violent killing
of “secular bloggers” by extremist groups as well as death threats, physical
attacks, intimidation and harassment of journalists, bloggers and human rights
defenders;  
     (b)        The arrest of at least 35 journalists,
“secular bloggers” and human rights defenders in 2016 under the Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) Act of 2006 (amended in 2013), a de-facto
blasphemy law which limits freedom of opinion and expression using vague and
overbroad terminology to criminalize publishing information online, which
“hurts religious sentiment” and information, which prejudices “the image of the
State” with a punishment of 7 to 14 years;
     (c)         Undue limitations on the ability of
human rights defenders and non-governmental organizations to operate, through
the Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities) Regulation Bill of 2016, which
restricts the ability of non-governmental organizations to secure resources and
makes it an offence to make “inimical” or “derogatory” remarks against the
Constitution or a constitutional body terms which are undefined and which can
result in deregistration of the non-governmental organization in question
(arts. 6, 19, and 22).
28. The State party should immediately undertake
the following measures to protect the rights of journalists, bloggers, human
rights defenders and civil society organizations: 
     (a)        Protect
them from unlawful killings, physical attacks and harassment. Ensure that
police officials receive adequate training regarding the protection of human
rights defenders. Register complaints and thoroughly investigate all attacks on
the life, physical integrity and dignity of these persons, bring perpetrators
to justice and provide victims with appropriate remedies;
     (b)        Repeal
or revise the laws mentioned above with a view to bringing them into conformity
with its obligations under the Covenant, taking into account the Committee’s
general comment No. 34 (2011) on freedoms of opinion and expression. In
particular, it should clarify the vague, broad and open-ended definition of key
terms in these laws and ensure that they are not used as tools to curtail
freedom of expression beyond the narrow restrictions permitted in article 19 of
the Covenant; 
     (c)         Repeal the Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities)
Regulation Bill, and ensure that any legal provisions restricting access to
foreign funding does not risk the effective operation of non-governmental
organizations as a result of overly limited fundraising options, and ensure
that non-governmental organizations can operate freely and without fear of
retribution for exercising their freedom of expression.
Right
to political participation
29. The Committee is concerned that violence during
elections, such as the excessive use of force by State actors during the
January 2014 election, hinders the rights of voters to participate in free and
fair elections (art. 25).
30. The
State party should ensure the safety and security of all individuals in the
context of elections so that they may exercise their right to vote.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
31. The Committee is concerned at reports that at times large
numbers of asylum seekers fleeing violence in Myanmar were returned to Myanmar
at the border. It is also concerned that the State party intends to relocate
over 30,000 Rohingya refugees to the island of Thengar Char, an area which
currently lacks the infrastructure necessary for respect of basic human rights,
and is prone to flooding, and that such relocation might take place without the
full and free consent of the affected individuals (arts. 6, 7, 12 and 27).
32. The State party should implement legislative and
administrative measures to comply fully with the principle of non-refoulement
in line with article 6 and 7 of the Covenant. It should consider acceding to
the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. It
should ensure that refugees are not forcibly relocated and
that planned relocation sites would offer conditions of life compatible with
the international obligations of the State party. 
          D.     Dissemination and follow-up
33. The State party should widely disseminate the Covenant, its initial reports, the written replies to the Committee’s list of
issues and the present concludingobservations with a view to
raising awareness of the rights enshrined in the Covenant among the judicial,
legislative and administrativeauthorities, civil society
and NGOs operating in the country, and the general public. The State party should ensure that the report and the present
concluding observations are translated into the official language of the State
party. 
34. In
accordance with rule 71, paragraph 5, of the Committee’s rules of procedure,
the State party is requested to provide, within one year of the adoption
of the present concluding observations,
information on the implementation of the recommendations made by the
Committee in paragraphs 14 (Early marriage and
harmful traditional practices), 20 (Extra-judicial killings and enforced
disappearances) and 22 (torture and ill treatment) above.
35. The Committee requests the State party to submit
its next periodic report by 29 March 2021 and to include in that report
specific up-to-date information on the implementation of the recommendations
made in the present concluding observations and of the Covenant as a whole. The
Committee also requests the State party, in preparing the report, to broadly
consult civil society and NGOs operating in the country, as well as minority and
marginalized groups. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 68/268, the word limit
for the report is 21,200 words. Alternatively, the Committee invites the State
party to agree, by 29 March 2018, to use its simplified reporting procedure,
whereby the Committee transmits a list of issues to the State party prior to
the submission of its periodic report. The State party’s replies to that list
will constitute its second periodic report to be submitted under article 40 of
the Covenant.
                             



            *           Adopted
by the Committee at its 119th session (6 - 29 March 2017) 