Honduras:  Joint Open Letter to the Honduras President on the murder of the defenders Berta Cáceres
March  4, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Honduras / 2016 / MarchHonduras: Joint Open Letter to the Honduras President on the murder of the defenders Berta CáceresPublic Letter Honduras President12 pages / 984 KB
Dear President Juan Orlando Hernández,

 

We, a group of 50+ international organisations, write to express our 
shock and concern over the recent killing of Berta Cáceres, environmental 
activist and head of the indigenous rights group COPINH.

 

As you will know, Mrs Cáceres was shot dead by gunmen in the late 
hours of 2 March 2016. Over the years she had received multiple death 
threats and attempted kidnappings because of her work defending indigenous 
Lenca land against the Agua Zarca dam project in Río Blanco.i These 
threats had escalated in recent weeks since construction of the dam had 
restarted.

 

We demand an independent international investigation into the 
circumstances around Mrs Cáceres’ death, and guaranteed protection 
for her family and colleagues. Mrs Cáceres was granted emergency 
protection measures by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights because 
of her acute vulnerability, but she claimed the Honduran state did not fully 
implement them.

 

We also demand urgent action to protect Gustavo Castro Soto, a 
Mexican activist who witnessed her assassination, and to ensure his safe 
passage back to Mexico.

 

Mrs Cáceres’ case is the most high-profile killing within a 
growing trend in the murder, violence and intimidation of people defending 
their indigenous land rights in Honduras. Honduras is the world’s most 
dangerous country per capita to be an environmental or land defender, with 
at least 109 people killed between 2010 and 2015.

 

Mrs Cáceres’ case has not escaped international attention. 
In a statement issued in response to her death U.S. Senator Patrick Leahy 
called on you to find and punish those responsible for “this 
despicable crime.” Last year, US Senator Barbara Boxer wrote a letter 
to US Secretary of State John Kerry urging for better protection of 
environmental defenders in Honduras. This was in direct response to Mrs 
Cáceres winning the 2015 Goldman Environment Prize – a prestigious 
award recognizing grassroots environmental activists from around the world. 
News of her death has generated substantial international media 
attention.

 

The 50+ international organisations listed below call on the 
Honduran state to ensure indigenous peoples’ right to their land is 
respected and that they are able to carry out their legitimate work without 
fear for their safety.

 

Yours faithfully,

(See the attached PDF for 50+ signatory organisations) 