Kyrgyzstan:  Fear for the safety of eleven individuals detained in the framework of the presidential elections.
August  5, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2009 / AugustKyrgyzstan: Fear for the safety of eleven individuals detained in the framework of the presidential elections.Case KGZ 050809 Enforced disappearance/ Incommunicado detention/ Ill-treatment  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan. Brief description of the situation The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the violent arrest of Ms. Ayzharkyn Asanova, Ms. Gulnaz Zhamgyrchieva, Mr. Baktybek Asanakunov, Mr. Sadyr Musabayev, Mr. Kurmanbek Abdykadyrov, Mr. Nurdolo Kozhokmatov, Mr. Mirbek Sagyn, Mr. Salamat Kudaibergenov, Mr. Syrgak Mambetaliev and Mr. Anarbek Urmanbektov as well as of the enforced disappearance of Mr. Sopiev Kanat (coordinator of KCHR in Issyk-Kul region) since 23 July 2009. According to the information received, on 23 July 2009, Ms. Ayzharkyn Asanova, Ms. Gulnaz Zhamgyrchieva, Mr. Baktybek Asanakunov, Mr. Sadyr Musabayev, Mr. Kurmanbek Abdykadyrov, Mr. Nurdolo Kozhokmatov, Mr. Mirbek Sagyn, Mr. Salamat Kudaibergenov, Mr. Syrgak Mambetaliev, Mr. Anarbek Urmanbektov and Mr. Sopiev Kanat were arrested and severely beaten by police officers while they were protesting in front of the administration building in Balykchy. They were reportedly urging the authorities not to manipulate the votes on the occasion of the presidential elections. According to the same information, all of them, except Mr. Sopiev Kanat, whose whereabouts have remained unknown since his arrest, are currently detained in prison n°3 in Karakol, with reportedly no access to a lawyer or their families. They would be charged with “obstruction of the exercise of electoral rights and interference in the work of electoral commission” (article 139 of the Kyrgyz Criminal Code), “mass riots” (article 233 of the Kyrgyz Criminal Code) and “public calls to violent change of the constitutional regime” (article 297 of the Kyrgyz Criminal Code). The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the safety of Mr. Sopiev Kanat, as his whereabouts remain unknown, as well as for the safety of Ms. Ayzharkyn Asanova, Ms. Gulnaz Zhamgyrchieva, Mr. Baktybek Asanakunov, Mr. Sadyr Musabayev, Mr. Kurmanbek Abdykadyrov, Mr. Nurdolo Kozhokmatov, Mr. Mirbek Sagyn, Mr. Salamat Kudaibergenov, Mr. Syrgak Mambetaliev and Mr. Anarbek Urmanbektov, who are currently detained incommunicado. OMCT fears that they may be subjected to torture or other ill-treatment. OMCT urges the competent Kyrgyz authorities to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all the above mentioned individuals at all times in accordance with international human rights law, in particular the provisions of the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as well as to take all necessary measures to immediately locate the whereabouts of Mr. Sopiev Kanat. Finally, OMCT recalls to the authorities of Kyrgyzstan hat no one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention. Action requested Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan urging them to:   Immediately locate the whereabouts of Mr. Sopiev Kanat and make it public;  Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Ayzharkyn Asanova, Ms. Gulnaz Zhamgyrchieva, Mr. Baktybek Asanakunov, Mr. Sadyr Musabayev, Mr. Kurmanbek Abdykadyrov, Mr. Nurdolo Kozhokmatov, Mr. Mirbek Sagyn, Mr. Salamat Kudaibergenov, Mr. Syrgak Mambetaliev, Mr. Anarbek Urmanbektov and Mr. Sopiev Kanat;   Guarantee unconditional access to a lawyer of their choice and their families, as well as guarantee that they are examined by independent doctors and receives adequate medical care, in accordance, inter alia, with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners;  Order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international legal standards, or if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times;  Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into these reports, in particular the allegation of ill-treatment during the arrest, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  i. Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards. Addresses  Mr. Bakiev Kurmanbek Salievich, President of Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996312218627, ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su Mr. Chudinov Igor, Prime Minister, Fax: 996312218627 Mr. Kongantiev Moldomusa Tashpolotovich, Minister of Internal Affairs, Fax: 996312663031, 996312288788 Mr. Tursunkulov Nurlan Zhanyshevich. , Minister of Justice, Fax: 996312663044 / 996312656502 Mr. Elmurza Satybaldiev, Public Prosecutor of the Kyrgyz of Republic, Fax: 996312665411 Permanent mission of Kyrgyzstan, Rue du Lac 4-6, 1207 Geneva, Switzerland, Email: kyrgyzmission@bluewin.ch, Fax: +41 22 707.92.21  Please also write to the embassies of Kyrgyzstan in your respective country.     *   Geneva, 5 August 2009 Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 