Syrian Arab Republic:  A prison for human rights defenders: publication of a leaflet in support of human rights defenders arbitrarily detained
October 14, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2010 / OctoberSyrian Arab Republic: A prison for human rights defenders: publication of a leaflet in support of human rights defenders arbitrarily detainedParis-Geneva, October 14, 2010 – One year after the arrest of Syrian human rights defender Haitham Al-Maleh, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), publishes today a leaflet entitled “Syria: A prison for human rights defenders”.

In recent years in Syria, despite economic and diplomatic opening, many human rights defenders, following trials marred with procedural irregularities, are serving prison sentences for peacefully exercising their right to freedom of expression, assembly and association or are awaiting trial in prison.

The provisions of the state of emergency in force since 1963 together with those of the Criminal Code, in particular Articles 257, 263, 267, 278, 285-288, 298 and 376, continue to give the authorities broad discretionary powers used to repress the activities of defenders.

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders highlights the ordeals of nine human rights defenders detained in reprisal for their human rights activities. These cases are emblematic of the climate of repression prevailing in Syria against all dissenting voices.

Human rights defenders are at constant risk of arrest due to their activities. Most of them are not allowed to leave the country.

The nine human rights defenders suffer specific acts of reprisal and intimidation in prison. Their right to be visited by their families and lawyers is severely restricted. Security officers constantly attend visits, lawyers need authorisation by the President of the Bar Association and the General Prosecutor to visit their client. They enjoy less time with their families during visits and access to basic supplies, including medication  is restricted.

This list is not exhaustive and was updated on October 1, 2010. Many other civil society activists are serving sentences on politically motivated charges.

The leaflet is available in English and French at the following addresses:
syria_prison_for_hrd_flyer_en.pdf and syria_prison_for_hrd_depliant_fr.pdf


For more information, please contact:

FIDH: Karine Appy / Fabien Maitre: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
OMCT: Seynabou Benga: +41 22 809 49 39 