Guatemala:  Joint Open Letter: A call for action to stop legislative initiatives to amend the National Reconciliation Law and the Law on NGOs for Development
March 22, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / Guatemala / 2019 / MarchGuatemala: Joint Open Letter: A call for action to stop legislative initiatives to amend the National Reconciliation Law and the Law on NGOs for DevelopmentYour Excellency Foreign Ministers of the European Union Member 
States,
	
		 

		As international human rights organisations, we write to express our 
profound concern about the recent developments in Guatemala that could 
gravely impact the human rights situation and rule of law in the country. We 
remain alarmed by the possible passage of the proposed amendment to the 
National Reconciliation Law or “Amnesty Law” (N.5377) by the 
Guatemalan Congressand the serious consequences it would have on peace and 
stability in the region. Equally distressing is the upcoming threat facing 
Civil Society organisations in exercising their rights in light of proposed 
amendments to the Law on Non-Governmental NGOs for Development (N.5257).We 
are also worried about the Guatemalan Government’s insistence to 
terminate the mandate of the International Commission against Impunity in 
Guatemala (CICIG) before September 2019 and to obstruct its work in various 
forms.   This bleak picture strengthens our belief that it is in 
the interest of the EU and its Member States, as well as the international 
community at large, to ensure that the Guatemalan authorities respect the 
rule of law, and to firmly support the efforts of the Guatemalan people in 
tackling corruption and impunity.

		 

		Reforms to the National Reconciliation Law have so far passed the second 
debate in the Guatemalan Congress. If approved, the reforms would grant 
broad amnesty to all perpetrators of serious human rights violations and 
would free, within 24 hours, all those convicted of international crimes 
committed during Guatemala’s internal armed conflict from 1960 to 
1996. The authors of massacres, widespread torture and sexual violence would 
be immediately freed from prison. The “Amnesty Law” will 
terminate ongoing and prohibit future investigations and prosecutions of 
crimes committed during this period. In addition, the law mandates legal 
sanctions against any judge or prison official who refuses to implement the 
reforms 
, thus punishing those that decide to uphold international law.

		 

		As noted by several UN experts, “amnesties, statutes of limitations 
and mechanisms that exclude responsibility are incompatible with crimes that 
represent serious violations of human rights such as torture, summary 
executions, forced disappearances and genocide, among others. Failure to 
investigate and prosecute such violations constitutes a serious breach of 
international human rights law”. The proposed reforms are both 
unconstitutional and contrary to international law.  

		 

		The “Amnesty Law” would seriously affect victims' rights 
to justice, truth, reparation and guarantees of non-repetition. It could 
lead to reprisals and attacks against victims, judges, prosecutors, lawyers, 
plaintiffs, witnesses, experts and others involved in human rights trials, 
putting their own safety and that of their families at risk. Victims’ 
organisations have already reported – and denounced – threats 
they have received. This worrying trend is likely to increase.

		 

		The reforms will undo Guatemala’s remarkable achievements in the 
pursuit of justice. Guatemala was the first country where a national court 
held a trial of a former Head of State on charges of genocide. Through the 
cases of Sepur Zarco, Molina Theissen, and Dos Erres, Guatemala showcased 
how a country can resiliently work towards overcoming a legacy of war and 
impunity and contribute to the prevention of future crimes. These trials not 
only restored the dignity to victims and their families, but helped restore 
faith in the Guatemalan justice system. This “Amnesty Law” sets 
adangerous precedent, and more importantly constitutes an affront to the 
victims, an infringement to their rights and a risk to their security.  
In this sense, on March 12, 2019, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights 
issued an order requiring the Guatemalan State to interrupt the legislative 
process for the approval of the National Reconciliation Bill and to archive 
it in order to ensure the right to judicial remedy of the victims of 14 
cases being dealt with by the Court.

		 

		The situation is particularly alarming amidst the rising tensions ahead of 
the 2019 electoral campaigns. In recent months, high-level Guatemalan 
government officials have repeatedly defied the Constitutional Court’s 
rulings. A case in point is the Morales administration’s unilateral 
decision to immediately terminate CICIG’s mandate despite the strong 
rejection from the UN Secretary General. Without political and financial 
support, CICIG will only be further weakened and its staff and judges 
exposed, leading to a more fragile justice system. In addition, there has 
been an alarming increase in cases of intimidation and threats against 
magistrates and judges since the appointment of Roberto Mota Padilla as Head 
of Security for the Judiciary. The vibrant Guatemalan civil society, which 
has been defending human rights for years, is under the threat of excessive 
restrictions in practicing its freedom of expression and peaceful gathering 
now that the Guatemalan Congress is close to adopt the Law on NGOs and 
Development.

		 

		At this critical moment, we should continue to speak up against 
Guatemala’s legislative initiatives. We should not allow impunity to 
prevail over justice. It is our collective responsibility to preserve the 
rights of victims and their relentless efforts over the years to attain 
justice. Their immense suffering cannot go in vain. Perpetrators should be 
held accountable as this is very important to ensure the non-recurrence of 
the atrocities or instability.

		 

		We welcome that Governments, including the G13, came in support of our 
plea and sent clear signals that impunity is unacceptable. We also welcome 
the recent Resolution adopted by the European Parliament in which it 
expressed strong support to the work of CICIG; urged the Guatemalan 
authorities to immediately ensure independence of the judiciary and 
guarantee freedom of the press and the media; and called on the Guatemalan 
Congress not to approve the proposed amendments of the National 
Reconciliation Law and the NGO Law.

		 

		This international pressure combined with national efforts led to the 
postponement of the vote on the Amnesty Law, but the struggle is not 
over.  The session might still be rescheduled anytime, and that is why 
we cannot lose the momentum. We therefore urge the EU and its Member States 
to:

		 

		·       Emphasise to the Guatemalan 
legislature and state their concern about any amnesty for international 
crimes, as well as any attempt to shield perpetrators of human rights 
violations from justice.

		·       Take a firm stance in the 
defence of the rule of law and human rights in Guatemala.

		·       Publicly call on the 
Guatemalan legislature to refrain from approving the amendments to the 
National Reconciliation Law (N.5377) and the Law on NGOs for Development 
(N.5257).

		·       Maintain political and 
financial support to the CICIG and to support the Guatemalan people and 
civil society in their fight against corruption ad impunity.

		·       Convey to the Government of 
Guatemala that it must ensure the security of victims, witnesses, experts, 
and human rights organisations who have courageously worked to denounce war 
crimes.  The Government must also ensure the security of lawyers and 
state prosecutors who have investigated, prosecuted and sanctioned the 
crimes committed during the internal armed conflict.

		 

		 

		Sincerely,

		 

		1. Both ENDS

		2. Center for Justice and International Law (CIJIL)

		3. EU-LAT Network

		4. Free Press Unlimited (FPU)

		5. Guatemala Human Rights Commission-USA (GHRC-USA)

		6. Humanistisch Instituut voor Ontwikkelingssamenwerking (HIVOS)

		7. Impunity Watch

		8. International Platform Against Impunity

		9. Peace Brigades International (PBI)

		10. REDRESS

		11. Serge Berten Comité

		12. TRIAL International

		13. World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 