Nepal: attack on Dalits and denial of entry to temple
February  9, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2004 / FebruaryNepal: Nepal: attack on Dalits and denial of entry to templeCase NPL 090204.ESCR Caste-based discrimination/Violence    The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT  intervention in the following situation in Nepal.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian  Human Rights  Commission, a member of the OMCT network, that a number  of Dalits were beaten up and forbidden to enter the village temple in  northwest Ajagaibi, Rautahat district, Nepal on 28 January 2004.  According to the information received, Shubhanarayan Mahara Chamar,  Jayamangal Mahara Chamar, Sukhdi Mahara Chamar, Sukhdi Mahara Chamar  and family members, who are Dalits, attempted to enter the Maisthan  temple in northwest Ajagaibi, Rautahat district, Nepal. They went to  the temple because they were making an offering after Jayamangal  Mahara Chamar made a 'bhaakal'(promise to offer something) for the  good health of his wife and son. When they arrived at the temple,  they were met by members of the upper caste, including Kashi Raut  Kurmi, the former president of the village development committee. The  group of upper caste people beat up the Chamars, claiming that "low  caste people do not have the right of access to the temple". The  perpetrators also destroyed the various materials that the Chamars  had brought with them for the offering and worship.   It is reported that a 'panchayat' (Village Development Committee)  meeting was held the next day where it was decided that the victims  of this crime should pay Rs.1000 "to purify the temple".      Background information  These attacks by members of the upper-caste community occur against  the background of a history of caste-based violence and  discrimination against Dalits, who on the basis of their descent to a  particular caste are considered to be 'untouchable'. The Nepalese  Constitution prohibits discrimination on the grounds of caste and  untouchability and provides that no person should be denied access to  any public place or use of public utilities on this basis. Despite  these provisions, Dalits continue to face severe discrimination,  private and public segregation including in housing and education,  access to public spaces and sources of food and water.  The denial of  entry to temples, exclusion from participation in religious  activities and violence against Dalits who attempt to worship at or  enter temples manifests and serves to reinforce and maintain this  segregation and discrimination.  OMCT condemns these acts of violence that are aimed at humilating the  Chamars and deny them the rights of access to the temple and to  worship there. OMCT is also gravely concerned by the involvement of  the panchayat (village development committee) and by the fine levied  against the Chamars to for the purposes of 'purifying the temple'.  OMCT urges the government to investigate this incident and take  action against the perpetrators of the violence and the village  development committee members as a matter of urgency. Caste based  discrimination is a violation of the Convention on the Elimination of  All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Covenant on  Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on  Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them to:  i.	take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and  psychological integrity of the afore-mentioned persons; ii.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victims of  these abuses; including for their confiscated property; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the  circumstances of these events, in order to identify those  responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or  administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the right of access of  Dalits and other people belonging to lower castes to public and  private facilities; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms  throughout the country in accordance with national laws and  international human rights standards.  Addresses  Prime Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa, Prime Minister's Office, Singha  Durbar, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax:+ 977 1 4 227 286   Mr. Padam Singh Bishwokarma, Chair Person, National Dalit Commission,  Thapathali, Kathmandu, NEPAL, Phone: 977-1-4245 325, 4245 919, Fax:  977-1-4229236, Email: ndc@mos.com.np  Mr. Nain Bahadur Khatri, Chairman of the National Human Rights  Commission, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, NEPAL, Tel: +977 1 5 547 974 or 525  659 or 547 975, Fax: +977 1 5 547 973, Email: nhrc@ntc.net.np  Mr. Shyam Bhakta Thapa, Inspector General of Police, Police  Headquarters, GPO Box 407, Naxal, Kathmandu, NEPAL, Fax: +977 1 441  55 93 or 1 4415594  Ambassador, Acharya, Gyan Chandra, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom  of Nepal, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122  7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective  country.  Geneva, February 9, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this  appeal in your reply. 