Cambodia:  Ny Chakrya’s unjust conviction must be overturned
September 23, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / SeptemberCambodia: Ny Chakrya’s unjust conviction must be overturned

 (c) ADHOC

Paris-Geneva, September 23, 2016
- The unjust conviction of prominent Cambodian human rights defender Ny
Chakrya must be overturned, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership) said today.
 
On September 22, 2016, the Phnom Penh
Municipal Court sentenced Ny Chakrya, former head of the Human Rights
and Monitoring Section of the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association
(ADHOC), to six months in prison and a six million riel (about 1,310 Euros)
fine. The conviction was based on trumped-up charges that stemmed solely from
his human rights activities.
 
“Ny Chakrya’s conviction is the
latest development in an ongoing pattern of harassment by Cambodia’s judiciary.
The guilty verdict clearly exposes the judiciary’s lack of impartiality and
independence. This conviction is unjust and must be overturned”, said FIDH President Dimitris
Christopoulos.
 
Ny Chakrya was found guilty of
charges of “public defamation”, “acts of slanderous denunciation”, and
“commentaries to put pressure on jurisdiction” under Articles 305, 311, and 522
of the Cambodian Criminal Code respectively[1].
The charges were based on a complaint filed by the former Deputy Prosecutor and
the Investigative Judge at the Siem Reap Provincial Court in relation to a
press conference held by Ny Chakrya on May 12, 2015, in Siem Reap. During the
press conference, Ny Chakrya condemned the arbitrary arrest and detention of
two villagers involved in land disputes in Siem Reap Province.
 
In court yesterday, the prosecution
failed to demonstrate that Ny Chakrya had committed any of the crimes with
which he was charged. During the three-and-half hour hearing, the court heard
abundant exculpatory evidence that clearly warranted the dismissal of the
charges against him.
 A recording of the May 12, 2015
press conference was played in court. From the content of the recording, it was
clear that Ny Chakrya never made any statements that defamed Siem Reap court
officials. In addition, two defense witnesses who attended the May 12, 2015
press conference testified to this fact. After the prosecution and defense
concluded their presentations, trial judge Khy Chhai took less than 15 minutes
to deliberate before announcing the guilty verdict.
 
“Yesterday’s
hearing showed that trials of human rights defenders in Cambodia are a farcical
formality. The judge’s behavior during the hearing and his disregard of
exculpatory evidence indicated that he was predisposed to finding Ny Chakrya
guilty”, said FIDH Director of Asia Desk - Southeast Asia Andrea
Giorgetta, who observed
the court proceedings on behalf of the Observatory.
 
Ny Chakrya has been arbitrarily
detained since May 2, 2016 in connection with another case in which he is
accused of having been an accomplice in the bribing of a witness, along with
ADHOC staff members Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Lim
Mony[2].
 
“The
escalating number of cases of judicial harassment and arbitrary detentions in
Cambodia is alarming and illustrative of the precarious situation in which
human rights defenders find themselves. Cambodian courts must no longer be used
as a tool of the authorities to silence civil society”, said
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
The Observatory urges the Cambodian
Government to put an end to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial
level, against Ny Chakrya, as well as against all human rights defenders in the
country, to enable them to carry out their work without hindrance.
 
The Observatory further calls on the
Cambodian Government to ensure that all judicial proceedings against Ny Chakrya
and other human rights defenders facing charges are carried out in full
compliance with their right to a fair trial, as protected under international
law.
 
The Observatory also urges the
Cambodian authorities to ensure the respect of international human rights
standards related to prison conditions. These include the United Nations (UN)
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (‘Mandela Rules’) and the
Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of
Detention or Imprisonment.
 
Background information:
 
Ny Chakrya
has been arbitrarily detained since May 2, 2016, on charges of being an
accomplice in the bribing of a witness (Articles 29 and 548 of the Criminal
Code) in connection with a separate case from the one for which he was
convicted on September 22, 2016. On May 2, 2016, ADHOC staff members Ny Sokha,
Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Lim Mony were also detained on charges of bribing a
witness (Article 548 of the Criminal Code). If convicted, the five human rights
defenders could face prison terms of five to ten years.
 
Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, and Yi Soksan
are held in Prey Sar’s Correctional Center 1 (‘CC1’), while Lim Mony is
detained in Prey Sar’s Correctional Center 2 (‘CC2’). Ny Chakrya is detained in
Police Judiciaire (PJ) prison. All three prisons are located in Phnom Penh.
 
On June 13, 2016, the
Court of Appeals in Phnom Penh denied bail to Ny Chakrya, Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda,
Yi Soksan, and Lim Mony. The court’s refusal to release the five detained human
rights defenders on bail is a significant obstacle to the exercise of their
basic rights, including the fundamental right to liberty and the right to a
fair trial.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT). The objective of this program is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.



[1] For more information, see Observatory
Urgent Appeal KHM 002 / 0715 / OBS 056.3, issued on July 15, 2016.


[2] For more
information, see www.freethe5kh.net. 