Viet Nam:  Concerns over risks of prosecution of Buddhist youth leader Le Cong Cau
March 22, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2013 / MarchViet Nam: Concerns over risks of prosecution of Buddhist youth leader Le Cong Cau
Attn:
President Truong Tan Sang, Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung and Communist Party
Secretary-General Nguyen Phu Trong
 
 
Paris-Geneva, March 22, 2013
 
Re: Concerns over risks of prosecution of Buddhist youth leader and human rights defender Le Cong Cau in Vietnam
 
Excellencies,
 
The Vietnam Committee on Human Rights
(VCHR) the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) call for the end of the judicial harassment
of Buddhist Youth leader and human rights defender Le Cong Cau, Head of
the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam’s (UBCV) Buddhist Youth Movement
Commission and an active coordinator of UBCV activities, including on human
rights issues, in the central province of Thua Thien-Hue. 
 
Mr. Le Cong
Cau has been threatened with prosecution by the police after his articles
criticising the policies of the State authorities for violations of freedom of
religion, its management of territorial disputes with China were posted on the
Internet. He is accused of violating Article 87 of the Vietnamese Criminal Code
on “undermining the unity policy” and
Article 88 on “circulating anti-state
propaganda”. These offences carry prison sentences of up to fifteen and
twenty years.
 
On March 12,
2013, Mr. Le Cong Cau was summoned by the Security Police to come for a
“working session” at the Truong An district police station at 8.00 am the
following day. For the next two and a half days (March 13 to 15, 2013) he was
subjected to intensive interrogations. Before releasing him on March 15, the
police declared that they had obtained “sufficient evidence” to prosecute him
under Articles 87 and 88 of the Criminal Code.
 
Unusually,
the police interrogation was not conducted by local police, but by an official
from the Provincial Security Police, Mr. Nguyen Huu Chung, and two members of
the Hue municipal Security Police. They began by showing Le Cong Cau several
articles downloaded from the Internet, which, they said, “slandered the regime and spread propaganda about an illegal
organization named the UBCV”. 
 
Specifically,
the police accused Le Cong Cau of criticising the Vietnamese Communist Party
(VCP) and calling for political change; advocating on behalf of the UBCV; and
denouncing the State-sponsored Vietnam Buddhist Sangha (VBS) as a political
tool of the regime. Whilst admitting he had written on all these subjects, Le
Cong Cau declared that he was expressing legitimate peaceful opinions in
accordance with the Vietnamese Constitution and with international law, and thereby
had committed no crime. 
 
On the last
day of the interrogation, on March 15, Officer Chung made Le Cong Cau write a
statement admitting that he had written articles accusing the VCP of selling
off Vietnamese waters and lands; being submissive to China and repressive
towards the Vietnamese people; persecuting religions and repressing
pro-democracy activists and human rights defenders; advocating political
pluralism; predicting the imminent demise of the Communist regime; and accusing
the State-sponsored VBS of being a political tool of the VCP.
 
Le Cong Cau
wrote the statement, but refused to recognise these acts as crimes. He tried to
add the words: “I stand by my convictions
and ideals. Everything I have done is in line with the rights enshrined in the
Vietnamese Constitution. All those who try to prevent me are violating our
Constitution. I refuse to collaborate with those who trample on the Vietnamese
Constitution”. However, the
Security Police struck these words off the statement.
 
FIDH, OMCT
and VCHR recall the right of Le Cong Cau to freely express his peaceful
opinions, as guaranteed in Article 69 of the Vietnamese Constitution and
Article 19 of the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to
which Vietnam acceded in 1982, which enshrines the right of all people to
“receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of
frontiers”. 
 
Accordingly,
we demand the immediate and unconditional end of judicial and other acts of
harassment against Mr. Le Cong Cau, and the guarantee, in all circumstances, of
his physical and psychological integrity.
 
In
the hope that you will take these elements into account,
 
We
remain,

Souhayr
Belhassen
President
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
 
Gerald
Staberock
Secretary
General
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
 
Vo
Van Ai
President
Vietnam
Committee on Human Rights (VCHR) 