Kenya:  Extrajudicial killing of human rights lawyer Willie Kimani, his client and their taxi driver
July 14, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2016 / JulyKenya: Extrajudicial killing of human rights lawyer Willie Kimani, his client and their taxi driver
KEN 001 /
0716 / OBS 061
Abduction / Enforced disappearance /
Torture / Extrajudicial
killing
Kenya
July 14, 2016
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Kenya.

Description of the situation: 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the extrajudicial
killing of human rights lawyer Mr. Willie
Kimani, together with his client Mr. Josephat Mwenda and their taxi driver, Mr.
Joseph Muiruri. Mr. Kimani, a human
rights lawyer based in Nairobi, worked with the internationally known
organization International Justice Mission (IJM)[1], was a board member
of Right Promotion Protection (RPP), and was affiliated with the Law Society of
Kenya (LSK). 
According to the information received, on,
July 1st, 2016, the bodies of the three men were recovered from the
Ol-Donyo Sabuk River in Machakos Country, 73km northeast of Nairobi. They had
been missing since June 23, 2016, at around 12 pm, as they were traveling home
after filing a complaint against a police officer in a corruption case. 
The
post-mortem report into the deaths of Messrs. Willie Kimani, Josephat Mwenda,
and Joseph Muiruri showed that they were brutally beaten and tortured before
being killed. The pathologist found that human rights lawyer Mr. Kimani
suffered from a skull fracture after being repeatedly hit in the head with a
heavy object. The taxi driver, Mr. Muiruri, also had injuries to his head and
appeared to have been strangled. The client, Mr. Mwenda, appears to have
suffered the most with injuries to his head, neck and chest. He also suffered
from a skull fracture and had blood in his chest. 
On July 2, 2016, Inspector-General of Police
Jospeh Boinett confirmed that three AP officers, Frederick Leliman, Stephen Chebulet and
Sylvia Wanjiku
were being held in relation to the killings. They appeared
in court on Monday, July 4, 2016, where the judge ordered that they be held in
custody for two weeks until investigations are carried out. The same day,
hundreds of Kenyan human rights defenders launched street protests in Nairobi
calling for justice in response to the killings.
The
Observatory fears that such killings might be related to a complaint filed with
the Independent Policing Oversight Agency (IPOA)[2]
last year by Mr. Mwenda, in relation to violations carried out against him by a
senior officer stationed at the Syokimau AP Camp. 
On
April 10, 2015, Mr. Mwenda was riding with a friend on his motorcycle when they
were stopped by two AP police officers in civilian clothes. One of the officers
reportedly shot Mr. Mwenda in the arm, after which he and his friend were taken
to the hospital and then placed in police custody. After filing a complaint
against the police, Mr. Mwenda was charged with “being in possession of
narcotic drugs,” “gambling in a public space,” and “resisting arrest”. 
Since
Mr. Mwenda reported the incident to the IPOA, he had been subject to persistent
threats and harassment. On December 13, 2015, the officer that had previously
shot Mr. Mwenda, along with a few other AP officers, picked him up from his
house and took him to the Mlolongo Police Station and charged him with six trumped-up
charges. On February 16, 2016, another incident occurred after two men claiming
to be from the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) picked up Mr. Mwenda
from court for alleged robbery.
The
Observatory would like to recall that the aforementioned killings are part of a
broader pattern of abuses carried out by Kenyan officials. According to Kenyan
human rights institutions and NGOs, in the past six years the number of
extrajudicial killings involving Kenyan police or security services is in the high
hundreds[3].

The
Observatory strongly condemns the murders of Messrs. Willie Kimani, Josephat
Mwenda, and Joseph Muiruri and urges the authorities to conduct an immediate,
thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into these killings and to
properly prosecute those responsible, as well as to grant adequate reparations
to the families of the deceased. 
More
generally, the Observatory urges the Kenyan authorities to adopt effective
measures to ensure the protection of the physical and psychological integrity
of all human right defenders in Kenya. 
Actions
requested:
Please
write to the authorities in Kenya, urging them to:
i.  Carry out an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent
investigation into the above-mentioned events and more in general into all acts
of enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings occurring within the
Kenya Police Service, in order to identify
all those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction
them as provided by the law;
ii.
Guarantee adequate reparation to the families of Messrs.
Willie Kimani, Josephat Mwenda, and Joseph Muiruri;
iii.  More in general, guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of all human rights defenders in Kenya;
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles 1 and 12.2;
v.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Kenya.
Addresses:

· Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the Republic of Kenya, State
House, Statehouse Road, P.O Box: 40530 00100, Nairobi, Kenya., Fax:
+254-020-2436, Email: president@statehousekenya.go.ke
· Hon. William Ruto, Deputy-President of the Republic of Kenya,
Office of The Deputy President, Harambee Avenue, P.O. Box 74434 - 00200
Nairobi, Kenya., Tel: +254 20 3247000/1/2/3/4/5, Email: dp@deputypresident.go.ke
· Hon. Joseph Nkaissery, Interior & Coordination of National
Government, Harambee House, Harambee Avenue, P.O Box 30510,00100 Nairobi,
Tel: +254-20-2227411, Email: ps.interior@kenya.go.ke
·Commissioner of Police, Kenya Police Headquarters, Vigilance House,
Harambee Avenue, P.O. Box 30083, Nairobi, Kenya, Tel:
+254-020-341411/6/8, Email: commissioner@police.go.ke, complaints@police.go.ke
· Commissioner Kagwiria Mbogori, Chairperson, Kenya National
Commission on Human Rights, Fax: +254-020- 2716160 E-mail haki@knchr.org
· H.E. Mr. Stephen Ndungu Karau, Permanent Mission of Kenya to the
United Nations in Geneva, Av. de la Paix 1-3, 1202 Genève, Switzerland,
Fax: +41 22 731 29 05, E-mail: mission.kenya@ties.itu.int
· H.E. Johnson Weru, Embassy of Kenya in Brussels, 208 av. W.
Churchill, 1180 Uccle, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 340 10 50 / + 32 2 340 10 68.
Email: kenbrussels@hotmail.com

Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Kenya in your
respective countries.




[1] IJM is a US-based
international organization that focuses on the legal protection of vulnerable
persons, including people experiencing poverty, and abuses of power at the
government level 


[2] IPOA was established to
provide civilian oversight over the work of police in Kenya 


[3] See The
Guardian, 1 July 2016. See also the Report of the Special
Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions on his mission to
Kenya, issued on 26 May 2009. 