Egypt:  Request for urgent action ahead of appeal verdict hearing on Yara Sallam
December 19, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2014 / DecemberEgypt: Request for urgent action ahead of appeal verdict hearing on Yara SallamMs. Reine ALAPINI-GANSOUACHPR Special Rapporteur on human Rights Defenders in AfricaEmail: rsddh.achpr@gmail.com
 Mr. Michel FORSTUN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defendersEmail: defenders@ohchr.org
 Mr. Mads ANDENASChair-Rapporteur of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary DetentionEmail: wgad@ohchr.org
 Mr. David KAYEUN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to
freedom of opinion and expressionEmail: freedex@ohchr.org
 Mr. Maina
KIAIUN Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of associationEmail:  freeassembly@ohchr.org
 
Paris-Geneva, December 19, 2014
  
Dear
Ms. Alapini-Gansou, Dear Mr. Forst, Dear Mr. Andenas, Dear Mr. Kaye, Dear Mr.
Kiai,
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights
(FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), are submitting this
urgent request for your consideration in the hope that you will act upon it to
ensure the protection of human rights defender Ms. Yara Sallam,
Transitional Justice Officer at Egyptian Initiative for Personal
Rights (EIPR), who is facing a appeal verdict hearing on 28 December 2014.
 
Ms. Sallam was arrested by security forces on the
evening of 21 June 2014 along with her cousin, Shehab Fakhry Ismail, as they
were buying drinks from a kiosk in Heliopolis in the vicinity of a protest
dispersed by security forces. Ms. Yara Sallam, Ms. Sanaa Seif, a member of the “No to Military Trials for Civilians”
movement and sister of the blogger Mr. Alaa Abdel Fattah, and 21 human rights defenders and peaceful
protesters, including one minor, were arrested on 21 June 2014 in relation to a
demonstration against the 'Protests Law' and were accused of breaching the
'Protests Law' by demonstrating without a permit, committing acts of violence,
possession of inflammable material and Molotov cocktails, blocking a road,
sabotaging public and private property, and belonging to the banned group
'April 6'. On 26 October 2014, Cairo Misdemeanours Court sentenced Ms. Yara
Sallam together with the 22 human rights defenders and peaceful protesters to 3
years' imprisonment, a further 3 years' police monitoring, a fine of 10,000
Egyptian Pounds (approx. €1,098) each, and the payment of compensation for the
damages caused. 
 
The Observatory believes that the arrest, prosecution
and verdict are related solely to the human rights defenders' peaceful and
legitimate activities, particularly to protect the rights to freedom of
assembly and expression.
 
Ms. Sallam is a recognised human rights defender. She
worked as the Director of the Women Human Rights Defenders program at Nazra
for Feminist Studies and as legal assistant at the African Commission
on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) in The Gambia. She was awarded the North
Africa HRD Shield 2013. Even though Yara was not arrested while protesting but rather
in a side-street, she has been targeted and detained because of her human
rights work, as she was interrogated about EIPR’s activities and management.
Her cousin, Shehab Fakhry Ismail, who was arrested with her under the same
circumstances, was released on the same day without any charges. 
 
Her case is symbolic of the Egyptian authorities
increasing crackdown against human rights organizations[1]
and human rights defenders, based on the Law 107 of 2013 on demonstrations and
public rallies (the “Anti-Protest Law”). Other human rights defenders have also
been targeted. 
 
Several of the charges in this case violate human
rights law; defendants are charged, fundamentally, with exercising their right
to peaceful protest. Several other charges are based on criminal law provisions
that use excessively vague and broad language, violating the basic principle of
legality (such as charges of « endangering general security and public
order », « terrorizing passersby », and « endangering general
peace »). In addition, the prosecution failed to provide any evidence that
Ms. Sallam, Ms. Sanaa Seif and the 21 others have done anything other than
exercise their right to peaceful protest.
 
Given the gravity of the situation of human rights
defenders in Egypt and the highly emblematic character of this case, we
strongly believe that your mandates should take the following measures :
 
- publish a joint statement to request the acquittal
and release of Ms. Yara Sallam, Ms. Sanaa Seif and the 21 other human rights
defenders and peaceful protesters
 
- conduct a trial observation mission or an emergency
mission at the occasion of the appeal verdict hearing on 28 December 2014

Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any
questions or if we can provide you with any additional information you may
need.
 
Yours sincerely,
 





 




Karim
  LAHIDJI
FIDH
  President


Gerald
  STABEROCK
OMCT
  Secretary General



 



[1]               Independent human
rights organisations are currently facing an imminent risk of shut-down and
prosecution in particular, after the authorities issued a dissolution ultimatum
in July 2014 and an amendment to the Penal Code in September 2014 that
criminalizes the sending or receiving of foreign funding that aims to harm
national security. For more information, see https://www.fidh.org/International-Federation-for-Human-Rights/north-africa-middle-east/egypt/16403-egypt-ongoing-human-rights-violations-amidst-a-widespread-crackdown 