Sudan:  Sudan: three students members of the Umma party have been arbitrarily arrested by the Sudanese security forces
May 28, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2002 / MaySudan: Sudan: three students members of the Umma party have been arbitrarily arrested by the Sudanese security forcesCase SDN 280502 Arbitrary arrest / Incommunicado detention / Risk of torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that on May 16th, 2002, three students members of the Umma party were arbitrarily arrested by the Sudanese security forces, in Nyala, Sudan.  According to the information received, on May 16th, 2002, 25-year old Yasir Ramadan, 25-year old Abdullah Hamad, and 26-year old Adam Issa were arbitrarily arrested at the house owned by Mr. Ramadan’s relatives.  The three students were reportedly assisting Umma party and Ansar Sect - one of Sudan’s largest Islamic sectarian factions - students at different universities to establish a students union.  The three students have not been charged, and are currently being held incommunicado at an undisclosed location.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by the arbitrary arrests of the aforementioned students, and fears that they may be subjected to torture since they are currently being detained incommunicado in an unknown location, as this is the set of circumstances under which people are at a particularly high risk of being subjected to torture. OMCT condemns the authorities’ use of arbitrary arrests and incommunicado detention against these persons, which represents a serious violation of their rights to freedom of association and expression, and is used, it is thought, as a way of stifling student groups and political opposition in Sudan.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	immediately locate the whereabouts of the aforementioned students, and take all necessary measures to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity; ii.	order that all persons arrested in connection with this affair be released immediately in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events  and guarantee that those responsible are brought to trial and that the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions are applied as provided by law; iv.	put an immediate end to the harassment of students; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights laws and standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, People's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 787676 / 783223. ·	His Excellency Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 24911 779383. ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the diplomatic representatives of Sudan in your country.  Geneva, 28th May, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 