Bahrain:  Violent repression of peaceful demonstrations.
February 28, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Bahrain / 2011 / FebruaryBahrain: Violent repression of peaceful demonstrations.
WORLD
ORGANISATION AGAINST TORTURE
PUBLIC
STATEMENT




BAHRAIN:
Violent repression of peaceful
demonstrations


Geneva,
16 February 2011. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
condemns the excessive use of force and violence against the protests
that have started on 14 February 2011 in different villages to demand
respect for basic human rights, more democracy and better economic
conditions, which led to the death of at least two protesters and
leaving many others injured, some of them in critical state.


According
to the information received, security forces used rubber bullets and
tear gas to disperse the peaceful demonstrations that took place in
different Bahraini villages, notably in Dirah, Sitra and Sehla. The
protesters, who had declared the 14th February a “Day of Rage”
spurred by the recent protests in Tunisia and Egypt, demanded respect
for human rights and an end to corruption, and economic inequality in
the country. OMCT is concerned about the apparent excessive and
indiscriminate use of force by the riot police forces, in this case
in particular, also directed to women and children, who were
protesting peacefully.
OMCT
is particularly preoccupied about the deaths of two young protesters.
Mr. Ali Abdulhadi Mushaima
reportedly died by a straight shot, on 14 February 2011, at a
demonstration in Dirah. Mr. Fadhel Ali AlMatrook was shot, on
15 February 2011, when security forces started to disperse the
peaceful funeral procession for Mr. Ali Abdulhadi Mushaima that took
place in Dirah.


OMCT
calls on the Bahraini authorities to


Immediately
	put an end to the repression of the peaceful protests and issue
	clear instructions to the security forces to refrain from using
	excessive force against the protesters in accordance
	with international standards, including the Basic Principles on the
	Use of Force and
	Firearms and the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials;Guarantee
	freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of expression;Carry
	out prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial
	investigations into the security
	forces abuses and violence, in particular into the circumstances
	surrounding the deaths
	of Mr. Ali Abdulhadi Mushaima and Mr. Fadhel Ali AlMatrook, the
	results of which must be
	made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent,
	independent and impartial
	tribunal and to apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions
	as provided by law; and provide the victims with adequate
	compensation, reparation and rehabilitation;Establish,
	in close cooperation with the people directly concerned and their
	representatives, programmes
	for political, social, economic and cultural development that
	effectively respond to the needs of the people of Bahrain ;Ensure
	the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the
	country in accordance
	with national laws and international human rights standards.



Contact:
Eric Sottas, +41 22 809 49 39 