Israel:  Israel : Interior Minister cancels investigation into the organization “Adalah”
February 19, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2004 / FebruaryIsrael: Israel : Interior Minister cancels investigation into the organization “Adalah”Paris-Geneva, 19 February 2004 – The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint program of FIDH and OMCT, welcomes the decision of the Israeli Interior Minister, Mr. Avraham Poraz, to accept the appeal submitted by the Legal Centre for Arab Minority Rights in Israel, “Adalah,” against the opening of an investigation into its activities.  On  August 11, 2002, Adalah learnt from the Israeli media that an official investigation was to be opened into its activities. On August 23, Adalah was notified of this decision in a letter dated August 18, signed by the Registrar of Associations’ of the Interior Ministry, and indicating that an investigator was to be appointed. The decision was based on three claims: “1) Contrary to the specific goals registered with the Registrar of Associations, the organization provided legal aid and legal services to Arab organizations and institutions on issues of discrimination; 2) prior to its registration, Adalah had allegedly received funds from the Galilee Society to finance salaries for Adalah employees; and 3) the registrar had suspicions concerning the use of money for the benefit of certain political figures.”  On February 7, 2004, Interior Minister Mr. Avraham Poraz decided to accept the appeal submitted by Adalah on September 5, 2002 calling for the investigation to be halted. Mr. Poraz stated: “after reviewing all documents which were provided by Attorney Goldstein (representative of the Registrar of Associations) and by Adalah, and after consulting with the Legal Advisor of the Ministry, Sarit Dana, Advocate and accepting her legal opinion, I hereby decide to accept the appeal.” Adalah is considering the possibility of filing a tort suit against the Registrar for harming the reputation of the organization by providing false information to the media. In this regard, the Observatory recalls that following the Registrar’s decision to open an investigation, Adalah had been subjected to a defamation campaign, in particular by the Jerusalem Post, Yediot Ahronot and Ma’ariv newspapers (See annual report of the Observatory 2002).    The Observatory, together with other international organizations, expressed its concern over the Registrar’s decision indicating that this decision came at a time when “the organization is involved in several important cases affecting members of the Arab minority community and follows the introduction of several laws and policies aimed at restricting the rights of Arab citizens of Israel” (See open letter to the Israeli authorities, co-authored with eight international NGOs, 20 August 2002).  Press Contact :   FIDH : 00 331 43 55 25 18 / OMCT : 00 41 22 809 49 29 