Pakistan:  OMCT and HRCP call upon the government to implement the UN Convention against Torture
November 24, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionReports and Publications / Pakistan / 2014 / NovemberPakistan: OMCT and HRCP call upon the government to implement the UN Convention against TorturePR: Consultation in Pakistan on CAT Implementation2 pages / 481 KB​
			
				
					Geneva, 24 November 2014. At the conclusion of a mission to Pakistan, the World
Organisation against Torture (OMCT) and its partner the Human Rights Commission of
Pakistan (HRCP) call for the implementation of the UN Convention against Torture and
the follow-up to its announcement to submit its overdue initial report to the UN
Committee against Torture.



Over the first two weeks of November, the OMCT and the HRCP held two consultations on the
implementation of the UN Convention against Torture (CAT) in Karachi and Islamabad. The two
consultations brought together experts and stakeholders from almost all parts of the country.
At the consultation in Islamabad, Law and Justice Secretary Barrister Zafarullah Khan reported
that the Ministry of Law, Justice and Human Rights had finalized Pakistan’s initial report and
was committed to submitting it to the Committee against Torture in the next months after the
conclusion of the inter-agency consultation process.

The OMCT and HRCP further appreciate that Awami National Party leader and Senate Standing
Committee on Human Rights Chairperson Senator Afrasiab Khattak, Senator Taj Haider from
the Pakistan Peoples Party, and Muttahida Quami Movement leader Khawaja Izhar Ul Hassan
participated in the consultations and promised to propose a draft bill and resolution in
parliament urging the national and provincial governments to implement the CAT.

Representatives from civil society, trade unions, journalists, lawyers, government officials,
members of provincial and national parliaments, and academics, who participated in the
consultations, discussed the challenges the state was facing and formulated several
recommendations in order to improve the implementation of the CAT.
Legal Reforms
Although Pakistan has laws in place that allow for the prevention of torture and protection of
victims, its legislation and practice lacks several important features and safeguards. First, the
Pakistan Penal Code does not criminalize torture and therefore does not provide accountability
for torture and ill-treatment. Second, despite supposed safeguards against the use of torture to
extract confessions in the constitution, the Criminal Procedure Code and in the evidence law
(Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984), coercion and torture are widely used during investigation,
with a view to obtain information or a confession. Third, the right of reparation is not
implemented in the existing legal framework. This means that the possibility of compensation
as an entitlement is lacking and rehabilitation structures are non-existent.

Participants therefore recommended an urgent amendment of the Pakistan Penal Code to
introduce a provision on torture that fully complies with the CAT. They also recommended
implementation of the right to rehabilitation resulting from Article 14 of the CAT.

Police Reforms
Torture and ill-treatment in police detention and during police interaction with the citizens in
general, including protesters, are frequent and systemic. Yet, almost no actions are brought to
court. In most cases, victims fear reprisals as often the police unit accused of torture is also
tasked with conducting inquiries into torture allegations. Participants were also concerned
about the fatalities that result from custodial torture and other police encounters.







Poverty and inequality have been identified as a root cause for torture by the police and for the
lack of judicial and political responses. Victims of torture and ill-treatment are usually ordinary
criminal suspects from the very low-income sector who cannot afford a lawyer and whose
family do not have the standing and connection to be taken seriously by the police, prosecutor
or judges. They usually also lack knowledge about their human rights.

Police officers are also not well trained to be exposed to poverty and situations that come with
it. They themselves are negatively affected by poverty and inequality. Also their basic human
rights are impeded as they are chronically overworked, poorly renumerated and
underequipped. Participants therefore proposed to invest in the training of police officers and
equip them with modern forensic means. 
Law and Order and Countering TerrorismA combination of criminal and terrorist activity, turf wars of criminal gangs with political
patronage pose a serious threat in several regions of Pakistan. Especially in FATA and in parts
of Balochistan, attacks, forced disappearance, and targeted killings affect a huge number of
families. Participants therefore recommended an independent commission to probe
accusations of torture, killings, and disappearances.

In order to react to these threats Pakistan enacted the Pakistan Protection Act earlier this year.
Participants expressed their concern over the provision that allows for administrative
detention for up to 90 days. Participants are also worried about the application of the anti-
terrorism law towards political and human rights activists who protest against this law. It has
thus been recommended that the Pakistan Protection Act be applied in compliance with
Pakistan’s obligations under the CAT and the UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
Background of the missionThe consultations were undertaken within the framework of a three-year OMCT project called
“Towards Implementation and Accountability”. It aims at the implementation of the UN
Convention against Torture and is financially supported by the European Commission and the
National Endowment for Democracy.

For further information please contact:

Nicole Buerli, Human Rights Advisor OMCT, nb@omct.org, Tel: +41 (0)22 809 49 39
Waqar Mustafa, OMCT-HRCP Project, wamust@hotmail.com, Tel: (92-42) 35838341,
35864994, 35865969 