Sri Lanka:  Sri Lanka: 19-year old Lalith Rajapakse was arbitrarily arrested and subjected to torture
May 13, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2002 / MaySri Lanka: Sri Lanka: 19-year old Lalith Rajapakse was arbitrarily arrested and subjected to tortureCase LKA 130502 Torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sri Lanka.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Asian Human Rights Commission that 19-year old Lalith Rajapakse was arbitrarily arrested and subjected to torture while in detention at the Kabdana police station on April 19th, 2002, and is now in a critical condition, in Colombo, Sri Lanka.    According to the information received, on April 19th, 2002, Mr. Rajapakse was sleeping at a friend’s house when police officer Wijeratne (badge no. 31125) and two other officers reportedly assaulted him and took him to the Kabdana police station, having accused him of theft.  His family was not informed and only learnt of his arrest on April 20th, 2002.  When Mr. Rajapakse’s grandfather went to see him, he found that his grandson was lying on the floor of the cell unconscious, reportedly as the result of torture inflicted on him the day before.  Alerted by the grandfather’s cries that they had killed his grandson, the guards told him that Lalith Rajapakse had had a fit, and they then took him to the Ragama Hospital in a very serious condition, which resulted in him being immediately transferred to Colombo Central Hospital.  He remained unconscious until May 7th, 2002. However, to date, his condition remains critical, and Mr. Rajapakse’s family, who are poor, cannot provide him with adequate medical attention. In addition to the physical injuries that Mr. Rajapakse sustained as a result of the police’s alleged action, he is reportedly also completely broken down psychologically and reacts fearfully to the sight of a person in uniform. No investigation has reportedly been initiated into the circumstances of these events, despite complaints made by Mr. Rajapakse’s family, and the perpetrators of this attack continue to enjoy impunity.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is deeply concerned by the Sri Lankan authorities use of torture on Lalith Rajapakse while he was in detention, as a result of which he is now in a critical condition.  OMCT fears that the perpetrators of this attack will not be brought to justice and that Lalith Rajapakse will not be granted adequate reparation, including appropriate medical assistance, which he requires as a matter of urgency.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sri Lanka urging them to:  ·	Ensure that Lalith Rajapakse be given appropriate medical assistance as a matter of urgency;  ·	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  ·	guarantee adequate reparation to Lalith Rajapakse;  ·	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Her Excellency President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, President's House, Colombo 3, Sri Lanka. Fax No 00 94 1 333703 E-mails: for_min@sri.lanka.net  ·	Prime Minister Honorable Ranil Wickremasinghe, 58 Sir Earnest de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 7. Sri Lanka. Fax No 00 94 1575454  ·	Honorable Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, 37, Kirula Place, Colombo 5. Sri Lanka. Fax No 00 94 1 437680  ·	Hon. Ambassador, Permanent Mission and Consulate General of Sri Lanka, 56, Rue De Moillebeau, 5th Floor, 1 209, Geneva 19, Switzerland, Fax: (41-22) 734 9084, E-mail: mission.srilanka@itu.ch  ·	Hon. High-Commissioner, The High Commission of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 13 Hyde Park Gardens London W2 2LU United Kingdom Fax: 0044 207 262-7970  Please also write to the embassies of Sri Lanka in your respective country.  Geneva, May 13th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 