Congo, Democratic Republic:  Meet Justin Bahirwe: A lawyer trying to reduce Congolese’s exposure to the pervasive risk of torture
December  2, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Links / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2015 / DecemberCongo, Democratic Republic: Meet Justin Bahirwe: A lawyer trying to reduce Congolese’s exposure to the pervasive risk of torture  
  
Dec. 2, Bukavu (DRC) – All lawyers are
supposed to uphold human rights, but Justin Bahirwe is as committed to fighting
torture as others to belief in God.
“One can be a
non-practicing believer,” he says. “For me, it’s a matter of personal
conviction; I see this fight as a very necessary dogma that I must put into
practice.”When listening to a
soft-spoken, articulate, impeccably dressed 34-year-old Justin, you would think
he is promoting human rights in a peaceful, predictable, functioning State. 

You cannot tell he
lives in Bukavu, in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), a
desolate place where the world’s deadliest conflict since WW2 has not relented
for over two decades, killing some 5.4 million people, where tens of thousands
of children are recruited as soldiers – if they do not die of diarrhoea or
malaria – political opponents are killed, corruption is rampant and
deeply-rooted, the infrastructure inexistent and extreme poverty pervasive. 
In a place like that,
it would be more than legitimate to simply give up on wanting to address an
issue as complex as torture. What sustains Justin’s drive are the many
thank-you letters he receives from survivors of torture or gender-based sexual
violence he saw through their trials as Coordinator of SOS Information Juridique
multisectorielle, or from members of poor communities in rural areas
that he provided with free training about their rights. 
A specialist in the
rights of women and children, he contributes to building the legal instruments
to combat torture by working with the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office
on the development of national protection measures for human rights defenders in
his country. 
The job can be
disheartening, Justin admits. Several times, after speaking about his work on
the radio for instance, he has had to flee his country to avoid government
reprisals, leaving behind family and work. 
To stay alive, Justin
has developed personal security strategies such as working with a national
network of lawyers to spread the risks of government retaliation, learning
how to engage United Nations human rights protection mechanisms, reaching out
to a prominent « godmother » such as Dutch politician Maria Martens,
or collaborating with international partners such as OMCT, Human Rights Watch
and Amnesty International, all of this to increase the « political
cost » of any action against him …
The deeply engrained
and pervasive use of torture in DRC puts citizens in a situation as precarious
as the constant exposure to the risk of having a car crash, according to
Justin. “Anyone can have their life overturned at any time.”
A man who has been
tortured may never again be able to be the family breadwinner he was, affecting
an entire community. He may even become incapable of facing them for years,
Justin explains. « Our colleague in North Kivu, Sylvestre Bwira, in spite
of all the medical and psychological assistance he received, has been hurting
ever since he was forced to leave the country in 2011. In addition to his
family, which he had to abandon, indirect victims of the torture he underwent
include his organization and the beneficiaries of his work.» 
– by Lori Brumat in
Geneva 
To know more about the "10 December, 10
Defenders" campaign, click here.Pledge your voice, an action, or funds and help us support 10 HRD
continue their fight against torture!

OMCT wishes
to thank the OAK Foundation, the European Union and the Republic and Canton
of Geneva for their support. Its content is the sole
responsibility of OMCT and should in no way be interpreted as reflecting 