Kenya:  Violent repression against an anti-corruption demonstration
November 10, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2016 / NovemberKenya: Violent repression against an anti-corruption demonstration 

URGENT APPEAL - THE
OBSERVATORY

KEN 002 / 1116 / OBS 094
Obstacles
to freedom of assembly /
Excessive
use of violence /
Arbitrary
arrest / Release
Kenya
November 10, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Kenya. 
 
Description of the situation: 
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Kenya Human Rights Commission
(KHRC) about the violent repression against an anti-corruption[1]
demonstration the KHRC co-organised with PAWA 254, the Inter-Religious Council,
Transparency International Kenya, Civil Society Reference Group, Sauti ya
Wanjiku, Katiba Institute among other partners in Kenya. 
 
According to the information received, on
November 3, 2016, around 500 people peacefully gathered in Nairobi’s Uhuru
Park, at the Freedom Corner, to protest against the increasing number of
corruption scandals and the admission by the President Uhuru Kenyatta of his
inability to resolve them. The crowd intended to reach the Presidential Palace
and give a petition[2]
to the President when the police violently dispersed the demonstration, through
firing tear gas and water canons. Moreover, some police officers were also
filmed beating up unarmed protesters and journalists.
 
At least 10 activists and journalists have
been injured, and 24 peaceful protesters were arbitrarily arrested, briefly
held at the Central and Parliament police stations and released a few hours later
without charges.
 
The Observatory would like to recall that
this is not an isolated case, but more a pattern of excessive use of force by the police against defenders, lawyers and
activists during peaceful demonstrations, used as a mean of repression against
their freedom of expression, association and assembly. This trend is perceived by the population
to be increasing, especially in view of the upcoming August 2017 elections, as
several defenders told to the Observatory delegates during the international
fact-finding mission conducted from October 24 to 28, 2016[3].
 
Similar episodes of violent crowd control by
the police, including by use of lethal force, have happened earlier this year
during May 23 and June 6 protests in the Nyanza region (Western Kenya) and of
June 6 in Nairobi against cases of corruption within the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (IEBC), the national elections management body. This violent
repression provoked at
least five extrajudicial killings and 60 wounded among the peaceful
demonstrators.
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the violent
repressions of peaceful demonstrations by the police, which only aim at
sanctioning the legitimate exercise of Kenyan citizens of their right to
freedom of assembly.
 
Moreover, the Observatory calls upon the
Kenyan authorities to promptly open investigation on police excessive use of
violence as a means of crowd control, and to implement sustained police reforms
as foreseen in the 2011 National Police
Service Act and the 2011 National Police Service Commission Act.

 
The Observatory recalls that the Kenyan authorities
have the responsibility to ensure the protection of human rights in general and
of the rights related to freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly and
association in particular, as protected respectively under Articles 33, 36 and
37 of the 2010 Constitution.
 

Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Kenya,
urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of all the defenders fighting against corruption and
other governance issues, as well as all peaceful protesters and human rights
defenders in Kenya; 
 
ii. Ensure in all circumstances that all human
rights defenders in Kenya are able to carry out their legitimate human rights
activities including the organisation of strikes and peaceful and unarmed
assemblies without any hindrance or fear of violence;
 
iii. Request the Independent Policing Oversight
Authority (IPOA); Commission on Administrative Justice (CAJ) and Kenya National
Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR) to jointly investigate the circumstances
under which the police continue to violate the rights of peaceful protesters
and hold the culprits to account.
 
iv. Call upon the National Police Service
Commission to review the police
standing orders to reflect international standards on the use of force and
policing of assemblies. 
 
v. Comply with all the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles
1 and 12,2;
 
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Kenya.
 
Addresses:
 
·  Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the
Republic of Kenya, Fax: +254-020-2436, Email: president@statehousekenya.go.ke
·  Hon. William Ruto, Deputy-President of
the Republic of Kenya, Email: dp@deputypresident.go.ke
·  Hon. Joseph Nkaissery, Interior &
Coordination of National Government, Email: ps.interior@kenya.go.ke
·  Inspector General of Police, Email:
nps@nationalpolice.go.ke 
·  Macharia Njeru,
Chairperson, Email: macharia.njeru@ipoa.go.ke

·  Otiende Amollo,
Chairperson, Commission on Administrative Justice (CAJ), Email: otiendeamollo@yahoo.com; otiendeamollo@ombudsman.go.ke
·  Commissioner Kagwiria Mbogori,
Chairperson, Kenya National Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR), Fax: +254-020-
2716160 E-mail haki@knchr.org 
·  H.E. Mr. Stephen Ndungu Karau, Permanent
Mission of Kenya to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22
731 29 05, E-mail: mission.kenya@ties.itu.int 
·  H.E. Johnson Weru, Embassy of Kenya in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 340 10 50 / + 32 2 340 10 68. Email: kenbrussels@hotmail.com 
Please also write to
the diplomatic representations of Kenya in your respective countries.
***
Paris-Geneva, November 10, 2016
 
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.

The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH
and OMCT. The objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy
situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT
are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union
Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil
society.



[1]     According to the Transparency
International’s corruption index, Kenya ranks 139 out of 168 countries, which
means that it is one of the countries with the highest public perception of
corruption.


[2]    The petition : http://www.khrc.or.ke/2015-03-04-10-37-01/press-releases/567-petition-to-his-excellency-the-president-uhuru-kenyatta-for-expedient-and-decisive-action-against-grand-corruption.html
 


[3]     See the Observatory Press
Release of October 28, 2016 with the preliminary findings of the mission.



​ 