Guatemala:  European Parliament mobilises for Human Rights Defenders in Guatemala
February 16, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Guatemala / 2017 / FebruaryGuatemala: European Parliament mobilises for Human Rights Defenders in Guatemala
2016 registered 233 human rights defenders
assaults and 14 homicides, the majority of those remained unpunished The EP reports threats and intimidation campaigns towards court officials The EP urges both Guatemalan authorities to comply with their human
rights obligations and the Congress to ratify the reform justice proposal.

Brussels 16 of
February, 2017.
The European
Parliament today, during his plenary session in Strasbourg, has approved an
urgent resolution on the situation of human rights defenders in Guatemala.  By this initiative, eurodeputies both express
their concerns and acknowledge the work carried out by human rights defenders.
For this reason, they urge the Guatemalan government to adopt measures aimed at
protecting HRDs from assaults and dangers they are confronting regularly.
Figures are alarming. The EP recalls that in
between January and November 2016, 223 assaults were registered against Human
Rights Defenders s as well as 14 killings and 7 attempted murders. Since the beginning of the year, 2 Human
Rights Defenders were killed in Guatemala. The majority of these crimes were
the final act of a long and repetitive cycle of violence.
The EP also underlines the hostile environment
in which justice officials have to work. They face harassment, criminalization,
coercion, discredit and intimidation campaigns, which undermine the
independence of the judiciary system in the country.
The resolution also supports the new justice
reform initiative, which has been presented recently in the Guatemalan
Congress. It aims at undertaking legal reforms to strengthen the Rule of Law in
the country.
Majority support in
the European Parliament
According to Beatriz Becerra,
vice-chair of the Subcommittee on Human Rights of the
European Parliament and member of the
Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE), “human
rights defenders are the most powerful asset in the achievement of a more
independent justice, however, they are defamed, harassed and ultimately
assassinated. For these reasons the Guatemalan government have to protect them
with ambitious public policies”.
Last year, Hans-Olaf Henkel, member of the European Conservatives and Reformists Group (ECR) took part in a European
Parliament mission to Guatemala. “Since my visit, I closely followed this
serious situation and although I developed hopes with the new elected
president, today I am deeply disillusioned and the situation of lawyers and
Human Rights Defenders seems highly worrying”. 
Marina Albiol, of the GUE/NGL group considers that “ showing concerns is
not enough”, especially because “EU responsibility is evident”. “There is a
link between the presence of multinational corporations and attacks of Human
Rights Defenders who oppose and mobilise against hydroelectrical projects, as
shown by the case of Pojom II or Renace, mining projects such as FeNix or the
one represented by the French oil company Perenco”.
Finally, Ernest Urtasun, member of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance states that “it is not
possible that representatives of the judiciary as well as the Director of the
International commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG), Iván Velázquez,
are subjected to attacks without the government putting in place efficient
protective measures. With the introduction of the Constitutional Justice Reform
proposal, elaborated with the contribution of many national sectors and under
discussion in the Congress now, we can see a light on the horizon although it
is imperative that the proposal is fully endorsed”. 
Civil society reactions 
International
organizations and civil society networks, whose membership exceeds 500
organisations, celebrate this parliamentary initiative and share the requests
and concerns expressed in it.
These
organizations highlight in particular the parliamentary petition which invites
the EU to take on a more proactive role in the promotion of the security of
Human Rights Defenders, through the adoptions of effective measures and£
protection mechanisms in the framework of their political dialogue, cooperation
and trade relations with Guatemala. 
The
organisations hope that this resolution can send a clear message to the
Guatemalan authorities in order to act and protect human rights defenders,
especially women, rural populations, trade unionists, persons discriminated
because of their sexual orientation and indigenous communities; who all work
towards a democratic society, and in
defense of their land, the environment, Economic Social and Cultural rights,
justice and the fight against impunity.
For More Information: 
Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui 
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), in the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human rights Defenders (OMCT-FIDH
partnership), Member of CIFCA
+32 2 218 3719
Kerstin Reemtsma
Peace Brigades International, Guatemala Project
+32 470 595295 