Iran:  Enforced disappearance of Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi
March  4, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2011 / MarchIran: Enforced disappearance of Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh KarroubiCase IRN 040311
Enforced disappearance/ Risk of torture and
ill-treatment/ Fear for the physical and psychological integrity
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Iran.
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by a reliable source about the enforced disappearance of Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, two opposition leaders[1], along with their wives, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and
Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi, since 24 February 2011. OMCT
fears for their safety. 
According to the information
received by the International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, on 14 February 2011, the aforementioned
persons were confined
in their homes, in Teheran, under an illegal “house arrest”, with no arrest
warrant, summons or charge, after Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mr. Mehdi Karroubi
called for public demonstrations in solidarity with Egyptian and Tunisian
pro-democracy activists[2].
Their homes were reportedly surrounded by uniformed and plain-closed security
forces. Family members and associates were not allowed to their homes and
communication, including the phone, was cut off. 
According
to the same information, around 24 February 2011, Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr.
Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi were transferred
from their homes to an unknown location, reportedly a “safe house”[3].
Some reports indicate that they may have been moved to Heshmatiyeh Prison,
in Tehran. Authorities have, on their side,
denied any transfer and stated that the four are still confined in their homes
prohibited from communication. However, according to the same information
received, their homes would be empty. Despite numerous requests from their
families to the authorities for information on their whereabouts, the families
were unable to receive any information. 
OMCT is deeply concerned about the safety of Mir
Hossein Mousavi, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh
Karroubi as their whereabouts remain unknown. OMCT
fears that they may be subjected to torture, ill-treatment and/or extrajudicial
killing. Iranian intelligence and
security services have a well-established track record of using torture against
opponents. OMCT urges the competent
authorities to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity at all
times, in accordance with international human rights law, in particular the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and to
immediately locate and disclose their whereabouts.
Action
requested
Please write to the authorities in
Iran urging them to: 
i.              
Immediately locate and disclose the
whereabouts of Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard
and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi; 
ii.            
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mir Hossein Mousavi, Mr Mehdi
Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi as well as of their
families;
iii.           
Grant Mir Hossein
Mousavi, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra
Rahnavard and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi prompt and unconditional access to a lawyer of their choice and their families, as
well as guarantee that they are examined by independent doctors and receive
adequate medical care, in accordance, inter alia, the UN Standard Minimum Rules
for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iv.          
Order
their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring them before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and
guarantee their procedural rights at all times;
v.            
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the enforced
disappearance of Mir Hossein Mousavie, Mr. Mehdi Karroubi, Ms. Zahra Rahnavard
and Ms. Fatemeh Karroubi, the results of which must be made public, in order
to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial
tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by
law; 
vi.          
Ensure that an effective remedy, including
the right to full redress with compensation and rehabilitation be granted to
the victims concerned; 
vii.         
Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental
freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and
international human rights standards.
Addresses 
Ø     
Leader of the Islamic Republic, His Excellency
Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, The Office of the Supreme Leader, Shoahada
Street, Qom, Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21 649, + 98 21 649 / 21 774
2228, Email: info@leader.ir / istiftaa@wilayah.org / webmaster@wilayah.org /
info_leader@leader.ir
Ø      President
Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, Azerbaijan
Intersection, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 649 5880. Email: dr-ahmadinejad@president.ir
Ø     
Head of the Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah
Sadeq Larijani, Ministry of Justice, Park-e Shahr, Tehran, Islamic Republic of
Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: Irjpr@iranjudiciary.com / bia.judi@yahoo.com
Ø     
Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Abdolmajid Keshk-e Mesri Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic
of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 390 1999, Email: matbuat@mfa.gov
Ø     
Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203,
Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
Ø     
Embassy of Iran in Brussels, 15 a
avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: +
32 2 762 39 15. Email: iran-embassy@yahoo.com
Please also write to the
diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective countries.
***
Geneva, 4 March 2011
Kindly inform
OMCT of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your
reply



[1] Both were unsuccessful candidates to the disputed 2009 presidential
elections. 


[2] Demonstrations that took place on 14 and 20 February 2011 were reportedly violently repressed by the security forces. 


[3] A “safe
house” is considered a location for secret detention of high security
detainees, which is not under the control of the Judiciary or any other
monitoring mechanisms. The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and the Iranian
intelligence agencies are known for using “safe houses” in order to get forced
confessions from detainees without scrutiny or pressure from other legal
bodies. 