Kyrgyzstan:  Press Release: The Supreme Court overturns the decision of the lower court designating Reports of FIDH Member Organisations as “Extremist”
October 23, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2018 / OctoberKyrgyzstan: Press Release: The Supreme Court overturns the decision of the lower court designating Reports of FIDH Member Organisations as “Extremist”

THE OBSERVATORY - PRESS RELEASE

  
Bishkek – Geneva - Paris,
October 23, 2018 – Yesterday, the Supreme
Court of Kyrgyzstan granted the petition of FIDH member organization Bir Duino Kyrgyzstan
challenging the lower court’s designation of reports by Bir Duino and Anti-Discrimination Centre (ADC) “Memorial” as “extremist” and banning
the activities of ADC “Memorial”. The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (FIDH-OMCT) welcomes the decision,
but calls on the judicial authorities to stop any judicial harassment against
the two NGOs or censure of their reports upon reconsideration. 
During
yesterday’s hearing, presided by judges Mr. Bolotbek Batyraliev, Ms. Dilara
Arstanbaeva and Mr. Zhumagulov Pamiridin, Chairman, the Supreme Court Council
of Judges for the Civil Section considered the petition of Ms. Tolekan
Ismailova, Director of Bir Duino Kyrgyzstan, requesting the reinstatement of
the appeals period to challenge the January 5, 2017, decision of the Oktyabrski
District Court of Bishkek. 
In
its decision issued on January 5, 2017, the Oktyabrski District Court had
declared a report submitted by ADC "Memorial" and Bir Duino
Kyrgyzstan to the United Nations Committee on the Rights of Migrant Workers as
“extremist material” and subsequently banned all activities of ADC
"Memorial" in Kyrgyzstan. 
Bir Duino’s lawyers argued that the Kyrgyz authorities did not notify
either ADC "Memorial" or Bir Duino Kyrgyzstan of the lower court’s
decision. Thus, the right of the two human rights organisations to defend
themselves in court and to appeal the decision within legally established
deadlines was violated. 
The
Supreme Court reinstated the period of appeal for the January 2017 decision and
annulled the decision of the Oktyabrski Court in its entirety, thus lifting the
“extremist materials” designation at least temporarily and reinstating the
right of ADC Memorial to carry out its activities in Kyrgyzstan. The matter was
remanded to the Oktyabrski Court for reconsideration.
“Yesterday’s decision by the Supreme
Court of Kyrgyzstan evidences the incipience of the rule of law and
independence of the judiciary in Kyrgyzstan”, commented
Ms. Tolekan Ismailova, who was present at the hearing. “The practice of power structures,
like the offices of the General Prosecutor and the Kyrgyz State Committee for
National Security, with the abusive implementation of Article 299 Part 2 of the
Penal Code of Kyrgyzstan against independent NGOs, activists, bloggers and
ethnic minorities must be abandoned. Bir Duino welcomes the decision of the
Supreme Court and congratulates its partners and colleagues in the
reinstatement of their rights and good name”, Ismailova
concluded.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective
of this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
For more information,
please contact:
• FIDH: Samuel Hanryon:
+33(0)672284294 / Audrey Couprie: +33(0)648059157
• OMCT: Miguel Martín /
Delphine Reculeau: +41228094939 