Angola:  Joint Press Release: Detained pro-democracy activists should be released
October 16, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Angola / 2015 / OctoberAngola: Joint Press Release: Detained pro-democracy activists should be releasedAngola_2015.10.16_Joint_PR_English2 pages / 248 KB​

JOINT PRESS RELEASE

 
 
Geneva-Paris, October 16, 2015 – After almost four months of arbitrary
detention of pro-democracy human rights defenders and following the detention
of 20 individuals who were participating in a vigil to demand their release,
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint FIDH-OMCT
programme), AJPD and OSISA-Angola call for their immediate and unconditional
release after filing a communication to the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention.
 
Thirteen pro-democracy activists namely, Messrs. Henrique
Luaty Beirão (a.k.a. Brigadeiro Mata-Frakuxz), Manuel Nito Alves, Nuno
Alvaro Dala, Nelson Dibango Mendes Dos Santos, Alfonso Jojo
Matias (a.k.a. Mbanza Hamza), Sedrick de Carvalho, Fernando
António Tómas (a.k.a. Nicola Radical), Hitler Chiconda (a.k.a.
Samussuku), Italiano Arante Kivuvu, Benedito Dali (a.k.a. Dito
Dali), Albano Bingobingo (a.k.a. Albano Liberdade), José Gomes
Hata (a.k.a. Cheik Hata) and Inocénio De Brito (a.k.a. Drux), were
arrested by heavily armed police on June 20, 2015, while participating in a
book club meeting to discuss human rights violations, democracy and governance
concerns in Angola, through a reflection on the book by Gene Sharp entitled
“From Dictatorship to Democracy”. The next day, journalist and human rights
activist Mr. Domingos da Cruz was also arrested. Mr. da Cruz was
initially supposed to take part in the meeting as a speaker, but he finally did
not attend the meeting. On June 24, Mr. Osvaldo Caholo, a reserve military
personnel and university professor acquainted to one of the fourteen, was also
arrested after the police found photos of him during a police search conducted.
A total of 15 individuals have been unlawfully detained on trumped up charges
of plotting against the Government  for
nearly four months .
 
“We reiterate
our strong condemnation of the ongoing arbitrary detention of pro-democracy
activists on trumped up rebellion and plotting charges, which was staged by the
authorities to punish them for peaceful human rights activities and in
violation of the rights recognized by the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights”, FIDH President Karim Lahidji
said.
 
Mr. Henrique Luaty Beirão has been on a hunger strike for 26
days to protest his arbitrary detention. It is reported that his physical
condition has seriously deteriorated. He was again hospitalised on October 9.
Other two activists Albano Bingobingo and Nelson Dibango Mendes Dos Santos have
also been on hunger strike for 12 and five days respectively.
 
“The situation for human rights defenders in
Angola is deteriorating in a very worrying way and the international community
must be firm in defending their right to carry out their activities without any
hurdles. That is why we have filed a complaint to the Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention and we are confident that this mechanism will confirm the
arbitrariness of these detentions and request their immediate and unconditional
release”, OMCT Secretary General Gerald
Staberock said. 
 
On October 12, 2015, 20 individuals
were arrested for participating in a vigil to demand the release of the
detained human rights defenders.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997
by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of
this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders.
 
For more
information, please contact:
• FIDH: Arthur Manet: + 33143552518
• OMCT:
Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +324966903 /
Delphine Reculeau: +41228094934
•
AJPD: Maria Lúcia da Silveira: +244923552478
•
OSISA-Angola: Elias Isaac - +244 924674399 