Cambodia:  New wave of arrests targeting human rights defenders threatens to destroy vibrant human rights community
May  9, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / MayCambodia: New wave of arrests targeting human rights defenders threatens to destroy vibrant human rights communityParis-Geneva, May 9, 2016 - Cambodian
authorities must immediately end its crackdown against the human rights
community, the Observatory (FIDH-OMCT) urged today. Two human rights workers,
four land rights activists and two international rights workers were arrested
this morning in Phnom Penh as they attempted to make their way to a
demonstration organised to denounce the arbitrary detention of four senior
human rights workers and a former colleague one week ago. All were released in
the evening of the same day.
 
On May 9 in the morning, Mr. Thav Kimsan,
Deputy Director of the Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defense of Human
Rights (LICADHO), and Mr. Ee Sarom, Executive Director of the housing
rights organisation Sahmakum Teang
Tnaut (STT), were stopped around 2 km from Prey Sar prison and detained in
Dangkao district police station. Shortly afterwards, Ms. Sor Sorn, a
land rights activist from the Borei Keila community, was also arrested and
brought to Dangkao district police station. At about the same time, Ms. Bov
Sophea, Ms. Kong Chantha and Ms. Song Sreyleap, three land
rights activists from the Boeung Kak community, were arrested and detained in
Daun Penh police station. 
 
The six were on their way to participate in the
first “Black Monday”, a demonstration that was planned to take place outside
Prey Sar’s CC1 and CC2 prisons and in which participants dressed in black to
call for the release of four staff of the Cambodian Human Rights
and Development Association (ADHOC) - Messrs. Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda,
Yi Soksan, and Ms. Lim Mony - as well as former ADHOC
staffer Mr. Ny Chakrya, recently appointed Deputy Secretary General of
the National Election Committee (NEC), who were detained on May 2 following their arrest by the Government’s
Anti-Corruption Unit (ACU) on
April 28. 
 
“Police
intimidation and judicial harassment have escalated in the past weeks. This is
the worst crackdown against civil society in years, and is a clear attempt to
destroy Cambodia's vibrant human rights community”, said FIDH
President Karim Lahidji.
 
At about 11.30 am, two international consultants
from LICADHO, were taken to the Immigration Department for
questioning while outside the Dangkao district police station. The two were
among about 40 who gathered outside the station to support the detained human
rights defenders. While in custody, the two were questioned in relation to the
attempted demonstration. 
 
The eight defenders were all released between
6.30 and 7.30 pm, without any charge.
 
On May 8, the Interior Ministry had issued a
statement opposing the “Black Monday”, warning that authorities would enforce
the law in order to maintain peace, political stability and social order.
 
“The waves of recent arrests add to legal restrictions imposed against
civil society through the repressive Law on Associations and Non-Governmental
Organizations (LANGO), which contains numerous provisions violating
international human rights standards binding Cambodia, as well as the country’s
own Constitution”, said OMCT
Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
The Observatory calls upon the authorities of Cambodia to immediately and
unconditionally release the five human rights defenders still
incarcerated after being arbitrarily detained last week and, more generally, to put an end to the increasing
repression of dissenting voices in the country.

The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).
The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or
remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders.
 
For more information, please contact:
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey
Couprie: + 33 1 43 55 25 18·       OMCT:
Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 