Cambodia:  Release detained human rights defenders and stop their harassment
July 21, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / JulyCambodia: Release detained human rights defenders and stop their harassment

Paris-Geneva,
July 21, 2016 - The Cambodian Government must immediately release five
prominent human rights defenders who are currently arbitrarily detained based
on trumped-up charges that stem solely from their human rights activities, the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT
partnership) said today. The call was made following a three-day mission
conducted by the Observatory in Phnom Penh. The Observatory also calls on the
authorities to end threats, intimidation, and harassment against human rights
defenders in the country. 

 
“An
increasing number of Cambodian human rights defenders find themselves behind
bars or forced into exile. The Government must immediately end its campaign of
repression against civil society and release all those who have been
arbitrarily detained,” said FIDH President Karim Lahidji.
 
On
July 18, 2016, Ny Chakrya, former
Head of the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association’s (ADHOC) human
rights section and current National Election Committee (NEC) Deputy
Secretary-General, stood trial at the Phnom Penh Municipal Court on charges of
defamation brought by the former Deputy Prosecutor and the Investigative Judge
at the Siem Reap Provincial Court (see background information). At the trial,
Ny Chakrya objected to the continuation of the proceedings without the presence
in court of the two plaintiffs. Ny Chakrya’s legal team argued that the absence
of the two plaintiffs prevented their client from challenging his accusers.
When the trial Judge Khy Chhai refused to adjourn the proceedings to allow for
the presence of the plaintiffs, Ny Chakrya’s attorney requested that he be
allowed to file a motion to recuse the judge within 30 days. As a result, Judge
Khy Chhai adjourned the trial pending a decision on the request to recuse him.
The proceedings lasted less than 20 minutes.
 
“The trial of
Ny Chakrya exemplifies the Cambodian judiciary’s lack of impartiality and
independence. Until he was faced with a request to have him recused, the judge
appeared determined to proceed with the prosecution of the defendant in total
disregard of standards for fair trials,” said FIDH
Director of Asia Desk - Southeast Asia Andrea Giorgetta, who observed the court
proceedings.
 
The
Observatory recalls that Ny Chakrya has been detained since May 2, 2016, in
relation to another case in which he is accused of having been an accomplice in
the bribing of a witness, along with ADHOC staff members Ny Sokha, Nay
Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Lim Mony (see background information).
 
“The ongoing
detention of the five human rights defenders is arbitrary and comes as yet
another confirmation of how the judiciary is being used by the Government of
Cambodia to silence and intimidate dissenting voices. Courts should send a
strong signal of judicial independence and grant bail to all detained human
rights defenders as a first step towards their unconditional release,” said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
On June 13, 2016, the Court of Appeals in Phnom Penh denied bail to Ny
Chakrya, Ny Sokha, Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Lim Mony. The court’s refusal to
release the five detained human rights defenders on bail is a significant
obstacle to the exercise of their basic rights, including the fundamental right
to liberty and the right to a fair trial. 
 
Family members of the five expressed concerns over poor detention
conditions in the prisons. They noted overcrowded cells, insufficient and poor
quality food, and inadequate medical care. In addition, the family members
complained that their relatives were not segregated from the general prison
population of convicted criminals, including those imprisoned for serious
offenses.
 
The
Observatory calls on the Cambodian Government to comply with the country’s
obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), to which Cambodia is a State party. Article 9(3) of the ICCPR
prescribes that pre-trial detention should be an exception and should be as
short as possible. The refusal to grant bail to the
human rights defenders also compromises their right to be presumed innocent
(guaranteed by Article 14(2) of the ICCPR). The Observatory also urges
the Cambodian authorities to ensure the respect of international human rights
standards related to prison conditions. These include the United Nations (UN)
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (‘Mandela Rules’) and the
Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of
Detention or Imprisonment.
 
The
Observatory conducted a three-day mission in Phnom Penh from July 17
to 19, 2016. In addition to the observation of Ny Chakrya’s trial and a
visit to Ny Chakrya in Phnom Penh's Police Judiciaire prison, Mr. Giorgetta
also met with activists, human rights defenders, and members of civil society
to discuss their human rights concerns, as well as with acting Cambodia
National Rescue Party (CNRP) Deputy Leader Kem Sokha and European Union (EU)
Ambassador to Cambodia George Edgar.
 
Background information:
 
Ny Chakrya is facing charges of “public defamation”,
“acts of slanderous denunciation”, and “publication of commentaries to put
pressure on jurisdiction”, under Articles 305, 311, and 522 of the Cambodian
Criminal Code. If found guilty of all charges, he could face a prison term of up to one-and-a-half years and a fine[1].
 
In addition to the above, Ny Chakrya has been
arbitrarily detained since May 2, 2016, on charges of being an accomplice in
the bribing of a witness (Articles 29 and 548 of the Criminal Code) in
connection with a separate case. On the same day, ADHOC staff members Ny Sokha,
Nay Vanda, Yi Soksan, and Lim Mony were detained on charges of bribing a
witness (Article 548 of the Criminal Code). If convicted, the five human rights
defenders could face from five to ten years’ imprisonment[2].
 
Ny
Sokha, Nay Vanda, and Yi Soksan are held in Prey Sar’s Correctional Center 1
(‘CC1’), while Lim Mony is detained in Prey Sar’s Correctional Center 2
(‘CC2’). Ny Chakrya is detained in Police Judiciaire prison. All three prisons
are located in Phnom Penh.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu,
the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
For more information, please
contact:
·    
FIDH:
Andrea Giorgetta: +66 886117722 (Bangkok) / Audrey Couprie:
+33648059157 (Paris)
·    
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva)



[1] For more
information, see Observatory Urgent Appeal KHM 002 / 0715 / OBS 056.3, issued
on July 15, 2016.


[2] For
more information, see Observatory Urgent Appeal KHM 001/0616/OBS 047, issued
on June 14, 2016. 