Turkey:  Ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Sebnem Korur Fincanci, Mr. Erol Önderoglu and Mr. Ahmet Nesin
March 24, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2017 / MarchTurkey: Ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Sebnem Korur Fincanci, Mr. Erol Önderoglu and Mr. Ahmet Nesin





New
information
TUR 004 /
0616 / OBS 049.4
Judicial harassment
Turkey
March 24, 2017
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information
and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Turkey.
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial
harassment of Ms. Şebnem Korur
Fincancı, President of the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey (HRFT), Mr. Erol
Önderoğlu, Turkey Representative of Reporters Without Borders (RWB), and
Mr. Ahmet Nesin, journalist. 
 
According to
the information received, on March 22, 2017, following a ten minutes hearing,
the Istanbul Caglayan 13th Heavy Penal Court postponed the hearing in the trial
of the three human rights defenders[1]
on charges of “provoking commission of an
offence”[2], “praising the offence and the offenders”[3] and “making propaganda of terrorist organisation through
means of press”[4] to June 8, 2017. The presiding
judge, Bulent Dalkiran, did not seat during the hearing.
 
The postponement was justified on the fact
that Mr. Ahmet Nesin and his lawyer did not attend the hearing. A bench warrant
was issued against Mr. Nesin.
 
The
Observatory recalls that the three face possible custodial sentences for taking
part in a solidarity campaign in support of the right to freedom of the press,
and more particularly the Kurdish newspaper Özgür Gündem[5].
 
The Observatory deplores the continuing judicial harassment against Ms.
Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Erol Önderoğlu and Mr. Ahmet Nesin, which seems to merely aim at sanctioning their
human rights activities. 
 
The
Observatory
calls upon the Turkish authorities to drop all the charges against them and, in the meantime, to
ensure that all judicial proceedings against them are carried out in full
compliance with their right to a fair trial, as protected under international
law. 
 
Background
information:
 
On June 20,
2016, the 1st High Court of Peace in Istanbul ordered the detention of Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Ahmet Nesin
and Mr. Erol Önderoğlu, pending an investigation into their alleged involvement
in the propaganda of terrorism. The human rights defenders presented themselves
after they had received arrest warrants, and were referred to the First High
Court of Peace after testifying before the Prosecutor on Terror and Organised
Crime at the Istanbul Court House in Çağlayan earlier that day, under
accusations of “provoking commission of offence”,“praising the offence and the
offenders” and “making terror propaganda”. 
 
Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Ahmet Nesin
and Mr. Erol Önderoğlu were questioned in relation to their participation in
the “Editor-in-chief on Duty” campaign launched in early May 2016 in solidarity
with the Özgür Gündem newspaper and to defend press freedom in Turkey[6].

 
Ms. Fincancı
was detained at Bakırköy Women Closed Prison, while Mr. Önderoğlu and Mr. Nesin
were held in Metris Prison in Istanbul. 
 
On June 30, 2016, the Istanbul Caglayan 13th Heavy Penal Court ordered
the provisional release of Ms. Fincancı and Mr. Önderoğlu. 
 
On July 1, 2016, the 14th Heavy Penal Court ordered the
provisional release of Mr. Ahmet Nesin.
 
On November
8, 2016, the Istanbul Caglayan 13th Heavy Penal Court decided to pursue the
charges against Ms. Fincancı, Mr. Önderoğlu and Mr. Nesin and decided to
postpone the hearing to January 11, 2017. 
 
On January
11, 2017, after a five minutes hearing, the Court postponed the trial to March,
21, 2017.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities in Turkey, urging them to:
 
i. Drop all
the charges against Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Erol Önderoğlu and Mr. Ahmet
Nesin and, in the meantime, ensure that any judicial proceedings against them
is carried out in full compliance with the defendants' right to a fair trial,
as protected under international law;
 
ii. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all human
rights defenders in Turkey, including Ms. Şebnem Korur Fincancı, Mr. Erol
Önderoğlu and Mr. Ahmet Nesin;
 
iii. Put an
end to all acts of harassment, including the judicial level, against all human
rights defenders in Turkey so that they are able to
carry out their work without hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Put an
end to the ongoing crackdown on civil society under the pretext of countering
terrorism and recognise the legitimate role of human rights defenders, in line
with Turkey's international obligations;
 
v. Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders
adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular its
Articles 1, 12.1 and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure in
all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Turkey.

Addresses:
 
·      
President of Turkey, Mr. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Fax: (+90 312) 525
58 31, E-mail: contact@tccb.gov.tr
·      
Prime Minister of Turkey, Mr. Binali Yıldırım; Fax: +90 (312) 403 62 82
·      
Minister of Justice, Mr.
Bekir Bozdağ, Fax: +90 (0312) 419 33 70; E-mail: info@adalet.gov.tr
·      
Minister of Interior,
Mr. Süleyman Soylu; Fax: +90 (312) 425 61 30; Email: ozelkalem@icisleri.gov.tr
·      
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Mevlüt
Çavuşoğlu, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Twitter account: @MFATurkey
·      
Ambassador Izzet Selim Yenel, Diplomatic Mission of Turkey to the
European Union in Brussels, Fax: + 32 2 511 04 50, Email: tr-delegation.eu@mfa.gov.tr
·      
H.E. Ambassador Mr. Ali Naci Koru, Permanent Mission of Turkey to
the United Nations in Geneva, Fax: +41 22 734 08 59; Email: mission.turkey@ties.itu.int
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of
Turkey in your respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, March 24, 2017
 
Kindly inform
us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu , the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line:

E-mail: Appeals[at]fidh-omct.org
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43
     55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
Tel and fax OMCT +
     41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29





[1] Mr. İnan
Kızılkaya, Managing Editor of the newspaper Özgür
Gündem, is also facing the same charges.


[2] Article 214 of the Turkish Penal
Code states that (1) Any person who openly provokes commission of an offense is
punished with imprisonment from six months to five year. (2) Any person who
arms a group against another group, or provokes to kill a person is punished
with imprisonment from fifteen years to twenty-four years. (3) In case of
commission of offenses which involves provocation, the offender is punished
from solicitation.


[3]Article 215 of the Turkish Penal Code
states that “Any person who openly praises an offense or the person committing
the offenses is punished with imprisonment up to two years”.


[4] Article 7/2 of the Anti Terror Law states that “(2) Those who assist
members of organizations constituted in the manner described above or make
propaganda in connection with such organizations shall be punished with
imprisonment of between 1 and 5 years and with a fine of between 50 million and
100 million Turkish liras, even if their offence constitutes a separate crime”.


[5] Özgür Gündem (Turkish for
“Free Agenda”) was an Istanbul-based daily newspaper in Turkish language.
Launched in May 1992, the newspaper was known for its extensive reporting on
the Kurdish-Turkish conflict, and was therefore regularly accused of making
propaganda for the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK). Its editors and staff have
frequently been arrested and tried and multiple publication bans were issued
within Turkey. On August 16, 2016, the newspaper was “temporarily” shut down
following a court order, and some twenty journalists and editors were taken
into custody. While others were released, novelist and Özgür Gündem
columnist Ms. Aslı Erdoğan, editor in-chief Mr. Zana Kaya and managing editor
Mr. İnan Kızılkaya remained imprisoned, facing charges of “membership of a
terrorist organisation” and “undermining national unity”. Ms. Asli Erdogan and
Zana Kaya were released pending trial on December 29, 2016.


[6] Özgür Gündem started the
“Editor-in-chief on Duty” campaign on May 3, 2016 to express solidarity and
defend press freedom in the face of a number of investigations faced by the
newspaper. A total of 49 prominent journalists have served as one-day
editors-in-chief since the beginning of the campaign. Some 37 of them have been
investigated up to now. Yet, Ms. Fincancı, Mr. Önderoğlu and Mr. Nesin were the
first persons to be arrested and detained in relation to the campaign. 