Equatorial Guinea:  Artist, Finally Free, Leaves Country
May 30, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Equatorial Guinea / 2018 / MayEquatorial Guinea: Artist, Finally Free, Leaves Country
Equatorial
Guinea: Artist, Finally Free, Leaves Country
Jailed for 6 Months, Barred
from Leaving for 3 More
(Nairobi, May 29, 2018)—The Equatorial Guinean
artist Ramón Esono Ebalé left the country on May 28, 2018, after being
imprisoned for six months on apparently false charges and then waiting three
months for travel documents, 13 rights organizations said today.
“Ramón Esono Ebalé’s nine-month
saga shows how many tools the Equatorial Guinean government has at its disposal
to silence critics,” said Sarah Saadoun, of Human Rights Watch. “But it also is
a powerful example of how solidarity and activism can confront abuses.” 
Esono Ebalé, a prominent
artist and cartoonist often critical of the government, who traveled to
Equatorial Guinea to request a passport, was arrested
on September 16, 2017 in Malabo, the capital, and charged
almost three months later with counterfeiting around US$1,800 worth of the
local currency. The line of questioning during the interrogation and a lack of
evidence raised serious concerns that the allegations were politically
motivated. These concerns were bolstered during the trial, when the
government’s sole witness admitted on the stand that
he was just following his bosses’ orders.
The judge dismissed the case
on February 27, and Esono Ebalé was freed,
but he remained effectively
trapped in the country because he lacked the proper travel documents. He
was finally issued a passport on May 23 and left the country five days later.
Throughout this ordeal, dozens
of cartoonists’ rights and human rights organizations and advocates worked to
publicize the case internationally, including with the United Nations and
global policymakers. The African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights wrote
a letter of appeal to
the Equatorial Guinean government, and US Senator Richard Durbin remained
actively engaged with the case. 
“We, the #FreeNseRamon
coalition, hundreds of artists, journalists, activists, rights defenders and supporters
from around the world, celebrate that Ramón will finally be able to see his loved
ones after an ordeal that lasted almost nine months,” said Tutu Alicante,
executive director of EG Justice, a group that monitors the government’s human
rights record. “Many critical voices remain silenced and imprisoned in
Equatorial Guinea, but today, we rejoice that one of those talented activists is
free and can go back to drawing truth to power.”
The human rights groups and
advocates are APIM, Arterial Network, Committee to Protect Journalists, CRNI, Caoilfhionn
Gallagher QC, Jonathan Price, Paul Mason, International Media Defence Panel,
Doughty Street Chambers, EG Justice, FIDH, within the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, FREEMUSE, Human Rights Watch, Index on
Censorship, PEN International, and Reporters without Borders.
For more Human Rights Watch reporting on
business and human rights, please visit:
https://www.hrw.org/topic/business


For more Human Rights Watch reporting on Equatorial Guinea, please visit:
https://www.hrw.org/africa/equatorial-guinea


For more
information, please contact:
In Chapel Hill, for EG Justice, Tutu Alicante (Spanish, English, French):
+1-615-479-0207 (mobile); or tutu@egjustice.org.
Twitter: @TutuAlicante
In New York, for Human Rights Watch, Sarah Saadoun (English): +1-917-502-6694
(mobile); or saadous@hrw.org. Twitter: @sarah_saadoun
In New York, for Committee to Protect Journalists, Angela Quintal
(English): +212-300-9004 (office); or aquintal@cpj.org. Twitter: @angelaquintal 