Morocco:  Morocco : campaign of harassment and threats is being carried out against the Moroccan poet, feminist and human rights defender, Hakima Chaoui
September 13, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Morocco / 2001 / SeptemberMorocco: Morocco : campaign of harassment and threats is being carried out against the Moroccan poet, feminist and human rights defender, Hakima ChaouiThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that a campaign of harassment and threats is being carried out against the Moroccan poet, feminist and human rights defender, Hakima Chaoui.   According to the information received, Ms. Chaoui read a poem she had written defending women's rights during a Moroccan radio special to commemorate international women's day on 8 March 2001. Since that time, she has been villified in the press, namely, by the newspaper "Attajid" which accused her of insulting the Prophet Mohammed and apostasy. Certain Imams in mosques around Morocco have also reportedly attacked Ms. Chaoui's reputation during Friday prayers, declaring her guilty of apostasy.   In response to a July 2001 letter from a Moroccan human rights organisation calling upon the Moroccan government to take action in relation to the harassment of Ms. Chaoui, the Ministry for Islamic Affairs replied that it was not aware of any violations of Islamic law. The Ministry further noted that the preacher was entirely free to choose the subject of the Friday prayers and that while the protection of individual reputations was important, the protection of the sacred religious principles represented in the person of the Prophet must be given priority.  On 5 August 2001, Ms. Chaoui was invited by a group of trade union and political associations to give a presentation on "the national plan for the integration of women in development: limitations and perspectives". During and following her presentation Ms. Chaoui was allegedly heckled, threatened and accused of lying about the campaign of insults and intimidation being carried out against her.  On 19 August 2001, Ms. Chaoui began receiving repeated telephone messages calling her a liar, insulting and threatening her in obscene language.   OMCT is gravely concerned by reports that Hakima Chaoui has been subjected to harassment and intimidation as a result of her work as a defender of the human rights of women. These alleged acts of harassment, which include threats against Ms. Chaoui's physical safety, constitute violations of her right to liberty and security of person, discrimination on the basis of sex and violations of her right to freedom of expression. All of these rights are guaranteed by international human rights instruments, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women both treaties to which Morocco is a State party.  OMCT would like to reiterate that Morocco has an obligation under international law to prevent, prosecute and punish acts of sexual harassment and other forms of violence against women with due diligence, irrespective of whether these acts have been committed by State or non-State actors. 