Russian Federation:  Arbitrary arrest and judicial harassment against Ms. Anna Udyarova and Mr. Philippe Kostenko
November 28, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2011 / NovemberRussian Federation: Arbitrary arrest and judicial harassment against Ms. Anna Udyarova and Mr. Philippe KostenkoURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
RUS 005 / 1111 / OBS 130
Arbitrary arrest / Release / 
Judicial harassment
Russian Federation
November 28, 2011
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in the Russian Federation.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the 
arbitrary arrest and judicial harassment against Ms. Anna Udyarova and 
Mr. Philippe Kostenko, members of the Anti-Discrimination Centre (ADC) 
“Memorial”, Saint Petersburg.
 
According to the information received, on November 26, 2011, at 
approximately 4 pm, Ms. Anna Udyarova and Mr. Philippe Kostenko were arrested by 
the police as they were picketing near the Embassy of Belarus to request the 
release of Mr. Ales Bialiatski, FIDH Vice-President and President of the Human 
Rights Centre “Viasna” in Belarus, and, more generally, all political prisoners 
in the region. 
 
They were participating to the international mobilisation called by 
FIDH to request the release of Mr. Ales Bialiatski, who was sentenced to four 
years and a half of prison the day before[1].
 
Four days before, ADC “Memorial” had requested the permission to 
organise a picket but the permission was denied by the authorities. Therefore, 
the organisation decided to organise one-person pickets, which does not require 
any authorisation from the authorities. Ms. Anna Udyarova and Mr. Philippe 
Kostenko, who were carrying two posters calling for the release of political 
prisoners and the release of Mr. Bialiatski, arrived in front of the Embassy of 
Belarus, at the time and place where the action had been initially planned and 
announced. The two stood at approximately 30 meters from each other close to the 
Embassy building.
 
As soon as they arrived, a large group of police officers surrounded 
and arrested them, on the pretext of having committed an offence by disobeying 
police orders. The police argued that though the two were not standing together 
they were picketing in front of the same building and that, therefore, it was 
not a one-person picketing. Mr. Philippe Kostenko was forcefully carried to the 
police car and Ms. Anna Udyarova was also arrested. Afterwards, as the ADC 
“Memorial” Director, Ms. Olga Abramenko, was walking towards the 
building, carrying another poster as well as balloons, the police tried to stop 
her under the pretext that she was walking and that therefore it was not an 
authorised one-person picket but a demonstration. Ms. Olga Abramenko stopped 
walking and remained where she was standing.
 
Meanwhile, Ms. Anna Udyarova and Mr. Philippe Kostenko, were 
transferred to two police stations (N76, N78 and then again N76). Their posters 
were confiscated as they were considered as illegal material by the police. They 
were later finally released during the night after eight to nine hours of 
detention following mobilisation in their favour, both at the national and 
international level. They were released under the condition that they appear 
before the police on November 28, 2011, at 11 am. At that time, they were 
informed by the police that they had been charged of two administrative 
offences, “illegal picketing” and “disobeying the police”, punishable by fines 
and administrative detention.
 
The Observatory condemns the arbitrary arrest and judicial harassment 
against Ms. Anna Udyarova and Mr. Philippe Kostenko since they seem to merely 
aim at sanctioning their human rights activities and expresses its deep concern 
about the ongoing attempts to hinder the right of human rights defenders to 
freedom of assembly. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Russian Federation, urging them 
to: 
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Ms. Anna Udyarova, Ms. Olga Abramenko and Mr. Philippe Kostenko as 
well as of all members of ADC “Memorial” and all human rights defenders in the 
Russian Federation;
 
ii. Put an end to any act of harassment - including at the judicial 
level - against Ms. Anna Udyarova and Mr. Philippe Kostenko as well as against 
all human rights defenders in the Russian Federation, and ensure in all 
circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate activities 
without any hindrance and fear of reprisals; 
 
iii. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on 
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, 
especially:
-          its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the 
protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the 
national and international levels”, 
-          its Article 5, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, 
at the national and international levels (a) to meet or assemble 
peacefully”;
-          its Article 6 (b) and (c), which states that “everyone has 
the right, individually and in association with others [...] as provided for in 
human rights and other applicable international instruments, freely to publish, 
impart or disseminate to others views, information and knowledge on all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms and [...] to study, discuss, form and hold 
opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw 
public attention to those matters”,
-          and Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall 
take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent 
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against 
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, 
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate 
exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”; 
 
iv. Comply with the provisions of the Declaration of the Committee of 
Ministers of the Council of Europe on the protection of human rights defenders 
and the promotion of their activities, and in particular With Article 2.i), in 
which the Committee calls on member States to “create an environment conducive 
to the work of human rights defenders, enabling individuals, groups and 
associations to freely carry out activities, on a legal basis, consistent with 
international standards, to promote and strive for the protection of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms without any restrictions other than those 
authorised by the European Convention on Human Rights;
 
v. More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments 
ratified by the Russian Federation.  
 
Addresses:  
·         
Mr. Dmitri Medvedev, President of the Russian Federation, 
Ilinka Str, 23, Moscow, 103132, Moscow, Russian Federation, Faxes:+ 7 495 606 5173 / 630 
2408
·         
Minister of Internal Affairs, Mr. Rashid Nurgaliev, ul. Zhitnaya, 16, 
117049 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Rossiia, 117049, Moskva, Fax: + 7 
495 637 49 25
·         
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Smolenskaya-Sennaya 
pl, 32/34, 121200 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Fax:+ 7 495 644 
2203
·         
Mr. Alexander Ivanovich Bastrykin, Chairman of the Investigations 
Committee of the Russian Federation, Building 28, house 15, Naberezhnaya 
Akademika Tupoleva, Moscow, 105005, Russian Federation.
·         
Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations in 
Geneva Av. de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland, e-mail : mission.russian@ties.itu.int, Fax: +4122 734 40 44 
·         
Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 31-33 boulevard du 
Régent, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 513 76 49.
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Russian 
Federation in your respective country. 
 
***
Paris-Geneva, November 28, 2011 
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·         E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·         Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 
80
·         Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 
49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 



[1] See Observatory Press Release, November 24, 
2011. 