Lao People's Democ. Rep.:  Joint Press Release: Pro-democracy student leaders must be released after 16 yearsof arbitrary detention
December  8, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Lao People's Democ. Rep. / 2015 / DecemberLao People's Democ. Rep.: Joint Press Release: Pro-democracy student leaders must be released after 16 yearsof arbitrary detentionLaos_2015.12.08_Joint_PR2 pages / 277 KBThe Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders
Lao
Movement for Human Rights (LMHR)
Paris-Geneva, 8 December 2015: The
Lao government must immediately and unconditionally release two former
pro-democracy student leaders who have been arbitrarily detained for more than
16 years and disclose the fate or whereabouts of two others, the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint FIDH and OMCT programme)
and the Lao Movement for Human Rights (LMHR) said today.
Mr. Thongpaseuth Keuakoun and Mr. Sengaloun
Phengphanh, two former student leaders with the Lao Students Movement for
Democracy (LSMD), remain detained in Samkhe prison, located on the eastern
outskirts of Vientiane. Thongpaseuth and Sengaloun were arrested in Vientiane
on October 26, 1999, along with fellow LSMD members Mr. Bouavanh
Chanhmanivong, Mr. Khamphouvieng Sisa-at, and Keochay, for
planning peaceful demonstrations that called for democracy, social justice, and
respect for human rights. All five were subsequently sentenced to 20 years in
prison for “generating social turmoil and endangering national security.” The
government, however, denied that it had detained Bouavanh, Khamphouvieng, and
Keochay.
Thongpaseuth and Phengphanh are imprisoned in
solitary confinement with their legs locked in wooden stocks at all times.
Prison authorities allow them to go out of their cells once a week or once
every two weeks to wash and empty their accumulated excrements. They are
accompanied by police officers and not by prison guards. Witnesses described
them as looking like “human skeletons.” Prison authorities do not allow them to
receive visitors and have consistently prohibited them from receiving food and
medication sent from family members. For many years, the Lao government refused
to acknowledge the detention of Thongpaseuth and Phengphanh.
“The lengthy arbitrary
detention of the two former student leaders as well as the prolonged torture
inflicted upon them are gross and unacceptable human rights violations. The
authorities must immediately and unconditionally release them, investigate
allegations of torture and ill-treatment, and provide compensation for their wrongful
detention,” said FIDH
President Karim Lahidji.
Khamphouvieng Sisa-at died in Samkhe prison in
September 2001 as a result of serious food deprivation, prolonged heat
exposure, and lack of adequate medical care. In 2006, the government stated
that Keochay had been released in 2002 upon completion of his prison term and
“transferred to guardians to further educate him to become a good citizen.”
However, Keochay’s family has never been informed about his alleged release and
his fate or whereabouts remain unknown. The government’s claim of Keochay’s
release and Sisa-at’s death in custody contradict Vientiane’s earlier statement
that only two LSMD members - Thongpaseuth and Phengphanh - had been arrested on
October 26, 1999. To this day, the fate and whereabouts of the fifth former
student leader, Bouavanh, also remains unknown.
“We
urge the Lao authorities to investigate and ascertain the circumstances related
to the death of Khamphouvieng Sisa-at in Samkhe prison, make the
investigation’s findings public, and hold those responsible for his death
accountable,” said OMCT
Secretary General Gerald Staberock. “They must also disclose the fate or
whereabouts of Bouavanh and Keochay.”
In addition, the Observatory and LMHR call on the
Lao authorities to determine the fate or whereabouts of nine other activists -
two women, Ms. Kingkeo and Ms. Somchit, and seven men, Messrs. Soubinh,
Souane, Sinpasong, Khamsone, Nou, Somkhit,
and Sourigna - who were detained in November 2009 for planning to
participate in pro-democracy demonstrations.
“More international efforts
are needed to press the Lao government to be transparent about the fate or
whereabouts of many missing student leaders, activists, and human rights
defenders. Many of these cases amount to enforced disappearance – an issue that
the Lao government has failed to address for far too long,” said LMHR President Vanida Thephsouvanh.
Article 2 of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED) defines enforced
disappearance as “the arrest, detention, abduction or any other form of
deprivation of liberty by agents of the State or by persons or groups of
persons acting with the authorization, support or acquiescence of the State,
followed by a refusal to acknowledge the deprivation of liberty or by
concealment of the fate or whereabouts of the disappeared person.” Despite
signing the ICPPED on September 29, 2008, Laos has not yet ratified the
convention.
On June 23, 2014, during its second Universal
Periodic Review (UPR), Laos rejected all eight recommendations that called for
investigations into all allegations of enforced disappearance in the country
and dismissed such allegations as “not true.”
The Observatory and LMHR reiterate their call for
the Lao government to conduct swift, thorough, and impartial investigations
into all cases of enforced disappearances in the country and hold those
responsible accountable. The two organizations also urge the Lao government to
speed up the investigation into the enforced disappearance of prominent civil
society leader Mr. Sombath Somphone, who was last seen at a police
checkpoint on a busy street of Vientiane on the evening of December 15, 2012.
Press
contacts
FIDH:
Mr. Andrea Giorgetta (English) - Tel: +66 88 611 7722 (Bangkok)
FIDH:
Mr. Arthur Manet (French, English, Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)
OMCT:
Delphine
Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 (Geneva)
OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +41 22 809 49 24
(Brussels)
​ 