The Observatory: Contribution to the 52nd ordinary session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
October 18, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2012 / OctoberThe Observatory: Contribution to the 52nd ordinary session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights





ORAL INTERVENTION – THE OBSERVATORY

 
AFRICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN AND PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
 
52nd ordinary session 
 
Yamoussoukro, Ivory Coast
 
9 - 22 October 2012
 
Contribution of the World Organisation against Torture (OMCT) 
and the
International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) 
 
In the framework of their joint programme, 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders
 
Under agenda item 9:
“Situation of human rights defenders”
 
 
Madame Chairperson,
The FIDH and
the OMCT, in the framework
of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, express their
renewed concern about the situation of human rights defenders in Africa.
Since the last session of the Commission in May 2012, the
Observatory has not recorded any improvement of their situation on the
continent. Quite on the contrary, human rights violations against defenders
have continued, in particular judicial harassment, threats, intimidations,
arbitrary detentions and unjustified condemnations. The situation of human
rights defenders has even become alarming in situations of internal conflicts,
such as for instance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Impunity and deficient
justice
In many countries where impunity prevails, justice continues to be
denied to human rights defenders who have been victims of human rights
violations. For instance, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the trial of
the murderers, in June 2010, of Floribert
Chebaya Bazire, Executive Director of the organisation “The Voice of the
Voiceless” (La Voix des Sans Voix - VSV) and member of the OMCT General
Assembly, and of Fidèle Bazana Edadi, member
of VSV, is in a stalemate. In June 2012, the defense requested that the main
suspect in these two crimes, general John Numbi Banza Tambo, appear as a
defendant. However, the military tribunal decided to publicly announce its
decision only on October 23, 2012, namely more than four months after that
request. The fact that the hearing has been scheduled a few days after the
Summit of the Francophonie may not be a coincidence. Whatever the case may be,
the absence of any progress in this emblematic trial clearly illustrates the
judicial authorities’ lack of will to shed light on those events and to punish
those responsible. We are far from the “rapid and impartial” investigation
provided for by article 5 of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders. In
addition, it is intolerable that the authorities have still not returned the
body of Fidèle Bazana Edadi to his family.
On the other hand, the Observatory welcomes the decision of a
court in Belgium, on October 3, to reject a complaint filed by General Numbi to
ban the use of his photo in the poster of the documentary “The Chebeya case: a
State crime?” directed by Thierry Michel, and screened during the Forum in
April 2012.
However, delivering justice implies much more than simply holding
a trial and issuing a sentence, as illustrated by the trial of the murderers of
Ernest Manirumva, Vice-President of the organisation
Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory (Observatoire de lutte
contre la corruption et les malversations économiques - OLUCOME) in Burundi in 2009. The
fact that 14 defendants were sentenced to long prison sentences should not
overshadow the prosecution’s systematic refusal to take into account relevant
and highly credible elements of the investigations that pointed out the
responsibility of senior personalities. The judicial authorities have lost an
excellent opportunity to hold an exemplary trial: a botched trial is an
insidious form of denial of justice.
Judicial harassment
The Observatory has also noted the widespread harassment of
defenders in many countries. In some countries, such as in Algeria, harassment
is targeting so many defenders that is can rightly be qualified as “systematic”.
The simple participation of reputable Algerian NGOs such as the LADDH, the
MJIC, the RDLD and the SNAPAP in a peaceful sit-in in April 2012 to condemn the
judicial harassment of Abdelkader Kherba,
member of the CNDDC and of the LADDH, has led to their prosecution for
“incitement to unarmed gathering” that is punishable by one year in prison. On
September 25, 2012, the Bab el Oued Court considered itself incompetent to rule
on the case and has referred it to the prosecution.
Yacine Zaïd, a trade unionist,
member of the LADDH and blogger, has been subjected for more than two year to
numerous acts of police and judicial harassment related to his activism. On
October 1, he was arrested again by the police, verbally assaulted, beaten and
detained until October 8, when the Ouargla Court pronounced a six-month
suspended prison sentence and a 10,000 dinars fine against him for “contempt
against a police officer while on duty”. On May 3, Abdelkader Kherba was also
sentenced to a one-year suspended term of imprisonment and to a 20,000 dinars
fine after he was arrested in April during a protest of clerks of the court
before a courthouse in Algiers. He is expected to be judged on appeal on
November 4. In Algeria, issuing suspended prison sentences to human rights
defenders has become a worrying practice to punish them.
Moreover, the presidential pardon that led to the release of the
human rights defender Mohamed Smaïn should
not hide the fact that he had been sentenced for “defamation”, “insult” and
“denunciation of imaginary crimes” in the first place, despite his tireless
fight on behalf of victims of the internal conflict in Algeria in the 90s.
In Zimbabwe, members of Women of Zimbabwe Arise (WOZA) have been
arrested and iniquitous lawsuits have been filed against them as reprisals for
their participation in demonstrations, in particular in Bulawayo.
The rights to freedom of expression and assembly are safeguarded
in the constitutions of those countries and in the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, ratified by Algeria and Zimbabwe. Restricting those
rights is thus unacceptable.
Indictments and
sentences
Many defenders are not only judicially harassed but are also
sentenced. In Chad, for instance, François
Djondang, Michel Barka and Younous
Mahadjir, members of the Federation of Trade Unions in Chad (Union des
Syndicats du Tchad - UST), have received a 18-month suspended prison sentence
and a 1,5 million francs CFA fine for “incitement to ethnic hatred”. Their
so-called “crime” only relates to the dissemination of an UST petition in
September 2012 that condemned the “high cost of living” and the “pauperization
of the population”, which the defenders attributed to corruption and faulty
management by the authorities 
Torture and ill
treatments
In their attempts to intimidate and silence human rights
defenders, the authorities often resort to torture and ill treatments, thereby
flagrantly violating non only the right to physical and psychological integrity
of every human being, but also the specific responsibility of States to protect
defenders, as explicitly required by Article 12 of the Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders.
Torture and ill-treatment very often go hand in hand with threats,
including death threats, to force defenders to stop documenting and condemning
human rights violations. The case of Grégoire
Mulamba, Director of the “Centre for Human and Humanitarian Rights (Centre
des droits de l’Homme et du droit humanitaire - CDH) in the DRC, is
appalling. Mr. Mulamba was kidnapped on August 14, 2012 for several hours and
savagely beaten on the head after he tried to ensure that the police was
conducting its work effectively when a corpse was unexpectedly found in a lake
near Lubumbashi. The kidnappers turned out to be policemen. This type of
ill-treatment demonstrates the authorities’ lack of political will to respect
their most basic human rights obligations since 
In Sudan, dozens of defenders have been arrested in June and July
2012 following popular demonstrations that protested price increases and called
for democratic reforms. They were finally released at the end of August.
Several defenders were detained incommunicado for several weeks and were
victims of inhumane and degrading treatments.
Human rights defenders victims of armed
conflicts
Finally, the
Observatory expresses its deep concerns regarding the situation of human rights
defenders in North Kivu, a region that is torn by a violent internal conflict.
Armes clashes between governmental forces and the rebels have not only impacted
the local population but have also jeopardized the security of many human
rights defenders who had to flee the area or are still trying to do so at this
very moment in order to save their life.
For instance,
Mr. René Kahukula, General Coordinator of the NGO “Action for the
development of poor peasants” (Actions pour le Développement des Paysans
Déshérités - ADEPAD), located in Bukavu, was kidnapped on June 3, 2012, by
a commando in Bujumbura, Burundi, then transferred back overland to Bukavu in
DRC. The commando, composed of Congolese security agents, reportedly acted with
the complicity of the Burundian authorities. As of today, Mr. René Kahukula
continues to be detained in the premises of the National Intelligence Agency (Agence
Nationale de Renseignements - ANR) in Kinshasa. 
Recommendations:
To conclude this worrying brief survey, the Observatory
reminds states parties to the African Charter of their obligation to respect
all its provisions, in particular those relating to the protection of human
rights defenders. More specifically, those States have to:
·       Acknowledge
the legitimacy and fundamental role played by defenders in the establishment
and strengthening of a society based on justice and respect for human rights.
·       Implement all
provisions of the UN Declaration on human rights defenders, in particular by
providing absolute safeguards for their physical and psychological integrity.
·       Release all
defenders who are detained solely for having exercised their right to
fundamental freedoms, in particular freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly.
·       Put en end to
the judicial harassment of defenders;
·       Prosecute
those responsible for violating the rights of defenders, in judicial
proceedings that upholds the requirements for efficiency and speed;
·       Establish
national protection mechanisms for defenders, in cooperation with defenders
themselves and the ACHPR’s Special Rapporteur
·       Extend an
open invitation to the UN and ACHPR special rapporteurs on defenders and
facilitate their visit to the country.
***
Yamoussoukro, October 2012
To contact
the Observatory :
·       Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·       Tel and fax FIDH: + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·       Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 34 