Iran:  Judicial harassment faced by Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi, Mr. Saeed Jalalifar, Ms. Shiva Nazarahari and Mr. Navid Khanjani
April 11, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / AprilIran: Judicial harassment faced by Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi, Mr. Saeed Jalalifar, Ms. Shiva Nazarahari and Mr. Navid Khanjani
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
 
New 
information
IRN 006 / 0811 / 
OBS 108.1
Judicial harassment / Sentencing / 
Arbitrary detention / Risk of arrest
Iran
April 11, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Iran. 
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Iranian League for the Defence of Human Rights (LDDHI) of the 
judicial harassment faced by several members of the Committee of Human Rights Reporters (CHRR), including Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi, Mr. Saeed Jalalifar, also a former member of the Association for Defence of Street and 
Working Children, Ms. Shiva Nazarahari, also a member of the “One Million Signatures” Campaign, and Mr. 
Navid Khanjani, who is considered as a significant figure in awareness on 
educational rights.
 
According to the information received, on February 26, 2012, Mr. 
Kouhyar Goudarzi was sentenced by Branch 26 of the Islamic Revolution Court to 
five years of imprisonment to be served in internal exile in the remote south-eastern city of Zabul. He was 
convicted on charges of “propaganda against the regime” through an interview 
with the German magazine Der Spiegel, in which he spoke about his hunger strike in solidarity with prisoners and his 
former cellmates, and “assembly and collusion against the regime”. Although he lodged 
an appeal, he remains detained in Section 209 of Evin prison under control of 
the Ministry of Intelligence. Since his arrest in July 2011, he has spent more 
than two months in solitary confinement. 
 
In addition, in the second half of December 2011, his mother Ms. 
Parvin Mokhtar'e, after spending nearly five months in Kerman prison, was 
sentenced to 23 months of imprisonment on charges of “assembly, collusion 
and spreading propaganda against the State” 
by the Kerman Islamic Revolution Court. On appeal, the sentence was reduced to 
23 months of suspended imprisonment. She was also sentenced to cash fine for 
“insulting the martyrs”, which she paid, before being released on March 18, 
2012. The Observatory welcomes Ms. Parvin Mokhtar'e's release but calls on 
Iranian authorities to stop the judicial harassment against her as it is 
believed that her sentencing was directly related to her legitimate activities 
in defence of her son.
 
Furthermore, in February 2012, the three-year imprisonment sentence 
against Mr. Saeed Jalalifar on charge of “acting against national security” was 
upheld on appeal. As of issuing this urgent appeal, he remains detained in Evin 
prison, where he is serving his sentence.
 
Finally, Ms. Shiva Nazarahari and Mr. Navid Khanjani remain at risk 
of arbitrary arrest at any time since the confirmation of their imprisonment 
sentences on appeal in, respectively, January and August 2011 (see background 
information). 
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the arbitrary detentions and acts 
of judicial harassment against the above-mentioned CHRR members, which seem to merely aim at sanctioning their peaceful and 
legitimate human rights activities, amid the continuing repression of the 
Iranian civil society.
 
Background information[1]:
 
Mr. Kouhyar Goudarzi was arrested in December 2009 and subsequently sentenced to one year in prison on charges, among 
others, of “propaganda activity against the regime through effective 
collaboration with the Committee of Human Rights Reporters website”, “collection 
and publishing of biased news against the regime and transfer of this 
information to terrorist organisations based abroad” as well as “interviews with 
foreign media and publishing articles in websites,” pursuant to Islamic Penal 
Code of Iran. He served the sentence and was released on December 14, 2010[2]. On July 30 or 31, 
2011, Mr. Goudarzi was again arrested in Tehran and his whereabouts remained 
unknown during the first several few weeks in what was tantamount to enforced 
disappearance. A day after his arrest, in the morning of July 31 or August 1, 
2011, his mother Ms. Parvin Mokhtar’e was also arbitrarily arrested at her home 
in Kerman, by four plainclothes agents, without a warrant. While in detention, 
she was informed that she had been accused of “insulting the Supreme leader”, 
“propaganda against the regime”, and “acting against national security”, whereas 
she had no political or human rights-related activities. 
 
On November 20, 2009, Mr. Saeed Jalalifar was arrested for “engaging 
in propaganda activities against the regime” and released on bail of one billion 
rials on March 16, 2010. In relation to the same case, on July 31, 2011, Mr. 
Jalalifar was arrested again and transferred to the Evin prison. In late August 
2011, Branch 28 of the Islamic Revolution Court sentenced Mr. Jalalifar to a three-year imprisonment sentence on 
charge of “acting against national security”. 
 
In March 2010, Mr. Navid Khanjani was arrested in Esfahan and was put 
under pressure to make self-incriminating interviews before a video camera. He 
spent 65 days in Evin prison before being released on a bail of one billion 
rials on May 3, 2010. On January 30, 2011, his lawyer was informed that his 
client had been sentenced by Branch 26 of the Islamic Revolution Court to 12 
years imprisonment for “spreading lies”, “disturbing the public opinion and 
propaganda against the system by giving interviews to foreign media”, and 
“membership of CHRR”. Mr. Khanjani, who was previously banned from pursuing 
higher education for being a member of the Baha'i religious minority in Iran, 
was also charged with founding an organisation for people banned from pursuing 
higher education. He was also banned from travelling abroad in an earlier 
sentence. He appealed the sentence. In August 2011, his sentence was upheld by 
the Appeals Court, which added a monetary fine of four million rials. Since 
then, he has been at risk of arbitrary arrest at any time.
 
Ms. Shiva Nazarahari was arrested on June 14, 2009, before being released on a 
two-billion rial bail on September 23, 2009. She was re-arrested on December 21, 
2009 by security forces and transferred to Evin prison. Following international 
pressure, she was released on September 12, 2010 on a bail of five billion 
rials. On September 18, 2010, she was sentenced to six years of imprisonment in 
internal exile in Izeh in south-west Iran and 74 whip lashes for “attempts to 
defame the Islamic system”, “assembly and collusion against the Islamic system”, 
“disturbing the public’s peace of mind” and “waging war against God”. On January 
8, 2011, the Appeals Court reduced her sentence to four years of imprisonment in 
internal exile in Karaj prison and 74 lashes. Since then, she has remained free 
on bail, but stands a risk of arrest any time.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Iranian authorities and ask them 
to:
 
i.         
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Ms. Shiva Nazarahari, Ms. Parvin Mokhtar’e and Messrs. Kouhyar Goudarzi, Saeed Jalalifar and Navid Khanjani as well as all human rights defenders and their families in 
Iran;
 
ii.       
Release Messrs. Kouhyar Goudarzi and Saeed Jalalifar immediately and 
unconditionally as their detention only aims at sanctioning their human rights 
activities;
 
iii.      
Put an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial 
level - against Ms. Shiva Nazarahari, Ms. Parvin Mokhtar’e and Messrs. Kouhyar Goudarzi, Saeed Jalalifar and Navid Khanjani and more generally against all human rights defenders in 
Iran;
 
iv.Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration 
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations 
General Assembly, in particular:
-        
its article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually or in association with others, to promote the protection and 
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels”;
-        
its article 5.b, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, 
at the national and international levels, (…) to form, join and participate in 
non-governmental organizations, associations or groups”;
-        
its article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse 
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his 
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present 
Declaration”; 
 
v.        Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights 
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards 
and international instruments ratified by Iran.
 
Addresses:
Leader of the Islamic Republic, His Excellency Ayatollah Sayed Ali 
Khamenei, The Office of the Supreme Leader, Shahid Keshvardoost St., Jomhuri 
Eslami Ave., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Faxes: + 98 21 649, + 98 21 649 / 
21 774 2228, E-Mail: info_leader@leader.irPresident Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the Presidency, Palestine Avenue, 
Azerbaijan Intersection, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 649 
5880. E-Mail: dr-ahmadinejad@president.irHead of the Judiciary, His Excellency Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, 
Ministry of Justice, c/o Public relations Office, Number 4, 2 Azizi Street, Vali 
Asr Ave., above Pasteur Street intersection, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: bia.judi@yahoo.com / info@dadgostary-tehran.ir Minister of Foreign Affairs, H.E. Mr. Ali Akbar Salehi, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Abdolmajid Keshk-e Mesri Av, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, Fax: +98-21-66743149 Secretary General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Jayad 
Larijani, [Care of] Office of the Head of the Judicary, Pasteur St, Vali Asr 
Ave, South of Serah-e Jomhouri, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: 
info@humanrights-iran.ir H.E. Mr. Seyed Mohammad Reza Sajjadi, Ambassador, Permanent Mission 
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Chemin du Petit-Saconnex 28, 1209 Geneva, 
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.intEmbassy of Iran in Brussels, 15 a avenue Franklin Roosevelt, 1050 
Bruxelles, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: secretariat@iranembassy.
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Iran in your 
respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, April 11, 2012
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this 
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the 
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in 
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency 
line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 
80Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 
29





[1] See Observatory Annual Report 2011.

[2] While in prison, Mr. Goudarzi was awarded the 2010 John Aubuchon 
Press Freedom Award by the US National Press Club in August 
2010. 