The New Right to Food and Nutrition WATCH 2009: Who controls the governance of the World Food System?
October 12, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Events / 2009 / OctoberThe New Right to Food and Nutrition WATCH 2009: Who controls the governance of the World Food System?The Geneva Press Club - Club suisse de la Presse, has the pleasure to invite the international, the Swiss press and its members to a press conference on the topic.   With     Mr. Eric SottasSecretary General, World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) Ms. Ester WolfPolicy Advisor, Right to Food, Bread for all (Pain pour le prochain/Brot für alle)   Mon 12th October 2009 at 2p.m. «At la Pastorale» Route de Ferney 106, Geneva   For the first time in history, the number of undernourished people in the world has surpassed the tragic figure of 1 billion. The gap between promises and reality is increasing as the international community and national governments are painfully far from realising the World Food Summit targets to halve the proportion of chronically hungry people in the world by the year 2015. It is clear that the global governance of the World Food System needs to be remodelled in order to effectively overcome hunger and its causes.   On the occasion of World Food Week 2009, the World Organisation Against Torture and the Ecumenical Advocacy Alliance invite you to the launch of the new issue of the Right to Food and Nutrition WATCH. This year’s edition focuses on the question of “Who controls the governance of the world food system?” – a burning issue in light of the current World Food Crisis.   The WATCH, available in three languages, is a common endeavor of a Consortium of human rights organisations, social movements and development agencies and aims to put public pressure on policy makers at the national and international level to take the human right to food serious, and to provide a systematic compilation of best practices for the realisation of the right to food, while documenting where violations take place.     The press meeting will be followed by a drink. I look forward to seeing you at this occasion. Guy Mettan, Director Executive 