Pakistan:  Pakistan: Shakeel Ahmed Shaikh tortured and murdered by law enforcement agencies
November 20, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Pakistan / 2000 / NovemberPakistan: Pakistan: Shakeel Ahmed Shaikh tortured and murdered by law enforcement agenciesCase PAK 201100  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Pakistan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that Shakeel Ahmed Shaikh, 32, an MQM (Muttahida Quami Movement) worker of Unit 159, Sector Liaquatabad, was abducted on 15 November 2000, allegedly by law enforcement personnel, and found dead, bearing marks of torture all over his body, two days later.  His dead body was dumped near a house E-354/1 Jehangir Road, Karachi, Pakistan.  The cause of death was reported as a bullet fired at his head from point blank range.  Shakeel Ahmed Shaikh was an employee of the Public Health Department.  Before 1996, Shakeel Ahmed Shaikh lived in Hyderabad.  Reportedly, as a result of illegal raids on his residence and harassment to his family members by law enforcement personnel, he moved to Karachi with his wife.  Prior to his abduction he was seen leaving the residence of his in-laws in Jamshed Quarter Area, Karachi.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Pakistan urging them to:  i.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the death of Shakeel Ahmed Shaikh, identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; ii.	guarantee adequate compensation to the family of Shakeel Ahmed Shaikh; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  General Pervez Musharraf, Chief Executive, National Security Council, General Block, Pakistan Secretariat, Islamabad, Pakistan.  Fax:  + 92 51 922 4768  Geneva, November 20, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 