China:  China: 30 petitioners from Shanghai injured in clashes with police
June 30, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2005 / JuneChina: China: 30 petitioners from Shanghai injured in clashes with policeCase CHN 300605Ill-Treatment  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in People's Republic of China. Brief Description of the SituationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that more than 30 petitioners from Shanghai were injured in clashes with police as they attempted to board a train for Beijing on 24th June 2005.  According to the information received, more than 30 petitioners including Wang Qiaojuan, Wang Minqing and Yang Weiming were attacked by several police officers at Shanghai’s West Train Station when they were preparing to board a train to the capital. Wang Qiaojuan was severely beaten to the point that she collapsed and her face was covered with blood. Fellow petitioners recorded the badge number of the PSB officer who assaulted her as well as the badge numbers of other officers involved in the incident. When petitioners attempted to get Wang Qiaojuan to the hospital, PSB officers prevented her from being admitted.  The petitioners were on their way to Beijing to express their dissatisfaction with the new process, as outlined in the new petition regulations that came into effect 1st May 2005. The new regulations were suppose to reduce the number of petitioners going to the central authorities by improving the effectiveness of the local officials to petitioners. For a period, there was a reduction in the number of petitioners going to the central authorities, however, over the past two months many petitioners have felt that local officials are not committed to dealing with their complaints so they have returned to filing complaints with the central authorities. It is reported that the number of petitioners currently going to the central authorities exceeds the numbers prior to the enactment of the new regulations.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the petitioners, especially Wang Qiaojuan, Wang Minqing and Yang Weiming. OMCT calls on the authorities to provide Wang Qiaojuan with all necessary medical assistance to enable her to recover from the injuries she sustained on 24th June 2005. Finally, OMCT calls on the Chinese Government to immediately launch an impartial investigation into the allegations of ill-treamtent, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law, as well as to provide adequate reparation to the victim of these abuses. Action requestedPlease write to the authorities in China, People's Republic of urging them to: i.	Take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the petitioners; ii.	Intervene with the proper authorities to ensure that adequate medical assistance is provided as a matter of urgency to Wang Qiaojuan; iii.	Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the allegations of ill-treatment, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	Guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards. Addresses:President Hu Jintao, People's Republic of China, c/o Permanent Mission of the People's Republic of China, Chemin de Surville 11, Case postale 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Genève, Suisse, Fax: +4122 7937014, E-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int Minister of Justice of the People's Republic of China, Zhang Fusen Buzhang, Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People's Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65 292345 Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China, Li Zhaoxing Buzhang Waijiaobu, 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Beijingshi 100701, People's Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6588 2594, Email: ipc@fmprc.gov.cn  Please also write to the embassies of China, People's Republic of in your respective country.  Geneva, 30th June 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 