Tunisia:  OMCT High Level Mission to Tunisia: Eradicating torture is a benchmark for the success of the transition
May 23, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Tunisia / 2011 / MayTunisia: OMCT High Level Mission to Tunisia: Eradicating torture is a benchmark for the success of the transition
 OMCT High Level Mission to
Tunisia
 
Eradicating torture is a
benchmark for the success of the transition
 
 
Tunis, 23 May 2011 

 
At the
conclusion of a seven day visit to Tunisia by a delegation of anti-torture
experts, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) calls on the
transitional authorities and all actors in the transition process to make the
eradication of torture a priority objective. Overcoming the legacy of a policy
of widespread and systematic torture in Tunisia will be a key to the success of
the transition process. It requires a firm plan of action and a policy of zero
tolerance to any incident of torture, or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
 
The OMCT delegation wishes to express its
appreciation for the openness of the discussions with the transitional
authorities on the reforms required to end any practices of torture and to
honour the right of victims of torture to reparation. The delegation met with
the Prime Minister of Tunisia, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Internal
Affairs, the Minister for Social Affairs, the State Secretary of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs. The mission also met the President of the High Commission
for Political Reform and the Commission investigating the abuses and violations
during the revolution. The OMCT is grateful for the opportunity to access a
number of detention facilities in the course of its visit. It expresses its
hope that this will be the beginning of transparency of the penitentiary system
in a democratic Tunisia.
 
In this regard, the OMCT warmly welcomes
assurances received during its meeting with the Prime Minister that the
transitional government will deposit this week the ratification documents for
the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention Against Torture (OPCAT) at the United
Nations in New York. The delegation is also encouraged by engagements expressed
by the authorities to consider the implementation of a series of individual
decisions by the UN Committee Against Torture which the previous regime refused
and which held that Tunisia violated the absolute prohibition of torture.
 
Recognizing the significance of the changes
undertaken, the delegation learnt with grave concern of serious allegations
that practices of torture and ill-treatment by the police and other law
enforcement bodies continue and that impunity for such violations so far
remains the rule. 
 
It is thus vital to accelerate the reform
process and to make the fight against impunity a priority. The transitional
nature of the government - despite its inherent limitations - should not be the
reason for delaying needed reforms to protect from torture. To the contrary,
such delay may put the enthusiasm for the project that started on January 14th
in jeopardy. 
 


Ending impunity
 
Some victims have already submitted complaints
and there is today a compelling body of documentation on torture, including by
OMCT’s member organisations (Council for National Liberties in Tunisia,
Tunisian Organisation Against Torture, Tunisian League for Human Rights). The
justice system has to start assuming its legal and professional responsibility
to investigate allegations of torture expediently in order to bring those
responsible to justice. 
 
As expressed by the UN Special Rapporteur on
Torture, investigating allegations of torture is a normal state function not
dependent on the election of a Constituent Assembly. In this regard, the
delegation was regularly referred to the possibility for victims to lodge
complaints – a possibility that had proven illusionary in the past. It
emphasizes that it is a positive obligation of the State to investigate any
case of torture ex officio even without any formal complaint. Ending
complacency towards torture requires that any state authority, including prison
or police officials, prosecutors or judges, who become aware of torture or
ill-treatment need to bring this information to the attention of the
prosecuting authorities.
 
The Commission set-up to investigate abuses and
violations during the revolution provides another opportunity to break with the
concept of impunity, ultimately by submitting cases to the justice system for
prosecution. In this context, it encourages all actors in the transition
process to consider a comprehensive process of truth and justice to address the
legacy of torture in Tunisia beyond the limits of the present commission, and
to make the voices of the victims heard as soon as possible. 
 
Legal reforms
 
Moreover, the OMCT encourages the transitional
authorities to move swiftly on legal reforms in Tunisia to prevent torture and
to enable the justice system to protect human rights. This includes reforms
strengthening the independence of the judiciary and limiting the jurisdiction
of military courts as required by international standards. 
 
The visit of the delegation of places of detention
and information received from victims confirms a real urgency to provide
safeguards against torture at the moment of arrest in police detention.
Priority should thus be given to provide access to lawyers from the moment of
arrest and the strengthening of judicial control and oversight over arrest and
detention. The delegation also encourages the authorities to work in close
cooperation with civil society for developing a robust independent mechanism as
required within one year after the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
UN Convention Against Torture.
 
The OMCT delegation also discussed the central
challenge to reform the security apparatus. It shares the view of the UN
Special Rapporteur on Torture that those who are implicated in the policy of
torture, including those who authorized, planned, participated or failed to
prevent torture, can in no case continue to serve within the services. The OMCT
also considers that a clear separation between intelligence and the judicial
police should be maintained and consideration be given to establish effective
democratic oversight over any security services.
 
Penitentiary reform
 
The OMCT greatly appreciates the opportunity to
visit a number of detention facilities. On the basis of this information received
it recommends an independent review of the penitentiary system to assess
reforms to ensure compliance with international human rights standards. The
visits have underlined also a need to investigate allegations of ill-treatment
within the prison system and to provide effective complaint mechanisms, but
also to allow for a review of convictions based on torture confessions as such
cases are not covered by the amnesty decree. 
 
Final remarks
 
Finally, the OMCT considers that transition
processes regularly benefit from making universal human rights standards an
integral part of the legal system and of any reform process under
consideration. 
 
It also encourages the legal community to use
international human rights standards, for example in relation to challenging
the lawfulness of detention. International human rights standards, such as
those contained in the UN Convention Against Torture, are not foreign but
Tunisian standards.
 
The delegation is confident in light of its
meetings of the resolve of Tunisian society to overcome the legacy of torture
and impunity. It also expresses its expectation that Tunisia will equally
become a vocal actor on the international level re-enforcing international
human rights law and mechanism.
 
 

Background of the OMCT mission: 
 
The delegation was composed of Mr. Yves
Berthelot, President of the OMCT, Mr. Eric Sottas, Secretary General of the
OMCT, Mr. Gerald Staberock, Deputy Secretary General of the OMCT, as well as
Mr. Roberto Garreton, member of the national human rights institute of Chile
and member of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, and Mr. Emilio
Ginés, Vice-President of the Federation of Spanish human rights associations,
and a member of the UN Sub-Committee on the Prevention of Torture (both joining
this mission as OMCT expert and not in official UN function).
 
 
For further information please contact
Gerald Staberock, Deputy Secretary General, OMCT, + 41 22 809 49 39, + 41 (0)79
377 5446 