Iran:  Press Release: The Observatory strongly condemns ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Nargess Mohammadi
July 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Iran / 2015 / JulyIran: Press Release: The Observatory strongly condemns ongoing judicial harassment of Ms. Nargess MohammadiIran_2015.07.10_Press_Release_EN2 pages / 162 KBParis-Geneva, July 10, 2015. The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), expresses its grave concerns regarding the pressures
exerted on the arbitrarily imprisoned human rights defender Ms. Nargess
Mohammadi in Iran.
Ms. Nargess Mohammadi, Spokesperson
and Vice-President of the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC), who was
arbitrarily arrested on May 5, 2015[1], is now facing further criminal charges and
judicial harassment while in prison. The Observatory recalls that Ms. Mohamadi
was allegedly arrested in order to serve the remainder of a 6-year prison
sentence she had commenced serving between April 21, 2012, and July 31, 2012,
when she was released on bail for medical reasons.
According to the information received,
the Iranian authorities had scheduled a hearing for Ms. Mohammadi on July 6,
2015, before Branch 15 of the Islamic Revolution Court of Tehran. The Ministry
of Intelligence had reportedly requested the judge to issue the maximum
punishment against her for the charges presented against her during a May 3,
2015 hearing, including “assembly and collusion against national security” and
“spreading propaganda against the State.[2]
However, this hearing did not take place, and the authorities did not provide
any explanation nor confirmation of whether or not it would be rescheduled.
In addition, Ms. Mohammadi continues to
face infringements to her rights while in prison. On July 6, 2015, an open
letter written by Ms. Mohammadi from Evin prison to the Tehran prosecutor was
published on the Internet under the heading: “Will telephone communications
of women prisoners with their children harm national security?” In this
letter, she complained that she was unable to contact her 9-year-old twins
because the prosecutor had banned all prisoners of the Women’s Ward in Evin
prison from making telephone calls, despite the fact that 14 of the 22
prisoners concerned are mothers, and five have children under the age of 10. 
Furthermore, prison officials have
refused Ms. Mohammadi access to medicines prescribed by specialists before her
imprisonment in order to treat her lung condition. 
The Observatory is highly concerned
about the ongoing judicial harassment and violations of human rights against
Ms. Mohammadi, which appear to be aimed at punishing her and her family for her
activities promoting human rights. 
The Observatory requests that the United
Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention intervene in Ms. Mohammadi’s case,
and urges the Iranian authorities to release her immediately and unconditionally,
and to guarantee in all circumstances her physical and psychological integrity
and that of all human rights defenders in Iran. The Observatory more generally
urges the Iranian authorities to put an end to all harassment - including at
the judicial level - against all human rights defenders in Iran.
Background information
For several years now, Ms. Mohammadi has
been facing continuous judicial harassment related to her human rights work,
including repeated summons, interrogations and trials.
On March 8, 2014, Ms. Mohammadi met the
then High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs &
Security Policy, Ms. Catherine Ashton, at the Austrian Embassy during an
official visit by Ms. Ashton to Tehran. Following this meeting, the Iranian
authorities banned Ms. Mohammadi from travelling abroad, and she has been
repeatedly interrogated by State security agents regarding her discussions with
Ms. Ashton about the suppression of the civil society and the conditions of
political prisoners in Iran. Since March 2014, she has received 10 summons and
has been detained twice by security agents for several hours each time. 
On June 1, 2014 she was summoned to the
Prosecutor's Office of the Islamic Revolution Court, where she was accused
of “disturbing public opinion” and “assembly and collusion against
national security” with reference to her participation in various
activities, including meetings in which participants criticised the
government’s “Citizenship Charter” and discussed “International Women’s Day”
and “the Day of Clean Air”.
In November 2014, the Observatory
expressed fears that Ms. Mohammadi may be re-arrested on fabricated charges[3].
 The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in
1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT).The objective of
this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders.
For more information,
please contact:
·                    
FIDH: Arthur Manet / Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55
25 18
·                    
OMCT: Miguel Martin Zumalacarregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49
24



[1]    See Observatory
press release of May 5, 2015.


[2]     Ibid.


[3]     See Observatory
press release
of November 7, 2014. 