Mexico:  Call for the adoption of a comprehensive Law against Torture as a turning point in the fight against torture
September 24, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Mexico / 2015 / SeptemberMexico: Call for the adoption of a comprehensive Law against Torture as a turning point in the fight against torture 
Geneva – Mexico, D.F., 24 September 2015. With just
over 100 days left before the deadline for the approval of a new General Law against
torture, CMDPDH and OMCT have published
an authoritative study "Proposal for the adoption
of an effective, nationwide law on torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment". The document will be submitted to the
members of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies, following the start of the
regular sessions of the Congress of the Union in early September (Legislature
LXVVV). 







Geneva – Mexico, D.F., 24 September 2015. With just over
100 days left before the deadline for the approval of a new General Law against
torture,[1] CMDPDH and OMCT
have published an authoritative study entitled "Proposal
for the adoption of an effective, nationwide law on torture and cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment". The document will be
submitted to the members of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies, following
the start of the regular sessions of the Congress of the Union in early
September (Legislature LXVVV).
This study calls
upon the competent authorities in the legislative process to create a set of firm
legal standards to put an end to the persistent practice of torture. The
document by CMDPDH and OMCT presents the key elements for the new law on
torture, based on the obligations to prevent and eradicate torture and cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment that Mexico is bound by. 
"It is
necessary and essential to adopt a General Law that criminalizes torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and sets out the
highest international standards on an effective prosecution of acts of torture,"
said José Antonio Guevara, Executive Director of the CMDPDH. 
There are
currently no mechanisms that ensure transparency and proper public consultation
in the process of elaboration of the new law. In this context, CMDPDH and OMCT,
in coordination with other non-governmental organisations, have requested that the Executive and Legislative Federal
Branches establish mechanisms allowing for dialogue and for the adequate and meaningful
consultation with members of civil society and anti-torture organisations.

"In our
global experience it is vital for the establishment of an effective legal
framework of torture to consult with those affected, civil society and
anti-torture organisations. There are plenty of experience of countries that
have adopted similar pieces of legislation that could inform the debate on the
new law in Mexico," said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the OMCT.
Both
organisations believe that the adoption of a new law and the inclusion of a
participatory process will be a litmus test of the commitment for the
eradication of torture of Mexican authorities. 
For
further information, please contact: 
Mariana Gurrola, CMDPDH
E-mail: comunicacion@cmdpdh.org
Tel: +52 (55)
55642582, ext. 114
Astrid Salcedo Pinzón, OMCT
E-mail: asp@omct.org
Tel: +41 228094939



[1] Pursuant to the decree published in the Official
Journal of the Federation on July 10, 2015 that called for the amendment of
Article 73 of the Constitution. 