Egypt:  Egypt: death in detention of Mr. Mahmoud Gabr Mohammed, reportedly as result of torture
October 22, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2003 / OctoberEgypt: Egypt: death in detention of Mr. Mahmoud Gabr Mohammed, reportedly as result of tortureCase EGY 201003 Arbitrary arrest and detention / Torture / Death in detention   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Egyptian Organisation of Human Rights (EOHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the death in detention of Mr. Mahmoud Gabr Mohammed, reportedly as result of torture, in Egypt.  According to the information received, Mr. Mohammed died in detention while being held in the police station of El Sayeda Zeinab. Mr. Mohammed was a worker and resident of El Sazeda Zeinab and was arrested without official charges on October 4th, 2003. The family of the victim was informed of his death on October 7th, 2003. They received his corpse and performed burial ceremonies later the same day. The health officer confirmed that there were numerous injuries and bruises on the victim's body and emphasized that the case concerning Mr. Mohammed's death had a "criminal aspect" about it. A relative of the victim reported that there were visible injuries on the corpse, including bruises under the knee, bleeding from the mouth, and other injuries all over the body.   It is important to note that in its latest report on torture inside police stations, EOHR called for investigations into 22 cases of torture in police stations in 2002, including 5 incidences of death in detention.   The International Secretariat of OMCT wishes to express its deep concern for the death in detention of Mr. Mahmoud Gabr Mohammed, notably as there are serious allegations that he was subjected to torture by members of the police. OMCT calls on the authorities to immediately order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of Mr. Mohammed's arrest, torture and death, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial, apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law, and award adequate reparation to his family.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to:  i.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to Mr. Mahmoud Gabr Mohammed’s family; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, His Excellency Mohammad Hosni Mubarak,  Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg, Fax:+202 390 1998  ·	Minister of the Interior, His Excellency General Habib al-Adeli, Ministry of the Interior, Al-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 579 2031  ·	Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr Faruq Sayf al-Nasr, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 795 8103   ·	Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Maher 'Abd al-Wahid, Dar al-Qadha al-'Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 577 4716  ·	Ambassadeur Gabr, Naéla, Av. Blanc 49 (2ème), CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 738 44 15  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.  Geneva, October 20th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 