Vacancy announcement: HRDs Grants and Reporting Officer (Brussels)
April  9, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Links / 2019 / AprilVacancy announcement: HRDs Grants and Reporting Officer (Brussels)Vacancy HRDs Grants and Reporting Officer 2 pages / 58 KB​The World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) is seeking to recruit a GRANTS
AND REPORTING OFFICER for its Human Rights Defenders Programme based in its
Brussels Office (OMCT Europe).
The position should be filled as soon as possible.ABOUT
OMCT

The OMCT works for, with and
through an international coalition of over 200 non-governmental organisations - the SOS-Torture network - fighting against torture, summary executions,
forced disappearance, arbitrary detentions and all other forms of cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment. The OMCT also provides a comprehensive and holistic system of support and protection for human
rights defenders (HRDs) including in the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders and of ProtectDefenders.EU.TASKS
& GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES

The incumbent will work under
the supervision of the Director of OMCT Human Rights Defenders Programme and
the Head of OMCT Europe Office.
 
Responsibilities of the
position include:
 
Grants
Management
-       To manage OMCT direct
assistance and emergency support to HRDs at risk as well as sub-granting and
institutional support to local HRDs organisations worldwide, including
screening grants applications, assessing the eligibility and needs of applicants and coordinating the
approval and delivery of grants under the guidance of the Director of OMCT HRDs
Programme.
-      To ensure the implementation
of due diligence processes and that all appropriate financial and narrative
reporting information related to grants allocated are adequately collected,
including ensuring that grant-related expenditures are properly tracked, and
that relevant receipts and documentation are maintained and recorded for all
grants allocated.
-       
To ensure that all grant
information is adequately reflected in the HRDs database.
-       
To take part in field missions
to verify and follow up grants allocated.
-
Monitoring
and Reporting
-       
To assist with the effective
monitoring, evaluation and the sharing of lessons learnt from the activities of
the HRD Programme.
-       
To provide support to the
production of narrative reports for relevant stakeholders on the activities implemented,
outcomes and impacts of the work of the HRDs Programme.
-
Other
responsibilities
-       
To liaise with OMCT network
organisations.
-       
To represent OMCT / the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders by participating in relevant
meetings, missions and conferences.
-       
To assist with other activities
of OMCT Human Rights Defenders Programme / the Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders in support to OMCT Geneva and Brussels offices.
 
QUALIFICATIONS
 
-       University degree in international
law, international relations, or in the field of business administration,
finance management or related field.
-       At least three years of experience
in human rights, social justice or civil society sector, including through
internships. Previous HRDs work
is an asset, as is experience in managing grant and financial assistance
programs, or in monitoring, evaluation and reporting. 
-       
Demonstrated commitment to
human rights, the rule of law and social justice causes.
-       
Excellent interpersonal and
communication skills managing conflicting demands, meeting deadlines and
adjusting priorities.
-       
Proven financial and organizational
management.
-       
Ability to adapt to
multidisciplinary work in the environment of a multicultural team and to engage
with partners in different countries and working in difficult security
environments.
-       
Ability to take initiatives
and prioritise with minimum supervision.
-       
Excellent oral and written
communication skills in two of the following languages (English, French or
Spanish); knowledge in the remaining or other relevant languages (such as Arabic,
Russian) would be an asset.
-       
Skills in the use of software
applications, database management and secure communication an asset.
-
APPLICATIONS
 
OMCT is an equal opportunities
employer.Applications
comprising a cover letter and a CV with at least two references should be
addressed to OMCT International Secretariat with the subject “HRDs Grants and Reporting Officer”, by
email to applications@omct.org. No
phone calls please. Only shortlisted candidates will be notified.
 
Deadline for the applications:
April 24, 2019. 