Turkey:  Muharrem Erbey released after 1’570 days in pre-trial detention
April 14, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Turkey / 2014 / AprilTurkey: Muharrem Erbey released after 1’570 days in pre-trial detention
Paris-Geneva, April 14, 2014 - 1’570 days after Muharrem Erbey's
arrest, FIDH and OMCT, within the framework of the Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, welcome his provisional release, but
remain gravely concerned about the prominent human rights lawyer's continued
judicial harassment over terrorism charges that clearly aim at repressing
legitimate human rights activities.
 
On April 12, 2014,
the Diyarbakir Heavy Penal Court No. 2 decided to release Mr. Muharrem Erbey,
human rights lawyer, Vice-President of the Human Rights Association (İHD),
former President of the İHD's branch office in Diyarbakır and recipient of the
Ludovic-Trarieux International Human Rights Prize for 2012, for “lack of
evidence”. Mr. Erbey has been suffering protracted pre-trial detention for more than four
years and is being prosecuted with 174 other Kurdish figures. 
 
During this
preliminary hearing, the provisional release of 48 of the accused was
discussed. 38 were released pursuant to the five-year limit of detention and
ten, including Mr. Erbey, were released for lack of evidence. However, charges
remain pending against them. The trial was postponed until July 7, 2014. To
date, 43 remained in jail. This move follows the closure of the Diyarbakir
Special Heavy Penal Court No. 6, which had been in charge of the trial since
October 2010, pursuant to the reform of the Turkish Penal Procedure Code that
ordered the closure of all specialised heavy penal courts. Accordingly, the
case was transferred to the Diyarbakir Heavy Penal Court No. 2.
 
“We welcome the decision of the court to release
Mr. Muharrem Erbey after more than 4 years in pre-trial detention. However, he
should never have been detained in the first place”, FIDH President
Karim Lahidji said. “His trial is hanging over his head like a sword of
Damocles. All charges against Mr. Erbey should be dropped. And the Turkish
authorities should recognise the legitimacy of human rights work, which should
never be labelled as terrorism offences”, he further urged.
 
“Although we are relieved that Mr. Muharrem Erbey is now out of jail, we are concerned about the persistence of charges against
him. His prosecution represents a gross miscarriage of justice
and is yet another blow to the credibility of Turkey's judicial system, which
continues to be used as a weapon to repress legitimate human rights activities”, OMCT Secretary General
Gerald Staberock said. “The Turkish authorities should release all human rights activists currently
detained and drop all the charges against them”, he further urged.
 
The facts and
circumstances of Mr. Erbey’s arrest, as well as a thorough examination of the
charges and evidence produced against him, clearly suggested that his
prosecution was carried out in retaliation for his activities as a high-profile
human rights lawyer. The judicial process has been marred by significant
irregularities and the fundamental rights of the accused have been repeatedly
violated. On December 24, 2009, Mr. Muharrem Erbey
was arrested as part of mass counter-terrorism operations
that
in fact have little to do with countering terrorism, but rather have been used
as a means of criminalising peaceful dissent and Kurdish political and cultural
expression. His arrest was based on his alleged
membership to the Kurdish Communities Union (KCK), an organisation said to be
the “urban branch” of the armed Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK). He was charged
with “being a member of an illegal organisation”,
pursuant to Article 314 of the Turkish Criminal Code. Mr. Erbey is facing a minimum
sentence of 7,5 to 15 years in prison should he be found guilty. 
 
The Observatory urges
the authorities of Turkey to guarantee Mr. Erbey's
right to a fair trial and to refrain from further harassing human
rights defenders, and to ensure they are able to carry out their work
without hindrance or fear of reprisals. It also calls on the Turkish
authorities to conform to the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international
and European human rights instruments ratified by Turkey. 