India:  India: imminent forced eviction of 5000 people in Howrah, West Bengal
January 15, 2009
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / India / 2009 / JanuaryIndia: India: imminent forced eviction of 5000 people in Howrah, West BengalThe International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received reliable information from the Banglar Manabadhikar Suraksha Mancha (MASUM), a member of the SOS Torture Network, that another forced eviction is taking place in Howrah, West Bengal, India. Following an order of the Kolkata High Court more that 5000 people, all from Dalit and poor communities, are about to be evicted from land that is said to be in their lawful possession near Belgachia Bhagar, the municipal garbage dumping ground of Howrah. The eviction was expected to take place on 14 January 2009, without any previous consultation with the households affected and in the absence of any resettlement plan. No prior notice was given other than an announcement by microphone two days earlier. Furthermore, OMCT has received information that a demonstration against the eviction is scheduled on 15 January at 10am and it will take place in Belgachia Bhagar. OMCT is particularly concerned that this protest will be met with violence on the part of the security forces.  OMCT is also seriously concerned that if this eviction takes place, this will involve violence and other ill-treatment against the community affected. OMCT calls upon both the Union Government of India and the State Government of West Bengal to halt immediately the current eviction procedure. In the unfortunate case that the eviction takes place, OMCT urges both authorities to ensure that the entire operation is carried out according to international standards on evictions, including freedom from violence, and to ensure also that the communities involved are granted relocation, alternative adequate housing and compensation. OMCT recalls that this eviction is not an isolated case, but rather the latest incident related to a policy of urban development and forced eviction supported by the Government of West Bengal. In particular, Howrah administration was already involved in the 2003 forced eviction in Belilious Park. In this respect, OMCT recalls that forced evictions constitute prima facie a violation of “a wide range of internationally recognized human rights and can only be carried out under exceptional circumstances and in full accordance with international human rights law.”[1]    [1] Basic principles and guidelines on development-based evictions and displacement, A/HRC/4/18 5 February 2007 