Iran:  Release on bail of Mr. Reza Khandan
January  7, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2019 / JanuaryIran: Release on bail of Mr. Reza Khandan

New informationIRN 001 / 0119 / OBS 002Release on bail /Judicial harassmentIranJanuary 7, 2019 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Iran.
New information:
The Observatory has been informed by the League for the Defence of Human
Rights in Iran (LDDHI) about the release on bail of Mr. Reza Khandan, a human rights defender known for having raised
concerns on Facebook about human rights violations in Iran, including the
imprisonment of human rights defenders and the prosecution of women who have
campaigned against the imposition of the hijab. Mr. Khandan also campaigned for
the release of his wife, Ms. Nasrin
Sotoudeh, one of Iran’s most prominent human rights lawyers, who was
arrested on June 13, 2018[1].
According to the information received, on December 23, 2018, Mr. Reza Khandan
was provisionally released on a ‘personal guarantee’[2].
This followed a court hearing that
was attended by Mr. Reza Khandan on December 19, 2018, at Branch 15 of the
Islamic Revolution Court in Tehran. During the hearing, the Court agreed to
change Mr. Khandan’s financial bail to a personal guarantee. Mr. Khandan is
still facing charges of “gathering and
colluding against national security” (Article 610 of the Islamic Penal Code),
“spreading propaganda against the system” (Article 500 of the Islamic Penal
Code), and propagating and promoting disregard for hijab in the society. 
Following Mr. Khandan’s release,
medical doctor and human rights defender Mr. Farhad Mayssami and Ms.
Nasrin Sotoudeh, who remain detained in Tehran’s Evin prison, ended their
hunger strike. Mr. Farhad Mayssami had been on hunger strike since August 1,
2018 and received intravenous fluid against his will[3].
Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh had been on hunger strike since November 26, 2018, to
express solidarity with Mr. Mayssami.
The Observatory welcomes the release
on bail of Mr. Reza Khandan, but recalls that he should never have been
incarcerated in the first place. The Observatory calls on Iranian authorities
to end all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Reza
Khandan and all human rights defenders in the country.
The Observatory also recalls
that several other human rights lawyers and human rights defenders remain in
arbitrary detention, including Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, Ms. Rezvaneh Mohammadi, Ms. Maryam Azad[4], Mr. Mostafa Daneshju, and Mr. Farhad Mayssami.
Background information[5]: 
Mr. Reza Khandan was arrested by agents of the Ministry of
Intelligence on September 4, 2018, at his home in Tehran and subsequently taken
to Branch 7 of the Prosecutor’s Office in the capital’s Evin prison. He was
detained on charges of “gathering and colluding against national security”,
“spreading propaganda against the system”, and propagating and promoting
disregard for hijab in the society. The Prosecutor’s Office ordered him to
deposit bail to the amount of 7,000 million Iranian rial (approximately 55,000
Euros). Mr. Reza Khandan refused to pay the bail, arguing that he had not
committed any offences, and remained detained in Evin prison.
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of Iran asking them to:
i.
Immediately and unconditionally release Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, Ms.
Rezvaneh Mohammadi, Ms. Maryam Azad, Mr. Mostafa Daneshju, Mr. Farhad Mayssami as well
asall human rights defenders arbitrarily detained in Iran; 
ii.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, Ms.
Rezvaneh Mohammadi, Ms. Maryam Azad, Mr. Mostafa Daneshju, Mr. Farhad Mayssami, Mr. Reza
Khandan and all human rights defenders in Iran;
iii. Put an
end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr.
Reza Khandan, Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, Ms. Rezvaneh Mohammadi, Ms.
Maryam Azad, Mr. Mostafa Daneshju, Mr. Farhad Mayssami as well
as all human rights defenders arbitrarily detained in the country;
iv.
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular its Articles 1, 6, 9, 11 and 12;
v. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Iran.
Addresses:
• Leader of the Islamic Republic, H.E. Ayatollah Sayed Ali Khamenei, Fax: + 98
21 441 2030, Email: info_leader@leader.ir; Twitter: @khamenei_ir
• President Hassan Rouhani, Islamic Republic of Iran, Fax: + 98 21 644 54811;
Email: media@rouhani.ir; Twitter: @HassanRouhani (English) and @Rouhani_ir
(Persian).
• Head of the Judiciary, H.E. Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, Islamic Republic of
Iran, Fax: +98 21 879 6671 / +98 21 3 311 6567, Email: info@dadiran.ir /
info@dadgostary-tehran.ir / info@bia-judiciary.ir
• Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Javad Zarif, Islamic Republic of Iran,
Fax: +98-21-66743149; matbuat@mfa.gov.ir
• Secretary General, High Council for Human Rights, Mr. Mohammed Javad
Larijani, Islamic Republic of Iran. Email: info@humanrights-iran.ir
• H.E. Mr. Javad Amin-Mansour, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41
22 7330203, Email: mission.iran@ties.itu.int
• H.E. Mr. Peiman Seadat, Ambassador, Embassy of Iran in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 39 15. Email: secreteriat@iranembassy.be
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Iran in your respective
countries.
***
Paris-Geneva, January 7, 2019
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society. 


[1]     See Observatory Urgent
Appeal IRN
001 / 0618 / OBS 085, published on June 15, 2018. 


[2]     This is a type of bail
under which a person guarantees to bring the defendant to the court, when
asked.


[3]     See Observatory Urgent
Appeal IRN 005 / 1118 / OBS 138, published on November 30, 2018. 


[4]     See Observatory Open Letter to President Hassan Rouhani, published on September
28, 2018. 


[5]     See
Observatory Open Letter to President Hassan Rouhani, September 28, 2018. 