India:  Khurram Parvez still illegally detained, despite High Court order for his release
November 29, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2016 / NovemberIndia: Khurram Parvez still illegally detained, despite High Court order for his releaseBangkok-Dhaka-Geneva-Paris-Quezon
City, 29 November 2016 – Kashmiri human rights defender Mr. Khurram Parvez
remains in arbitrary detention, despite a High Court order declaring his
detention illegal and ordering his release. Our organisations are appalled at
this abuse of power and demand the immediate and unconditional release of Khurram
Parvez.
Last Friday 25 November 2016, the High Court of Jammu
and Kashmir in Srinagar quashed the order of detention and ordered the release
of Mr. Khuram Parvez, Chairperson of
the Asian Federation Against Involuntary Disappearance (AFAD) and Program
Coordinator of Jammu Kashmir Coalition of Civil Society (JKCCS),
who has been arbitrarily detained since 16 September. However, police at
Jammu’s Kot Balwal Jail, where Mr. Parvez was being held, refused to release
him, claiming there was a typing error on the Court order. A new Court order
for his release was therefore issued on Tuesday 29 November, but instead of
releasing Mr. Parvez, officials from the counter-intelligence wing of Jammu
& Kashmir Police took Mr. Parvez to the Joint Interrogation Centre at
Meeran Sahib, Jammu. No information regarding the grounds of his continued
detention was provided to Mr. Parvez or to his legal counsel. 
We recall that on 20 September, the Principal Districts and Sessions Judge of
Srinagar had also quashed the charges against Mr. Parvez and ordered the
authorities to release him from jail. However, this order was also ignored and the
police re-arrested him under the preventive detention provisions of the Public
Safety Act of 1978 (PSA). The
Judge at the Jammu and Kashmir High Court on Friday notably observed: “A
society, which has catapulted itself to the highest position of democratic
values and principles, may not accept the law like the Act of 1978.” 
The
High Court Judge concluded that the detention of Mr. Parvez “is not only
illegal but [that] the detaining authority has abused its powers in ordering
his detention”. He also found that Mr. Parvez has not been provided the
documents relevant to his detention, and has therefore been deprived of the
opportunity to effectively appeal his detention. The authorities have also
manipulated the courts and used administrative delays to prolong Mr. Parvez’s
arbitrary detention, which now totals more than 74 days.[1]
The
High Court Judge also stated that “it is the duty of the State and its
authorities to maintain peace in the society but it is equally their
responsibility to ensure that laws, which they invoke to achieve such purpose,
are followed and complied with honesty”. The refusal by police to obey Court
orders and re-arrest Mr. Parvez is an abuse of power and a violation of the
rule of law and basic human rights.
Our organisations recall that just before his arbitrary arrest,
the authorities prevented Mr. Parvez’s from travelling to Geneva to speak at the United
Nations about enforced disappearances in Kashmir. We condemn this repression
and the arbitrary arrest of Mr. Parvez, which seem aimed at silencing his work
as a human rights defender, and are a violation of India’s obligations under
international law to allow human rights defenders to freely engage in their
legitimate work without fear of reprisals or repression. We take this opportunity to call on India to remove
the obstacles preventing the work of human rights defenders, particularly
those working on the issue of
enforced disappearance, and to finally ratify the
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance, which India signed in 2007 but has still refused to ratify and
implement nationally.
We call for the authorities to immediately
and unconditionally release Mr. Parvez, in compliance with both the High Court
order and India’s human rights obligations, and to ensure that he is not
subjected to further repression or reprisals for his important human rights
work.
Signed:
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (The Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.
The Asian Federation Against Involuntary
Disappearances (AFAD) is a federation of
human rights organizations working directly on the issue of involuntary
disappearances in Asia. Envisioning a world without desaparecidos, AFAD was
founded on June 4, 1998 in Manila, Philippines. 
The Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) works towards the radical rethinking and fundamental redesigning of
justice institutions in order to protect and promote human rights in Asia.
Established in 1984, the Hong Kong based organisation is a Laureate of the
Right Livelihood Award 2014.
FORUM-ASIA is a regional
human rights group with 58 member organisations in 19 countries across Asia.
FORUM-ASIA addresses key areas of human rights violations in the region,
including freedoms of expression, assembly and association, human rights
defenders, and democratisation. FORUM-ASIA operates through its offices in
Bangkok, Jakarta, Geneva and Kathmandu.
The International Coalition Against Enforced
Disappearances (ICAED) is a network of 42
member organisations concerned with the issue of human rights and the struggle
against enforced disappearances. The principal objective of ICAED is maximising
impact of the activities carried out by its members in favour of an early
ratification and effective implementation of the Convention for the Protection
of all Persons from Enforced Disappearances.
Odhikar, a human
rights organisation based in Dhaka, Bangladesh, was founded in 1994 with the
aim to create a wider monitoring and awareness raising system on the abuse of
civil and political rights.



[1]     For more information, see our joint
statement from 26 October 2016. 