Indonesia:  Press Release: Drop defamation complaints against human rights defender Haris Azhar
August  8, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Indonesia / 2016 / AugustIndonesia: Press Release: Drop defamation complaints against human rights defender Haris AzharParis-Geneva, August 8, 2016 – The Indonesian 
police must immediately stop the judicial harassment of KontraS Executive 
Director Mr. Haris Azhar, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights 
Defenders (an FIDH-OMCT partnership) said today. The call was made after the 
Indonesian military and police had filed criminal defamation complaints 
against Haris Azhar in relation to an article he had written containing 
allegations that top-ranking Indonesian police officials accepted bribes 
from an international drug trafficking network.

		 


On August 2, 2016, the National Police, the Indonesian Military (TNI), and 
the National Narcotics Agency (BNN) each filed complaints against Haris 
Azhar for defamation under the 2008 Electronic Information and 
Transactions Law. The law, which prohibits any person from distributing, 
transmitting, or making accessible electronic information “with 
contents of affronts and/or defamation”, carries a penalty of up to six years in 
prison and a one billion Rupiah (approximately 68,500 Euro) fine.


 


The defamation complaints stem from an article that Haris Azhar wrote and 
subsequently published on social media on July 28, 2016. In the article, 
titled “The Dark Story of a Bandit: testimony from a meeting with 
Freddy Budiman in Nusakambangan Prison (2014)”, Haris Azhar detailed 
statements made by the convicted drug lord who was executed on July 29, 
2016. According to him, police officials, including officials from the 
National Police and BNN, regularly received kickbacks from his drug 
business.

		 

“
Instead of pursuing defamation charges against Haris Azhar, the authorities 
must investigate the alleged corruption of police officials. The right to 
scrutinise institutions and report on allegations of corruption is a 
legitimate exercise of Haris’ right to freedom of opinion and 
expression”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji.


 

Police are now 
considering summoning Haris Azhar for questioning. Police Chief Spokesman General Boy Rafli Amar said 
that the allegations made by Haris Azhar needed to be backed by proof. 


 

Drug smuggling is a prominent issue in Indonesia. 
In 2015, Indonesia executed 14 individuals who had been convicted of 
drug-related offenses. So far, four individuals have been executed for drug 
crimes in 2016.


 

“
Authoritative UN 
jurisprudence has confirmed that criminal defamation laws should not be 
invoked if there is a public interest in the subject matter of the 
criticism. We urge the Indonesian authorities to drop all charges seeking 
criminalisation of the legitimate human rights activities of Haris 
Azhar”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.

 

Finally, the Observatory calls upon Indonesian 
authorities to protect Haris Azhar from any acts of reprisals committed in 
response to his legitimate human rights work.

 

The Observatory for the Protection of Human 
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to 
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights 
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders 
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.

 

For more information, please contact:


• 
FIDH: Arthur Manet: + 33 143552518

• OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui / Chiara Cosentino: 
+32 4966903 / Delphine Reculeau: +41 228094934 