China:  Fear for the safety of three monks of the Tawu Nyasto Monastery in Sichuan Province, whose wherebaouts remain unknown after their arrest
August 24, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2011 / AugustChina: Fear for the safety of three monks of the Tawu Nyasto Monastery in Sichuan Province, whose wherebaouts remain unknown after their arrest​CHN 240811Whereabouts unknown/ Risk of
torture and ill-treatment
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.

Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by The Tibetan Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy (TCHRD), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the arrest
and disappearance of three Tibetan monks of the Tawu Nyatso Monastery, namely
monk Norbu, monk Gyaltsen and the identity of the third
monk remains, at the time of issuing this urgent appeal, unknown. All three
were arrested by members of the Public Security Bureau (PSB), in Tawu county,
Kandze Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture (TAP), Sichuan Province. OMCT fears that they may be at risk of torture and
ill-treatment. 
According to the information received, monk Norbu,
originally from the village of Rinah Lungpa, was arrested on 19 August 2011 in Siyo, near Chengdu (the capital of the Sichuan Province). Monk Gyaltsen, originally from the village of Nyeshap, was arrested
on 21 August 2011, at the
entrance of a hospital in Chendgu, where he was accompanying a relative. The
third monk, whose identity is currently unknown, was arrested on 22 August 2011 (at the time
of issuing this urgent appeal, no further information was available on the
exact circumstances of their arrest). The charges against them and their
current whereabouts are not known. 
OMCT recalls that, on 15 August 2011, 29-year-old
monk Tsewang Norbu of the same aforementioned monastery set himself on fire
after raising slogans such as “Freedom in Tibet” and “Return
of his Holiness the Dalai Lama to Tibet”. Since then,
security forces have been reportedly deployed in the area and the monks of the
monastery have been regularly interrogated. Furthermore, restrictions on the
movement of local Tibetans and communications have been severely tightened. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is
gravely concerned about the safety of monk Norbu, monk Gyaltsen and the third
monk who was arrested, as their
whereabouts and fate remain unknown.OMCT fears that they may be
subjected to torture or other ill-treatment. OMCT urges the competent
authorities to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity at all
times, in accordance with international human rights law, in particular the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, and to immediately locate and
disclose their whereabouts. Enforced disappearance and torture and other
ill-treatment constitute serious human rights violations and are strictly
prohibited under international law. 
Actions
Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.                    
Immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of the three arrested monks; 
ii.                  
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity; 
iii.                 
Grant them
immediate and full access to a lawyer of their choice and their family, as well
as guarantee that they are examined by independent doctors and receive adequate
medical care if necessary, in accordance, inter
alia, with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iv.                
Order their immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring them before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and
guarantee their procedural rights at all times;
v.                  
Guarantee
the
respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in
accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
·  
   Mr. Wen
Jiabao, Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The
State Council General Office, 2 Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017,
People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o
Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
·  
   Mr. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the
People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyangqu,
Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529 2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
·  
   Mr. Meng Jianzhu,
Minister of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang,
Gong’anbu, 14 Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s
Republic of China, Fax: +86 10
63099216

Director of the Sichuan Provincial
Department of Justice, Sifating, 24 Shangxiznglu, Chengdushi 610015,
Sichuansheng, People's Republic of China

·      Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Ch. De Surville, CP 85, 1213
Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse, e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22 793 70
14
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 24 August 2011
Kindly inform us of any
action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 