Israel:  Israel : sentence of one year imprisonment pronounced against five Israeli conscientious objectors
January  5, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2004 / JanuaryIsrael: Israel : sentence of one year imprisonment pronounced against five Israeli conscientious objectorsParis, Geneva, 5 January 2004.  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint  programme of the FIDH and the OMCT is very concerned at the sentence  of one year imprisonment pronounced against five Israeli  conscientious objectors (COs) on 4 January 2004 by the Military Court  in Jaffa.  Noam Bahat, Adam Maor, Haggai Matar, Shinri Tsameret and Matan  Kaminer, who are among more than 300 high school seniors, who refuse  to serve in military forces involved in the occupation of Palestinian  Territories are considered as "selective conscientious objectors", as  they do not refuse to enlist in the army whatever, but refuse to join  an army of occupation.   They have already been detained over a year for refusing to serve in  the army. On December 16, 2003, the five were convicted of refusing  to obey an order. On January 4, 2004, the court sentenced them to one  year imprisonment. It further recommended that the army consider  their discharge after this period of time. However, the Israelian  Defence Forces (IDF) has the possibility to demand they be mobilized  or face additional jail time after their sentence is completed.  On 12 November 2003, conscientious objector Jonathan Ben Artzi was  convicted by the Military Court in Jaffa for disobeying an order by  refusing to serve in the Army. Nevertheless, the Court recognized him  as being a pacifist and recommended that he appears once again before  the Military Conscientious Committee (see the judicial observation  mission report of the Observatory : Israel: conscientious objection  tackled by military justice, Ben Artzi trial, December 2003).  Jonathan Ben Artzi is still detained awaiting for the final verdict  of the Court.  The Observatory considers that these sentences violate the right to  freedom on conscience, thought and religion enshrined in article 18  of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),  to which Israel is a party. On April 16, 2003, the Observatory,  considering their detention to be arbitrary, brought the cases of  conscientious objectors in Israel before the UN Working Group on  Arbitrary Detention.  The use of military courts to try COs is also source of concern.  Recommendations by human rights experts of the Sub-Commission for the  Promotion and Protection of  Human Rights indicate that civil courts should deal with similar  cases to ensure impartiality and independence of justice towards  those people willing to exercise their  freedom of conscience and opinion.   The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders demands  that:  - the conscientious objectors that are currently arbitrarily detained  and judged before the military court be released; - the Israeli legislation as well as the military authorities  recognize the right to conscientious objection as a legitimate  exercise of the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion  as contained in article 18 of the International Covenant for Civil  and Political Rights by establishing an independent and impartial  committee in charge of examining the cases; - a true alternative civil service which is not of a punitive nature  be established; - Israel conform with the provisions of the Universal Declaration on  Human Rights and the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders (1998).  Press contact : FIDH: 00 33 1 43 55 25 18 - OMCT: 00 41 22 809 49 39 