Benin:  Report on the conditions of children’s deprivation of liberty in Benin. The issue of violence against children deprived of liberty
July 15, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Reports and Publications / Benin / 2011 / JulyBenin: Report on the conditions of children’s deprivation of liberty in Benin. The issue of violence against children deprived of liberty
Geneva-Cotonou,
July 2011. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and its
local partner in Benin, Solidarity for Children in Africa and the
World (ESAM), publish their report on the situation of children
deprived of liberty in Benin. It focuses on the various forms of
violence perpetrated against those children while in police custody
and pre- and post-trial detention. It also shows that the conditions
of children in detention fail to satisfy international standards.
Thanks
to the official authorisation to visit the prisons, the OMCT and ESAM
(member of the OMCT SOS/Torture network in Benin since 2003) have
conducted more than 30 monitoring visits between September 2009 and
February 2011. The situation observed and the information collected
during those visits as well as the various meetings and seminars with
the authorities and the civil society are gathered in the report. It
confirms the critical findings contained in the UN Subcommittee for
the prevention of torture 2008 mission report[1],
namely:
-  
that
ill-treatment, including torture, is often used against children in
police stations;
-  
that
the conditions of child detention often amount to inhuman and
degrading treatment;
-  
that
several of the children’s quarters (where boys are detained) and
women’s quarters (where girls are kept) in the prisons are
overcrowded. This situation results from overuse of deprivation of
liberty and lengthy pre-trial detention and leads to appalling
conditions of detention;
-  
that
the separation of children from adult detainees is limited. In police
custody, there is no such separation. In the prisons, although boys
are kept in separate quarters, girls remain detained with women.
The
report contains a series of detailed recommendations to the attention
of the authorities and other relevant stakeholders. It ends with the
comments from the Ministry of Justice of Benin that was offered the
opportunity to read and comment the report before it was published.


Link report (only in French) : OMCT-ESAM_Rapport sur les conditions de privation de
liberté des mineurs au Bénin 







[1]
Report
on the visit of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment to Benin, UN Doc
CAT/OP/BEN.1. Available at:
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cat/opcat/docs/ReportVisitBenin-AdvanceCopy.pdf. 