Philippines:  Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Rodel Estrellado, a 34 years old farmer and member of the Bayan Muna Party
March 29, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2011 / MarchPhilippines: Alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Rodel Estrellado, a 34 years old farmer and member of the Bayan Muna Party​Case PHL 290311Abduction/ Alleged extrajudicial killing/ No effective
investigation/ Risk of impunity
The
International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in the Philippines.
Brief description of
the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by the Alliance for the
Advancement of People’s Rights (KARAPATAN), a member of OMCT SOS-Torture
Network, about the alleged extrajudicial killing of Mr. Rodel Estrellado,
a 34 years old farmer and member of the Bayan Muna Party, Sorsgon chapter
(section), in Barangay 3 (village), Malilipot, in the province of Albay.
According to the information received, on 25
February 2011, at
around 9:00 a.m.,
Mr. Rodel Estrellado was approached by four men, who introduced themselves as
members of the Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency (PDEA)[1],
when he was walking back home. The four presumed members of the PDEA reportedly
forced Mr. Rodel Estrellado inside a gray-coloured car with plate number MXN
902, and drove in direction of the city of Legazpi, province of Albay. 
According to the same information, on the same day, on
25 February 2011 around 6:00 a.m., the spokesman of the 9th Infantry
Division of the Philippines Armed Forces[2]
issued a statement, which announced that a certain Mr. Elmer Estrellado, an
alleged member of the New People’s Army (NPA), had been killed in an armed
encounter in the village of Buluang, in the Municipality of Bato, Province of
Caramines Sur. Moreover, later on the same day, two members of the Armed
Forces, allegedly Major Danilo Ambe and 2nd Lieutenant Maribel
Donilla, both based in Mabaludbalud, Camarines Sur, filed a blotter report at
the Philippine National Police (PNP) station of Bato stating that a man named
Mr. Elmer Estrellado had died during a strike operation they had conducted in
Buluang village.[3] 
On 27 February 2011, after hearing in the local news about the
death of a certain “Elmer Estrellado”, Mr. Rodel Estrellado’s family went to
the funeral parlour in Bato, Camarines Sur, where the body of the alleged Mr.
Elmer Estrellado had been brought. There, the family discovered that Mr. Elmer
Estrellado was actually their abducted relative, Mr. Rodel Estrellado. 
The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely
concerned about the circumstances surrounding the death of Mr. Rodel
Estrellado, which seem to suggest that he may have been victim of an
extrajudicial killing. Mr. Rodel Estrellado was reportedly an active member of
the Bayan Muna Party, whose members have repeatedly been branded as “supporter”
of the New People’s Army (NPA) by the military and targeted under the guise of
counter-insurgency measures[4].
OMCT expresses also its grave concern about the ongoing impunity of such
killings, and therefore recalls to the Philippines authorities that they have to fulfil their
obligations under international human rights law to protect the right to life
and to bringing to justice those responsible for violating this right.
OMCT urges the
competent authorities to carry out a prompt, effective, thorough,
independent and impartial investigation into the circumstances
surrounding the killing of Mr. Rodel
Estrellado, in accordance with international human rights
standards, such as the UN Principle on the Effective Prevention and
Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions, the result of
which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law.
OMCT is
also gravely concerned about the safety of Mr. Rodel Estrellado’s family,
and calls on the competent authorities to guarantee, in all
circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity.
Actions Requested
Please write to the
authorities in the Philippines urging them to:
i.                    
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Rodel
Estrellado’s family; 
ii.                  
Carry out a
prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the killing of Mr. Rodel Estrellado, in accordance
with international human rights standards, inter alia, with the UN Principle on
the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-legal, Arbitrary and
Summary Executions, the result of which must be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iii.                 
Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt
reparation, including adequate compensation, is granted to the victim’s family;
iv.                
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      H.E. Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Republic of the Philippines,
Malacaang Palace, JP Laurel St., San Miguel, Manila, Philippines, Fax: (+632) 742-1641 / 929-3968, E-mail: corres@op.gov.ph / opnet@ops.gov.ph
Ø      Sec. Teresita Quintos-Deles, Presidential Adviser on
the Peace Process, Office of the Presidential
Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP), 7th
Floor Agustin Building I, Emerald Avenue,
Pasig City 1605, Fax:+63 (2) 638 2216, E-Mail Address: osec@opapp.gov.ph
Ø      Ret. Lt. Gen. Voltaire T. Gazmin, Secretary,
Department of National Defense, Room 301 DND
Building, Camp Emilio Aguinaldo, E. de los Santos
Avenue, Quezon City, Fax:+63(2) 911 6213, Email:
osnd@philonline.com
Ø      Atty. Leila M. De Lima, Secretary, Department of
Justice, Padre Faura St., Manila, Direct Line 521-8344; 5213721, Trunkline 523-84-81 loc.214, Fax: (+632) 521-1614, Email: doj.delima@gmail.com
Ø      Hon. Loretta Ann P. Rosales, Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights, SAAC
Bldg., UP Complex, Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman,
Quezon City, Philippines, Fax: (+632) 929 0102, Email:
chair.rosales.chr@gmail.com 
Ø      Permanent Mission
of the Philippines to the United Nations in Geneva, 47 Avenue Blanc, 1202
Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716 19
32, Email: mission.philippines@ties.itu.int
Please also write to the embassies of the Philippines in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 29 March 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] The PDA is an agency accompanying the
Philippine National Police on drug-related crimes. PDA has reportedly denied any operation on
the day of Mr. Estrellado’s abduction.


[2] The 9th Infantry Division of the
Philippine Army is based in the town of Pili, province of Camarines Sur, South Eastern part of Luzon. 


[3] The region of Bicol, composed among other
provinces of the provinces of Albay and Camarines Sur, is highly militarized as
it is identified by the Armed Forces of Philippines (AFP) as one of its target
areas of the counter-insurgency program Oplan Bayanihan.


[4] See OMCT report
« Addressing the Economic, Social and Cultural Root Causes of torture and
Violence in the Philippines », 2010. http://www.omct.org/files/2010/10/20939/philippines_follow_up_mission_report_final_01_10_10.pdf.

See also for
example OMCT urgent appeal PHL 141010, issued 4 October 2010. 