Occupied Palestinian Territory :  Palestine Autonomous Areas:  continued detention of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasem despite release order
July 19, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Occupied Palestinian Territory  / 2000 / JulyOccupied Palestinian Territory : Palestine Autonomous Areas:  continued detention of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasem despite release orderPalestine:  continued detention of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasem  Case PAL 011299.6 Sixth follow-up of Case PAL 011299  Geneva, 19th July 2000  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in the Palestinian Autonomous Areas.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information from the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW) a member of the OMCT network, that on 11th July 2000, the Palestinian High Court of Justice convened and issued a release order to affirm the preliminary order of April 3rd 2000 demanding the immediate release of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasem.  According to information received, he is still in detention.  According to the information received, the Palestinian High Court issued a preliminary order for Police Chief Ghazi al Jabali and the Attorney General to explain the continued illegal detention of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasem, a professor at Al Najah University who was re-detained on 18th February 2000.  The defendants were given 8 days to provide a satisfactory explanation.  Brief reminder of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT received new information from (LAW) that on Friday 18 February 2000 the Palestinian police criminal department arrested Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasem, 50, professor at al-Najah National University in Nablus and one of the signatories of the "petition 20" statement issued in November 1999 criticizing corruption in PNA institutions.   According to the information received, Dr. Qasem's wife reported that on Friday 18th February two officers, who said they were from the criminal police department, arrived at their house in Nablus at approximately 11:00pm and arrested her husband without an arrest warrant. The officers explained that they had an order to arrest Dr. Qasem issued by Ghazi Jabali, head of Palestinian civil police, and President Arafat. She added that the reasons for his arrest are yet unknown and that the two officers who came to arrest him had originally told her that they needed him for questioning for only fifteen minutes. Dr. Qasem's wife added that the Palestinian police in Jericho are still holding her husband and he has not been allowed visits.  At this time, LAW's lawyers were refused a permit to visit Dr. Qasem.  Previously, the International Secretariat of OMCT was informed of the arrest of Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim on 28th November 1999, along with a number of Palestinian political and social figures, following the release on 27th November 1999 of a statement accusing the Palestinian Authority of corruption.  Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasem had been transferred to the General Intelligence detention centre in Jericho and was informed that he would not be allowed visits, without a satisfactory reason.  On 5th January 2000, LAW's lawyer was able to visit Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasem at the Jericho detention center.  At this time, the attorney general had renewed his detention period for the third successive time on 30 December 1999 for a further 15 days.   Finally, the International Secretariat of OMCT received information (LAW) that Dr. Abdel Sattar Qasim was released on 6th January 2000 from Jericho Detention Centre.  According to the information, Khaled Al Qidra, Head of the State Security Court, informed the detainees that President Arafat had issued a release order for bail.  He was required to sign a pledge that bound him to appear at police stations if summoned.  Bail, was placed at 50,000 Jordanian Dinars (approximately $USD75,000) to be forfeited for non-compliance with the summons.  Requested Action  Please write to the authorities in Palestine Autonomous Areas urging them to:  ensure compliance with the court order that demands the immediate release of Dr Abdel Sattar Qasem; order the immediate release of all political detainees who have been held in PNA controlled prisons without charge or trial; guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards  Addresses  Yasser Arafat, President of the Palestinian Authority, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, via Israel.  Fax : + 972 7 2822 365/6 ( if voice, say "fax, please"). Palestinian Authority, Minister of Justice, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, via Israel. Fax : + 972 7 822 236 or +972 7 286-7109 Khalid al-Qidrah, Attorney General, Palestinian Authority, Attorney General Building, Yarmouk, Gaza, via Israel.  Fax : + 972 7 824 503.  Geneva, 19th July 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 