India:  Acts of harassment and death threats against Ms. Swathi Vadlamudi
April 20, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2018 / AprilIndia: Acts of harassment and death threats against Ms. Swathi Vadlamudi​IND 003 / 0418 / OBS 052Harassment / Death threats
India
April 20, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in India.
 
Brief description
of the information:
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources about acts of harassment and death threats against Ms. Swathi
Vadlamudi, a journalist based in Hyderabad, India[1].
 
According
to the information received, on April 10, 2018, Ms. Swathi Vadlamudi published
a cartoon on her Twitter and Facebook accounts commenting on recent incidents of rape and
kidnapping in Kathua, Jammu and Kashmir State, and Unnao, Uttar Pradesh State,
which have sparked widespread protests and public outcry across India.
 
The
cartoon depicts the mythical Hindu Gods Ram and Sita commenting on these recent
cases, in which Sita remarks “I was so
glad I was kidnapped by Ravan and not your bhakts!”[2]. The
cartoon, which criticizes rape apologists and those protecting
individuals accused of rape, was published in response to recent protests by
Hindu Ekta Manch, a right-wing group, seeking the release of Deepak Khajuria,
one of the prime suspects in the recent Kathua rape case[3].
 
Since
the cartoon’s publication, Ms. Swathi Vadlamudi has been subjected to
extensive online harassment and intimidation, including several death threats.
For instance, she was threatened with the same fate as Gauri Lankesh, a
journalist who was killed outside her residence in Bangalore in 2017,[4]
as well as with attacks similar to those carried out in France in response to a
cartoon published by the weekly satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo in
January 2015. In some cases of online abuse, she was also accused of being
connected with terrorist groups who allegedly would have paid her to publish
this so-called ‘anti-Hindu’ cartoon.    
 
Furthermore, on April 14, 2018, Karuna Sagar Kashimshetty, President of
the Hindu Sanghatan, a subset of the right-wing Hindu nationalist organisation
Vishwa Hindu Parishad, filed a police
complaint against Ms. Swathi Vadlamudi at the Saidabad police station in
Hyderabad under Section 295 (a) of the Indian Penal Code for “deliberate and
malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by
insulting its religion or religious beliefs.” The Hindu Sanghatan also filed a
complaint against Mr. Shabbir Ahmed,
Deputy Editor of the news channel Times Now, for sharing Ms. Vadlamudi’s
cartoon on his Twitter account.  
 
The Observatory strongly
condemns these acts of harassment and death threats targeting Ms. Swathi
Vadlamudi, which seem aimed at punishing
her for her peaceful and legitimate human rights and journalistic activities
and in particular at infringing on her freedom of expression.
 
The
Observatory urges the Indian authorities to guarantee in all circumstances Ms.
Swathi Vadlamudi’s physical and psychological integrity. 
 
Actions requested: 
 
Please write to the authorities in India,
urging them to:
 
i.
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Swathi Vadlamudi and all journalists and human rights
defenders in India;
 
ii. Conduct a prompt, independent, and thorough
investigation into the aforementioned acts of harassment and intimidation
against Ms. Swathi Vadlamudi in order to identify all
those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them
as provided by the law;
 
iii.
Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at
the judicial level - against Ms. Swathi Vadlamudi and Mr.Shabbir Ahmed as well
as against all journalists and human rights defenders in India, and ensure in
all circumstances that they are able to carry out their legitimate activities
without any hindrance and fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, in particular with Articles 1, 12.1 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments to which India is a State party.
 
Addresses: 
 
·    
Mr. Shri Narendra Damodardas
Modi, Prime Minister of India, Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857. E-mail: pmosb@pmo.nic.in / manmo@sansad.in
·    
Mr. Raj Nath Singh, Union
Minister of Home Affairs of India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979. Email: dirfcra-mha@gov.in
·    
Mr. Rajiv Gauba, Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs of India, Email: hshso@nic.in
·    
Justice Dipak Misra, Chief Justice of India,
Supreme Court, of India, Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in
·    
Mr. K.
Chandrashekar Rao, Chief Minister, Government of Telangana, Email: cm@telangana.gov.in
·    
S.K. Joshi, Chief
Secretary, Government of Telangana, Email: cs@telangana.gov.in
·    
Mr. Anjani Kumar, Commissioner
of Police, Hyderabad City Police, Email: cp@hyd.tspolice.gov.in 
·    
Justice Mr. H.L. Dattu, Chairperson of the National
Human Rights Commission of India, Fax +91 11 2465 1329. Email: chairnhrc@nic.in
·    
Mr. Srinivasa Kammath, Focal Point on Human Rights Defenders, National
Human Rights Commission of India, Email: hrd-nhrc@nic.in
·    
H.E. Mr. Rajiv Kumar Chander, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of India to the
United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·    
H.E. Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri,
Embassy of India to the European Union, Belgium and Luxembourg in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: +32 2 6489638 / +32 2 6451869
Please also write to the
diplomatic mission or embassy of India located in your country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, April 20, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.




[1] Ms.
Swathi Vadlamudi is notably associated with the national daily The Hindu.
She is also known for drawing cartoons on sensitive social issues.


[2] Bhakts generally
refer to supporters to current Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.


[3] The Kathua rape case has shocked many across India owing to the brutality unleashed on the
child by her attackers. The eight-year-old victim had been missing since
January 10, 2018. On January 17, her mutilated body was found, bearing evidence
of gang rape.


[4] See
Observatory Urgent Appeal IND 004 / 0917 / OBS 098,
published on September 12, 2017. 