Gambia:  Death threats against journalists Abubacarr Saidykhan and Babucarr Ceesay
October 29, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Gambia / 2012 / OctoberGambia: Death threats against journalists Abubacarr Saidykhan and Babucarr CeesayURGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 New informationGMB 001 / 0912 / OBS 085.1Death threats /Drop of chargesThe GambiaOctober 29, 2012The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in The
Gambia.
New information:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of death threats targeting
two journalists, Messrs. Abubacarr
Saidykhan, a freelance journalist who often investigates and reports on
cases of human rights violations, and Babucarr
Ceesay, First Vice-President of the Gambia Press Union (GPU)[1].
According
to the information received, on October 25, 2012, Messrs. Abubacarr Saidykhan
and Babucarr Ceesay both received an email containing violent death threats
signed by self-denominated “Mofala
Jato and his team of patriotic killers”. The email thus read: “It is
left to you to make a choice. You choose to live or die. […] You […] want to
destroy the image of the APRC[2] Government and [the] President
Yahya Jammeh. You think that you can apply for permit to bring the Tunisian,
Egypt, Algeria, Syria and Libya situation here. I will come with my team of
patriotic killers who kill for the love of our country and our president. The
police are not the best guys to deal with you. [...] I know that you are
dealing with Gambian dissidents abroad, but you will not survive it at all.
[...] We will get all of you and slaughter you like Tobaski Rams. We will come
for you without any further information. [...]”. The said Mr. Mofala Jato also mentioned that he knew where
Messrs. Saidykhan and Ceesay's respective homes were located. A complaint was
filed at the Kairaba police station, for an urgent investigation.
These
death threats intervene less than two months after Messrs. Abubacarr Saidykhan
and Babucarr Ceesay were arbitrarily arrested, on September 6, and detained for
seven days before being released on bail with a criminal case opened against them.
The two journalists were charged of “conspiracy to commit felony”, “seditious
intention” and “incitement to violence” after they had planned to lead a
demonstration against the executions of death-row detainees. On October 23, the
Attorney General and the Minister of Justice announced that the charges had
been dropped during a meeting held with the two journalists.
The
Observatory welcomes the dismissal of the charges and thanks all the persons,
institutions and organisations who intervened in their favour. However, the
Observatory remains deeply concerned for the safety of the two journalists and
urges the judicial authorities to take the required legal actions.
Background information:
In
the afternoon of September 6, 2012, Messrs. Ceesay and Saidykhan were invited
to the police headquarters in Banjul to allegedly collect a permit they had
solicited in the morning of the same day after they submitted a request to the
office of the Inspector General of police to organise
a peaceful protest against the execution of nine death-row detainees in August[3]. However, both were arrested upon
arrival at the police station and kept in custody, without any explanation
given to them.
Messrs.
Ceesay and Saidykhan spent four days in detention, during which they were
reportedly separated, transferred to a different police station every night and
intensively interrogated. In addition, the police escorted them to their houses
to conduct a search. On September 7, 2012, the executive members of the GPU as
well as their lawyer were denied access to visit them.
On
September 10, 2012, Messrs. Ceesay and Saidykhan, were released on bail after
signing a bond of GMD 250,000 (approximately 6,300 Euros). They were further
required to report weekly to the police headquarters. They remained charged with “conspiracy to commit felony”,
“incitement to violence” and “seditious intention”. 
On
October 8, 2012 in the morning, Messrs. Saidykhan and Ceesay reported at the police
headquarters in Banjul in order to ask what the police intended to do with the
case opened against them. However, they could not obtain any answer, as the
police informed them that the Interpol officer and another inspector in charge
of their case would not be available during the two following days, so that
they would have to report again to the police station on October 12, 2012. 
Actions requested:
Please
write to the Gambian authorities and ask them to:
i.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Messrs.
Babucarr Ceesay and Abubacarr Saidykhan and, more generally, of all human
rights defenders in the Gambia;
ii.
Order an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial investigation into the above-mentioned
death threats against Messrs. Abubacarr Saidykhan and Babucarr Ceesay and apply
the penal sanctions provided by the law to those held responsible for those
acts; 
iii.
Put an end to all acts of harassment – including at the judicial level –
against Messrs. Abubacarr Saidykhan and Babucarr Ceesay and as well as against
all human rights defenders and their organisations in the Gambia;
iv.
Conform with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, and in
particular:
-       
- Article 1, which states that
“everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to promote
the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels”, 
-     - and Article 12.2 which provides that
“the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present
Declaration”.
v.
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
in accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by the Gambia.
Addresses:
·    
Captain (retd.) Alhaji Yahya A. J.
J. Jammeh, President and Minister of Defence, Office of the President, State
House, Banjul, Republic of The Gambia. Fax: +220 4227 034. Email: info@statehouse.gm.
·    
Mr. Lamin A. M. S. Jobarteh,
Attorney General and Minister of Justice, Department of State for Justice,
Marina Parade, Banjul, Republic of The Gambia. Fax: +220 4229 908
·    
Mr. Ousman Sonko, Minister of the
Interior, Office of the President, State House, Banjul, Republic of The Gambia.
Fax: +220 4223 718
·    
Ambassador Mr. Ousman Badjie,
Permanent Mission of The Gambia to the United Nations in Geneva, c/o Embassy of
the Republic of the Gambia, 117, rue Saint Lazare, 75008 Paris, France. Fax:
+33 1 53 04 05 99. Email: ambgambia_france117@hotmail.com
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of the Gambia in your respective
countries.
***
Paris-Geneva,
October 29, 2012
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
Email:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / 01 43 55 18 80Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39
/ 41 22 809 49 29



[1] Among the
GPU's aims are the promotion and defence of the rights to freedom of expression
and of information.


[2] APRC stands for the Alliance for
Patriotic Reorientation and Construction, the political party currently
governing in the Gambia.


[3] See FIDH and
World Coalition Against The Death Penalty (WCADP) Joint Press Release, August
31, 2012, available at: http://www.fidh.org/FIDH-and-the-World-Coalition. 