Syrian Arab Republic:  Assault and arrest of dozens of family members of human rights defenders and prisoners of conscience
March 16, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Syrian Arab Republic / 2011 / MarchSyrian Arab Republic: Assault and arrest of dozens of family members of human rights defenders and prisoners of conscience

URGENT 
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY
SYR 
003 / 0311 / OBS 037
Obstacle 
to freedom of assembly / 
Arbitrary 
arrest / Assault
Syria
March 
16, 2011
The 
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of 
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation 
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following 
situation in Syria.
Description 
of the situation: 
The 
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the assault and arrest 
of dozens of family members of human rights activists and prisoners of 
conscience who had gathered before the Ministry of Interior to call for the 
release of their relatives and all prisoners of conscience in 
Syria.
According 
to the information received, on March 16, 2011, dozens of family members of 
prisoners of conscience and human rights activists gathered peacefully at noon 
to call for the release of all prisoners of conscience in Syria as well as to 
express disappointment that a significant number of prisoners of conscience were 
not covered by the March 8, 2011 amnesty adopted to mark the Baath Revolution 
Day. 
There, 
they were “welcomed” by State security officers who beat them up and arrested 
some of them, in particular Omar Al-Labwani, Yassin Al-Labwani, 
Riba Al-Labwani, Laila Al-Labwani, Ammar Al-Labwani, 
Siba Hassan, Hussein Labwani, Amer Dawood, Hanibal 
Awad, Sereen Khouri, Nahid Badawieh, Naret Abdul Karim, 
Mahmoud Ghawrani, Badr Al-Shallash, Kamal Cheikho[1], 
Osama Nassar,  Maimouna 
Alammar, Mohammad Adib Matar, Saad and Bisher Saeed, 
Ghaffar Muhammad, Dana Al-Jawabra, Wafa Al-Lahham, Tayeb 
Tezini, Mohammad Darwish, Kaka Dawood, Nabil Shurbaji, 
Merveen Awsi, Ghaffar Hikmat Muhammad, Abdul Rahman Khitou, 
Rayan Suleyman, Daya Al-Din Daghmoush, Nasredin 
Ahmou, Hassiba Abderrahman, Abd Temmo as well as Mazen Darwish, 
Director of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM) and 
Suhair Al-Attassi, President of the Attassi Forum, a pro-democracy 
discussion group. 
As 
of issuing this urgent appeal, all those persons remained detained in an unknown 
location.
Moreover, 
the Observatory recalls that a group of around 12 prisoners of conscience 
detained in the Damascus central prison of Adra went on a hunger strike on March 
7, 2011 to demand the end of political trials and detentions, as well as 
democratic reforms in the country. This group notably included human rights 
defenders Messrs. Anwar Al Bunni, a 
lawyer and founding member of the Syrian Human Rights 
Association, Habib 
Saleh, 
founder 
of the Tartus branch of the National Dialogue Forum, 
Ali Al-Abdallah, 
member 
of the National Council of the Damascus Declaration for Democratic National 
Change (NCDD), Kamal 
Labwani 
member 
of the Committee for the Defence of Democratic Liberties and Human Rights in 
Syria (CDF).
These 
acts illustrate once more the extreme harassment faced by human rights defenders 
in Syria and the refusal of the regime to open any dialogue with any dissenting 
voices. The Observatory expresses its deepest concern about the assault and 
arrest of these peaceful demonstrators, which seem to merely aim at sanctioning 
their human rights activities, and particularly fears for their physical and 
psychological integrity. The Observatory therefore calls upon the Syrian 
authorities to take prompt action in order to immediately and unconditionally 
release them, as well as all human rights defenders currently detained in the 
country.
Actions 
requested:
Please 
write to the Syrian authorities, urging them to: 
i. 
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all 
above-mentioned peaceful demonstrators and human rights 
defenders;
ii. 
Ensure their immediate and unconditionally release since their detention is 
arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning their human rights activities; 

iii. 
Put an end to any acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against 
all human rights defenders in Syria; 
iv. 
Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, 
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, 
especially: 
-          its 
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in 
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and 
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels”;
-          its 
Article 5 (a), which states that “for the purpose of promoting and protecting 
human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and 
in association with others, at the national and international levels: to meet or 
assemble peacefully”;
-          and 
its Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary 
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, 
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, 
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other 
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the 
rights referred to in the present Declaration”.
v. 
Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in 
accordance with international human rights standards and international 
instruments ratified by the Syrian Arab Republic. 
Addresses: 

· 
President, His Excellency Bashar al-Assad, Presidential Palace, al Rashid 
Street, Damascus, Syria Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 332 
3410
· 
Minister of Defence, His Excellency General, Ali Habib Mahmud, Ministry of 
Defence, O mayyad Square, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 223 7842 

· 
Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr. Ahmad Hamod Younes, Mazeh “Otstrad”, 
Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 666 2460 
· 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Wallid Mu’allim, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, al-Rashid Street, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Fax: +963 11 332 7620 

· 
Ambassador Faysal Khabbaz Hamoui, Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic 
to UN in Geneva, 72 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 
42 75, Email: mission.syria@ties.itu.in 
· 
Embassy the Syrian Arab Republic in Brussels, 1 avenue F.D. Roosevelt, 1050 
Brussels, Belgium, Tel: +32 2 554 19 22; Fax: +32 2 648 14 85 

Please 
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Syrian Arabic Republic in 
your respective country. 
*** 

Paris-Geneva, 
March 16, 2011 
Kindly 
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your 
reply.
To 
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·         
E-mail: 
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·         
Tel 
and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·         Tel 
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1] Kamal 
Cheikho, 
a member of the Committee for the Defence of Democratic Liberties and Human 
Rights in Syria (CDF), was released on bail on March, 13, 2011. He is still 
facing charges. 