Bahrain:  International NGOs raise concerns for prisoners of conscience
September 20, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2017 / SeptemberBahrain: International NGOs raise concerns for prisoners of conscience





Attn: Federal Department of Foreign Affairs
Bundeshaus West, 3003
3003
Bern, Switzerland 
 
20 September 2017
 
Re: Poor
treatment of political detainees in Bahrain
 
Dear Foreign Minister
Didier Burkhalter,
 
We are writing to draw your attention to the
ongoing arbitrary detention and ill-treatment of human rights
defenders and other prisoners of conscience detained in Bahrain and to urge your government to
take action on their behalf. 
 
There are widespread concerns for the health
and well-being of twelve high profile human rights defenders and political
leaders in Bahrain who are serving lengthy prison sentences in Jau Prison
solely related to their political and human rights activities. 
 
The twelve prisoners are Abdulwahab Hussain,
Mohammad Ali Ismael, Mohammad Hassan Jawad, Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, Sheikh Mirza
Al-Mahroos, Sheikh Abdulhadi Al-Mukhoder, Sheikh Abduljalil Al-Muqdad, Sheikh
Mohammad Habib Al-Muqdad, Hassan Mushaima, Sheikh Saeed Al-Noori, Dr. Abduljalil
Al-Singace and Sheikh Ali Salman. Eleven of them are serving sentences handed
down by military court following unfair trials in June 2011, and upheld by
civilian appeals courts in 2013; the twelfth, Sheikh Ali Salman, is the
Secretary-General of the now-dissolved Al Wefaq political society, who was
sentenced in 2015 on politically-motivated charges.
 
According to our information, they have been
subjected to ill-treatment in detention, including being denied access to
adequate medical treatment, having limitations placed on family visits, having
their phone calls monitored and cut off, and being prevented from receiving
medical treatment unless they are shackled, contrary to the UN Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Mandela Rules). Specifically, prisoners
are shackled from ankles to wrists, so many of these prisoners have not had
medical appointments in six months. As well, their visits with family members
have been reduced from two one-hour visits per month to two half-hour visits
per month.
 
Of particular
concern is the case of Dr. Abduljalil Al-Singace, detained by the Bahraini
authorities for his role in nonviolent demonstrations during the 2011
pro-democracy movement and later sentenced to life imprisonment. Security
personnel subjected Dr. Al-Singace to severe torture and mistreatment during
his initial detention, including sexual abuse, beatings, two months of solitary
confinement, and psychological abuse such as threats against his family. 
The harm from this torture has been
compounded by deliberate medical neglect. Dr. Al-Singace is a survivor of
childhood polio and relies on a cane, crutches, or wheelchair for mobility. He
also suffers from sickle cell anaemia, which causes periodic episodes of
intense pain. Despite this, the authorities have not provided him with any
medication since mid-March 2017. Furthermore, as a result of the new
restrictions imposed by the prison administration, like arbitrary shackling,
the authorities have failed to take Dr. Al-Singace to any of his scheduled
medical appointments. The withholding of medication is due entirely to the
actions of the prison administration and was condemned in a recent joint statement by ten human rights groups, including many
of the undersigned organizations. 
 
Dr. Al-Singace is just one of the thousands
of political prisoners and prisoners of conscience suffering poor prison
conditions and mistreatment in Bahrain. The twelve high profile prisoners of
conscience regularly endure degrading treatment, such as disruption of prayer
rituals and, in some cases, having their beards and heads forcibly shaved. The
authorities have also subjected them to torture in the form of forced standing,
verbal and sexual assault, beatings, and prolonged solitary confinement. The
Government of Bahrain consistently refuses to investigate allegations of
torture, and continues to deny them adequate medical care. 

The Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) has adopted opinions on two of
the detainees in question, Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja and Sheikh Ali Salman, finding their detention to be arbitrary. We
note that the remaining ten inmates were tried in the same case as Mr.
Al-Khawaja and believe that their imprisonment also amounts to circumstances of
arbitrary detention. On 28 February, your government signed a joint statement at the 26th Session of the UN
Human Rights Council calling for the release of all persons imprisoned solely
for exercising their human rights, including persons identified as arbitrarily
detained by the WGAD. 
 
In May, the United Nations (UN) Committee Against Torture found that “there continue to be numerous
and consistent allegations of widespread torture and ill-treatment of persons
who are deprived of their liberty in all places of detention [in Bahrain].”
They noted that political prisoners, including Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, Dr.
Abduljalil Al-Singace and Abdulwahab Hussain, routinely face personally
targeted abuse, including excessive and unjustified solitary confinement, and
arbitrary deprivation of medical care; and called for their release. 
 
The Government of Bahrain must not be
permitted to arbitrarily imprison and abuse human rights defenders and
political activists with impunity. We therefore urge your government to
continue to put pressure on Bahrain, demanding that the authorities provide
humane treatment and proper medical care to all detainees, in line with
international detention standards, and allow the prisoners to meet their
families. We additionally urge you to press the Government of Bahrain to
permanently resolve these cases by releasing the high profile political leaders
and human rights defenders, and all other prisoners held solely for exercising
their rights to freedom of expression, association, assembly, or belief. 
 
We thank you for your attention and
consideration.
 
Sincerely,

Americans for Democracy and Human Rights in
Bahrain (ADHRB)
Bahrain Institute
for Rights and Democracy (BIRD)
Bahrain Center for Human Rights (BCHR)
CIVICUS
European Centre
for Democracy and Human Rights (ECDHR)
English PEN
French PEN
Gulf Centre for Human
Rights (GCHR)
Index on Censorship
PEN International
PEN Suisse Romand
PEN Québécois
Reporters Without Borders (RSF)
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 