Eritrea:  Eritrea: arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention of three trade union leaders
May 13, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Eritrea / 2005 / MayEritrea: Eritrea: arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention of three trade union leadersURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  ERI 001 / 0505 / OBS 032 Arbitrary arrest / Incommunicado detention Eritrea  May 13, 2005   The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information on the following situation in Eritrea and requests your urgent intervention.   Description of the situation:  The Observatory has been informed by the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) of the arrest and arbitrary detention of three Eritrean trade union leaders.  According to the information received, Mr. Tewelde Ghebremedhin, Chairperson of the Food, Beverages, Hotels, Tourism, Agriculture and Tobacco Workers Federation, affiliated to the International Union of Food, Agricultural, Hotel, Restaurant, Catering, Tobacco and Allied Workers’ Associations (IUF), and Mr. Minase Andezion, Secretary of the Textile and Leather Workers’ Federation, were arrested by security police on March 30, 2005. Some days later, probably on April 9, 2005 (the exact date could not be definitely confirmed to this date), security police also arrested Mr. Habtom Weldemicael, Head of the Coca-Cola Workers Union as well as an executive committee member of the Food and Beverage Workers’ Federation. Mr. Weldemicael is reported to have been arrested for urging industrial action to protest against workers’ worsening standard of living.  The three trade union leaders are reportedly being held incommunicado with no access to lawyers, which puts them at greater risk of torture or ill-treatment, and are furthermore being detained in violation of Eritrean laws which stipulate that they be brought before a magistrate within 48 hours of their arrest. It would appear that these three trade union leaders are being held in detention solely on account of their efforts to exercise their mandates as trade union officers. These arrests and continued detentions therefore constitute a grave violation of international legal standards as well as explicit violations of Conventions 87 and 98 of the ILO regarding freedom of association which are legally binding on Eritrea as an ILO member state, and which Eritrea, moreover, has ratified.   The Observatory believes that the detentions are designed to stop the union representatives fulfilling their legitimate functions as trade union officials. Moreover, these arrests come against a background of increasing international concern over repression inside Eritrea.   Action requested: Please write to the authorities in Eritrea urging them to: i. guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Tewelde Ghebremedhin, Mr. Minase Andezion and Mr. Habtom Weldemicael, as well as of all human rights defenders in the country;  ii. release immediately and unconditionally Mr. Tewelde Ghebremedhin, Mr. Minase Andezion and Mr. Habtom Weldemicael, and all human rights defenders who are arbitrarily detained, or in the case of valid charges against them, bring them before an impartial tribunal without delay and guarantee procedural rights at all times, ensuring, among others, that they have access to legal advice;  iii. put an end to all forms of harassment, legal action, and ill-treatment of human rights defenders in Eritrea, as well as any obstacles to freedom of expression and assembly;  iv. ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, article 5.b which stipulates that everyone has the right “(b) To form, join and participate in non-governmental organisations, associations or groups, as well as article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually or in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;   v. guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human rights instruments ratified by Eritrea.  Addresses: His Excellency President Issayas Afewerki, President of Eritrea, Office of the President, P.O. Box 257, Asmara, Eritrea, Fax: + 29 11 12 64 22  Ms Fawzia Hashim, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, P.O. Box 241, Asmara, Eritrea  Brigadier General Abraha Kassa, Head of Security Office of the President, P.O. Box 257, Asmara, Eritrea, Fax: + 29 11 12 64 22  Brigadier Abraham Andom, Commissioner of Police, Ministry of Internal Affairs, P.O. Box 1223, Asmara, Eritrea  Permanent mission of Eritrea to the United Nations and other international organisations in Geneva, Rue de Vermont 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Case postale 85, 1211 Geneva 20, Fax: + 41 22 740 49 49  Please also write to the embassies of Eritrea in your respective country.    *** Paris - Geneva, May 13, 2005  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.  The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 1 43 55 20 11 / + 33 1 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax: OMCT : + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 E-mail :  HYPERLINK "mailto:observatoire@iprolink.ch" observatoire@iprolink.ch 