Pakistan:  WHRDIC condemns the murder of Sabeen Mahmud
May  1, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Pakistan / 2015 / MayPakistan: WHRDIC condemns the murder of Sabeen MahmudPakistan_2015.05.01_WHRDIC_English2 pages / 56 KBThe
 Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC), of which
 OMCT is a member, is a resource and advocacy network supporting
women human rights defenders worldwide. ​The Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition is appalled 
and deeply saddened at the news of the murder of Sabeen Mahmud, 
Pakistani woman human rights defender.
On Friday 24 April in Karachi, Sabeen Mahmud was shot by unidentified
 gunmen after leaving an event she hosted about the human rights 
situation in Balochistan. Sabeen’s friends told Pakistani media she had 
been receiving death threats for several weeks prior to her murder.
Sabeen was an inspiration for her innovation and her bravery. In 2007
 she established The Second Floor (T2F), a café, bookshop, art gallery 
and performance space that is ‘an alternative, independent, safe space 
for discourse’. T2F opened a space for dialogue in a culture of 
pervasive fear.
Sabeen also organized Pakistan’s first hackathon, inviting Pakistani 
authorities to be part of the event while defenders developed apps for 
social change including apps for reporting government inefficiencies and
 broken infrastructure.
The murder of Sabeen Mahmud draws attention to the extremely 
dangerous climate that women human rights defenders face while working 
to keep a space open for civil society dialogue.
The Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition urges the 
Pakistani authorities to conduct a prompt, thorough and transparent 
investigation into the murder of Sabeen Mahmud and perpetrators brought 
to justice in accordance to international standards of fair trials, 
without recourse to the death penalty.
The Pakistani government must ensure the protection of women human 
rights defenders and promote an environment where they can carry out 
their work free from threats, attacks and intimidation, and where 
freedom of expression is not unlawfully restricted.


Members of WHRD:





Amnesty International (AI)
Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development (APWLD)
Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM ASIA)
The Association for Progressive Communications Women’s Networking Support Programme (APC WNSP)
Association for Women’s Rights in Development (AWID)
BAOBAB for Women’s Human Rights (BAOBAB)
Center for Reproductive Rights (CRR)
Center for Women’s Global Leadership (CWGL)
Coalition of African Lesbians (CAL)
Frida the Young Feminist Fund
Front Line Defenders
Human Rights First
Information Monitor (INFORM)
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
International Service for Human Rights (ISHR)
International Women’s Rights Action Watch Asia Pacific (IWRAW-AP)
Isis International
ISIS Women’s International Cross-Cultural Exchange (ISIS-WICCE)
Just Associates (JASS)
The Latin American and Caribbean Committee for the Defense of Women’s Rights (CLADEM)
MADRE
Nazra for Feminist Studies
Nobel Women’s Initiative (NWI)
Peace Brigades International
Rainbow Rights Project (R-Rights), Inc.
Society for Appraisal & Women Empowerment in Rural Areas (SAWERA)
Urgent Action Fund for Women’s Human Rights (UAF)
Women Living under Muslim Laws (WLUML)
Women’s Global Network for Reproductive Rights
Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice (WIGJ)
Women’s Rehabilitation Centre (WOREC)
World Organisation against Torture (OMCT) 