Viet Nam:  Suspected abduction and subsequent arbitrary detention of blogger Mr. Truong Duy Nhat
March 28, 2019
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2019 / MarchViet Nam: Suspected abduction and subsequent arbitrary detention of blogger Mr. Truong Duy Nhat​VNM 001 / 0319 / OBS 032
Suspected abduction /
Arbitrary
detention
Vietnam
/ Thailand
March 28, 2019

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests
your urgent intervention in the following situation in Vietnam and Thailand.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Vietnam Committee on Human
Rights (VCHR) about the suspected abduction and subsequent arbitrary detention
of blogger Mr. Truong Duy Nhat[1].

 
According
to the information received, on January 26, 2019 Mr. Truong Duy Nhat went missing in Bangkok,
Thailand, where he had fled to from Vietnam to seek political asylum. The day
before, he had gone to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) office in Bangkok in order to file an asylum claim.
 
It is suspected that Mr. Truong Duy Nhat was
abducted by unknown individuals in Bangkok before being taken back to Vietnam
against his will.
 
On March 15, 2019, Ms. Cao Thi Xuan Phuong, Mr.
Truong Duy Nhat’s wife, was allegedly informed by unknown sources that her
husband was being held at Hanoi’s T16 detention centre.
 
On March 20, 2019, Ms. Cao Thi Xuan Phuong went
to Hanoi’s T16 detention centre to attempt to visit her husband. However, the
prison authorities denied her visitation rights.
Moreover, they told her that her
husband had been arrested on January 28, 2019, and transferred on the same day
to T16 detention centre.
 
On March 25, 2019, during a press conference in
Hanoi, Public Security Ministry Spokesperson Lt Gen Tran Van Ve accused Mr.
Truong Duy Nhat of taking advantage of documents in possession of the newspaper Dai Doan Ket, where he was a journalist
from 1995 to 2010, to buy properties without an auction, causing financial loss
to the State. Lt Gen Ve said the case was still under investigation.
 
The Observatory recalls that this is not the
first time Mr. Truong Duy Nhat has been targeted. On June 26, 2014, the Supreme
People’s Court in Danang, central Vietnam, upheld a two-year prison sentence
against him for publishing articles on his blog that were critical of the
government, which Mr. Truong Duy Nhat served[2].

 
The Observatory is also concerned about the
situation of Mr. Bach Hong Quyen, another Vietnamese blogger and human
rights campaigner, who is currently living in Thailand with UNHCR refugee
status. Mr. Bach Hong Quyen helped Mr. Truong Duy Nhat with his administrative
procedures in Thailand and feels under threat from the Thai authorities because
of his knowledge about Mr. Truong Duy Nhat’s suspected abduction. Mr. Bach Hong
Quyen’s family is under surveillance by Thai authorities and on March 20, 2019,
Thai plainclothes police officers entered his house. The police officers then
left as they could not find him. 
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the suspected abduction and arbitrary detention
of Mr. Truong Duy Nhat, as they seem to be only aimed at sanctioning him for
his legitimate human rights activities, and urges the Vietnamese authorities to
immediately and unconditionally release him and ensure an independent
investigation into his suspected abduction. The Observatory further fears that Mr. Truong Duy Nhat would
be at risk of torture and ill-treatment while in detention, which would be
contrary to Vietnam’s obligations under Article 3 of the United
Nations Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
 
The Observatory also
urges the Thai authorities to protect all human rights defenders in Thailand,
regardless of their nationality, put an end to all acts of harassment against
Mr. Bach Hong Quyen, and comply with their non-refoulement
obligations under Article 3 of the Convention against Torture.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Vietnam
asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical integrity and
psychological well-being of Mr. Truong Duy Nhat and of all human rights
defenders in Vietnam;
 
ii. Immediately and
unconditionally release Mr. Truong Duy Nhat as his detention is arbitrary and merely aimed at
punishing him for his human rights activities;
 
iii. Put
an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against him
and all human rights defenders in Vietnam, and ensure in all circumstances that
they are able to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance
and fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Guarantee the access of Mr. Truong Duy Nhat to
his relatives and a lawyer of his choice;
 
v. Conduct an
immediate, thorough and independent investigation into the circumstances
surrounding Mr. Truong Duy Nhat’s suspected abduction and subsequent
reappearance in Hanoi’s T16 jail; 
 
vi. Conform to the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular with
Articles 1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
vii. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Vietnam.
 
Please also write to the authorities of
Thailand asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical integrity and
psychological well-being of Mr. Bach Hong Quyen and all human rights defenders in
the country, regardless of their nationality; 
 
ii. Conduct an
immediate, thorough and independent investigation into the circumstances
surrounding Mr. Truong Duy Nhat’s suspected abduction in Bangkok and subsequent
reappearance in Hanoi’s T16 jail;
 
iii. Put an end to any
act of harassment against Mr. Bach Hong Quyen and all human rights defenders in
the country, regardless of their nationality; 
 
iv. Comply with their non-refoulement obligations under
Article 3 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
 
v. Conform to the
provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular with
Articles 1, 5(b), and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Thailand.
 
Addresses:
 
Authorities from
Vietnam:
 
·    
Mr.
Nguyen Phu Trong,
President of Viet Nam, Email: banbientap@nguyenphutrong.org 
·    
Mr. Nguyen Xuan Phuc, Prime Minister of Viet Nam,
Email: banbientap@nguyenxuanphuc.org
·    
Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Viet Nam; Fax: 84-4-38231872 – 84-4-37992682, Email: bc.mfa@mofa.gov.vn
·    
Mr. Le Vinh Tan, Minister of Home Affairs of Viet Nam, Fax:
84-4-39781005
·    
Mr. Le Thanh Long, Minister of Justice of Viet Nam, Fax: 84-4-38431431
·    
Mr. To Lam, Minister of Public Security of Viet Nam, Fax: 84-4-9420223
·    
Mr. Mai Tien Dung, Minister, Office of the Government (OOG), Viet Nam;
Fax: 84-4-80 44130
·    
Mr. Chi Dung Duong, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
Viet Nam to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland; Fax: +41 (0) 22-798 07
24; Email: info@vnmission-ge.gov.vn
·    
Mr. Vuong Thua Phong, Ambassador, Embassy of Viet Nam in Brussels,
Belgium. Fax: +32 (0)2 374 93 76; Email: vnemb.brussels@skynet.be -
unescochau@yahoo.com
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Vietnam in your respective
countries.
 
Authorities from
Thailand:
 
·    
Gen. Prayuth Chan-ocha, Prime Minister of
Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131
·    
Mr. Don Pramudwinai, Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·    
Air Chief Marshal Prajin Juntong, Minister of
Justice of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 953 0503
·    
Pol Gen Chaktip Chaijinda, Commissioner-General
of the Royal Thai Police, Fax: +66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2 251 8702
·    
Mr. Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of the National
Human Rights Commission of Thailand, Email: help@nhrc.or.th
·    
H.E. Mr. Thani Thongphakdi, Ambassador,
Permanent Mission of Thailand to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: +41 22 715 10 00 / 10 02; Email: mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·    
Embassy of Thailand in Brussels, Belgium, Fax:
+32 2 648 30 66; Email: thaibxl@pophost.eunet.be
 
Please also write to
the diplomatic representations of Thailand in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, March 28, 2019
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by
FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this
programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society. 




[1] Mr. Truong Duy Nhat is a former journalist with
State-run newspapers Bao Cong An Quang
Nam Danang (Quang Nam Danang Security Police newspaper) and Dai Doan Ket (Great Solidarity
newspaper). In 2011, he quit his work as a reporter to write for his blog “Mot
Goc Nhin Khac” (A Different Point of View), which became widely known for its
criticism of the government. In his blog, Mr. Truong Duy Nhat frequently
criticizes the performance of top government officials, including the Prime
Minister, on human rights issues. 


[2] See
Observatory Press Release published on June 30, 2014. 