Violent night raid in Al-Jalazon refugee camp by Israeli army resulting in arrest of children
February 12, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Israel / 2010 / FebruaryViolent night raid in Al-Jalazon refugee camp by Israeli army resulting in arrest of childrenCase ISR 120210.CC
Violent night raid in Al-Jalazon refugee camp by Israeli army resulting in arrest of children
 
The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) received new information on the following situation in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories.
Brief description of the situation
The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Defence for Children-Palestine section (hereafter DCI-Palestine), a member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture network, of a raid of the Israeli army in Al-Jalazon refugee camps on 10th of February. At the end of the incursion, 19 children were arrested in addition to adult residents.
According to the information received, Israeli troops entered Al-Jalazon, West Bank, at around midnight on Wednesday, 10 February, then went from house to house and started rounding up, beating and harassing residents of the camp. The night raid ended at approximately 5:00 a.m. when the army withdrew. Tens of residents were reportedly arrested, including 19 children.
According to DCI-Palestine’s initial information, which will shortly be verified, among the 19 children arrested were: five children aged 14, seven children aged 15, four children aged 16, and three children aged 17.
Information obtained from residents’ testimonies, show that, during the raid, Israeli soldiers allegedly broke or blasted open doors of houses and thus terrified the children. It was also reported that some Israeli soldiers beat up children in their bed to wake them up. Residents of the camp reported being terrified and not having been subjected to such a violent night raid in years.
OMCT is gravely concerned by the violence used in this Israeli military operation, including the night time search and arrest of so many children. OMCT strongly condemns this operation which would appear to constitute yet another exercise in the excessive use of force in violation of Israel’s obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law. OMCT would like to recall that, in the application of Israel’s international legal obligations as a State Party to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child recently recommended Israel to “take prompt measures to comply with the fundamental principles of proportionality and distinction enshrined in humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which set out the minimum standards for the protection of civilians in armed conflict” (CRC/C/OPAC/ISR/CO/1).
Actions requested
Please write to the authorities in Israel urging them to:

 Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of the arrested individuals as well their immediate and unconditional access to legal assistance, medical care and members of their families;
 Order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are consistent with international legal standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them promptly before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal that will ensure due process at all times;
 Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation into the events, the result of which must be made public, in order to bring those responsible before a competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by the law;
 At all times ensure strict respect for international human rights and humanitarian law in the exercise of its jurisdiction, including in connection with military operations in the Occupied Palestinian Territories.

Addresses

Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, 3, Kaplan Street, PO Box 187, Kiryat Ben-Gurion, Jerusalem, Israel, Fax: +972- 2-651 2631, Email: pm_eng@pmo.gov.il
Mr. Menachem Mazuz, Attorney General, Fax: + 972 2 627 4481; + 972 2 628 5438; +972 2 530 3367
Brigadier General Avihai Mandelblit, Military Judge Advocate General, 6 David Elazar Street, Hakirya, Tel Aviv, Israel, Fax: +972 3 608 0366, +972 3 569 4526, Email: arbel@mail.idf.il, avimn@idf.gov.il
Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations Office and Specialized Institutions in Geneva, Avenue de la Paix 1-3, 1202 Geneva, Fax: +41 22 716 05 55, Email: mission-israel@geneva.mfa.gov.il

Please also write to the embassies of Israel in your respective country.

Geneva, 12 February 2010
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 