Russian Federation:  Two extrajudicial killings in three days in Dagestan: The Observatory refers the matter to United Nations (UN) Special Procedures
July 18, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2013 / JulyRussian Federation: Two extrajudicial killings in three days in Dagestan: The Observatory refers the matter to United Nations (UN) Special Procedures

Attn. Mr. Christof Heyns
UN
Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
 
Ms. Margaret Sekaggya
UN
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders
 
Mr. Franck La Rue
UN
Special Rapporteur on freedom of opinion and expression
 
 
Paris-Geneva,
July 18, 2013
 
 
Re: Extrajudicial killings of Messrs. Akhmednabi Akhmednabiev and
Magomed Guchuchaliev in Dagestan, Russian Federation
 
 
Dear Special Rapporteurs,
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), expresses its deepest concern about the assassination
of a journalist and a lawyer, which occurred within three days in the region of
Makhachkala, the capital of the Russian province of Dagestan, and which seem to
be related to their human rights activities and aimed at silencing their work
in the country.
 
Facts:
 
On July 9, 2013,
at around 7 a.m. local time, Mr. Akhmednabi Akhmednabiev, Deputy Editor of the daily local newspaper Novoe Delo and a
correspondent for the Caucasian Knot, an important news platform in the
North and South Caucasus, was shot dead by unknown individuals. The killing
took place near his house in Semender, a village close to Makhachkala. It is
highly probable that the journalist was murdered in relation to his
professional activity. Mr. Akhmednabiev was indeed investigating sensitive
issues and had often openly criticised local politicians for embezzlement and
local military and police officials for human rights abuses committed during anti-terrorist
operations.
 
Three days later, on July 12, 2013, lawyer Magomed Guchuchaliev, Chairman of the law firm “Kavkaz”, known for
defending persons accused of “belonging to illegal armed forces”, was shot dead
by two unknown individuals close to his home in the outskirts of Makhachkala.
 
Inaction of the
authorities over previous threats, murder attempts and assassinations:
 
No proper investigation into previous death threats
and murder attempt against Mr. Akhmednabiev since 2009
 
Mr. Akhmednabiev had received threatening messages
in the past, and had already escaped an assassination attempt on January 11,
2013, when unknown assailants had fired on his car. At that time, the police
had started an investigation only for "deliberate
destruction or damage of property" (Article
167 of the Criminal Code) and "illegal
acquisition, transfer, sale, storage, transportation or carrying
of weapons" (Article 222),
but not “preparation of a crime and crime attempt” (Article 30), “murder
attempt” (Article 105) and “hindrances to the legitimate and professional work
of a journalist” (Article 144). On February 1, 2013, Mr. Akhmednabiev's lawyer
had requested the Kirov District Attorney to initiate proceedings pursuant to
Articles 105 and 144, but the Prosecutor had rejected the request. Mr.
Akhmednabiev's had then appealed this refusal at the level of the District
Court, which had admitted the complaint on February 15, 2013. However, the
District Attorney had again appealed against the decision, and proceedings
continued until July 4, 2013, four days before the killing, when Mr.
Akhmednabiev received a response from the District Attorney (dated June 28)
concerning another complaint filed on June 10 to denounce the fact that no case
had ever been opened under the above-mentioned Articles. As in his response,
the District Attorney alleged that he had committed no irregularity. Mr.
Akhmednabiev's lawyer appealed that response to the Supreme Court, where the
case is now pending.
 
Mr. Akhmadnabiev's lawyer had also referred the January
attack and other threats against his client to the Investigation Committee (a
State body which can also initiate criminal proceedings), most recently on June
10, to complain about the inaction of the police in front of the death threats previously
received by his client through SMS.On June 25, 2013, the Committee however
rejected the referral of the lawyer, and the appeal against this refusal was
scheduled to take place on July 9, 2013, the day of the killing.
 
On the day of the killing, the District Attorney of
Dagestan announced that he had taken the case of Mr. Akhmadnabiev “under [his]
personal control” and ordered his administration to examine the case related to
the January-11 attack, so as to make sure that all the proceedings were
regular.
 
Previously, in 2009, the name of Mr. Akhmednabiev
had appeared on a “hit list”, anonymously disseminated throughout the region.
The names of 17 other human rights defenders, journalists and activists were
also on that list.
 
According to the information received, inspectors
are currently exploring several scenarios that might have led to the killing.
It is however highly probable that the journalist was murdered in relation to
his professional activity. Mr. Akhmednabiev was indeed investigating sensitive
issues and had often openly criticised local politicians for embezzlement and
local military and police officials for human rights abuses committed during
anti-terrorist operations. Mr. Akhmednabi Akhmednabiev is the 17th
journalist who died in suspicious circumstances since 1993 in Dagestan.
 
No proper investigation into previous killings and
previous death threats against Mr. Guchuchaliev and his colleagues over the
past years
 
Over the past years, members of “Kavkaz”, the law
firm of Mr. Guchuchaliev, have been threatened for their professional
activities and harassed by the authorities. On November 19, 2008, Mr.
Konstantin Mudunov, a colleague of Mr. Magomed Guchuchaliev, had survived an
assassination attempt. On January 20, 2012, another colleague of Mr. Magomed
Guchuchaliev, lawyer Omar Saidmagomedov, was killed with his cousin in a street
of Makhachkala by two masked individuals in an armoured car who approached them
and opened fire. Security officers with shields then reportedly got off the
vehicle and shot again at one of them. However, the authorities alleged that
the killing was perpetrated by “two members of an armed group”. The law firm is
known for defending persons accused of “belonging to illegal armed forces”, and
many of the lawyers' names have been on the above-mentioned “hit list”. In
spite of strong allegations that lawyer Saidmagomedov was targeted in
connection with his work and extrajudicially executed, such allegations have
never been effectively investigated. In addition, a parallel investigation was
requested by Mr. Omar Saidmagomedov’s colleagues to ensure that the authorities
impartially investigate his death, but this led instead to themselves being
harassed by investigation officials who notably carried out a search in the
apartment of Mr. Guchuchaliev.
 
The Observatory firmly denounces the
extrajudicial killings of Messrs. Akhmednabiev and Guchuchaliev, which seem to be related to their human rights activities and aimed at
silencing their work in the country. 
 
The Observatory is also strongly concerned by
the context of impunity in which these crimes have occurred.
 
In light of the absence of any proper enquiry into the past events, we
hope you will be able to urge the Russian authorities to carry out a prompt,
thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into this killing, so as to
identify all those responsible, bring them before a competent and impartial
tribunal and apply to them the sanctions provided by the law, as well as to
guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of
human rights defenders in the Russian Federation.
 
In the hope that you will take all these elements into account, we
remain at your disposal for any further information.
 
Yours sincerely,
 
                 Karim Lahidji                          Gerald
Staberock
                 President of FIDH                  Secretary
General of OMCT 