Venezuela:  Declaration of State of Emergency: Sweeping powers can open floodgates to human rights abuse
May 20, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Venezuela / 2016 / MayVenezuela: Declaration of State of Emergency: Sweeping powers can open floodgates to human rights abuse
OMCT expresses grave concern about what Venezuelan human rights
organizations see as a ”rupture of constitutional order”.
The
decree was enacted on May 13, 2016, by the President Nicolás Maduro, to address
the ”extraordinary circumstances” of social, economic, political, natural and
ecological order that seriously affect the national economy. Pursuant to
article 227 of the Venezuelan Constitution, under States of Exception rights
can be temporarily restricted except the right to life, the prohibition of
incommunicado detention and torture, due process and the right to information.
The
approval of the decree, which was rejected by the National Assembly on May 17,
2016, and yesterday finally declared constitutional by the Supreme Court, gives
the National Executive discretionary powers to, among others: 1) adopt
extraordinary plans to ensure the maintenance of public order against
”destabilizing actions” and 2) undertake special measures to guarantee national
sovereignty and prevent foreign interference in internal affairs, including the
suspension of foreign funding received by national legal entities or
individuals for the execution of projects in the country.”In
the experience of OMCT and SOS-Torture network members worldwide, States of
Exception dramatically weaken the guarantees against torture and personal
integrity and security”, stated Gerald Staberock, Secretary General of the
OMCT.
The
recent declaration of a State of Exception in three municipalities in the Zulia
state (bordering state with Colombia) brought about an increase of human rights
abuses. It is also noteworthy to mention that the current militarization of
public order, reflected in security operations such as the ”Operación
Liberación y Protección del Pueblo” (launched in July 2015), has raised alarms
over the increase of extrajudicial killings and arbitrary arrests, as OMCT
denounced in its last mission in October 2015. In this setting, OMCT is alarmed
by the potential implications of a nation-wide State of Exception.
Any
decree declaring the State of Exception should be enacted lawfully, meet the
necessity and proportionality requirements and be defined in concrete terms. In
light of its wording, OMCT is very concerned that the decree does not spell out
the implications these new powers may entail for the enjoyment of human rights
and it may worsen a social context already marked by the
widespread shortage of food and medicine. In this setting, OMCT calls on
Venezuelan authorities to uphold the safeguards against arbitrary detention and
torture, ensuring that due process guarantees and the right to an effective
remedy are upheld in all circumstances. “History
especially in Latin America is replete with emergency frameworks opening the
floodgates to unfettered executive power, militarization and impunity for
serious human rights violations. In crisis situations such as this,
arbitrariness and the restriction of individual and collective rights including
the right to peaceful assembly, only exacerbate tensions further”, stresses
Gerald Staberock. 
Finally,
OMCT urges the Venezuelan authorities to guarantee full respect for fundamental
human rights, and reminds the authorities of the vital role that individuals
and organizations protecting human rights play, particularly in situations of
crisis. * For further information, please contact OMCT International Secretariat (Helena Solà Martín, +41 228094939, hs@omct.org) 