Sudan: arrest, detention and torture of eleven persons
May 14, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2004 / MaySudan: Sudan: arrest, detention and torture of eleven personsCase SDN 140504 Torture / Incommunicado detention / Release  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Sudan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudanese Organisation against Torture, a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest, detention and torture of eleven persons by the Armed Forces in Sudan.  According to the information received, on March 19th, 2004, the armed forces and the military intelligence, reportedly under the leadership of the First lieutenant Daffa Ala Mahmoud Almasalli, arrested eight persons from Jeway Kheen village on suspicion of participating in an attack on Bouram town on March 10th, 2004, by the SLA (Sudan Liberation Movement) rebel forces.   The names of the detainees are as follows (the first six persons are members of Zaghawa tribe, number 7 is a member of the Barno tribe and number 8 is a member of the Fur tribe):  1. Alsadig Ahmed Harba, 32, from Nyala Hey Althawra; 2. Haroun Basheer, 35, fish trader; 3. Abdu, cooking oil trader; 4. Mohamed Youseif, 43, sorghum trader; 5. Mohamed Adam Hurry, 45, headmaster of Legaid Diba Primary School; 6. Zakaria Madibo, 60, sorghum trader; 7. Mohamed Ahmed Abu Kantosh, 55; 8. Alfaki Abdella Kiraykirro, 45, Islamic cleric.  According to our information, following their arrest they were detained in a military camp in Bouram for nine days and then transferred to Nyala, where they were detained in a military prison. On April 2nd, 2004, Alsadig Ahamed Harba was reportedly released. The other seven detainees’ whereabouts remain unknown.   It has been reported that the eight detainees were subjected to torture during their custody in the military camp in Bouram. Military intelligence officers allegedly tied them to each other with robes and put them into a lorry for four days without food or enough water. They were beaten with sticks and gun butts, punched, kicked and tied by the legs and arms upside down against a tree for many hours. Mr. Haroon Basheer reportedly had metal objects inserted into his rectum. They were not provided with any food for three days after their arrival at the military prison in Nyala.  In a separate event, Abdel Kareem Jabir Narow, 48, a merchant living in Bouram and Abdel Shafi Badawi Basheer, 35, a merchant living in Nyala, both of whom are Zaghawa tribe members, were arrested by the security forces in Bouram province on March 29th, 2004. They were suspected of joining the opposition rebel group and, as with the eight other persons arrested on the March 19th, 2004, of participating in an attack on Bouram town on March 10th, 2004.  The two men were arrested at Abdel Kareem’s shop, and then detained in the police station in Bouram town without any official charges being brought against them. During their detention, it has been alleged that they have been tortured by the police officers in Bouram police station. They were reportedly beaten on their backs with fists and metal stick, burnt on their backs, stomachs and faces with hot metal, whipped using a water hose and kicked all over their bodies.  They are reportedly badly wounded as a result of this treatment and require medical attention, which the authorities have thus far refused.   In a further separate event, the security forces in Nyala reportedly arrested Ahmed Abdel Hameed, 38, on 4th May, 2004. Ahmed Abdel Hameed, who is a member of the Fur tribe, was suspected of joining the Sudan Liberation Army/ Movement (SLA/M). Mr. Ahmed works for the Faisal Islamic Bank, Nyala branch. He was arrested at his house in Nyala in the evening and was taken to the security offices and detained there. He has been denied any visits from his family.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the personal integrity of the ten persons who remain in detention, notably those being detained incommunicado, as they run further risks of being subjected to torture, and those who require medical attention. OMCT condemns the Sudanese security forces’ alleged use of torture and calls upon the authorities to immediately locate the detainees’ whereabouts, provide them with adequate medical assistance, and release them in the absence of legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards. OMCT calls upon the authorities to immediately launch prompt, thorough and impartial investigations into these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and award adequate reparation to the victims.  Background information  OMCT is seriously concerned about the situation in Darfur, which has been characterised as being the worst humanitarian situation in the world (please see our recent press release on this situation at:  http://www.omct.org/base.cfm?page=article&num=4786&consol=close&kwrd=OMCT&grp=Press.   Following international pressure and demands for humanitarian access, a ceasefire agreement was signed on April 8th 2004 in N'Djamena between the Government of Sudan and the two main rebel groups, the Sudan Liberation Army/Movement (SLA/M) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM). The ceasefire has been effective since April 12th 2004. The parties had agreed to cease hostilities within 72 hours, for a renewable period of 45 days. They had also agreed to guarantee safe passage for humanitarian aid to the region, to free prisoners of war, and to disarm the 'Janjaweed' militias that have been blamed for much of the "ethnic cleansing" and "atrocities" against civilians.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:  i.	take all measures necessary to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the eleven afore-mentioned persons; ii.	immediately locate the whereabouts of all the persons detained; iii.	intervene with the proper authorities to ensure that adequate medical assistance is provided as a matter of urgency to all the detainees who require it; iv.	guarantee that the detainees are granted access to legal representation and family visits; v.	order the immediate release of the eleven detainees, in the absence of legal charges that are consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; vi.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box, 281, Khartoum, Sudan , Fax: + 24911 783223  ·	Mr Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and, Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan , Fax: + 24911 788941  ·	Mr Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan , Fax: + 24911 779383   ·	Mr Yasir Sid Ahmed, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan , Sudan, Fax: + 24911 770883  ·	Mr Osman Mohammad Yusif Kubor, Governor of North Darfur State, c/o People's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 249 11 771 024  ·	Governor of South Darfur, Lieutenant-General Adam Hamid Musa, c/o People's Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan, Fax: + 249 11 771024  ·	His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Ibrahim Mirghani Ibrahim, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 335, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, , E-mail: mission.sudan@ties.itu.int.  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.  Geneva, May 14th, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 