Iraq: OMCT calls for effective investigation into reports of torture and ill treatment of Iraqi detainees
May  4, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Iraq / 2004 / MayIraq: OMCT calls for effective investigation into reports of torture and ill treatment of Iraqi detaineesWorld Organisation Against TortureP.O. Box 21- 8, rue du Vieux BillardCH 1211 Geneva 8, SwitzerlandPhone: 0041/22 809 49 39 / Fax: 0041/22 809 49 29E-mail: omct@omct.org / Website: www.omct.org  PRESS RELEASE Geneva, May 4th, 2004  Iraq: OMCT calls for effective investigation into reports of torture and ill treatment of Iraqi detainees  The International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), is gravely concerned by the recent reports and photographs documenting acts of torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment committed by Coalition forces in Iraq against Iraqi prisoners. Several such reports have been made by a number of human rights organizations and the media over the last year. It appears that virtually none of these allegations have been effectively investigated by the Coalition forces.    These reports highlight a number of issues that are particularly worrying. The fact that the persons involved allowed themselves to be photographed together with the detainees they were abusing indicates a culture of impunity. Such a certainty of impunity may be the result of lack of investigations in past cases of abuse and/or the reported lack of transparency in the treatment of detainees in Iraq. It has been reported that some 10,000 civilians are allegedly being held in Iraq, many without being informed of the reasons of their detention for several months. A number families have reported great difficulties in obtaining information regarding their whereabouts and in securing visits. Although some measures have apparently been adopted to allow for monitoring and review of detainees’ situations, it remains unclear whether these are sufficient to ensure that the treatment of prisoners in Iraq is consistent with international norms and standards.  Moreover, the role of private contractors in the alleged abuse raises serious questions regarding the appropriateness of their use in this context and their accountability for crimes and abuses committed in Iraq. Although applicable international law clearly stipulates that the Coalition forces have an obligation to investigate and punish cases of torture and ill-treatment, it is not clear what, if any, action will be taken to ensure that private contractors who are proven to have been involved in such cases are prosecuted under criminal law.   “After the scandal of Guantanamo,” said Eric Sottas, Director of OMCT “recent photographs of Coalition soldiers abusing prisoners represents a new factor that demonstrates the need to strengthen international standards that prohibit torture, monitoring mechanisms to prevent its occurrence, and international judicial bodies to sanction perpetrators. By refusing all international control, the United States both loses its credibility and  also exposes itself to justified criticism about it employing double standards.”  OMCT would like to join others in calling on the Coalition forces to take all measures to ensure that effective investigations are carried out without delay into alleged abuses, that those responsible are prosecuted and sanctioned, and that victims are ensured full reparation. OMCT would particularly like to urge that the findings of such investigations be made public.  For further information, please contact OMCT at: omct@omct.org, + 41 22 809 49 39 