Viet Nam:  Arbitrary internment of Le Anh Hung in “Social Support Centre No 2” Ung Hoa
January 30, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Viet Nam / 2013 / JanuaryViet Nam: Arbitrary internment of Le Anh Hung in “Social Support Centre No 2” Ung Hoa

JOINT OPEN LETTER – THE OBSERVATORY

Attn: President Truong Tan Sang, Prime Minister
Nguyen Tan Dung and Communist Party Secretary-General Nguyen Phu Trong
January
30, 2013
Re:
Arbitrary internment of Le Anh Hung in “Social Support Centre No 2” Ung Hoa,
Hanoi, January 24, 2013 
Your
Excellencies,
The Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), together with the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights
(VCHR), wish to draw your attention to the internment of blogger Le Anh Hung,
engaged in the promotion of freedom of expression, good governance and
democratic reforms. 
Mr. Le Anh Hung was kidnapped at his work
place in Hung Yen on January 24, 2013 by six secret security agents. They
failed to provide any document and pretexted to his boss that they needed to
see him about “matters concerning
temporary residence papers”, before forcing him into their car. Later, his
friends discovered that he had been interned in “Social Support Centre No. 2”
in Ung Hoa, Hanoi, a mental health institution. They were told that his mother
had requested Le Anh Hung’s internment, and were denied the right to visit him.
It later turned out that his mother had never made a request for his
internment.
This is not the first time that police
have harassed Le Anh Hung, who has been subjected to repeated interrogations,
threats and other acts of harassment to sanction his human rights activities.
Our organisations fear that Le Anh Hung is
detained under Ordinance 44 of 2002 on “Handling of Administrative Violations”.
The ordinance provides that people who “commit
acts of violating legislation on security, public order and safety, but not to
the extent of penal liability” (Article 1.3) may be detained without trial
for up to two years under house arrest (“probationary detention”), in
“reformatories”, educational institutions, rehabilitation centres or “medical
treatment establishments” (i.e. psychiatric hospitals). The United Nations has
repeatedly called on Vietnam to abrogate Ordinance 44 on the grounds that it is
inconsistent with the provisions of the UN International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights to which Vietnam is a state party. However, Vietnam has
ignored these recommendations, and continues to implement it to detain peaceful
activists. Blogger Bui Thi Minh Hang was detained for five months in an
“education centre” in Thanh Hoa in 2011 under extremely harsh conditions.
Pro-democracy activist Nguyen Trung Linh is interned in the Central
Psychiatric Hospital in Hanoi. 
Our organisations deplore that this
internment takes place in the context of a crackdown targeting Internet
activists since 2008, including arbitrary arrests and detentions, despite the
fact that in June 2012, the UN Human Rights Council adopted a resolution
affirming that the right to freedom of expression on-line must be protected,
and called on States to “promote and
facilitate access to the Internet”.
Therefore,
the Observatory and VCHR respectfully ask your Excellencies to:
·              
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Le Anh Hung as well as all human rights defenders in Vietnam;
·              
Release Le Anh Hung immediately and unconditionally as his internment
seems to merely sanction his human rights activities and is contrary to
national and international law as well as all other human rights defenders;
·              
Put an end to all acts harassment against Le Anh Hung as well as against
all human rights defenders in Viet Nam;
·              
Comply with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular:
- its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”,
- as well
as Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
·              
More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international and regional human
rights instruments ratified by Viet Nam.
We thank you in
advance for your attention on this situation of concern.
Sincerely
yours,
Souhayr
Belhassen
President
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)
Gerald Staberock
Secretary-General
World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
Vo Van Ai
President
Vietnam
Committee on Human Rights (VCHR) 