Russian Federation:  Proposed bill on Non-Commercial Organisations: open letter to State Duma members
July  6, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2012 / JulyRussian Federation: Proposed bill on Non-Commercial Organisations: open letter to State Duma members
Mr Sergey Naryshkin
Chairman of the State Duma         
Okhotnyi Ryad Street, Building 1
103265, Moscow
Russia
06
 July 2012
Open Letter
To: Members of the State Duma of the Russian
Federation
Re:  Introducing
Amendments to Legislative Acts of the Russian
  Federation in Part Regulating
Activities of Non-commercial Organizations, which Carry Functions of Foreign
Agents
We, the
undersigned organisations, call on you and your colleagues in the State Duma to
reject in first reading the bill on the above draft legislation on
non-commercial organisations (NGOs), which is scheduled for today, Friday 6th
July.
The proposed
amendments would characterise any NGO involved in ‘political activities’ that
receives funds from abroad as a ‘foreign agent’, and they would be required to
register separately with the Ministry of Justice. Such NGO’s would have to
comply with stringent audit and reporting requirements or face severe financial
penalties, six month bans and even custodial sentences for their employees.
There is significant potential for arbitrary and selective restrictions to be
placed on the activities of Russian civil society at large.
Within less than a week after being proposed, on
Friday 29th June, this bill has been put on your agenda, without
consultation amongst those stakeholders that will be most affected. If adopted the Russian Federation would be in clear breach of its international human rights
commitment and specifically the rights to freedom of association and freedom of
expression. The State Duma
must allow for a longer period of discussion and reflection, both for its
members as well as of civil society and government agencies alike. 
Our main concerns with regards to the draft
legislation are the following:
·        
The
concept of ‘foreign agent’ solely being linked to its source of funding,
without merit or acknowledgement of the nature of the activities carried out by
a non-governmental organization.
·        
 The overbroad definition of political
activities as included in the amendments, allowing for arbitrary and selective
use of the proposed legislation.
·        
The
strict control as proposed over any activities by non-commercial organizations
considered ‘foreign agents’, with additional audit and reporting requirements. If an organisation fails to comply its executive manager can be
subject to a 300.000 RUR (EUR 7.300) fine or up to three years in prison.
As partners of Russian non-commercial organizations
we condemn the proposed changes, which would indiscriminately brand those
organizations that receive foreign funding as ‘foreign agents’. Their work in
promoting international standards for example in the area of human rights and
democracy would be particularly affected by the negative connotation of this
term and we urge you to reject the changes proposed today. 
Yours sincerely,
 
ARTICLE 19
Civil Rights Defenders
Frontline Defenders
Human Rights House Foundation
Norwegian Helsinki Committee
The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) 