Cambodia:  Detention of land rights defenders
September 13, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2012 / SeptemberCambodia: Detention of land rights defenders

FFOR IMMEDIATE RELEASEJOINT PRESS RELEASE
 
Cambodia:
Latest Detention of Women Land Activists: Rights Groups Call for Immediate
Release, Condemn Government’s Ongoing Persecution of  Human Rights Defenders
 
 
(Bangkok, 13
September 2012): Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA),
Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development (APWLD), Human Rights Watch
(HRW), the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights and the World
Organisation against Torture), WITNESS, Amnesty International and Freedom House call for the immediate release of land and housing rights
activists, Yorm Bopha and Tim Sakmony, who were arrested on 4 September and 5
September, respectively, on dubious charges. The women appear to be the latest
targets of the Cambodian authorities’ use of seemingly trumped-up criminal
charges to intimidate Cambodia’s human rights defenders and social activists.
We urge the Phnom Penh Municipal Court to immediately grant the women
provisional release. Unless independent and impartial judicial investigations
conducted according to international fair trial standards demonstrate the
existence of sufficient, credible evidence that the women have committed recognizable
criminal offences, the cases against them must be dropped. 
 
Yorm Bopha, long prominent in
protests against forced evictions of residents from the Boeung Kak area of
Phnom Penh, was detained for allegedly assaulting a person who was suspected of
stealing. Bopha has denied the allegations, saying she was not even present at
the scene. She is currently being held in pre-trial detention at Prey Sar
prison in Phnom Penh, awaiting judicial investigation for “intentional violence
with aggravating circumstances” under Article 218 of the Cambodian Penal Code. 
 
In a separate case, Tim Sakmony, a
leader in protests against forced evictions from Borei Keila, another area of
Phnom Penh was arrested on 5 September 2012. The arrest came after the owner of
Borei Keila developer Phanimex filed a complaint alleging that Sakmony made a
“false declaration” in a request for the Phanimex Company to compensate her
disabled son for having failed to provide him with an apartment after his
eviction from Borei Keila in January 2012. Phaminex was originally granted land
in Borei Keila conditional upon construction of ten apartment buildings to
rehouse residents, but has only built eight buildings. Sakmony is also being
held in pre-trial detention at Prey Sar prison, pending judicial investigation
for making a “false declaration to a public body for
the purpose of obtaining an allowance, a payment or any unlawful advantage”
under Article 633 of the Cambodian Penal Code. 
 
The pre-trial detention of the two
women is unwarranted under Cambodian law. The Cambodian Code of Criminal
Procedure, consistent with international human rights law, states that pre-trial
detention is to be used only in exceptional circumstances, such as to stop
another offence from occurring, to prevent harassment of witnesses or victims,
to preclude collusion among accomplices, to preserve evidence, to protect
public order, or to guarantee the presence and/or security of the accused –
none of which seems reasonably applicable to the cases of Bopha or Sakmony.
 
In view of the Cambodian
authorities’ established record of abuse of the law and misuse of the courts to
persecute political opponents, social activists and human rights defenders for
their legitimate exercise of basic human rights, we are concerned that the legal actions against Bopha and Sakmony were very likely
motivated by their involvement in protests and campaigns on behalf of the land
and housing rights of the Boeung Kak and Borei Keila communities. The latest
cases of Bopha and Sakmony appear to extend and broaden the persecution of land
activists highlighted by other cases in recent months. On 22 May 2012, 13 women
activists from Boeung Kak were arbitrarily and violently arrested while holding
a peaceful protest at the development site affecting their community. The 13
women, all mothers or grandmothers, were charged, tried, convicted and
sentenced to lengthy prison terms on baseless charges in a three-hour summary
trial on 24 May. While on 15 July 2012, Mam Sonando, owner of independent radio
station Beehive, was arrested and
detained on trumped-up charges of being the ringleader of a supposed
“secessionist movement” by a community involved in a land dispute in Kratie
province. His Trial began on 11 September and is ongoing. 
 
Media
Contacts:
 
·      John Liu, East Asia
Programme Officer, FORUM-ASIA, +6680.2828.610, johnliu@forum-asia.org 
·      Mary McGuire,
Senior Communication Manager, FREEDOM HOUSE, +1.202.747.7035, mcguire@freedomhouse.org
·      Ruppert Abbot,
Asia Researcher – Cambodia, laos, Viet Nam- Asia
Pacific Programme, AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL, +855
(0)17 500 778. Rupert.Abbott@Amnesty.org
·      Ryan Schlief,
Program Manager, WITNESS, +1.718.307.9786, ryans@witness.org 
·      The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
(FIDH-OMCT), Arthur Manet,  FIDH,  : +33 1 43 55 25 18, and Isabelle Scherer, OMCT,  : +41 22 809 49 39
·      Phil Robertson, Deputy Director, Asia Division, HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH - +66-85-060-8406, RobertP@hrw.org 
·      Kate Lappin,
Regional Coordinator, Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development, APWLD,
kate@apwld.org 