Albania:  Albania: 34-year old Mr. Sabaudin Cela tortured by Vlora city Criminal Police Chief
March 13, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Albania / 2002 / MarchAlbania: Albania: 34-year old Mr. Sabaudin Cela tortured by Vlora city Criminal Police ChiefCase ALB 130302 Torture  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Albania.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from the Greek Helsinki Monitor concerning the torture to which 34-year old Mr. Sabaudin Cela was reportedly subjected on March 5th, 2002, in Vlora, Albania.  According to the information received, Mr. Cela was first detained on February 12th, 2002, when he was taken to the Vlora police station, having been suspected of an unspecified crime not long prior to his arrest. He was reportedly held in detention in a cell for over ten hours prior to being interrogated, which contravenes Albanian procedures. During the interrogation, Mr. Cela was reportedly beaten on his palms and feet by the Criminal Police Chief of the city, Alnor Hasa, and three other officers.    According to the report, on March 5th, 2002, Mr. Cela was again apprehended by the Criminal Police Chief Alnor Hasa and three other persons, and forced at gunpoint into an unmarked vehicle.  Mr. Cela’s face was covered during the ride to the city’s outskirts, where another car joined them.  Here, Mr. Cela was allegedly threatened and subjected to torture for four straight hours by Alnor Hasa and five other persons whose identities are currently unknown.   Mr. Cela was purportedly severely beaten with the butt of a gun and with batons.  Later he was reportedly left unconscious near his home, where a neighbour found him and took him to the city hospital.  Alnor Hasa reportedly went to the hospital on March 6th, 2002, where he threatened to kill Mr. Cela and his family if he denounced him.  According to the information received, Mr. Sabaudin Cela was diagnosed as suffering from grave body contusions.  Six cigarette burns were clearly distinguished on his chest and his left arm, his back was badly damaged, he had injuries to his head and legs, and was also unable to move his left leg.  Mr. Gj. Loka, the Vlora Police Director, reportedly suspended Alnor Hasa from his job at the police station immediately after the incident, and the district prosecutor’s office has initiated an investigation into these events.  While, the International Secretariat of OMCT welcomes the investigation being led into the torture to which Sabaudin Cela was subjected by Criminal Police Chief Alnor Hasa and five other unidentified men, it remains gravely concerned for Mr. Cela’s physical and psychological integrity, as well as that of his family, as he has received death threats from Alnor Hasa. OMCT also condemns the police’s use of torture, which is in violation of both Albanian law and the international human rights standards ratified by the country. OMCT is also concerned that the perpetrators of this attack will not be brought to justice, and that they will continue to be active within the police force, and that Sabaudin Cela may not receive adequate reparation for the injuries sustained during these events.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Albania urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Sabaudin Cela and his family; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; guarantee adequate reparation to Sabaudin Cela; guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	President Rexhep Meidani, e-mail: presec@presec.tirana.al ·	Ambassador Ksenofon Krisafi, Ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, Permanent Mission to the United Nations in Geneva of the Republic of Albania, Fax: 0041 22 738 81 56, e-mail: mission.albania@ties.itu.int.   Please also write to the embassies of Albania in your respective country.  Geneva, March 13th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 