Russian Federation:  Russia: Staffers of the RCFS harassed and threatened again
September 16, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2005 / SeptemberRussian Federation: Russia: Staffers of the RCFS harassed and threatened againRUSSIAN FEDERATION: Staffers of the Russian-Chechen Friendship Society harassed and threatened again. Geneva-Paris, 16 September 2005 - The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), in the framework of their joint programme, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, wish to express their deep concern about the growing harassment of members of the human rights NGO Russian-Chechen Friendship Society (RCFS) in Nizhny Novgorod.  On September 9, 2005, unidentified people distributed leaflets containing threats and smears aimed against the managing director and editor-in-chief of the RCFS Information Centre, Mr. Stanislav Dmitrievsky, and his colleague and editor, Ms. Oksana Chelysheva.   The leaflets were distributed in the environs of Mr. Dmitrievsky’s house and  included phrases such as “Infamy and contempt!”, “Be afraid of the people’s anger!”, “We say no to the pro-Chechen vermin who live among us and at our expense”,   “Death to the enemies!”.  Two telephone numbers were mentioned at the end of the leaflets, with the phrase  “We are waiting for you !”  addressed to the population, as an incitation to undertake acts of reprisals against Mr. Dmitrievsky and Ms. Chelysheva.  On March 14, 2005, similar leaflets had been distributed in the area where Ms. Oksana Chelysheva lives, mentioning her personal address. The investigation conducted by the prosecutor’s office of Kanavino district of Nizhny Novgorod has not been able to identify the authors so far.  These acts add up to the fiscal harassment the RCFS has been subjected to for the past months, culminating in the compulsory withdrawal of funds from the NGO’s bank account since August 26, 2005, despite the pending appeal filed against the decision of the Tax Inspection office of Nizhegorodsky district, Nizhny Novgorod.   Moreover, on September 2, 2005, Mr. Dmitrievsky was charged by the prosecutor’s office with “inciting to hatred” in a criminal case against the RCFS human rights newspaper, Pravozaschita in relation with the publication of statements calling for a peaceful end to the Russian – Chechen conflict by Messrs. Akhmed Zakaev and Aslan Maskhadov, two Chechen separatist leaders.  A court hearing is scheduled for September 21, 2005, on another case filed by the prosecutor’s office, aiming at closing down the organisation on the basis of the allegation that RCFS had failed to provide some documents to the Ministry of Justice during a parallel audit to the one conducted by the Tax Inspection.  The Observatory is gravely concerned about these numerous acts of harassment against the RCFS, which seem to aim at halting its activities, and urges the authorities to take the necessary measures to ensure the physical and psychological integrity of its members, to conduct a thorough investigation into the threats and smears against them, and to put an end to their harassment.  The Observatory recalls the Russian Federation authorities’ duty to comply with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of United Nations on December, 9 1998; in particular its article 1 that states “Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, as well as article 12.2., which provides that “The State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.  For more information, please contact : FIDH: 00 33 1 43 55 25 18 - OMCT: 00 41 22 809 49 39 