Congo, Democratic Republic:  DRCongo: reprisals against defenders in Kisangani
May 17, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2002 / MayCongo, Democratic Republic: DRCongo: reprisals against defenders in KisanganiCase COD 090500.2 Second Follow-up to Case COD 090500  Geneva, September 29th 2000.  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Democratic Republic of Congo.  New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed that on 25th September 2000, Freddy Loseke Lisumbu La Yayenga, Editor of La Libre Afrique, was taken to hospital in Kinshasa under armed escort where it was revealed that he was suffering from a slipped disc.  According to the information received, he was returned to the Centre Penitentiaire et de reeducation de Kinshasa (CPRK) pending further examinations to determine further treatment.  He is reportedly now taking a course of treatment in prison.  The International Secretariat of OMCT wishes to thank all those who intervened on Freddy Loseke’s behalf but remains gravely concerned for his physical and psychological integrity.  Brief reminder of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT expressed its concern for the physical and psychological integrity of Freddy Loseke Lisumbu La Yayenga, Editor of La Libre Afrique, who had been in custody since his arrest on 31 December 1999 in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  Freddy Loseke stated that he was subjected to torture during his long detention in a military camp preceding his trial.  His state of health has continued to deteriorate severely.  According to the information received, from Agir Ensemble pour les Droits de l'Homme, a member of the OMCT network, Freddy Loseke, in a letter from his CPRK cell on 1st September 2000, stated that he was extremely ill and was confined to his bed for 10 days.  He further noted that his right leg is paralysed and that he suffers from kidney failure.    A communiqué by La Libre Afrique, confirmed that doctors treating Freddy Loseke, in the University clinic of Mont-Amba, had already diagnosed this illness.  Also, it was noted that this kidney failure was confirmed in reports, on 29th and 31st August 2000, from the Medical Centre of the CPRK.  He was sentenced in May 2000 to three years imprisonment for "outrage a l'armee".  It is believed that his trial was politically motivated.  The prosecution had demanded a 10-year prison sentence for Freddy Loseke on charges of "outrage à l'armée".  The charge relates to two articles which Freddy Loseke wrote in late December 1999 about alleged unrest within the armed forces.  According to the information, Mr. Loseke had appeared before the Cour d'Ordre Militaire on several occasions and his case had repeatedly been adjourned because the prosecution failed to provide the relevant documentation.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Democratic Republic of Congo urging them to:  i.	continue to take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Freddy Loseke Lisumbu La Yayenga and order his immediate release from prison; ii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  The President Laurent-Désiré Kabila. Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo. Fax (+ 243) 880 02 120   Mr Mwenze Kongolo, Minister of  Justice, Ministère de la Justice, BP 3137, Kinshasa Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.   Mr Gaetan Kakudji, Minister of the Intérieur, Ministère de l'Intérieur, Hôtel du Conseil exécutif, Kinshasa - Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.  Geneva, September 29, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 