Brazil:  Killing of Mr. Semião Fernandes Vilhalva, one of the leaders of the Guarani-Kaiowá indigenous people in Brazil
September 10, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Brazil / 2015 / SeptemberBrazil: Killing of Mr. Semião Fernandes Vilhalva, one of the leaders of the Guarani-Kaiowá indigenous people in Brazil

 URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
BRA 002 / 0915 / OBS 073
Killing
Brazil
September
10, 2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Brazil. 
 
Brief
description of the information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by Justiça Global and Indigenous Missionary
Council (Conselho Indigenista Missionário – CIMI) about the killing of Mr.
Semião Fernandes Vilhalva, one of the leaders of the Guarani-Kaiowá
indigenous people in Brazil, who actively participated in efforts undertaken
for the recognition of indigenous territories and the recognition of the lands
of the Guarani-Kaiowá people[1]. 
 
According to
the information received, on August 29, 2015, Mr.
Semião Fernandes Vilhalva was shot in the face while trying to find his son
during a land recuperation operation held in the municipality of Antônio João
in the western state of Mato Grosso do Sul. 
 
The
killing of Mr. Semião Fernandes Vilhalva occurred in the context in which land
and environmental rights defenders, in particular indigenous rights defenders
in Brazil, are increasingly at risk as a result of their human rights work. 
 
Attacks
against the Guarani-Kaiowás continue even after the killing of Mr. Semião
Fernandes Vilhalva. The Nanderu Marangatu territory was attacked again on
August 30 by 60 gunmen, who entered the land shooting against children, elderly
people, women and indigenous men. On September 3, 4 and 5, another
Guarani-Kaiowá territory was targeted by the farmers, Guyra Kamby’I, which was
attacked with fire conflagration and gun shooting. 
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the murder of Mr. Semião
Fernandes Vilhalva and the use of excessive force against human rights
defenders, including indigenous leaders and activists participating in peaceful
land reclamation actions. The Observatory urges the authorities to adopt
measures to ensure their effective protection in Brazil and to conduct an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent
investigation into the above-mentioned events.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities in Brazil, urging them to:
 
i. Carry
out an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the above-mentioned
events in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law;
 
ii.
Move forward in the processes of Guarani-Kaiowá land demarcation, as delays in
the finalization of such processes results in legal uncertainty and insecurity
regarding land ownership and foster increased violence in land dispute; 
 
iii.
Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all
human rights defenders in Brazil, including in particular land rights
defenders;
 
iv.
Conform to the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998,
especially:
-       
Article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-       
Article 12 , which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms. The State shall take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration. In this connection, everyone is entitled, individually
and in association with others, to be protected effectively under national law
in reacting against or opposing, through peaceful means, activities and acts,
including those by omission, attributable to States that result in violations
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as acts of violence
perpetrated by groups or individuals that affect the enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms”.

v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Brazil.

Addresses:
 
·               
H.E. Ms. Dilma Rousseff, President of the Federative Republic of Brazil, Palácio
do Planalto, Praça dos Três Poderes, 70150-900, Brasilia DF, Brazil. 
Mr.
Gilberto
José Spier Vargas, Secretary for Human Rights,
Secretariat for Human Rights of the Presidency of the Republic, Setor Comercial Sul - B, Quadra 9, Lote C,
Edificio Parque Cidade Corporate, Torre A, 10º andar, Brasília, Distrito
Federal, Brasil - CEP: 70308-200. Email: direitoshumanos@sdh.gov.br;
snpddh@sdh.gov.br.
Twitter: @DHumanosBrasil
·               
Ms. Izabella Mônica Vieira
Teixeira, State Minister of the Environment, Ministry of the
Environment, Esplanada dos Ministérios - Bloco B, CEP 70068-900 - Brasília/DF,
Brazil. FAX: 2028-1756. Email: gm@mma.gov.br Twitter: @mmeioambiente
·               
Mr.
João Pedro Gonçalves da Costa, President of the Indian National Foundation
(FUNAI), SBS, Quadra 02, Lote 14, Ed. Cleto Meireles, CEP 70.070-120 –
Brasília/DF, Brazil, Email: presidencia@funai.gov.br.
·               
H.E. Ms. Regina Maria Cordeiro
Dunlop, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations in
Geneva, Chemin Louis-Dunant 15 (6th Floor), 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41
22 910 07 51, Email: delbrasgen@itamaraty.gov.br
·               
H.E. Mr. André Mattoso Maia Amado,
Ambassador, Embassy of Brazil in Brussels, Avenue Louise, 350 B-1050, 1050
Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 640 81 34, Email: brasbruxelas@beon.be
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Brazil in your respective
country.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva,
September 10, 2015
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of human
rights defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·    
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·    
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·    
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]            In 2005, the territory of Nanderu
Marangatu was finally demarcated and approved as belonging to the indigenous
people. However, the decision was suspended in the same year by the Federal
Supreme Court following an injunction filled by the land owners. As a result,
many Guarani were forced to live in overcrowded reserves or in makeshift camps
on the roadside where malnutrition, disease and suicide are high.
            After ten years of displacement from
what they consider their ancestral lands, on August 21, 2015, around 1,000
Guarani-Kaiowá people decided to occupy the ranches of the city of Antônio João
demanding access to their basic land right. Peaceful protesters were violently
repressed by the farm owners supported by Mato Grosso do Sul's police who used
excessive force and fired shots at members of the indigenous communities. 