Angola:  Press Release: The Angola 15 must be released and their right to a fair trial guaranteed
November 19, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Angola / 2015 / NovemberAngola: Press Release: The Angola 15 must be released and their right to a fair trial guaranteedAngola_2015.11.19_PR_English2 pages / 140 KB

Paris-Geneva,
November 19, 2015 – As the trial against pro-democracy activists detained since
June 2015 opened three days ago in Luanda, the Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (a joint FIDH-OMCT programme) reiterates its call on
the authorities of Angola to release them immediately and unconditionally and
to guarantee their right to a fair trial.
 
After almost
five months of arbitrary detention, the trial of pro-democracy
human rights defenders Messrs. Henrique Luaty Beirão (a.k.a. Brigadeiro
Mata-Frakuxz), Manuel Nito Alves, Nuno Alvaro Dala, Nelson
Dibango Mendes Dos Santos, Alfonso Jojo Matias (a.k.a. Mbanza Hamza),
Sedrick de Carvalho, Fernando António Tómas (a.k.a. Nicola Radical),
Hitler Chiconda (a.k.a. Samussuku), Italiano Arante Kivuvu, Benedito
Dali (a.k.a. Dito Dali), Albano Bingobingo (a.k.a. Albano Liberdade),
José Gomes Hata (a.k.a. Cheik Hata),  Inocénio De Brito (a.k.a. Drux), Domingos
da Cruz as well as of Osvaldo Caholo, finally opened on November 16, 2015.
Ms. Rosa Kusso Conde and Ms. Laurinda Manuel Gouveia are also
facing the same charges, but are not detained. The hearings are expected to
take place until November 20, 2015, before the Luanda Provincial Tribunal.
 
On the first
day of the trial, the defense turned up not having been able to see the
complete one thousand long file case, including part of the evidence against
the Angola 15, which is standard and lawful procedure in Angola. Furthermore,
although it was announced that the trial would be open to the public, only two
relatives per detainee were allowed inside the court room during the November
16 hearing. Representatives from embassies, including the United States, the
European Union and Portugal were barred from observing the court proceedings.
On the second day of trial, observers, including journalists, were also barred
and told to return only for the reading of the verdict. All this constitutes
blatant violations of the right to a fair trial, a right that is guaranteed in
Angola's constitution and a range of international human rights conventions
binding Angola. 
 
“The
individuals unlawfully detained for nearly five months on trumped up charges of
'plotting against the Government' are not criminals, they are human rights
defenders. The Angolan authorities must abide by its human rights commitments
and release them immediately and unconditionally”,
FIDH
President Karim Lahidji said.
 
“The detention
of the pro-democracy human rights defenders is arbitrary, as it clearly aims at sanctioning their peaceful human
rights activities. Angola must commit to its obligation to respect and promote
the rights to freedom of expression, opinion and peaceful assembly in all
circumstances”, OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock added. 
 
The Angola
15 are young activists arrested in June 2015 for discussing democratic reforms
and peaceful protest. Most of them are known pro-democracy activists, who have
been organizing peaceful protests against the 35-year-regime of Angolan
President Eduardo Dos Santos since 2011. These protests were often repressed by
the authorities. On September 16, 2015, they were charged with “preparatory
acts to rebellion” and “plotting against the President and other institutions”,
both of which constitute crimes against the security of the Angolan State.
Several experts and institutions have called for their release, including the
European Parliament and the UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights defenders.
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders.
 
For more information, please contact:
·       FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey Couprie: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·       OMCT: Miguel Martín
Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 24 