Kenya:  Demolition of one the Coalition for Grassroots Human Rights Defenders offices
April  4, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kenya / 2018 / AprilKenya: Demolition of one the Coalition for Grassroots Human Rights Defenders offices 
URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY                                                                              
 
KEN 001 / 0418 / OBS 038
Office demolition /
Physical attack /
Threats
Kenya
April 4, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation
in Kenya.
Description of the situation:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the demolition of one the
Coalition for Grassroots Human Rights
Defenders (CGHRD)’s offices and about the physical assaults and threats
directed to several of its members. CGHRD’s office had been operating since January
2018 as a meeting space for local grassroots human rights defenders working in
slums and rural areas and as space for reporting and documenting gross human rights
violations in the Dam Slums’ community, Kangemi Division, Nairobi County. 
 
According
to the information received, on March 27, 2018, at 2.00 pm, CGHRD’s office in
Dam Slums was demolished by police officers from Kabete police station in
Nairobi led by Chief Kitisuru Ward Rose Kibocha and who did not show any order
of demolition. The police, armed with metal bars and together with youths in
civil clothes, tore down the structure and the iron sheets, bringing down the
poles and carrying away the material in a handcart pushed by the youths. At the
time of publication of this appeal, CGHRD members have not been able to retrieve
the materials. While demolishing CGHRD office, the police also demolished a
stall used by a local woman to sell vegetables and another adjacent structure.
 
During
the demolition, Chief Kitisuru Ward Rose Kibocha allegedly physically assaulted
CGHRD member Mr. David Otieno.
Moreover, other CGHRD members present during the demolition were threatened by
the police officers who claimed that “they had not run out of bullets” [1].
 
Immediately
after the demolition of the office, CGHRD convened a meeting at the spot where
the office stood. The local village Chairman Steve Shipanzi attempted to
disrupt the meeting by intervening with local thugs but was repulsed by the
community. During the meeting, CGHRD members wrote a petition addressed to the officer
in charge of Kabete police station regarding their office demolition, Mr. David
Otieno’s physical assault and the threats received. 
 
On
March 28, 2018, CGHRD members held a peaceful procession towards the offices of
the Kangemi District Officer, Westlands
District Commissioner and the office of the Member
of Parliament for Westlands constituency, in Nairobi,
where they delivered copies of their petition.
 
On
March 26, 2018, CGHRD had circulated a petition against a case of land grabbing
concerning a plot of land which had been used by the Kikwetu Football Club and
reported the harassment and arbitrary detention of local residents by the
police. On the same day, CGHRD Kangemi Cluster members received threats of
demolition of the office from one of the policemen involved. However, when
inquired by one of the members, the police denied having such plans.
 
The
Observatory fears that the demolition of CGHRD’s office is a reprisal against the
organisation’s peaceful and legitimate human rights activities and in
particular their work against land-grabbing and the arbitrary detention of
local residents. 
 
Over
the past years, the Observatory has documented the shrinking space and the
climate of hostility in which civil society organisations operate in Kenya[2].
The Observatory would like to recall that this happens under the same
administration that has been undermining, for five years since its signing into
law on January 14, 2013, the commencement of the Public Benefit Organisation
(PBO) Act 2013, a law seeking to provide an enabling environment for NGOs.
Despite the High Court ruling for its immediate overdue commencement on October
31, 2016, no further step has been undertaken so far[3].
Instead, as of today the NGO Coordination Act 1990 is still regulating the
space for civil society with broad and vague provisions leaving room for
arbitrariness and abuses against NGOs[4].
 
Thus,
the Observatory calls upon the Kenyan authorities to ensure the physical and
psychological integrity of all CGHRD members and of their offices and to put an
end to all acts of harassment against them. 
 
Moreover,
the Observatory urges the Kenyan authorities to conduct an immediate, thorough
and impartial investigation into the demolition of CGHRD’s office and on the
physical assault and threats against Mr. David Otieno and other CGHRD members.
 
Actions requested:
Please write to the authorities of
Kenya urging them to: 
i. Put an end to all forms of
harassment against CGHRD and its members as well as against all human rights
defenders in Kenya so that they are able to carry out their peaceful and
legitimate human rights activities without any hindrance or fear of reprisals;
ii.   Guarantee under all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of all CGHRD members and human rights
defenders in the Kenya;
iii. Carry out an immediate, thorough
and impartial investigation into the demolition of CGHRD’s office and on the
physical assault and threats against Mr. David Otieno and other CGHRD members in
order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an independent
tribunal, and sanction them as provided by the law;
iv. Follow the order of the High
Court of Kenya by effectively implementing the PBO Act without further delay;
v. Conform with the provisions
of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular its Articles
1 and 12.2; and
vi. Ensure in all circumstances,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by
Kenya.
Addresses:
·       Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the
Republic of Kenya, Fax: +254-020-2436, Email: president@statehousekenya.go.ke 
·       Hon. William Ruto, Deputy-President of
the Republic of Kenya Email: dp@deputypresident.go.ke 
·       Hon. Fred Matiangi, Interior &
Coordination Ministry Email: ps.interior@kenya.go.ke 
·       Mr. Joseph Boinnet, Inspector General
of Police, Email: nps@nationalpolice.go.ke
·       Macharia Njeru, Chairperson,
Independent Policing Oversight Authority, Email: macharia.njeru@ipoa.go.ke
·       Dr. Regina G. Mwatha, Chairperson,
Commission on  Administrative Justice, Email: info@ombudsman.go.ke
·       Commissioner Kagwiria Mbogori,
Chairperson, Kenya National Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR), Fax: +254-020-
2716160 E-mail haki@knchr.org
·       H.E. Mr. Stephen Ndungu Karau,
Permanent Mission of Kenya to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax:
+41 22 731 29 05, E-mail: mission.kenya@ties.itu.int
·       H.E. Johnson Weru, Embassy of Kenya in
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 340 10 50 / + 32 2 340 10 68. Email:
kenbrussels@hotmail.com 
Please also write to the diplomatic
representations of Kenya in your respective countries. 
***
Geneva-Paris,
April 3, 2018
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org  
·      
Tel and fax
FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 



[1] The
other CGHRD members are: Ms. Purity
Gatwiri, Mr. Antony Kirika, Mr. Richard Williams, Mr. Clement Otiende, Ms. Nancy Inzelo, Ms. Susan Owiti, Mr. Nicholas
Oyuko and Mr. Nelson Maneno.


[2]      See the Observatory’s report “2017 elections:
broken promises put human rights defenders at risk” published on May 3, 2017.


[3]      See the Observatory Press Release issued on
November 4, 2016.


[4]      For example, the NGO Coordination Board can
refuse registration of an NGO applicant if its proposed activities or
procedures are not “in the national interest”, and is not legally required to
furnish the applicant with an explanation for the refusal of registration.
Moreover, wide discretion is given to the NGO Board and the Minister, including
regarding the certificate of registration, and the timeframe within which the
NGO Coordination Board must act on NGO registration applications. 