Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: Rape of Two Women Members of Opposition Movement
February 25, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2003 / FebruaryKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: Rape of Two Women Members of Opposition MovementCase KGZ 250203.VAW Violence Against Women/Rape    The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of the OMCT Network, of the rapes of Ms. Ajieva Saikal and Ms. Kadyrbekov Kenjegul.  According to the information received, on 19 February 2003, Ms Ajieva Saikal was raped by four militia officials. Ms. Saikal is a staff member of the Coalition for Democracy and Civil Society and she opposed a referendum held on 2 February 2003 concerning a new Constitution for Kyrgyzstan, which would solidify the power held by the current government (see OMCT appeal, Case KGZ 060203). Although numerous human rights activists have approached the police and prosecutor’s office to demand an investigation into the rape of Ms. Saikal, the law enforcement agencies have, thus far, refused to investigate the crime and, according to the information received, the police are actually trying to prevent an investigation.  Ms. Kadyrbekov Kenjegul was raped by three men on 16 February 2003 at the shop where she works. She is the sister of Ishenbai Kadyrbekov, who is a member of the Kyrgyz Parliament and a leader of an opposition group that is calling for the resignation of President Akayev. The Kyrgyz government asserts that an investigation is in progress concerning this crime, but the police have not yet arrested any suspects.  OMCT expresses its grave concern over failure of the police to conduct adequate investigations into the crimes. OMCT would like to remind the Kyrgyz authorities that the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, in article 4(c), states that States should “exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and, in accordance with national legislation, punish acts of violence against women, whether those acts are perpetrated by the State or by private persons.”  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity Ms. Ajieva Saikal and Ms. Kadyrbekov Kenjegul and intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to ensure that the adequate medical assistance is provided; ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into these rape cases, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided for by law;   iii.	guarantee adequate reparation to both women; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout Kyrgyzstan in accordance with international human rights standards.   Addresses  ·	Mr Askar Akayev, President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996 312 218 627, Email: ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su ·	Mr. Nikolai Tanaev, Prime Minister; fax: 996 312 661 382, e-mail: pmoffice@mail.gov.kg ·	Mr. Daniyar Narymbaev, Minister of Justice, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720040, g. Bishkek, ul. Orozbekova, 37; e-mail: minjust@bishkek.gov.kg  Please also write to the embassies of Kyrgyzstan in your respective country.  Geneva, February 25, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 