Bangladesh:  Bangladesh: Civil society decries mass arrests amid worsening human rights situation
March 22, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / Bangladesh / 2018 / MarchBangladesh: Bangladesh: Civil society decries mass arrests amid worsening human rights situation22
March 2018: The Solidarity Group for Bangladesh[1] today decries the mass
arrests of opposition supporters that have taken place in Bangladesh over the
past two months, and calls on the government to release all those who have been
detained and to undertake urgent measures to ensure the respect for fundamental
human rights.
Starting
on 30 January 2018, authorities began arresting supporters of the opposition
Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), ahead of the verdict in the alleged
corruption case against BNP leader Khaleda Begum Zia, which was delivered on 8
February. Over the course of a month, almost 5,000 opposition supporters,
including ordinary people who were suspected of being opposition sympathizers,
were arrested throughout almost all of the country’s districts. Most of them
remain detained in prisons throughout Bangladesh.
This
large-scale crackdown on opposition parties, government critics, and activists
is one of the most severe attacks on fundamental freedoms in Bangladesh over
the past few years. While authorities claim the arrests were carried out to
prevent violence from erupting in connection with the verdict, it is apparent
that these actions were politically motivated. In addition, there have been
numerous reports of torture and ill-treatment of those detained.
In
the most serious incident, on 12 March 2018, Zakir Hossain Milon, the
Vice-President of the Dhaka North Unit of the BNP’s student wing Jatiotabadi
Chhatra Dal, died while in police custody. He had been arrested on 6 March upon
returning from a BNP event at the Jatiya Press Club in Dhaka. Zakir’s family
members claim that he died as a result of torture.
Between
January 2009 and February 2018, 120 people have died as a result of systematic
custodial torture in Bangladesh, and dozens have become permanently disabled as
a result of kneecappings while in police custody. Over the same period, law
enforcement agencies have allegedly been involved in 422 cases of enforced
disappearances and 1,480 cases of extra-judicial killings.
The
Solidarity Group for Bangladesh calls on the Bangladeshi government to uphold
its obligations under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, fully investigate the death in custody of
Zakir Hossain Milon, and all other allegations of torture or ill-treatment in
detention, and take appropriate measures to ensure it does not occur in the
future.
Meanwhile,
the government has continued to take worrying steps to further restrict the
right to freedom of opinion and expression through the introduction of new repressive
legislation. The 2018 Digital Security Bill, which was approved by the Cabinet
on 29 January 2018 and is likely to be approved by Parliament in the coming
months, is inconsistent with the Constitution and the country’s obligations
under international law. The proposed legislation contains overly broad grounds
for restrictions on freedom of speech and prescribes lengthy prison sentences
for violators.
In
October 2017, the Solidarity Group for Bangladesh made a joint submission to the United Nations (UN)
Human Rights Council ahead of
Bangladesh’s third Universal Periodic Review (UPR), which will take place on 14
May 2018. The joint submission, which covered the period from 1 May 2013 to 30
September 2017, highlighted increased restrictions on civic space, the
continued use of torture, and violations of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression. In addition, it underscored Bangladesh’s failure to implement many
of the 171 recommendations it accepted during its second UPR in April 2013. The
joint submission also made recommendations for the Bangladeshi government to
hold free and fair elections, criminalize enforced disappearances, and ensure
the independence of criminal justice institutions.
With a general election scheduled to be held at the end of 2018, the
Solidarity Group for Bangladesh calls on the international community to press
the Bangladeshi government to address serious and ongoing human rights abuses,
including those detailed in the Joint Submission. UN member states should
reiterate their human rights concerns during the upcoming UPR and make
recommendations to Bangladesh that address the most recent developments.




[1]
The Solidarity Group for Bangladesh is a group of
civil society organizations established in March 2017 to advocate for the
respect for human rights in Bangladesh. The group comprises the following
organizations: the Asian Federation Against Involuntary Disappearances (AFAD); the
Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA), the Asian Legal Resource
Centre (ALRC); CIVICUS Global Alliance; the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH); Odhikar; the Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights; and the World Organization
Against Torture (OMCT). The Asian Network for Free Elections (ANFREL) joined
the Solidarity Group for Bangladesh in 2018. 