Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Burma: Arbitrary arrest of several democracy leaders subsequent to peaceful protests
August 22, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2007 / AugustMyanmar (ex-Burma): Burma: Arbitrary arrest of several democracy leaders subsequent to peaceful protestsGeneva-Paris, August 22, 2007. The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) express their deep concern at the arbitrary arrest in Rangoon of several democracy leaders subsequent to peaceful protests against fuel hikes. On August 21, 2007, at midnight, fourteen members of the 88 Generation Students Group[1], namely Mr. Min Ko Naing, Mr. Ko Ko Gyi, Mr. Mya Aye, Mr. Pyone Cho (aka) Htay Win Aung, Mr. Jimmy (aka) Kyaw Min Yu, Mr. Ant Bwe Kyaw, Mr. Kyaw Kyaw Htwe (aka) Marky, Mr. Yin Htun, Mr. Min Zeya, Mr. Pandate Tun, Mr. Thet Zaw, Mr. Zaw Zaw Min, Mr. Nyan Lin Tun and Mr. Zeya, were arrested by members of the Police Special Branch. They were all taken to the Kyaikkssan Ground Detention Center in Tamwe Township of Rangoon. Their mobile phones were confiscated and their houses were searched. At the same time, three members of the Myanmar Development Committee (MDC), including Mr. Htin Kyaw, were also arrested in a separate location. As of issuing this press release, no information could be gathered regarding their whereabouts. These arrests would aim at dissuading nationwide demonstrations against the recent sudden increase by the regime of fuel prices, therefore leading to a deterioration of the standard of living. In particular, these arrests followed a peaceful march that took place on August 19, 2007 in order to protest against the decision, on August 15, 2007, by the regime to double the price of diesel and petrol and quintupled the prices of compressed natural gas for cooking and buses. Another manifestation was scheduled on August 22, 2007. Five university students, namely Mr. Kyaw Ko Ko, Mr. Nyan Oo, Mr. Yar Zar Mon, Mr. Nyan Linn Oo, and Mr. Nyi Lwin Oo, were also arrested on August 21, 2007, at 10 am, in Rangoon, by members of the Union Solidarity and Development Association (USDA), the civilian wing of the Burmese military government, and plain cloth police officials, while they were posting a poster demanding to reduce the high prices of fuel and basic commodities. They were brought to Shwe Pyi Thar Police Regiment No.2 Head Quarters. As of issuing this press release, all the above-mentioned persons remain under detention and interrogation. Although no official charges were brought against them, the military regime justified their arrest as a way to prevent unrest and instability in Burma. OMCT and FIDH express their deepest concern regarding these events, which evidence the extremely repressive environment in the country, and calls upon the Burmese authorities to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all above-mentioned persons and to release them immediately and unconditionally since their detention is arbitrary. OMCT and FIDH further urge the Burmese authorities to conform with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, in particular with its Article 19, which provides that “Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice”, and its Article 21, which states that “The right of peaceful assembly shall be recognized. No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those imposed in conformity with the law and which are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, public order, the protection of public health or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms of others”. More generally, OMCT and FIDH calls upon the Burmese authorities to ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Burma.   For further information, please contact: OMCT: Alexandra Kossin, + 00 41 22 809 49 39 / FIDH : Gaël Grilhot, + 00 33 1 43 55 25 18  [1] All members of the 88 Generation Students Group are former student leaders who organised in 1988 a major popular uprising in Burma, which the military regime responded to by killing up to 10,000 students and activists throughout the country. They spent over 15 years in prison after suffering severe torture and were released in 2004. 