Occupied Palestinian Territory :  Palestine Autonomous Areas: abuse, hospitalisation and neglect of 15 year-old Indonesian domestic worker girl
May 10, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Occupied Palestinian Territory  / 2000 / MayOccupied Palestinian Territory : Palestine Autonomous Areas: abuse, hospitalisation and neglect of 15 year-old Indonesian domestic worker girlPalestine: abuse, hospitalisation and neglect of 15 year-old Indonesian domestic worker   Case   PAL 100500 VAW/CC Violence Against Women/Child Concern   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention regarding the following situation in Palestine Autonomous Areas.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group (PHRMG), a member of the OMCT network, of the abuse, hospitalisation, and neglect of Mila Windsari Afendi.  Mila is a 15 year old Indonesian girl.  She was brought to Gaza by an agency called 'Star of the Morning' to work as a domestic for Nihad al-Sheikh Deeb, a legal consultant.  Mila arrived in Gaza on 17th March 2000.   According to information received, Mila was severely mistreated by both her employer and the manager of 'Star of the Morning', Iyad al-Kurdi.  It has furthermore been reported that attorney Nihad al-Sheikh Deeb has beat her several times, and complained to the manager of the office, Iyad al-Kurdi, who in turn beat her, and advised the attorney to continue beating her.  Al-Kurdi is supposed to have threatened to kill her if she did not obey his orders to work harder.   On 25th March 2000 she jumped from a 4th floor window in an attempt to either commit suicide, or to escape from her situation.  She was taken to al-Shifa hospital, suffering from bleeding in her kidney and broken legs. On 21st April 2000, Mila began a hunger strike, demanding to return to her country.  Currently, 'Star of the Morning' is said to be arranging for her return to Indonesia.  The International Secretariat of OMCT has also been informed that Mila's identity documents have been forged.  She is 15 years old, born on 25 June 1985, however, her passport states that she is 27 years old, born on 15 May 1973.  According to information received, the circumstances that Mila found herself in are not uncommon.  A similar case occurred earlier regarding a girl from Sri-Lanka. According to the information there is a lack of control on offices that bring girls from abroad to become servants in the houses of Palestinians.   The International Secretariat is deeply concerned with the abuse and neglect of Mila Windsari Afendi.  The lack of action on the part of the Palestinian Authorities with regards to the plight of Mila and other domestic workers is considered to be a violation of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Palestine Autonomous Areas urging them to:  take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mila Windsari Afendi, including ensuring medical assistance as well as her return to Indonesia; carry out a thorough and impartial investigation of the alleged physical abuses and ill treatment of Mila Windsari Afendi in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and impose upon them the penal sanctions provided by law, and guarantee adequate compensation and rehabilitation for Mila; carry out a thorough and impartial investigation of the agency 'Star of the Morning', and impose upon them the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Yasser Arafat, President of the Palestinian Authority, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, via Israel.  Fax : + 972 7 2822 365/6 ( if voice, say "fax, please").  Palestinian Authority, Minister of Justice, Abu Khadra Building, Omar al-al-Mukhtar Street, Gaza, via Israel. Fax : + 972 7 822 236 or +972 7 286-7109  Khalid al-Qidrah, Attorney General, Palestinian Authority, Attorney General Building, Yarmouk, Gaza, via Israel.  Fax : + 972 7 824 503.  Geneva, May 10, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 