Mauritania:  Mauritania: arrest of opposition leaders
December 11, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Mauritania / 2000 / DecemberMauritania: Mauritania: arrest of opposition leadersCase MRT 111200  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Mauritania.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by SOS-Esclaves, a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrest and detention of Ahmed Ould Daddah, Ahmedou Ould Bebana and a group of about  30 youths  in Mauritania.  According to the information received, on Saturday 9 December, Mr Ahmed Ould Daddah, Secretary General of the UFD/EN (recently dissolved opposition party Union des Forces Démocratiques/Ere Nouvelle) was arrested as he disembarked from a flight from Paris.  Furthermore, on 6 December 2000, Mr Ahmedou Ould Bebana, vice president of At-talia Al Watanya, banned opposition party, was arrested in Rosso.  It is further noted that a group of about 30 youths were arrested on 4 December 2000.  Amongst those arrested, the following persons have been identified: Sidi Ould Ethmane Sid'Ahmed Yessa, Mouvid Oud Hassen Ould Taleb, Mohamd'El Hassen Ould Lebatt and Feil Ould Mohamed Lemine Ould Cheiguer who have been detained in an unknown location whilst the others were released, without explanation, four days after being detained secretly.  These arrests are part of a cycle of repression and systematic violations of fundamental freedoms which has reigned during the last few weeks in Mauritania where arbitrary arrests and detention have become commonplace.  On 28th October 2000, the Special Council of Ministers dissolved the UFD/EN by decree.  At-talia Al Watanya was banned in 1999.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Mauritania urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons; ii.	order their immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President of the Republic, Son Excellence Monsieur le Président Maaouiya Ould Sid 'Ahmed Taya, Président de la République, La Présidence -BP 184, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 52406 or +222 2 59801. Minister of the Interior, Monsieur Dah Ould Abdel Jelil, Ministre de l'Intérieur, des Postes et des Télécommunications Ministère de l'Intérieur, des Postes et des Télécommunications BP 195, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 53661 Minister of Justice, Monsieur Mohamed Salem Ould Merzoug, Ministre de la Justice, Ministère de la Justice - BP 350, Nouakchott – Mauritania.  Fax : +222 2 57002 or +222 2 54995 Public Prosecutor, Mohamed Yeslem Ould Jidimou, Procureur de la République, Palais de Justice, Nouakchott - Mauritania Telegrams: Procureur République, Nouakchott, Mauritania.  Geneva, December 11, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 