China:  Enforced disappearances of four Uyghur men_Fear for their safety
July 18, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / China / 2011 / JulyChina: Enforced disappearances of four Uyghur men_Fear for their safety​Case CHN 180711
Forcible return/ Enforced
disappearances/ Fear for the safety
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the People’s Republic of China.
Brief description of the situation
TheInternational
Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source and Antenna
International, a member organisation of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about the
enforced disappearances of Mr. Ershidin Israel and his brother Mr. Shemshiden Israel,Mr. Abdusalam Nasir and Mr. Abdukerin Dihan, fourUyghur men from the Xinjiang Uyghur
Autonomous Region (XUAR). OMCT
is gravely concern about their safety and fears that they may be at risk of
torture and ill-treatment. 
According to the information received, Mr. Ershidin Israel, a38 years oldUyghur asylum seeker, was forcibly
deported to China from Kazakhstan, on 30 May 2011. The Chinese authorities have reportedly only
disclosed that he is being held in custody facing “major terror” charges,
without providing information about his fate and whereabouts. 
According to the same information received, Mr. Ershidin Israel fled China to Kazakhstan in late September
2009 after having provided information to Radio Free Asia (RFA) about the
alleged torture to death of a Uyghur detainee, Mr. Shohret Tursun[1], and the subsequent arrest of two Uyghur men whom the Chinese
authorities also accused of providing information on the case to RFA[2].
In Kazakhstan, Mr. Ershidin Israel reportedly applied for asylum to the office of the UN
Refugee Agency (UNHCR) in Almaty and received refugee status in mid-March 2010.
At the end of March 2010, UNHCR had secured a resettlement offer for Mr. Ershidin Israel from Sweden, where he was supposed to fly to on 1st April 2010. However, the Kazakh authorities reportedly then refused Mr. Ershidin Israel’s application for an exit visa, indicating
that his name appeared on an Interpol’s Red Notice and that they wanted to
interrogate him. The Kazakh authorities firstly authorised Mr. Ershidin Israel to live in a “safe place” designated by
UNHCR and guarded by Kazakh security forces. During several months, he was
reportedly interrogated by the authorities about his background and on how he
crossed the border into Kazakhstan. 
According to the
same information, on 23 June 2010, Mr. Ershidin Israel was formally arrested after the Chinese
authorities made an extradition request on the basis of terrorism allegations
against him. Between June 2010 and May 2011, Kazakh courts reportedly rejected Mr.
Ershidin Israel’s applications for asylum and uphold the
decision to arrest/extradite him. On 3 May 2011, the UNHCR also withdrew Mr. Ershidin Israel’s refugee status, without providing any
information. Mr. Ershidin Israel was extradited to China, without his family and lawyer being informed,
on 30 May 2011, and, on 14 June 2011, the Chinese authorities confirmed that
Mr. Ershidin
Israel was in Chinese
custody, facing “terror charges”, but without disclosing his whereabouts.
OMCT has also been informed about the arrest by
Chinese security forces, shortly after his extradition to China, of one of Mr. Ershidin Israel’s brother, Mr. Shemshiden Israel, on
13
June 2011, in Urumqi, on alleged
irregularities in a car business, as well as of Mr. Abdusalam Nasir and Mr. Abdukerin
Dihan, on 9 June 2011, in Suydung (Gulja
district). The Chinese
authorities have reportedly since then refused to disclose information about
their whereabouts, legal statuses or well-being. 
According to the same
information received, Mr. Abdusalam Nasir, Mr. Abdukerin Dihan and Mr. Enver Israel, another of Mr. Ershidin Israel’s brother, were
reportedly among a group of 20 Uyghur men detained in 2009 after Mr. Ershidin Israel provided information
about Mr. Shohret Tursun to RFA. They were later released in 2010. 
The International
Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the safety of the abovementioned
 Uyghur individuals and their relatives,
and accordingly urges the competent Chinese
authorities to immediately disclose their whereabouts as well as guarantee
their physical and psychological integrity, at all times, in accordance with international human rights
law, in particular the UN Convention Against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment to which
China is a State party. 
Actions
Requested 
Please write to the
authorities in the People’s Republic of China urging them to:
i.                    
Take all necessary measures to immediately
locate and disclose the whereabouts of the four abovementioned Uyghur;
ii.                  
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, their physical and psychological integrity; 
iii.                 
Grant
them immediate and unconditional access to a lawyer of their choice and their
families, as well as guarantee that they are examined by independent doctors
and receive adequate medical care if necessary, in accordance, inter alia, with the UN Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; 
iv.                
Order their immediate release in the absence of valid
legal charges that are
consistent with international law and standards, or, if such charges exist,
bring them before an impartial, independent and competent tribunal and
guarantee their procedural rights at all times;
v.                  
Guarantee
the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country
in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.
Addresses
Ø      Mr. Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China, Guojia Zongli, The State Council General Office, 2
Fuyoujie, Xichengqu, Beijingshi 100017, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 65961109 (c/o Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
Ø      Mr. Wu Aiying, Minister of Justice of the
People’s Republic of China, Buzhang Sifabu, 10 Chaoyangmen Nandajie,
Chaoyangqu, Beijingshi 100020, People’s Republic of China, Fax: +86 10 6529
2345, minister@legalinfo.gov.cn / pfmaster@legalinfo.gov.cn
Ø      Mr. Meng Jianzhu, Minister of
Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, Buzhang, Gong’anbu, 14
Dongchang’anjie, Dongchengqu, Beijingshi 100741, People’s Republic of China,
Fax: +86 10 63099216
Ø     
Permanent
Mission of the People’s Republic of China, Ch. De Surville, CP 85, 1213 Petit-Lancy 2, Suisse,
e-mail: mission.china@ties.itu.int, Fax : +41 22 793 70 14
Please also write to the embassies of the People’s Republic of China in your respective country.
***
Geneva, 18 July 2011
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.



[1] According to the information received, in July 2009, after the
violent crackdown in Urumqi, hundreds of Uyghur, including Mr. Shohret Tursun, Mr. Ershidin Israel, Mr. Haji
Memet and Mr. Abdusalem Nasir were detained, and people were executed for
involvement in the rioting. The crackdown was one of the most violent in years
with over 200 people killed in Urumqi, the regional capital. Mr. Shohret Tursun’s dead body was reportedly returned by the Chinese
authorities to his family in September 2009 covered with wounds and bruises but
the authorities claimed he died of a heart attack. His family was forced to
bury the body without any inquiry about his death. 


[2] Radio Free Asia broadcasted and published
stories on this case on 19 September 2009 and 21 September 2009 based on information that Mr. Ershidin Israel and two other witnesses provided. 