Internship announcement: OMCT Convention Against Torture Programme
January 29, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionLinks / 2018 / JanuaryInternship announcement: OMCT Convention Against Torture Programme
INTERNSHIP ANNOUNCEMENT
OMCT
CONVENTION AGAINST TORTURE PROGRAMME
The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), the largest international
coalition of nongovernmental organisations fighting against torture, summary
executions, forced disappearances and all other forms of cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment, is currently seeking to recruit an INTERN for its Committee against Torture related activities.
Location: International Secretariat of the OMCT, Geneva,
Switzerland.
Dates and duration: The starting date of the internship would be 9
April 2018, or earlier, for a minimum of 3 months. 
Application date: until 9 February 2018.
RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Committee against Torture will be holding its 63rd session
from 23 April to 18 May 2018. The OMCT is facilitating the coordination of civil
society activities during the session and is supporting the access of Civil
Society Organisations to the Committee against Torture in person. It is also
expanding the Committee’s reach through sharing experiences through live tweets
and Facebook posts, a blog, and is issuing E-bulletins on the Committee’s
sessions. 
The intern will work under the supervision of the Programme Director of the
OMCT Convention Against Torture Programme and the activities will include:
·     
To assist in the coordination of Civil Society Organisations’
engagement with the Committee against Torture; 
·     
To follow the country reviews during the 63rd session of the Committee and other meetings in relation to the session;  
·     
To assist in the drafting of the E-bulletin;  
·     
To carry out research on torture related issues.
PROFILE:
·      Attained
or concluding a University degree in law, international relations, social
sciences or related field; 
·      Good
knowledge of the UN procedures and regional mechanisms for the protection of  human
rights; 
·      Excellent
drafting and editing skills; 
·      Ability
to work under pressure to deadlines and to adapt to multidisciplinary work in
the  environment of a multicultural team; 
·      Good
interpersonal and communication skills; 
·      Fluency
in oral and written French and/or English. Knowledge of Spanish will be
appreciated.  
This is a non- remunerated
position.
Applications for this position should be sent (by
email only) to Carin Benninger-Budel at cbb@omct.org. For
consideration, please send a cover letter and a CV indicating “INTERNSHIP “ as
your message Subject. Only shortlisted candidates will be contacted.  
For more information about the OMCT, please visit our
website: http://www.omct.org/ 