Azerbaijan:  OMCT joins initiative asking sponsors of Baku 2015 to reconsider their financial engagement in the light of serious human rights concerns
September 23, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2014 / SeptemberAzerbaijan: OMCT joins initiative asking sponsors of Baku 2015 to reconsider their financial engagement in the light of serious human rights concernsLetter to BP5 pages / 312 KBJOINT LETTER TO BP / NAR MOBILE / P&G / TISSOT/ MC DONALD'S AND TICKET HOUROn behalf of the signatories below, and in the light of the media news
concerning the sponsorship agreement concluded between (BP / Nar Mobile /
P&G / Tissot (part of Swatch Group) / McDonald's / TicketHour) and the
National Olympic Committee of Azerbaijan, which covers  both the European Games scheduled for 2015,
and the Games Academy launched in April 2014, we would like to draw your
attention to and express our great concern at the current political situation
in Azerbaijan and your potential contribution and complicity in the human
rights violations taking place in that country.In line with the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, business
enterprises have responsibility to respect human rights, also in their business
relations, which requires them to: 
 (a) Avoid causing or contributing to
adverse human rights impacts through their own activities, and address
such impacts when they occur; and 
 (b) Seek to prevent or mitigate
adverse human rights impacts that are directly linked to their operations,
products or services by their business relationships, even if
they have not contributed to those impacts.
Enterprises are also required to ‘know and show’ how they meet this
responsibility, and in order to enable this, are expected to have in place
effective policies and processes appropriate to their size and circumstances,
including processes to enable the remediation of any adverse human rights
impacts they cause or to which they contribute.
We understand (BP / Nar Mobile / P&G / Tissot (part of Swatch Group) /
McDonald's / TicketHour) is engaged in the country both economically and
culturally, and probably perceives its sponsorship agreement as element of its
corporate social responsibility dimension. However, given the potential
negative human rights impacts that such financial involvement (sponsorship)
might have on the local community and human rights defenders in Azerbaijan, we
would like to query whether (BP / Nar Mobile / P&G / Tissot (part of Swatch
Group) / McDonald's / TicketHour) has conducted a rigorous human rights due
diligence process, including a thorough human rights impact assessment of its financial
involvement with the Games organization (including construction of new sport
and related facilities and infrastructure), before it entered into sponsorship
agreement. In particular we would like to query whether (BP / Nar Mobile /
P&G / Tissot (part of Swatch Group) / McDonald's / TicketHour):

took into consideration  the political situation in the country,
     particularly the long- lasting repression of civil society in the country
     and the wave of arrest of human rights defenders in July and August 2014?
analysed the impact of development of sports
     infrastructure on local communities, particularly bearing in mind the
     unlawful evictions in various Baku districts that have preceded this event
     e.g. for the Eurovision contest?
required the Games organizer to conduct and
     disclose the results of the human rights and environmental impact
     assessment of the new building/infrastructure projects? 
required inclusion of a human rights clause that
     would enable (BP / Nar Mobile / P&G / Tissot (part of Swatch Group) /
     McDonald's / TicketHour) to terminate the sponsorship agreement if the
     organization of the Games gave rise to increased human rights violations? 
has in place adequate policies, processes
     and  grievance mechanisms to enable
     those negatively affected by the Games, an organization of which it is
     financially involved, to seek effective remedy and justice in case adverse
     on human rights impacts and occur?

We believe that a global company like (BP / Nar Mobile / P&G / Tissot
(part of Swatch Group) / McDonald's / TicketHour) has the potential not only to
impact great numbers of people around the world, but also to exert important
leverage over its business partners.  In
situations like this when it is making a significant financial contribution, it
should use this leverage to require guarantees that sponsored activities and
projects do not result in adverse human rights impacts. It is up to (BP / Nar
Mobile / P&G / Tissot (part of Swatch Group) / McDonald's / TicketHour) to
choose the message it wants to promote, whether that will be the message of
democracy, or the message of support for one of the most authoritarian regimes
in Europe.
In recent weeks, prominent human rights defenders in Azerbaijan have been
arrested. Hasan Huseynli, acting far from Baku, in Ganja, was detained first.
He is a renowned activist for people in the regions. Then, Leyla Yunus and her
husband Arif Yunus were put behind bars. They were involved in the protection
of citizens suffering from massive expropriation in Baku and were promoting a
peace process between Armenians and Azerbaijanis in Nagorno-Karabakh. On 2
August, Rasul Jafarov, a thirty-year-old human rights defender was detained and
arrested for three months. He was the mastermind of the 'Sing for Democracy'
campaign organised during the Eurovision song contest held in Baku in 2012. He
was engaged in counting political prisoners in Azerbaijan and fought to
mobilise international organisations to react to the Azerbaijani government’s
human rights abuses. On 8 August, Intigam Aliyev, a well-known activist and a
prominent lawyer, was arrested. He had won a dozen of cases against Azerbaijan
before the European Court of Human Rights. His arrest has left a number of
applicants to the Court without legal representation. 
It is clear that the
charges against these activists are spurious; all of them were accused of
economic and tax offences, despite the fact that they operate non-profit
organisations. Three weeks ago, on exactly the same grounds, prosecution
proceedings were opened against 21 non-governmental organisations. Accounts of
activists and their organizations were frozen, and most of them have had to
cease their human rights activity. 
The recent crackdown is
just another step in a long chain of assaults on democratic values. Anar
Mammadli, the head of an independent think-tank monitoring elections, who dared
to claim that the presidential elections held in the autumn of 2013 were
unfair, was jailed a couple of months ago. Ilgar Mammadov, the head of the
opposition party, was jailed over a year ago, and the European Court of Human
Rights has already acknowledged him as a political prisoner. Prominent
journalists, such as Tofiq Yagublu, Sardar Alibeili, and Parviz Hashimli, have
also been added to President Ilham Aliyev’s collection of activists behind
bars. These detentions are just a derivative of policies that the Government of
Azerbaijan has been conducting for many years, preventing non-governmental
organizations from registering their activity and the grants received from foreign
funding.
In the light of these facts, it is striking that (BP / Nar Mobile / P&G
/ Tissot (part of Swatch Group) / McDonald's / TicketHour), a company that
strongly supported John Ruggie’s mandate and development of the Guiding
Principles on Business and Human rights, and on numerous occasions highlights
its efforts to respect human rights and be a good corporate citizen, chooses to
promote Azerbaijan by providing financial support to the European Games. This
leads to a paradoxical situation in which a repressive leader – Ilham Aliyev –
receives loud support from companies in Europe, which choose to turn a blind
eye to the human rights abuses.
We call on you to verify and reassess, taking into account the U.N. Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights, to what extent your financial support
for the European Olympic Games in Baku will white-wash human rights violations
in Azerbaijan, and reconsider your sponsorship. Despite the official statement
of the Organizing Committee, which attempts to ignore the political situation
in Azerbaijan and ongoing human rights repressions, we believe that the
activists’ arrests, in particular that of Rasul Jafarov, are related to the
organization of the games. The activist was planning to launch a new campaign
“Sport for democracy” during the 2015 European Games, engaging sportsman and
sport teams to promote democratic values and draw the public attention to the
degrading human rights situation in the country. 
We do hope and believe that an honest and diligent assessment of the human
rights situation in the country will lead you to reconsidering the financial
engagement in the European Games. 