European Parliament/DROI Mission to Guatemala, February 2016: Joint briefing by Civil Society Organisations
February  9, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Reports and Publications / European Union (EU) / 2016 / FebruaryEuropean Parliament/DROI Mission to Guatemala, February 2016: Joint briefing by Civil Society Organisations2016.01.29 Briefing Guatemala_English8 pages / 470 KB

Some General figures about Guatemala
·        
Guatemala has one of the
world’s highest rates of violent deaths.
Despite the decrease of killings in 2014 compared to 2013, the National
Institute of Forensic Sciences (INACIF) registered 5.924 violent deaths (16 per
day), and the rates in Guatemala City increased 8,8%.[1]
·        
Since 2009, impunity has been
decreasing in cases of life threats. Nevertheless it is still very high in
cases of violence against Human Rights Defenders (HRDs). It is important to
note the role that the International Commission Against Impunity in Guatemala
(CICIG) and its coordination with the General Attorney in the fight against
impunity regarding different corruption cases in the last months that concerned
several public institutions.
·        
Guatemala has one of the worst
poverty and inequality indicators America, with a Gini coefficient of 0,628. Half
of the children under 5 suffer from chronic malnutrition[2] and more than 3 million people suffer from hunger, with indigenous
peoples and peasants among the most affected. Despite the reduction of
mortality attributable to undernutrition, still in 2014 the rates were high,
9.1 deaths per hundred thousand people[3].The imposition of an economic model aimed at the eviction of indigenous
and peasant population from the countryside in order to implement agricultural
and extractive projects, mainly for export purposes, has devastating effects on
the rights of the affected populations, namely the right to adequate food, the
right to free, prior and informed consultation and to access to land and
natural resources. The persecution of HRDs, especially those defending
economic, social, cultural and environmental rights, opposing those projects,
is also of particular concern[4].
·        
CICIG's revelations about
corruption and impunity structures within the State contributed to create a new
situation of citizen participation and social protest since April 2015. In this
new situation the leadership of students was remarkable as a newcomer on the
political scene. On the other hand, the indigenous movement managed to take
this new situation to position their historical demands on the democratization
of state institutions. Such rejection of corruption and openness to renew and
democratize the institutions There seem to be positive conditions for civil
society - women's organizations, indigenous peoples and youth - to strengthen
mobilization and influence who are well positioned to take advantage of the.
During these demonstrations the citizens made several claims, among which the
resignation of the then President Otto Perez Molina, and the cancellation of
the elections, which finally took place between September and October 2015.
Otto Perez Molina finally resigned and is currently in prison waiting to be tried
for corruption. The new government will have to address these calls regarding
changes of the Electoral and Political Parties Law, the Civil Service Law, the Law
of State Contracts and the Constitution itself. Another request of the social
movement was the organization of a Popular and Plurinational Constituent
Assembly (Asamblea Constituyente Popular y Plurinacional) with the
participation of indigenous peoples and social movements, to discuss changes to
the Constitution.
Situation of Human Rights Defenders (HRDs)
·        
Despite the
legal, political and institutional framework, the work of HRDs has become a
risky activity that involves defamation, criminalization and prosecution. Between
2000 and 2014, 4.252 direct attacks against HRDs took place, 42% of them in the
last three years, especially in the context of extractive and monoculture
projects.[5] Between January and June 2015, 337 attacks against
defenders were recorded, and in 2014 a total of 805 [6]. It should be noted that those who defend the
rights of indigenous peoples and environmental rights are particularly
targeted. Women HRDs represented 53% of the victims of the attacks perpetrated
during the first half of 2015. Despite
some progresses, a high level of impunity in cases of killings of HRDs remains. According to the CICIG there are still
significant deficiencies in the investigation and prosecution in cases of
attacks against HRDs.[7]
·        
For those
defending the right to land, the situation is very critical and is worsened by
structural issues generating conflict in the country, such as the failure in
implementing the agrarian reform recognized as necessary by the Peace Accords,
the re-militarization and lack of management of social conflict through
criminalizing measures such as the "Ley de Túmulos", as well as structural
discrimination against indigenous peoples, inequality and poverty and the
systematic violation of the right to consultation, which is considered by the Guatemalan
Constitutional Court as non-binding. In particular, communities that have taken
action in defense of human rights, such as Santa Cruz Barillas, La Puya or San
Rafael de las Flores and Mataquescuintla, have been subjected to repressive
policies and mechanisms like unjustified and violent evictions or the excessive
use of the state of siege[8].
·        
The
criminalization of social protest is a widespread phenomenon perpetrated by
state and non-state actors, involving the use of the legal system in order to
delegitimize, repress and weaken the human rights movement. An example of such criminalization
is the frequent trumped-up accusations without any evidence against defenders
for crimes they did not commit. The economic social and cultural (ESC) rights
defenders are particularly targeted due to their firm opposition to large-scale
economic projects. While the social and political situation of 2015 and the
"democratic spring" showed that the state does allow social protest,
it also showed that it is possible only in certain cases: the reaction of the state
is very different and stronger when the protests and demonstrations are against
big economic projects of national interest.
·        
In reaction
to the obstacles that the defense of human rights represent for the interests
of corporate sectors, national slandering campaigns against defenders have been
put in place, questioning their work without any funded reason.
·        
Guatemala
has several national mechanisms to carry
out actions of acknowledgement and protection of human rights defenders and
their work: the Human Rights Ombudsman (La
Procuraduría de DDHH, PDH); the Support Institute for the Analysis of
Attacks against Human Rights Defenders (la
Instancia de Análisis de Ataques contra Defensores de Derechos Humanos),
the Presidential Human Rights Commission (La
Comisión Presidencial Coordinadora de la Política del Ejecutivo en materia de
Derechos Humanos, COPREDEH);  the
Human Rights Unit within the Sepecialist Division for Criminal Investigations (la Unidad de Derechos Humanos de la División
Especializada de Investigaciones Criminales, DEIC); the Protection Program for
Journalists in Guatemala (el Plan/Programa
de Protección del Periodista en Guatemala), etc. Nevertheless, none of
these mechanisms proved to be effective enough, as the worrying data on
aggressions against HRDs dranatically show. In 2014, the Inter-American Court
of Human Rights (IACtHR), in its ruling
on the case of  Human Rights Defender and Others v. Guatemala, ordered the State of
Guatemala to implement a public policy to protect HRDs, to be elaborated in
collaboration with those directly concerned by protection measures, ensuring a
comprehensive and inter-institutional perspective as well as sufficient
financial and human resources.



Accordingly, we recommend you urge
the authorities of Guatemala to:
- Effectively implement the ruling
of the IACtHR in the case Human Rights
Defender and others v. Guatemala, by putting into place a public policy to
protect human rights defenders and creating effective protection mechanisms
that can guarantee their physical and psychological integrity.
– Repeal the “Ley de Túmulos”
which could be used to prohibit the legitimate right to peaceful assembly and
demonstration. 
- Respect the due process and
guarantee the principles of legality and proportionality in the application of Criminal
Law, particularly in cases against human rights defenders. 





Women’s rights
·        
In 2014, 774 violent deaths of
women were reported. In the same year,  1400 convictions for femicide were registered,
compared to the 779 happened in 2013, and courts specialized on femicide were
created in 11 departments. Nevertheless, not all women in Guatemala have access
to these specialized courts, particularly women living in remote rural areas. Moreover,
there are still shortcomings in addressing violence against women in the
ordinary courts, since a gender perspective is often not included in
investigations and discriminatory stereotypes largely predominate. These shortcomings
seriously affect  women's legal certainty
as well as their right to effective judicial protection.[9]


Accordingly, we recommend you urge the authorities of Guatemala to:
- Guarantee to all women access to courts, especially
to those specialized in violence against women and femicide.
- Guarantee that judicial and investigative
authorities include a gender perspective when investigating and prosecuting for
crimes of violence against women and femicide.




Indigenous peoples' rights
·        
The protection of indigenous
peoples, their territories and the respect of their traditions are recognized
by the Guatemalan Constitution.[10]
Nevertheless, these provisions are not respected. The promotion of a
development model based on the exploitation of natural resources through
extractive megaprojects such as mining, hydroelectric or monoculture plantation,
for the benefit of the domestic and foreign business sector is contrary to the
vision of development of indigenous communities, peasants and other rural
populations. This development model causes grabbing of natural resources in a
densely populated country, limiting the access and control on them of the communities,
with consequent impacts on human rights and conflict escalation. Moreover, in
most cases the state systematically  fails
to fulfil its duty to carry out a prior, free and informed consultation with
the communities affected by megaprojects, as enshrined in the ILO Convention
No. 169, the UN Declaration the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and the article 63
of Decree 12-2002 of the Municipal Code.
·        
It is worth mentioning that in
many cases European investment companies are involved in violations committed
against indigenous peoples and human rights defenders, especially in the
context of mega-projects, for instance the Spanish company Hidralia Santa Cruz
Barillas / Huehuetenango.



Accordingly, we recommend you urge the authorities of Guatemala to:
- Respect indigenous peoples’ rights, particularly the
right to a prior, free and informed consultation as enshrined in the ILO
Convention N 169, ratified by the State of Guatemala. 
- Adopt legislative and other measures to guarantee
and strengthen  the mechanisms in place
for monitoring the activities of transnational enterprises in the following
ways: ensuring that those companies with registered domicile in the Guatemalan territory
or under its jurisdiction are obliged to monitor and study the human rights impact
of their investment projects; regularly monitoring compliance with their due
diligence relating to human rights through regular meaningful participation of local
population and affected communities, including land rights defenders.
- Adopt national policies that allow fair access to
land, that guarantee land tenure, and that  respect the protection of unwritten, traditional
and customary land rights, without forced evictions. To achieve this, it would
be necessary to carry out the agrarian reforms foreseen in the Peace Agreements.
Moreover, review the definition of the crime of usurpation in the Penal Code,
and deal the majority of cases of possession within civil justice system, to
avoid criminalization of rural communities.





Right to Food[11]
·        
Despite the existence of different
plans, programmes and policies addressing hunger, the right to food of more
than 3 million people in Guatemala is infringed. Children, women, indigenous
and populations living in rural areas are the most affected. The lack of
institutional coordination and focus on structural problems are the main obstacles
to the eradication of  hunger and
malnutrition. An example of this serious situation is the case of Camotán. Between
April and May 2013, a judge of the Department of Zacapa condemned the State of
Guatemala for the violation of the right to food, the right to life, health,
education and housing of three boys and two girls. In the aforementioned rulings,
he ordered the state institutions to carry out a series of measures of redress.
However, these measures
have not been implemented yet.[12] 
·        
Rural and indigenous populations
lack access to and control on natural resources. The expansion of industrial
monocultures, like palm oil or sugar cane, and other extractive projects forced
the eviction of small-scale farming, causing rural and indigenous populations to
be deprived of the access to their land and livelihoods. Additionally, water
and land pollution generated by these projects have a negative impact on the health,
life and food sovereignty of those communities.




Accordingly, we recommend you to urge the authorities in Guatemala to:
- Promote policies and mechanisms of access to land
and control of natural resources, in order to guarantee food sovereignty,
respecting the specific characteristics of rural communities and integrating a
gender perspective able to increase the equality and sustainability of such
policies.
- Recognize and treat hunger and malnutrition as a
problem of national interest, addressing the historical and structural problems
that generate it through a human rights-based approach.
- Guarantee a better coordination and strengthening of
the different government offices responsible for implementing policies and
programmes to eradicate hunger and malnutrition.
- Guarantee the correct and full implementation of the
rulings recognizing the State's responsibility for the violation of the right
to food of five children in Camotán.



Independence of Justice
·        
In 2014 the nominating
committees (Comisiones de Postulación)
carried out the selection process  to
appoint the highest judicial authorities. In this process we witnessed the
absence of objective and transparent criteria for assessing the merits, skills,
expertise and reputation of the candidates. The recommendations made by the UN
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Rapporteur on the independence
of judges and lawyers and the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights to
prevent such situation were not taken into consideration, nor were the Guidelines
issued by the Constitutional Court, in line with international standards. A
series of attacks and threats against judges and prosecutors who were involved
in high-impact cases took place, as well as several slandering campaigns on
social media discrediting their work.



Accordingly, we recommend you urge the authorities of Guatemala
to:
- Conduct an integral review of the legal and
constitutional framework in order to guarantee the independence of justice, in
line with international standards. 
- Guarantee that judges, prosecutors and judicial
officers are allowed to freely carry out their duties, particularly those
dealing with cases of human rights violations.



Transitional Justice
·        
Since the conviction of the
former general and former head of state Efrain Rios Montt for genocide and
crimes against humanity and its subsequent cancellation in 2013, the re-opening
of the trial for genocide has been constantly postponed, always under the
threat of possible amnesties. The advanced age of Mr. Rios Montt and his
deteriorating health may contribute to fact that the new trial never takes
place, leaving the crimes he committed in total impunity.
·        
On February 1, 2016 the ground-breaking
trial in the Sepur Zarco case is due to start. It is a case concerning sexual
violence, domestic servitude and sexual slavery committed against a group of
Mayan women Q'eqchí of the Sepur
Zarco community (located at the boundary between Alta Verapaz and Izabal) in
1982 during the internal armed conflict. This case is emblematic since it considers
sexual violence as a weapon of restraint in armed conflict.
·        
On January 6, 2016, the Guatemalan
authorities arrested 18 senior military officers, accused of crimes against
humanity and enforced disappearances. Among them retired generals Romeo Lucas
Garcia and Manuel Antonio Callejas y Callejas, known to have held positions of
responsibility during the armed conflict and to be involved in various
corruption cases. The alleged crimes were committed as part of the military
operations conducted in Cobán, between 1981 and 1988, and some of those acts played
a role in the Maya Achi genocide. Civil society organizations welcomed these
arrests and recognized the efforts done by justice officers, namely the Public Prosecutor
and the Attorney General. Similarly, we urge the judicial authorities to
conduct the process respecting impartiality and judicial independence, ensuring
the due process and safety of all parties taking part in it.



Accordingly, we recommend you urge the authorities of
Guatemala to:
- Strengthen the courts and tribunals investigating
and prosecuting cases of human rights violations and ensure that the
perpetrators of those crimes will be brought to justice, as a way to prevent
impunity. Furthermore, guarantee that the national legislation is interpreted
in line with the principle of inadmissibility of amnesties in cases of grave human
rights violations, according to international law.
- Guarantee the independence of the judiciary and the
respect of the principles of due process and rule of law.
- Establish measures to ensure the physical and
psychological integrity of the surviving victims, their families, communities
and groups supporting them, as well as of the judicial officers, prosecutors
and complainants, in order to prevent defendants from using their influence on
the authorities to seek  impunity.



Torture and
prison conditions [13]
·        
Despite the creation of a
National Mechanism for Prevention of Torture (MNPT), the lack of appropriate
and sufficient allocation of financial resources within the national budget entails
a serious lack of operational effectiveness. Furthermore, there is no national
registry of victims of torture in place.
·        
Despite the ruling of the Constitutional
Court[14]
calling for adapting the definition of torture in national
legislation to be in line with regional and international standards, there is an
excessive delay in the submission of the Bill before the Parliament. Such
concern has also been expressed by the United Nations Committee Against Torture
(UN CAT) in its last Concluding Observations[15].
·        
Prison conditions are a major concern,
since they often amount to cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment. The high
degree of overcrowding in centers of detention is due, among other factors, to
the absence of adequate measures for a fair treatment of prisoners, as well as to
the insufficient use of alternative punitive measures, associated with the abuse
of pretrial detention as the main form punishment. This is  contrary to the international standards, such
as the Tokyo Rules, stating that preventive imprisonment should be the last
resort in order to respect the rights of people subjected to any kind of
detention. In addition, there are insufficient appropriate measures, also from
a financial perspective, to create and adequately monitor separate centers of deprivation
of liberty for women, juveniles, and for the protection and treatment of detainees
with mental illnesses.



Accordingly,
we recommend you urge the authorities of Guatemala to:
- Strengthen
financial resources in order to effectively make the National Mechanism for
Prevention of Torture operational and create a registry of victims of torture
in the country.
- Present as
soon as possible a Bill to adequately categorize the crime of torture
according to international and regional standards, as stated in the ruling of
the Constitutional Court and as recommended by the UN CAT.
- Establish
adequate measures and allocate both human and financial resources in order to
guarantee a fair treatment of the detainees, including the creation of
adequate centers of deprivation of liberty for women, juveniles and detainees
with mental illnesses. Additionally, use more punitive measures that are alternative
to imprisonment, and do not abuse of preventive detention as the main mean of
punishment, as required by international standards, including the Tokyo Rules.






[1] OHCHR in Guatemala, Report
of Activities in Guatemala for 2014.


[2] UNICEF, 2010.


[3] National Institute of Statistics, Indicators.


[4] Report of the Third
International Fact-finding Mission on the Right to Food and the Situation of
human rights defenders in Guatemala, 2015.


[5] Ibid.


[6] Annual Report El Acompañante, UDEFEGUA 2015 and Six-months
report, January-June, UDEFEGUA 2015. 


[7] OHCHR in Guatemala (note 1).


[8] Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OMCT-FIDH), “Smaller
than David. The struggle of
Human Rights Defenders in Guatemala", together with the
documentary available here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SXr0Ml0freo. See also the 2014 Annual
Report of the Observatory “We are not afraid". Land rights
defenders: attacked for confronting unbridled development".


[9] OHCHR in Guatemala (note 1).


[10] Articles 66-70 of the Guatemalan
Constitution.


[11] Between November and December 2014, the International organizations
Act Alliance EU, CIDSE, CIFCA, FIAN, REL-UITA and La Via Campesina carried out
the third International fact finding mission on the right to food and situation
of human rights defenders. You can find here the report
of the mission and its executive
summary. 


[12] For more information, see the report of the International Fact-finding
Mission (note 11) and the report
of FIAN on the monitoring of the rulings' implementation. 


[13] See the Joint
Press Release of OMCT and UDEFEGUA. 


[14] File 1822-2011, ruling of 17 of July 2012.


[15] See Concluding
Observations of the UN CAT (6-31 of May 2013). 