Egypt:  Stop Harassment of Women Human Rights Defenders and Drop Politically-Motivated Case 173
December 14, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Egypt / 2016 / DecemberEgypt: Stop Harassment of Women Human Rights Defenders and Drop Politically-Motivated Case 173Egypt_WHRDIC_Statement2 pages / 740 KB​The Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition (WHRDIC), of which OMCT is a member, is a resource and advocacy network supporting women human rights defenders worldwide.

 
The Women Human Rights Defenders International Coalition is
extremely concerned about the escalation of crackdown on Egyptian Women Human
Rights Defenders (WHRDs) and NGOs. The Egyptian government has been using a politically
motivated case, 173 of the year 2011 known as the NGO Foreign Funding Case, to
carry out systematic crackdowns against NGOs and human rights defenders. 
 
The latest development in this case occurred on December 7, 2016,
when Azza Soliman, a prominent women’s rights defender and lawyer was arrested
on the order of an investigative judge in Case 173.  Police forces arrived at her house in the
morning of December 7, arrested her and took her to a police station and then
to the office of the investigative judge, where she was questioned. She was faced
with three preliminary charges, including “receiving foreign funding to harm
the state’s interests.” Under Egypt’s penal code, this could be sentenced with
up to life imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 Egyptian pounds. She was released
on bail after she paid 20,000 Egyptian pounds, pending further court
hearings.  
 
On December 14, a court hearing is expected to decide on the
freezing of Azza Soliman’s personal and organizational bank accounts (her
private law firm).  It should be noted
that Soliman has not been officially informed of the pending court hearing, and
only learned about it through the media. Prior to this development, Azza
Soliman was informed by her bank that her accounts had been frozen. Despite her
insistence, no official document has been provided to explain the reason for
the freezing of her assets.  The bank has
however referred to a November 17 verdict by the Cairo Criminal Court to freeze
her assets on order of one of the judges in Case 173.  The verdict however has not been presented to
Azza Soliman or anyone from her law firm. 
On November 19, while at the airport and attempting to go to Jordan to
attend a women’s rights meeting, Azza Soliman was informed that she had been
banned from travel. 
 
Azza Soliman’s case is only one example of the pressures the
Egyptian government has exerted on Egyptian women human rights defenders.  Mozn Hassan, a prominent WHRD and Executive
Director of Nazra for Feminist Studies was barred from travel on June 27,
2016.  Hassan and her organization Nazra
Feminist Studies are also facing charges in the NGOs Foreign Funding Case, case
173 of 2011.  The hearing scheduled for
December 14, will also look into and rule on the freezing of assets of Mozn
Hassan and Nazra for Feminist Studies. 
As further testament to the targeting of WHRDs by the Egyptian security
apparatus, Aida Seif El Dawla, the co-founder of the El Nadeem Center for the
Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and a leading Egyptian WHRD was barred
from travel on November 23, 2016.
 
The WHRDIC expresses its deep concern about the Egyptian government’s
efforts to harass WHRDs and prevent them from carrying out their legitimate activities
within their respective civil society organizations. This concern is especially
heightened given that President Abdel Fattah Al-Sisi is due to sign a highly
restrictive and regressive new law on associations, which would give the
government and security apparatus extraordinary powers over non-governmental
organizations.
 
The WHRDIC calls on the Egyptian authorities to stop its harassment
of Azza Soliman and drop all charges against her and other WHRDs, such as Aida
Seif El Dawla and Mozn Hassan. 
 
Further the WHRDIC urges the Egyptian authorities to close the
politically motivated Case 173 of 2011 and end the harassment and intimidation
of women human rights defenders, including through arbitrary arrests,
interrogations, travel bans and asset freeze and closure of their
organizations.  
 
The WHRDIC while expressing genuine concern about the new NGO bill,
which contradicts the Egyptian constitution of 2014, calls on President Abdel Fattah
Al-Sisi to reject the bill and respect the rights of citizens to organize in
civil groups in line with their internationally recognized right to freedom of
association. 