Uzbekistan:  Press Release: Release of human rights defenders a positive sign, others must follow
October  6, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2017 / OctoberUzbekistan: Press Release: Release of human rights defenders a positive sign, others must follow

PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORYUZBEKISTAN: Release of human rights defenders a positive sign, others must follow
 
Paris-Geneva, October 6,
2017 - The recent release of human rights defenders Azam Formonov and
Salijon Abdurakhmanov after long years in prison on spurious charges marks a
long-awaited first practical step in alleviating the plight of defenders in
Uzbekistan. The Observatory, a partnership of FIDH and OMCT (World Organisation
Against Torture), calls for their full rehabilitation and for an immediate
release of other defenders still in detention. 
 
The exact number of political prisoners in Uzbekistan
is hard to establish due to closeness of the regime over last 28 years, marked
by continuous impunity and repressions. 
 
Since Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev took office as President
after Islam Karimov's passing away in August 2016, eight government critics,
including five human rights defenders[1], are
reported to have been released, some after spending more than two decades in
prison and one from psychiatric facility. However, two of them, including
journalist and human rights defender Muhammad Bekjon, regained their
freedom at the end of their prison term. 
 
On October 3, 2017, Mr. Azam Formonov, defender of farmers’
rights and former Chairman of the Syrdarya regional branch of the Human Rights
Society of Uzbekistan (HRSU), was released. He had been sentenced to nine years in prison in 2006 on
fabricated charges of extortion. In 2015, days before the end of his prison
term, he was sentenced to five additional years in prison for alleged prison
rules' violations. 
 
On October 4, 2017, Mr. Salijon Abdurakhmanov,
a human rights defender, journalist and contributor to the Institute for War
and Peace Reporting (IWPR), Radio Free
Europe and other media, was freed in turn. He had been arrested in 2008 on
trumped-up drug-related charges and sentenced to 10 years in prison. 
 
Both have been conditionally released.
 
"Lately President Mirziyoyev's regime sent
several positive signs suggesting first liberalisation efforts to take place
after an almost 30 year-long dictatorship. Yet more systemic and systematic
changes are now needed to prevent a roll-back effect and also to repair the
injustice, as none of them should never have
been arrested and sentenced", commented the Observatory.
 
The Observatory hails the release of these two
prominent civil society actors, but reminds that other human rights defenders, including Ms. Zulkhumor Khamdamova and Messrs. Israil
Kholdorov, Yuldosh Rasulov, Akzam
Turgunov, Dilmurod Saidov, Gaybullo Jalilov, Ganikhon Mamatkhanov, Mekhrinso
Khamdamova, Chuan Mamatkulov, and Farkhidin Tillaev, continue
to be arbitrarily detained.
 
The Observatory calls upon the Uzbek authorities to release
immediately and unconditionally all detained human rights defenders as well as to ensure in all circumstances that
defenders in the country are able to carry out their legitimate activities
without any hindrance and fear of reprisals.
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this program is to
prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders. FIDH
and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human
Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.

For more information, please
contact:FIDH: Samuel Hanryon / Audrey Couprie: + 33143552518OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41228094939
[1]                 
Namely Messrs. Bobomurad Razzakov, Muhammad Bekjon, Jamshid
Karimov, Azam Formonov, and Solijon Abdurakhmanov. 