New initiative to multiply litigation victories against torture and impunity
December 18, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Statements / 2018 / DecemberNew initiative to multiply litigation victories against torture and impunity  











Call
for participation in the SOS-Torture Regional Litigators’ Groups
 Geneva, Manila,
Lomé, San Cristobal de las Casas, 19 December 2018“As long as there is impunity, there will
be torture.” The World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) Secretary General Gerald Staberock, speaking
on the occasion of the launch of three SOS-Torture Regional Litigators’ Groups in Africa, Asia and Latin America, expressed
the frustration of anti-torture organisations around the world. “Despite Conventions and ratifications and
even new national laws, all too often violators are simply not brought to
justice in their own countries, victims of torture and other abuses are left
without a remedy, and as a result the rest of society remains as vulnerable as
ever – this cannot, must not be allowed to continue.”  
Over
the coming three years the initiative will gather together, connect, empower
and seek to multiply anti-torture litigation to challenge impunity through an
innovative, holistic and collective methodology. Jointly with the Collectif des
Associations Contre l’Impunité au Togo (CACIT), the Philippine Alliance of
Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA) and Centro de
Derechos Humanos Fray Bartolomé de las Casas (Frayba), the OMCT is today
issuing the call
for participation in the SOS-Torture Regional Litigators’ Groups. This call forms
part of the OMCT’s global ‘Civil Society United Against Torture’ initiative to
step up the collective fight against torture and impunity. 
Anti-torture
litigation is never an easy task and never business as usual. As litigators and
activists we face multiple challenges: torture and other ill-treatment is
clouded in secrecy; law and order forces systematically deny wrong doing; victims
and witnesses as well as lawyers and defenders are often threatened with reprisals
and intimidation; victims who most commonly have to withstand a hostile legal
system suffer trauma requiring special support; and not the least – the general
public is repeatedly told to tolerate state abuse for a higher good, security. Anti-torture
litigation in the SOS-Torture Network have brought important victories in the
past, but its use has been too sparse. 
To
counter this, the OMCT and its CSO partners around the world will build on
their experience in litigation and training, both in domestic and international
fora, in order to bring this work to new levels. The initiative supports litigation
not in isolation but along with victim assistance such as medical, social or
legal support; experience sharing on effective documentation and investigation
of torture; the development of best practices to protect against reprisals and
intimidation; and broader advocacy, visibility and communication strategies to
accompany and boost public awareness of legal action that fundamentally affects
the public good. 
Litigation
is fundamental to generate greater accountability and to obtain reparation for
victims of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
including comprehensive rehabilitation. However, without platforms that enable
continued engagement and knowledge sharing among litigators committed to the
fights against torture, strategic litigation will remain an underused tool, and
civil society organisations active in the fight against torture and impunity will
continue facing serious obstacles to defend victims of torture and
ill-treatment. 
“This anti-impunity initiative will provide
a platform for experienced litigators in the SOS-Torture Network to identify
and use innovative strategies in defence of victims of torture and
ill-treatment in their quest for justice”, stated Gerald
Staberock, Secretary General of OMCT. “Torture is a persistent challenge worldwide
which needs collective work – linking civil society, litigators, victim
assistance and advocacy –to bring about real, felt change on the ground”,
he added. 
How it works and how you can apply: 
Each regional
SOS-Torture Litigators’ Group will initially be made up of fifteen litigators,
who will be expected to actively pursue their cases and engage with the
respective groups during a two-year period through both in-person and remote
(webinar) workshops and exchanges. The litigators need to be connected to
members of the SOS-Torture Network or other CSO partners. The supporting CSOs
will be expected to accompany and provide support to the litigator with regards
to the legal and advocacy strategy surrounding the cases.
A first
in-person seminar is expected to take place during the first quarter of 2019. The
Latin American Litigators’ Group will meet in Mexico, the African Group will
meet in Togo, and the Asian Group will meet in the Philippines. The working
languages of these three groups will be conducted in French, English and
Spanish, respectively. Direct assistance to victims of torture, including
legal, medical, psychological or social assistance in 150 cases will be available to
litigators and CSOs through the OMCT’s Urgent Assistance Fund for Victims of
Torture. 
If
you want to join the fight against impunity in torture cases worldwide – apply
today! See the call for participants for each region for more information and
application requirements:- Africa SOS-Torture Litigators' Group- Asia SOS-Torture Litigators' Group- Latin America SOS-Torture Litigators' Group 