Open Letter to Member States of the UN Human Rights Council calling for support in rejecting amendments to HRC32 draft resolution protecting civil society space
June 29, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / 2016 / JuneOpen Letter to Member States of the UN Human Rights Council calling for support in rejecting amendments to HRC32 draft resolution protecting civil society spaceHRC32 OL Resolution CSO space6 pages / 130 KB







Re: Call for your support and solidarity in rejecting amendments to HRC32 draft resolution
protecting civil society space (A/HRC/32/L.29)




29 June 2016Your Excellency,We, the undersigned 244 civil society organizations, spanning across all regions of the world, call on your
delegation to stand in solidarity with civil society by supporting the draft resolution on the protection
of civil society space, to be considered for adoption at the 32nd session of the Human Rights Council (on
30 June or 1 July). We urge you to cosponsor the draft resolution, reject all amendments, and vote in
favour of the resolution if a vote is called.

The draft resolution, presented by a cross-regional group of States comprising of Chile, Ireland, Japan,
Sierra Leone, and Tunisia, was developed through broad consultation with States and civil society and in
the past was adopted by consensus.

The essential ingredients for States to create a safe and enabling environment for civil society are spelled
out in the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights’ report, on which the draft resolution is based. It
affirms that:

“If space exists for civil society to engage, there is a greater likelihood that all rights will be better
protected. Conversely, the closing of civil society space, and threats and reprisals against civil society
activists, are early warning signs of instability. Over time, policies that delegitimize, isolate and repress
people calling for different approaches or legitimately claiming their rights can exacerbate frustrations
and lead to instability or even conflict.”

The draft resolution welcomes the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and
recognizes the key role of civil society in achieving the goals. Once adopted, the resolution will be a
substantive contribution to the Council’s work to protect civil society space. In particular, it:


Emphasizes the positive contribution of independent, diverse and pluralistic civil society to
peace, security, sustainable development and human rights, and highlights good practice in
protecting and supporting this role;


Provides useful guidance for States to ensure that legal and policy frameworks are enabling for
civil society and prevent intimidation and reprisals against civil society actors;


Helps States and civil society to identify areas of legal, policy and administrative reform to
safeguard the ability of civil society actors to fully exercise the rights to freedoms of
expression, opinion, assembly and association, and to participate in democracy and public
life, without hindrance. This includes on registration and reporting requirements, access to
information, and securing resources for the vital work of civil society;


Creates opportunities and incentives for States to voluntarily share and develop their good
practices, and to lay the groundwork to benefit from the transformative potential of a vibrant civil
society in any healthy, pluralistic and participatory democracy;


Mandates OHCHR to study practices and procedures for civil society to contribute to the
work of international and regional organisations, and consolidate best practices and challenges
in that regard; and


Invites United Nations bodies, agencies, funds and programs to themselves contribute to the
protection and expansion of space for civil society.








However, fifteen amendments (L. 51 – L. 66) tabled by the Russian Federation seek to remove these
essential elements from the draft resolution, and insert language to justify illegitimate restrictions on civil
society that would undermine the protections of international human rights law. Many of the amendments
challenge previously agreed HRC or General Assembly language.

If adopted, the amendments would undermine international efforts to safeguard space or civil society,
including because they would effectively:


Reject the expert guidance and practical recommendations made by the UN High
Commissioner on Human Rights on civil society space, including to remove substantive
recommendations to states on ensuring: a supportive legal framework for civil society and access
to justice; public and political environment for civil society; access to information; public
participation of civil society actors, and human rights education (L. 63);


Remove or otherwise limit commitments to protect and promote the right to freedom of
association, in particular civil society’s right to access resources for its vital work, and to be
free of arbitrary registration and reporting requirements that seek to hinder the work and
safety of civil society (L. 56, L. 57, L. 61, L. 63);


Remove references to the gravity of threats civil society faces, including illegitimate
restrictions to their rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly, as
well as reprisals against those seeking to cooperate or cooperating with the United Nations
and other international bodies (L.51, L.54);


Narrow the understanding of “minority groups”, by seeking to include only a limited and
under-inclusive list of protected characteristics to the exclusion of others recognised under
international human rights law (L. 59);


Remove reference to the term “human rights defenders”, as well as previous work of the HRC
on their protection (L.51, L. 53);


Remove concerns that restrictions on civil society may limit the United Nations in achieving its
purposes and principles (L. 52), and removing the emphasis on the Universal Periodic Review
as an important mechanism to create space for civil society (L.62).

Excellency, we therefore ask that your delegation stand in solidarity with civil society by
cosponsoring draft resolution L.29 on civil society space, opposing any amendment that would
weaken the text, as those tabled appear to do, and voting in favour of the resolution if a vote is
called.






Yours sincerely, (for all signatory organisations see the PDF version attached) 