United Arab Emirates:  Continued incommunicado detention of Mr. Obaid Yousef al-Zaabi, a Twitter activist
August  6, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / United Arab Emirates / 2014 / AugustUnited Arab Emirates: Continued incommunicado detention of Mr. Obaid Yousef al-Zaabi, a Twitter activist​












ARE 001 / 0814 / OBS 069
Incommunicado detention / 
Judicial harassment
United Arab Emirates 
August 6, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in the United
Arab Emirates (UAE).
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the continued incommunicado detention since December 12, 2013 of
Mr. Obaid Yousef al-Zaabi,
a Twitter activist, for posting a series of tweets criticising a mass
trial of government critics and reform advocates. 
 
According to the information received, although
on June 23, 2014 the State Security Chamber of the Federal Supreme Court in Abu
Dhabi acquitted Mr. Obaid al-Zaabi of all charges, he remains kept in incommunicado
detention. He and his family have not been informed why he is still held and on
what legal basis. He has been allowed only one family visit since his arrest
and has had no access to a lawyer since his acquittal.
 
Mr. Obaid al-Zaabi was arrested on July 2,
2013, after posting a series of tweets criticising a mass trial of 94
government critics and reform advocates (UAE 94 trial). On August 4, 2013, he
was released on bail due to his poor health.
 
On December 12, 2013, Mr. Obaid Yousef
al-Zaabi was arrested again by State Security officers, after CNN aired
an interview he had given, in which he said he had been using Twitter to
express his political opinions, denounce torture and defend human rights,
raising awareness about people arbitrarily detained by the security forces. He
was charged with “harming public peace and violating public order”, “offending
the Supreme Court”, “offending the State Security apparatus by accusing it of
torture”, “accusing rulers of UAE of injustice” and “instigating people against
the rulers and the security of the State”, on the basis of the Cybercrimes Law
2012.
 
Mr. al-Zaabi was held in conditions
amounting to enforced disappearance for several weeks after he was arrested.
His family was not told where he was despite enquiring about him with the
relevant police authorities, and he had no access to a lawyer during his
pre-trial detention. 
 
Mr. Obaid Yousef al-Zaabi is now detained
in the prisoners’ ward in Sheikh Khalifa Medical City Hospital in Abu Dhabi, as
he suffers from advanced arthritis and rheumatism and has difficulty walking. 
 
Mr. Obaid Yousef al-Zaabi’s continuing
detention after his acquittal violate both international and UAE law, as there
is no legal basis for depriving him of his liberty.
 
Moreover, the case of Mr. Obaid Yousef
al-Zaabi is illustrative of a wider repression campaign targeting human rights
defenders criticising the current regime in the country since the “Cybercrimes
Law” was passed in 2012. UAE authorities have increasingly used this law to clamp
down on all forms of on-line dissent, especially via Twitter, which is
used widely in the United Arab Emirates, and to prosecute social media users
criticising the country's human rights offences.
 
The Observatory expresses its concern regarding the ongoing arbitrary
detention of Mr. Obaid Yousef al-Zaabi, which seems to aim only at preventing
him from carrying out his peaceful human rights activities, and calls upon the
UAE judicial authorities to immediately and unconditionally release him. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of the United Arab Emirates asking them
to:
 
i.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Obaid Yousef al-Zaabi and all human rights defenders in UAE;
 
ii.     Release Mr. Obaid Yousef al-Zaabi immediately and unconditionally, since his detention is arbitrary as it
seems to only aim at curtailing his human rights activities; 
 
iii.   Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial level,
against Mr. Obaid Yousef al-Zaabi and all human rights defenders in UAE;
 
iv.    Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
-     
its Article 1, which
provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-     
its Article 6(a), which
foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-     
its Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v.     Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by the United Arab Emirates.
 
Addresses
: 
 
·
President of the United Arab Emirates, Mr. Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al
Nahyan, Ministry of Presidential Affairs, Corniche Road Abu Dhabi, P.O. Box 280
United Arab Emirates. Fax: +971 2 622 2228. Email: ihtimam@mopa.ae 
· Crown
Prince of Abu Dhabi, Mr. Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Crown Prince Court
Bainunah Street, Abu Dhabi, P.O. Box 124, United Arab Emirates. Fax: +971 2 668
6622. Twitter: @MBZNews 
· Vice-President and Prime
Minister, MR Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashid al-Maktoum, Office of the Prime
Minister, Dubai, P.O. Box 2838, United Arab Emirates. Fax: + 971 4 353 1974.
Email: info@primeminister.ae
· Minister of Justice, Sultan bin
Saeed Al Badi, Al Khubirah, Sector 93, Street 5, P.O. Box 260, Abu Dhabi,
United Arab Emirates. Fax: +971 2 681 0680. Email, via website: http://ejustice.gov.ae/portal/page/portal/eJustice%20MOJ%20Portal/HomePages/Contact%20Us/Feedback 
· H.E.
Mr. Obaid Salem Saeed Al Zaabi, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the United
Arab Emirates to the United Nations in Geneva, 58 Rue de Moillebeau, 1209
Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41.22.734.556. E-mail: mission.uae@ies.itu.int
·
H.E. Mr. Sulaiman Hamid Salem Almazroui,
Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates in Brussels, 11 Rue des Colonies, 1000
Brussels, Belgium. Fax: 02 646 24 73. E-mail: consbruxelles@mofa.gov.ae 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of UAE in your
respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, August 6,
2014
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply. 