Uzbekistan:  Uzbekistan: torture victim Mr. Arabjon Sultanov requires urgent medical assistance
June 26, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2003 / JuneUzbekistan: Uzbekistan: torture victim Mr. Arabjon Sultanov requires urgent medical assistanceCase UZB 250603 Torture / Freedom of religion and belief   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights, a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest, torture and sentencing of Mr. Arabjon Sultanov for alleged membership in the Hizb-ut-Tahrir party in Uzbekistan.  According to the information received, Muhlisa Sultanova, a Tashkent City resident, has reported that her husband, Arabjon Sultanov, who was born in 1967, was sentenced by Zangiotinsk regional court in 2000 to 10 years imprisonment, under articles 159, 216, 244-1, and 244-2 of the Criminal Code of Uzbekistan. Mr. Sultanov's alleged membership in the Hizb-ut-Tahrir party was reportedly the main basis for the sentence.   While in SPE (Settlement of Punishment Execution), Mr. Sultanov was repeatedly tortured by SPE personnel. The severe treatment to which he was subjected has reportedly resulted in him suffering from heart failure, a stomach ulcer, and generally impaired health, having aggravated an illness to his goitre. Mr. Sultanov’s health deteriorated to such a point that, in early June 2003, he was brought on a stretcher to the republican hospital of the APE MIA (Administration of Punishment Execution) in Tashkent city. Our sources indicate that most persons who are detained due to their religious beliefs are subjected to torture, including beatings, needles under the nails, rape and burning of hands and other parts of the body.  Ms. Sultanova, the mother of three children, is worried that her husband may not survive without the appropriate medical care. The MAPE MIA (Main Administration of Punishment Execution) is not fulfilling its promises to release him from detention, despite his serious health condition.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Sultanov, particularly as there have been allegations of torture and Mr. Sultanov is reported as being in a critical condition. OMCT calls on the Uzbek government to order his immediate release and to ensure that he receives appropriate medical assistance as a matter of urgency and to guarantee his integrity at all times. OMCT also calls on the authorities to launch an immediate and impartial investigation into these allegations of torture, in order to identify those responsible, and to bring them to justice. Additionally, OMCT calls on the Uzbek government to ensure religious freedom in the country and, more specifically, to halt the harassment and repression of alleged members of the Hizb-ut-Tahrir party.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Uzbekistan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Sultanov; ii.	order his immediate release, as promised, in order to enable him to receive appropriate medical assistance; iii.	intervene with the proper authorities to ensure that Mr. Sultanov is provided adequate medical assistance as a matter of urgency; iv.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, notably the allegations of torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; v.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Note: you may encounter difficulties with the fax and e-mail information below. Please keep trying until you get through.  ·	Islam Abduganiyevich Karimov, President of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Respublika Uzbekistan; 700163 g. Tashkent; ul. Uzbekistanskaya, 43; Rezidentsia prezidenta; Prezidentu RU; KARIMOVU I.A., UZBEKISTAN, Fax: + 998 71 2 89 00 46 (please write on the top of your fax: "Tel.: 139 53 75; 139 82 60; 139 59 29; Prezidentu RU; KARIMOVU I.A.")   ·	Abdulaziz Khafizovich KOMILOV, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Respublika Uzbekistan; 700029 g. Tashkent; pl. Mustakillik, 5; Ministerstvo inostrannykh del, RU; Ministru KOMILOVU A.Kh., UZBEKISTAN, Fax: + 998 71 139 15 17  ·	Sayora RASHIDOVA, Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights, Sayora RASHIDOVA, Respublika Uzbekistan; 700035 g. Tashkent; ul. Xalqlar Dostligi, 1; Oliy Majlis RU; Upolnomochennoy po pravam cheloveka pri Oliy Majlis; RASHIDOVOY S., UZBEKISTAN, E mail: ombudsman@uzpak.uz / office@ombudsman.gov.uz   ·	Chairman of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Respublika Uzbekistan; 700183 g. Tashkent; ul. Abdulla Kodiri, 1; Verkhovny Sud Respubliki Uzbekistan; Predsedatelyu ISMETOVU I  Please also write to the embassies of Uzbekistan in your respective country.  Geneva, June 25th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 