Mexico:  26th session of the Human Rights Council: Statement delivered during the interactive dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
June 13, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Statements / Mexico / 2014 / JuneMexico: 26th session of the Human Rights Council: Statement delivered during the interactive dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions OMCT_Oral Statement_SP extrajudicialkillings_HRC262 pages / 390 KB
Human Rights Council, 26th Session, 10th June
– 27th June 2014 Item 3: Clustered Interactive Dialogue with the Special
Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and the Special
Rapporteur on internally displaced persons
Check against delivery
Oral statement delivered by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), a non-governmental organisation with
general consultative status
Thank
you, Mr. President.
First
of all, the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) welcomes the report of
the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions on “the
protection of the right to life during law enforcement” operations which draws
upon the legislation of 146 countries on the use of force.  
Mr.
Special Rapporteur,
OMCT
encourages the continuation of the study and supports the identification and
inclusion of good legal practices to guide States in bringing laws and
regulations in line with the obligation to respect and protect the right to
life. 
However,
OMCT remains deeply concerned about the pervasive and persistent lack of
adequate implementation at the country level to prevent and punish violations
of the right to life and the right to be free from torture and other ill-treatment,
particularly in the context of the policing of assemblies. OMCT wishes to draw
the attention to the inextricable link between the proliferation of restrictive
laws on peaceful assembly and the increase in the presence and diversity of
repressive responses. Instead of realizing the positive duty to facilitate the
exercise of freedom of assembly minimizing conflict through strategies
favouring mediation and negotiation, States opt for the suppression of dissent
and resort to heavy handed crowd management strategies, including the use of
lethal force. 
We
hope that your efforts help triggering such reforms, in this setting we would
welcome concrete and publicly accessible monitoring mechanisms to ensure that
States take action. However, do you intend to monitor laws on the use of force
alongside with laws regulating the exercise of freedom of assembly? OMCT is concerned
that fundamental change regarding the use of force and firearms in the context
of assemblies can only occur if the control paradigm gives way to a facilitation
paradigm. The narrow notion of “public space” entrenched in many domestic legal
frameworks must be replaced with a more pluralistic one that welcomes and
facilitates the exercise of freedom of assembly even if it creates some level
of disruption.        
Mr.
Special Rapporteur, turning to your report on your mission to Mexico, 
OMCT
and its member organizations in Mexico, Comisión Mexicana para la Defensa y
Promoción de los Derechos Humanos, Centro Prodh and Centro de Derechos Humanos
de la Montaña “Tlachinollan” welcome the report. The report extensively covers
the multifaceted challenges and shortcomings of the legal framework and
implementation related to the use of force and accountability. Statistics concerning
the execrable levels of violence and violations of the right to life plaguing
the country can only worsen if the militarization of internal security and the
structural impunity continue.
In
this context, we urge the Mexican authorities to endorse and implement the
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur. We believe that to tackle the
endemic impunity and curb the alarming level of loss of life the Mexican
authorities should swiftly mobilize efforts to create an independent national
forensic institute to help guarantee professionalized and scientific
investigations of extrajudicial executions as well as fair, evidence-based
trials in the criminal justice system. It is also essential that Mexico creates
and enforces a federal law on the use of force that complies with international
standards in order to uphold the “protect life” principle and facilitate
accountability for the excessive use of force against demonstrators and others.
We further highlight the Rapporteur’s recommendation for Mexico to create a
“safe corridor” for migrants in transit and call on the government to take
effective measures to address the extremely grave situation of this population.
Mr.
Special Rapporteur,
We
would like to know what concrete steps will be taken under your mandate to
ensure that Mexico meets its international obligations. We believe that it
would be of great help if emblematic cases such as the the case of
Ayotzinapa, in which two students were killed during the forced eviction of a
student protest in Guerrero in December 2011, are closely followed up upon to
ensure that the end of the impunity for crimes committed by public officials is
no longer an illusion, but a reality. This also includes crimes of past decades,
such as the extrajudicial execution of Diego Lucero, mentioned in your report
as a “particularly shocking” example of crimes committed during the “Dirty
War”, all of which remain in impunity today.   
We
thank you. 