Nepal: extra-judicial execution of Mr. Parsuram Khanal
February 12, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2004 / FebruaryNepal: Nepal: extra-judicial execution of Mr. Parsuram KhanalCase NPL 110204 Extra-judicial execution  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Nepal.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a reliable source that Mr. Parsuram Khanal alias Nabin, reported as being a middle-aged man, was shot and killed on February 2nd, 2004 at about 4:00 pm. by members of the security forces in Gulariya Municipality- 6, Balapur, Bardiya District, Nepal.   According to the information received, around 100 members of the Bardiya District joint security personnel were conducting an operation in Bhainsahi Village in Mohamadpur VDC and began chasing Mr. Parsuram Khanal, who fled to take refuge in the house of a stranger, Mr. Dukha Ram Tharu, who was out working.  The latter’s wife, Mrs. Ram Kali Tharu, however, was at home.  The security forces that followed him there reportedly  threatened to kill Mrs. Ram Kali Tharu and demanded that she get the man to come out. She complied and he exited her  home, surrendering to the security forces with both arms raised.   One of the members of the security forces reportedly opened fire on the victim, and, having been hit in the chest by 3 or 4 rounds, Mr. Parsuram Khanal collapsed and died. The security personnel then searched his pockets and found some money packed in a plastic bag and some papers. They reportedly took these items into their possession, and, having searched the house, asked Mrs. Ram Kali Tharu for a rope, tied the victim's hands together, and dragged his body along the road towards Guleriya. It is unknown what the security force did with the body, and the victim’s address and other personal information could not be obtained.   It is important to note that the next day, the radio TV reported the event, declaring that a Maoist had been shot and killed along the bed of the Babai River in the Guleriya area, Banke district, and that the security forces seized a pistol, a “socket” bomb, NRs. 60,000 cash, and other materials from him. However, several eyewitnesses have stated that Mr. Parsuram Khanal did not have a pistol or bomb in his possession at the time of his extra-judicial execution.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by this reported extra-judicial execution and calls on the authorities to immediately launch an investigation into these events, bring the perpetrators of these acts to justice and award adequate reparation to Mr. Parsuram Khanal’s family.  Action Requested  Please write to the Nepalese authorities urging them to:  i.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these event, notably the alleged extra-judicial execution of Mr. Parsuram Khanal, in order to identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; ii.	guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to Mr. Parsuram Khanal’s family; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Prime Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa, Prime Minister's Office, Singha Durbar, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax:+ 977 1 4 227 286 ·	General Pyar Jung Thapa, Chief of Army Staff (COAS), Army Headquarters, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax + 977 1 4 242 168 ·	Colonel Nilendra Prasad Aryal, Head of the Army Human Rights Cell, Army Headquarters, Singha Durbar, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977 1 4 226 292 / 229 451 ·	Shyam Bhakta Thapa, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: + 977 1 4 415 593 / 415 594 ·	Ambassador, Gyan Chandra Acharya, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Nepal, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int  Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.   Geneva, February 11th, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 