Presentation of the Observatory Annual Report 2011 in Kampala, Uganda
December  6, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Events / 2011 / DecemberPresentation of the Observatory Annual Report 2011 in Kampala, Uganda
INVITATION - THE OBSERVATORY 
 
Steadfast in Protest : Human rights defenders more than ever at 
risk
 
Publication of the Observatory Annual Report 2011 in Kampala, 
Uganda
 
 
At the occasion of the publication of its 14th Annual Report 2011, 
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture 
(OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), 
organises a press conference in Kampala, Uganda. This event will provide 
the opportunity to present the obstacles and acts of harassment suffered by 
human rights defenders in Africa.
 
Press Conference in 
Kampala
December 6, 2011 at 2 pm
Human Rights House, 
Nsambya,
Plot 1853 Lulume Road, Kampala, 
Uganda 
With the participation of:
Livingstone Sewanyana, Executive Director, Foundation for Human Rights Initiative (FHRI) - 
UgandaPelagia Razemba Semakweli, National Acting Chairperson, Zimbabwe Human Rights Association 
(ZimRights) - ZimbabwePepe Julian Onziema, Programme Coordinator, Sexual Minorities Uganda (SMUG) - UgandaHassan Shire Sheik, East and Horn Africa Human Rights Defenders Project 
(EHAHRDP)Margaret Sekaggya, United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights 
Defenders.
 
with the symbolic presence of Ales Bialiatski, President of 
the Centre for Human Rights “Viasna” (Belarus) and FIDH Vice President, 
arbitrarily detained since August 4, 2011.
  Ms. Margaret Sekaggya, Livingstone Sewanyana, Pelagia Razemba Semakweli, Hassan Shire Sheik, Pepe Julian OnziemaWhile the revolutions that took place in 
the Arab world in 2011 reminded the international community of the emergency to 
put the issue of human rights back at the top of its political agenda, utmost 
attention must be paid to the alerts made by human rights defenders worldwide, 
and no compromise must be made towards the harassment they 
face.
 
The report and the media kit are available on the following 
links:
 
Report: http://www.omct.org/files/2011/10/21443/obs_2011_uk_complet.pdf 
or
http://www.fidh.org/IMG/pdf/obs_2011_uk-complet.pdf
 
Media Kit: http://www.fidh.org/IMG/pdf/dpobs2011_final-eng-ldb.pdf
or
http://www.omct.org/files/2011/10/21443/eng_press_kit_obs_2011_final.pdf
 
The release of the Annual Report is a key momentum of the daily 
activity of the Observatory. This report tells of the struggle of human rights 
defenders in about 70 countries - civil society activists, journalists, 
trade-unionists, lawyers or simple citizens “indignant” at injustice, 
arbitrariness, or horror.
 
The document highlights the universality of the claims raised by the 
“Arab Spring”. As pointed out by Stéphane Hessel and Aung San Suu Kyi in the 
foreword to the report, “everywhere, respect for human rights was at the 
heart of the peoples’ claims, (…) These movements did not feed on identity, 
religious or cultural politics, but were rather founded on the principles 
enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(…)”.
 
“At the same time”, FIDH President Souhayr Belhassen says, 
“human rights defenders are more than ever at risk. As the Report is being 
published, the blood bath continues in Syria, in Libya and in Yemen. In Africa, 
the Middle East, Europe, Americas, Asia, human rights defenders are harassed, 
imprisoned, sometimes tortured”.
 
For OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock, “far from being 
recognised for what they are - vital protagonists for change, the guarantors of 
a free society - human rights defenders are, on the contrary, subjected daily to 
repression by regimes that are all the harsher for having understood the force 
and the legitimacy of their claims”. “The present report calls for 
stronger protection for those involved in human rights and democracy”, he 
concludes.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 
accompanies, follows and protects human rights defenders at risk throughout the 
year.
 
 
 
The Observatory wishes to thank the 
European Union for making the publication of this report possible, as well as 
the International Organisation of the Francophonie, the Republic and Canton of 
Geneva, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Finnish Ministry for 
Foreign Affairs, the French Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs, the 
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) and the Sigrid 
Rausing Trust for their support. Its content is the sole responsibility of OMCT 
and FIDH and should in no way be interpreted as reflecting the view(s) of the 
supporting institutions.​ 