Micheline Calmy-Rey Announces Nominees for 2012 Martin Ennals Award  for Human Rights Defenders
April 24, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2012 / AprilMicheline Calmy-Rey Announces Nominees for 2012 Martin Ennals Award  for Human Rights DefendersPRESS 
RELEASEMicheline Calmy-Rey Announces Nominees for 2012 Martin Ennals 
Award 
for Human Rights 
Defenders
GENEVA, 24 April 2012. Former Swiss President and 
newly-appointed Chair of the Martin Ennals Foundation, Micheline Calmy-Rey, 
today announced the nominees for the 2012 Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights 
Defenders (MEA) at a press conference at the Palais Eynard, Geneva, Switzerland. 
The MEA is the main award of the international human rights 
movement. 
 



The three nominees for the 2012 award are:
Venerable Luon Sovath, Cambodia. Buddhist monk in Chi Kreng 
pagoda in Siem Reap, Venerable Loun Sovath began his work as a human rights 
defender in March 2009 after two members of his family were shot by the military 
police during a forced eviction in Chi Kreng. The Venerable Sovath
arrived just after the shooting, and filmed the ongoing violence 
while also obtaining footage of the incident taken by members of the community. 
He soon became a focal point for the victimised villagers and an irritation for 
authorities. He was interrogated by the police chief and asked to hand over the 
CD and all its copies, which the Venerable refused. Pressure intensified. 
Despite threats of violence, arrest and ongoing police intimidation, the 
Venerable Sovath, a non-violent Buddhist monk, uses videos, poems and songs to 
defend the right to housing, but his advocacy touches powerful economic 
interests. The threats against Venerable Sovath are very 
real. 
 
Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh, a woman human rights lawyer from Iran, known for defending juveniles facing death penalty, prisoners of 
conscience, human rights activists and children victims of abuse, is currently serving a six-year sentence in Section 350 of Evin prison on charges of “spreading propaganda against the State”, “collusion 
and gathering with the aim of acting against national security” and “membership 
in an illegal organization [the Defenders of Human Rights Centre – DHRC]”. She is the former lawyer and member of the DHRC, the organisation 
of the now-exiled Iranian Nobel Peace Prize winner Shirin Ebadi, who declares 
Ms. Sotoudeh is “one of the last remaining courageous human rights lawyers who 
has accepted all risks for defending the victims of human rights violations in 
Iran”.
The Bahrain Centre for 
Human Rights (BCHR) is internationally recognised for its work on 
documenting human rights abuses in Bahrain. Despite harassment by the 
Government, who warns of legal action against the Centre’s members if they 
continue their activities, the BCHR provides information to international NGOs 
and the diplomatic community in Bahrain and advocates locally and 
internationally in support of demands for democratic change in the Gulf 
Kingdom.

The nominees were carefully selected by ten human rights organisations which 
make up the Martin Ennals Award Jury: Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, 
Human Rights First, the International Federation for Human Rights, the World 
Organisation Against Torture, Frontline, the International Commission of 
Jurists, German Diakonie, the International Service for Human Rights and 
HURIDOCS.On 2 October 2012, the Laureate will be announced during the 
annual ceremony at Victoria Hall, organized in cooperation with the Ville de 
Genève.
For more information, photos and videos regarding 
this year's nominees please visit  http://www.martinennalsaward.org  or contact  info@martinennalsaward.org
+41 22 809 49 25. 