Turkmenistan:  Turkmenistan: former-Minister Shikhmuradov in critical condition
June  3, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Turkmenistan / 2003 / JuneTurkmenistan: Turkmenistan: former-Minister Shikhmuradov in critical conditionCase TKM 140203.1 Follow-up of Case TKM 140203 Arbitrary and incommunicado detention / Torture / Risk to personal integrity  Geneva, June 3rd, 2003  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received new information regarding the following situation in Turkmenistan.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights, a member of the OMCT network, of the continuing incommunicado detention of Boris Shikhmuradov and of his gravely deteriorating health, in Turkmenistan. Mr. Shikmuradov was arrested in relation with the attempted assassination of President Saparmurad Niazov that took place on November 25th, 2002 in the centre of the capital, Ashgabat.  According to the information received, Boris Shikhmuradov, the former Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkmenistan, is in critical condition. Since having been arrested on December 25th, 2002, he has been subjected to torture and received psychoactive and paralytic drug injections, as a result of which, his health has seriously deteriorated, and he is reportedly losing both his physical and mental capabilities. He reportedly spends much of his time lying down. Sources indicate that he is unlikely to survive for much longer. The same sources claim that the intention of Mr. Shikhmuradov's detention and the use of the drug injections are to cause him physical and psychological damage, and potentially death. The government is reportedly preventing international human rights organisations and the OSCE from visiting Mr. Shikhmuradov.  In addition, as many as 67 other persons are reportedly being detained in relation with the attempted assassination of President Saparmurad Niazov (more details concerning these persons can be supplied upon request) and a much larger number of their relatives are reportedly being subjected to harassment by the authorities.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for Mr. Shikhmuradov's personal integrity, given that he is being detained incommunicado and is reportedly in a critical medical condition. OMCT calls on the Government of Turkmenistan to guarantee Mr. Shikhmuradov's physical and psychological integrity and to order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges that are in line with international law, or, if such charges exist, to ensure that Mr. Shikhmuradov receives a prompt and fair trial. OMCT calls on the authorities to immediately halt the use of the drug injections, to guarantee that he has access to appropriate medical assistance as a matter of urgency, as well as access to legal representation, international monitors and his family. OMCT also calls on the authorities to launch a prompt and impartial investigation into these allegations, in order to find those responsible and apply the appropriate sanctions.  Brief reminder of the situation  After a three-day detention period, the ex-Vice Prime Minister of Turkmenistan, Boris Shikhmuradov, admitted to having organised the attempted assassination of President Saparmurad Niazov. The attempted assassination took place on November 25th, 2002 in the centre of the capital, Ashgabat. The day before his detention, Boris Shikhmuradov published a letter on his opposition group’s website. In it he stated that he was going to turn himself in because he could not tolerate friends and family being interrogated and tortured - practices that became increasingly merciless as the days went by. Mr. Shikhmuradov claims that he was indeed involved in the organisation of political activity that was to take place at the end of November but it was to be in the form of demonstrations and public protests only. According to him the assassination attempt was a ploy orchestrated by the government itself, who was aware of his plans, in order to have an excuse to liquidate all opposition.   During his interrogations he also admitted to having stolen 5 Cy-17 Destructors, 9000 automatic Kalashnikovs, approximately 1. 5 million bullets and other military equipment of a value of 30 million dollars. Subsequently, Mr. Shikhmuradov was sentenced to life in prison, a sentence created especially for him since the maximum time was previously 25 years. Additionally, he must pay 30 million dollars for damages to the Turkmen economy.   Boris’s sister Larissa Shikhmuradov revealed that since the November 25th events, members of her family have been subjected to interrogations by the Turkmen special service. Her house has been searched several times and her husband was arrested for 3 days. Konstantin Shikhmuradov, Boris’s brother, was arrested in Ashgabat on December 7th, 2002. He was detained for two weeks without any charges being pressed. His arrest was allegedly based on the accusation from an unreliable source who claims that Konstantin extorted him out of 1000 dollars and threatened his life. Consequently he was sentenced to 14 years in prison but as a terrorist, not as an extortionist. According to Larissa Shikhmuradov, no one can see or communicate with her brother or bring him medication or warm clothing. His lawyer is not even allowed to visit him. His wife, Aina is subjected to almost daily interrogations. Their family possessions have been seized but have not yet been confiscated. Their telephones are tapped and the house is under observation.   Aina’s brother’s son Beguentch Beknazarov is currently being sought by the authorities. He was the replacement of the commander of the group "fusiliers-motocyclistes" from Ashgabat. His parents saw him for the last time on the morning of November 26 2002. He has since disappeared. The special services have claimed that their search for him is due to his involvement in a plot against the government. His father, Amandourdy Beknazarov, aged 63 and handicapped, was arrested for 2 days by the ministry of national security. During his interrogation he was forced to say whatever he knew of his son’s whereabouts. Beguentch’s mother was also interrogated several times as was his sister, aged 19, who was also arrested for 2 days.   Despite her immobility, Boris’s mother’s house is under constant surveillance, guarded by two armed agents. Unwarranted searches have frequently taken place and she is often threatened and interrogated by agents from the Ministry of National Security. Boris’ son lives abroad with his family but his wife’s family have been interrogated frequently. Her sister, who is nearing the end of her pregnancy, was interrogated for 8 hours. At the beginning of December, Dr. Aman Berdyklytchev, aged 73, a close family friend of Boris’s and who has cancer was subjected to interrogations that lasted for several days.   Action requested:  Please write to the authorities in Turkmenistan urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Boris Shikhmuradov; ii.	guarantee his full access to appropriate medical access and immediately cease his “treatment” of drug injections; iii.	guarantee his access to international monitors, legal representation and family visits; iv.	order his immediate release in the absence of valid legal charges, or, if such charges exist, bring him before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee his procedural rights at all times; v.	guarantee an immediate investigation into the circumstances of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions provided by law; vi.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses:  ·	President of Turkmenistan, Saparmurad Atayevich NIYAZOV Turkmenistan; 744000 g. Ashgabat;  Apparat Prezidenta; Prezidentu Turkmenistana NIYAZOVU S.A.; TURKMENISTAN, Fax: + 993 12 35 51 12 / 51 17 55 ·	Minister of Foreign Affairs of Turkmenistan, Rashit Ovezgeldiyevich MEREDOV, Turkmenistan; 744000 g. Ashgabat; pr. Magtymguly, 83; Ministerstvo inostrannykh del Turkmenistana; Ministru MEREDOVU R.; TURKMENISTAN, Fax: + 993 12 35 42 41 ·	Procurator General of Turkmenistan, Gurbanbibi ATAJANOVA Turkmenistan; g. Asghabat; ul. Seidi, 4; Prokuratura Turkmenistana; Generalnomu prokuroru; ATAJANOVOY G. Fax:  + 993 12 35 44 82  Please also write to the embassies of Turkmenistan in your respective country.  Geneva, June 3rd, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 