Pakistan:  Assassination of Mr. Rashid Rehman, a human rights lawyer and HRCP Regional Coordinator in Punjab
May 15, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Pakistan / 2014 / MayPakistan: Assassination of Mr. Rashid Rehman, a human rights lawyer and HRCP Regional Coordinator in Punjab​













PAK 001 / 0514 / OBS 040
Assassination
/ Death threats
Pakistan
May 15, 2014
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Pakistan.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP)
of the assassination of Mr. Rashid
Rehman, a human rights lawyer and HRCP Regional Coordinator for
the work of human rights defenders in Punjab. He headed the HRCP special
taskforce office in Multan.
In December 2013, Mr. Rashid Rehman had participated in OMCT campaign "10 Days of activism against torture"
 
According to
the information received, on May 7, 2014, at 8.45 pm, Mr. Rashid Rehman was
shot five times by two
unidentified men who walked into the HRCP office on Kutchery Road, Multan. He succumbed
to his injuries on the way to Nishtar Hospital. Mr. Rashid Rehman's colleague
Mr. Nadeem Parvaz and client Mr. Fazal Baloch were also shot and are
receiving treatment in the same hospital. The two gunmen managed to escape.
 
The
Observatory firmly denounces the assassination of Mr. Rashid Rehman, which was
preceded by death threats he received as a result of his human rights
activities. Indeed, Mr. Rehman denounced the repression of religious minorities
and advocated against the misuse of blasphemy laws in Pakistan[1]
and, since December 2013, had been representing Mr. Junaid Hafeez, a lecturer
at Bahauddin Zakariya University in Multan, who was accused of blasphemy in a
high profile case. It is reported that no lawyer was willing to take the case
for many months after Mr. Hafeez’s first lawyer withdrew on the first hearing
of his bail petition after being threatened by extremist religious groups. The
next hearing in Mr. Junaid Hafeez's case is fixed for May 19, 2014. 
 
On April 9,
2014, Mr. Rehman was threatened with death by four men in a courtroom in Multan
Central Prison, where the case of Mr. Junaid Hafeez was being heard due to
security reasons. According
to Mr. Rehman, Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Sindhu and Mr. Sajjad Ahmad Chawan, both
lawyers who were present in the courtroom, said to him: “you will not come to court next time because you will not exist
anymore”. Mr. Ayoub Mughal and a
fourth man present in the court whose identity is not known allegedly repeated
the threat.
 
Although the
threats were made before Additional District and Sessions Judge Shahbaz Ali
Paracha, he did not say anything even when Mr. Rehman reportedly drew his
attention to the threats. On April 10, 2014, Mr. Rehman and Advocate Allah Dad, who was also representing
Mr. Hafeez, wrote to the Punjab Chief Minister, the Inspector General of Punjab
police, the city police officer and District Bar Association’s President Sher
Zaman Qureshi, saying that they had been threatened by two lawyers and two
other people who asked them not to appear in a blasphemy case.
 
HRCP also
wrote to the Punjab government on April 10, 2014,
bringing the threats made against Mr. Rehman inside a courtroom and in front of
a judge to his attention. HRCP
expressed its concern in that regard and also demanded that the persons who had
threatened Mr. Rehman were proceeded against and effective measures were taken
to ensure Mr. Rehman’s security. On the same day HRCP
also released a statement to
the media exposing and condemning the threats[2]. 
 
However
the authorities took no action against those who threatened Mr. Rehman
and did not provide any security to him. The police in Multan did not even
summon the men who had threatened Mr. Rehman for questioning, much less take
into custody for making the threat, which is an offence under Pakistan’s penal
law. No case was registered against the four men either.
 
Following
Mr. Rashid Rehman's assassination, the police stated that the shooting was
likely to be a targeted killing and that they were aware of threats that had
been made against him. The Chehliyak police in Multan, on a complaint of the
brother-in-law of Mr. Rashid Rehman, lodged a first information report under
Section 302 ("Punishment of qatl-i-amd"[3]),
Section 324 ("Attempt to commit qatl-i-amd") and Article 7 of the
Anti Terrorism Act (ATA), 1997 against two unidentified attackers. No further
steps have been taken so far and no progress made in arresting the killers. 
 
Moreover, on
May 8, 2014, the day of Mr. Rehman’s burial, leaflets that claimed that Mr.
Rehman had met his “rightful end” were distributed in Multan and the person who
led the funeral prayers was threatened. 
 
The
Observatory recalls that this is not the first time that those opposing or
advocating against the misuse of blasphemy laws in Pakistan are targeted.
Judges have previously been attacked in Pakistan for acquitting blasphemy
defendants and two politicians who discussed reforming the law were shot dead
in 2011. The federal and provincial governments’ inability to condemn such killings
as well as their failure to investigate abuses in the lodging
of blasphemy cases and instigation of hate and violence in Punjab not only encourage
acts of violence against human rights defenders but also undermine
their trust in the authorities’ commitment to protect them. 
 
Furthermore,
in the last three years five human rights defenders belonging to HRCP have been
killed. Numerous others have been intimidated and threatened for their work and
remain under constant threat. To date all these crimes remain in impunity as no
one has been held to account for any of these crimes and the authorities fail
to guarantee the protection of human rights defenders under threats.
 
The
Observatory offers sincere condolences to the bereaved family and to Mr. Rashid
Rehman's friends and colleagues and urges the authorities in Pakistan to conduct an immediate, thorough, effective,
and impartial investigation in order to identify all those responsible, bring
them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal
sanctions provided by the law, as well as to adopt
urgent measures to protect human rights defenders in Pakistan.
 
Actions requested:

The Observatory urges the authorities of Pakistan to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all HRCP
members and staff, particularly Advocate Allah Dad, witnesses of Mr. Rashid
Rehman’s assassination, as well as all human rights defenders in Pakistan; 
 
ii. Carry
out an immediate, effective, thorough, transparent and impartial high-level
investigation into the assassination of Mr. Rashid Rehman, in order to identify
all those responsible, bring them before a civil, competent and impartial
tribunal, and apply to them the penal sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii Probe
the reasons why the authorities failed to take any meaningful steps on
information provided by Mr. Rehman and HRCP detailing the threats, requesting
security for the lawyer and taking action against the four men who threatened
him;
 
iv. Provide
adequate reparation and compensation to Mr. Rashid
Rehman’s relatives;
 
v. Take effective
steps to ensure that the rising dangers against human rights defenders are
curbed and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their
work without unjustified hindrance and fear of reprisal;
 
vi. Condemn Mr.
Rashid Rehman’s murder unequivocally and recognise publicly that human rights
defenders have a legitimate role to play in ensuring peace, justice and
democracy, and therefore promote a dignification campaign of human rights
defenders;
 
vii. Conform
in all circumstances with the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly,
in particular:
- its
Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in
association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international
levels” ;
- and its
Article 12.2 which states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to
ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration”.
 
viii. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Pakistan.
 
Addresses:
 
·      
H.E. Mr. Muhammad Nawaz SHARIF,
Prime Minister of Pakistan, Prime Minister House, Islamabad, Pakistan. Fax: +
92 51 9221596. E-mail: pspm@pmsectt.gov.pk or nsethi@pmsectt.gov.pk
·      
H.E. Mr. Mamnoon Hussain, President
of Pakistan, President's Secretariat, Islamabad, Pakistan. Fax: +92 51 9207458.
Email: publicmail@president.gov.pk
·      
Mr. Pervaiz RASHID, Minister
of Justice, Human Rights, Information, Broadcasting and National Heritage,
Pakistan. E-mail: pervaiz.rashid@senate.gov.pk
·      
Mr. Shahbaz Sharif, Chief Minister, Government of
Punjab Province, Chief Minister's Secretariat, 5-Club Road, GOR-I, Lahore,
Punjab, Pakistan. Fax: +92 42 99205065. Email: cmcomplaintcell@cmpunjab.gov.pk
·      
Mr. Justice Tassaduq Hussain
Jillani, Chief Justice of Pakistan, Supreme
Court of Pakistan, Constitution Avenue, Islamabad, Pakistan. Fax: +92 51 9213452. Email:  mail@supremecourt.gov.pk 
·      
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, Chief
Justice of the Lahore High Court, Shahra-e-Quaid-e-Azam, Lahore Pakistan. Fax:
+92 42 99212319.
·      
H.E Mr. Zamir Akram, Ambassador to
the Permanent Mission of Pakistan to the United Nations in Geneva, 56, Rue de
Moillebeau, Case Postale 434, 1211 Geneva 19, Switzerland. Fax:
+41-22-734-8085. E-mail: mission.pakistan@ties.itu.int
·      
H.E Mr. Munawar Saeed Bhatti,
Ambassador to EU, Belgium and Luxembourg, 57 Avenue Delleur; 1170 Brussels,
Belgium. Fax: +32 (0)2 675 83 94. E-mail: parepbrussels@mofa.gov.pk 
 
Please also
write to diplomatic representations of Pakistan in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
May 15, 2014
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To contact
the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·     
Tel
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]
Blasphemy carries the death penalty in Pakistan. The accused are often
lynched or languish for years in jail without trial because lawyers are too
afraid to defend them.


[2] See http://hrcp-web.org/hrcpweb/hrcp-slams-threat-to-lawyer-representing-blasphemy-accused/ 


[3]
Qatl-e-Amd is murder by intention. 