Iran:  Stop torture, cruel and inhuman treatment against Mohammad Sadiq Kaboudvand and other human rights defenders
May  7, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2014 / MayIran: Stop torture, cruel and inhuman treatment against Mohammad Sadiq Kaboudvand and other human rights defendersParis-Geneva,
May 7, 2014 - The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,
a joint FIDH-OMCT programme, has been informed about acts of torture as well as
cruel and inhuman treatment against Mr. Mohammad Sadiq Kaboudvand, an Iranian
human rights defender and President of the Human Rights Organisation of
Kurdistan, who has been serving an 11-year prison sentence since 2007.  
 
On
April 17, 2014, Mr. Mohammad Sadiq Kaboudvand was severely beaten up,
along with a large number of other prisoners of conscience, by prison guards
and security agents during an inspection of prisoners’ personal effects, and
taken away from Ward 350 of Evin prison. On May 5, he returned to Ward 350.
During this period, he was initially detained in solitary confinement for three
days despite his severe injuries and need of medical care. He was then taken to
Evin prison’s clinic, where he remained until May 5 because bruises and other
signs of beating up were clearly visible on his body, although all other
prisoners had returned from solitary cells by May 1. 
 
According
to Mr. Kaboudvand’s family who visited him in prison on May 5, Mr. Kaboudvand
suffered three broken ribs, two broken toes of left foot, kidney bleeding, and
injuries on his left hand and back of his head. Despite his conditions, Mr.
Kaboudvand has not been provided with adequate medical care. He has suffered
other ailments as well as three strokes in prison in previous years. In its
November 2012 session, the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
declared that Mr. Kaboudvand’s detention was arbitrary.
 
Furthermore,
Mr. Behnam Ebrahimzadeh, a trade unionist and child right activist, who
was also among the prisoners beaten up and transferred to solitary confinement
for two weeks until May 1, was summoned to the Prosecutor’s Office on May 3 but
has not been returned to Ward 350 of Evin prison and his whereabouts remain
unknown.
 
The
Observatory recalls that other human rights defenders who were beaten up
and taken to solitary confinement for several days each included Messrs. Abdolfattah
Soltani, Hossein Ronaghi-Maleki, Saeed Matinpour and Omid
Behrouzi. They all suffered injuries and are in need of medical care.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the cruel and inhuman treatment of Messrs. Kaboudvand,
Ebrahimzadeh, Soltani, Ronaghi-Maleki, Matinpour and Behrouzi by the Iranian
authorities. Furthermore, the Observatory calls on the Iranian authorities to
provide immediate and adequate medical care to these and other prisoners of
conscience, to end their cruel and inhuman treatment, and release them and all other human
rights defenders in Iran immediately and unconditionally. 

For more information, please contact:
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Audrey Couprie: +33 1 43 55 25 1OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41 22 809 49 39 