Zimbabwe:  Zimbabwe: Attack on human rights defenders
February 10, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Zimbabwe / 2000 / FebruaryZimbabwe: Zimbabwe: Attack on human rights defendersURGENT APPEAL- THE  OBSERVATORY  ZWE 001/0002/OBS 006 Attack on human rights defenders Zimbabwe 10th February  2000  The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the FIDH and the OMCT, requests you to intervene with the Zimbabwe authorities with utmost urgency in connection with the following situation.  Brief description of the facts  The Observatory has received information that on the night of 7th February 2000, staff and members of the Zimbabwe Human Rights (ZimRights), member of FIDH were attacked by a group of youths whilst addressing a civic education meeting, in Tafara No.2 Community Hall, on the draft constitution and the forthcoming referendum.  Two members of the association were injured and were treated at Parirenyatwa Hospital.  The youths also smashed the rear screen of the ZimRights vehicle which was being used.    The aim of the meeting was to carry out a national programme to ensure that the citizens could make an informed choice in the coming referendum.  The attackers, who were said to be ZANU (ruling party) youth by the participants, reportedly stated that they were not going to welcome anyone other than the commissioners from the Constitutional Commission to carry out such a national objective.  Furthermore, a ZimRights member of staff has received threats in the form of red paint ‘X’ signs marked on his residence on Tuesday 8th February 2000.  The same threat was made to another person who attended the meeting.  Action requested:  Please write to the Zimbabwe authorities urging them to:  guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all members of ZimRights;  carry out a full and impartial investigation into these events in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  abide by the provisions of the Declaration on  Human Rights Defenders adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9th 1999  ("Declaration on the Rights and Responsibility of individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ") and more particularly article 1 which provides that "Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels" and Article 5 which provides that “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and international levels: (a) To meet or assemble peacefully; (b) To form, join and participate in non-governmental organizations, associations or groups..”  more generally to abide by the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the regional and international covenants ratified by Zimbabwe  Addresses :  President Robert Mugabe Fax: 263 4 79 03 16 / 263 4 73 46 44 Home Affairs Ministry Mr. Dumiso Dabenjwa  Fax: 263 4 72 67 16  Geneva - Paris, 10th February 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, a joint FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.  To contact the Observatory, call the Emergency line New coordinates : Fax :  33 (0) 1 55 80 83 92   Tel FIDH 33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11     OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 E.Mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 