Honduras:  Human rights defenders between a rock and a hard place - Publication of an international fact-finding report
December  1, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Honduras / 2016 / DecemberHonduras: Human rights defenders between a rock and a hard place - Publication of an international fact-finding report





JOINT PRESS RELEASE
 
Publication
of an international fact-finding report
Panama City-Geneva-Paris-Tegucigalpa, December 1, 2016 - Everyday in Honduras, human rights defenders face killings, threats
and criminalisation. The Honduran authorities must show genuine
political willingness to confront this crisis, urge today the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (an OMCT - FIDH partnership), Honduran
human rights organisations CEHPRODEC, CIPRODEH, COFADEH and the International
Platform Against Impunity. This call was launched in the framework of a public hearing
held in Panama City before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR) on the situation of human rights defenders in Honduras.
 
The
predicament of human rights defenders in Honduras has received a great deal of
international attention in 2016, following the murder of Berta Cáceres, an emblematic Lenca indigenous defender. This crime
is just the tip of the iceberg; the high levels of violence directed against
defenders in Honduras have made it one of the most dangerous countries in the
world for human rights defence.
 
Since 2001,
17 defenders have been murdered, although they were beneficiaries of IACHR
precautionary measures - an average of one per year. Since May 2015, the
Observatory has documented 16 killings of human rights defenders - almost one
per month. These figures clearly demonstrate that the situation is becoming
more acute. 
 
Attacks
against defenders tend to go unpunished, largely due to inefficiencies in the
administration of justice as well as a number of other structural factors. Meanwhile,
there have been a great many incidences of defenders being criminalised, and
the judicial system has shown remarkable diligence in pursuing these cases.
According to IACHR, since 2010 there have been 3,064 cases in Honduras where
human rights defenders have been criminalised as a means of intimidation.
 
Our report
concludes that Honduras needs a clearer and more protective national framework,
one which fully recognises the human rights of the rural population, indigenous
peoples and the LGBTI community. This would improve the working environment of defenders
of these rights, and would allow them to enjoy a greater degree of legitimacy
and visibility, especially in situations of conflict over natural resources and
hetero-patriarchal stereotypes respectively.
 
“Until
we find solutions to the structural problems that endanger human rights defenders,
positive measures, like the Protection Law on Defenders, will have little
impact. Discriminatory policies against the LGBTI community, as well as violations
of land rights (including the obligation of consultation of communities affected
by development projects), exacerbate conflicts and reinforce stereotypes -
leaving defenders between a rock and a hard place,” stated
our organisations.
 
Specifically,
in a context where 35% of the country’s land area is set to be soon affected by
837 potential mining projects, the establishment of a clear domestic
legislative framework that shows respect for international human rights
standards related to the use of land would help to channel situations where
there is a risk of conflict through institutional processes based on dialogue,
instead of giving rise to violence and social strife. That is why our
organisations are advocating for a participatory discussion process to be
adopted, with the full involvement of civil society and particularly representatives
of the indigenous and Garifuna people.
 
Furthermore,
the report concludes that structural factors, such as the militarisation of the
State, the lack of a truly independent judiciary, systematic stigmatisation of
defenders and institutional failings on the part of the State with respect to
human rights are evidence that the government lacks any real willingness to
protect those who speak out to defend human rights. 
 
This is
illustrated by the recent and worrying statements by President Juan Orlando
Hernández, in which he irresponsibly criminalised human rights organisations by
assimilating them to gangs. Such statements only contribute to increasing risks
of attacks against defenders.
 
In view of
the conclusions of our report, our organisations formulate specific
recommendations in terms of the necessary structural reforms that were
identified over the course of the study. 
 
The full report is available online:- in English here.- in Spanish here.The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society. 