Belarus:  Judicial harassment against several leaders of the Belarusian Independent Trade Union of Radio and Electronic Industry Workers (REP) and the Belarusian Independent Trade Union (BITU)
August 10, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2017 / AugustBelarus: Judicial harassment against several leaders of the Belarusian Independent Trade Union of Radio and Electronic Industry Workers (REP) and the Belarusian Independent Trade Union (BITU)

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY


BLR 003 / 0817 / OBS 087
Judicial harassment / Arbitrary detention /
Release
Belarus
August 10, 2017

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Belarus.
 
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources of the judicial harassment faced by several
leaders of the Belarusian Independent Trade Union of Radio and Electronic
Industry Workers (REP) and the Belarusian
Independent Trade Union (BITU). During the mass social protests that
sparked in the Spring of 2017 to protest the Presidential Decree No. 3 (“On the
Prevention of Social Parasitism”) which imposes a fee on the unemployed and
partially employed, REP provided legal aid and strongly criticised the Decree
in that it negatively impacted citizens' economic and social rights. REP
gathered over 45,000 signatures against Presidential Decree No. 3 and actively
participated in the peaceful marches held in several major cities of Belarus.
 
On August 2, 2017,
officers of the Financial Investigation Department of the State Control
Committee of Belarus raided and confiscated,
under warrant, computers and financial documents
from REP’s headquarters and BITU’s central office as well as the homes of BITU
Chairman Mr. Mikalai Zimin, BITU Secretary-Treasurer Ms. Sniazhana
Hrynevich, the former editor of REP ‘s website Ms. Natallia Pichuzhkina,
REP’s Chief Accountant Mr. Ihar Komlik and REP Chairman Mr. Henadz Fiadynich.

 
The latter two were
arrested during the raid as suspects of tax evasion. Mr. Henadz Fiadynich was released the
same day after an interrogation, while an investigation against him continues.
At the time of publication of this appeal, Mr. Ihar Komlik remained in
detention charged under Article 243, Part 2, of the Criminal Code for “Tax
evasion on a large scale”. Both face up to seven years in prison with
confiscation of property. 
 
According to the official
information provided by the State Control Committee of Belarus on its website, a
criminal case was opened against Messrs. Henadz
Fiadynich and Ihar Komlik on the ground that “the chairman and
the chief accountant of the trade union opened accounts in foreign banks on
behalf of the trade union with the purpose of personal enrichment and
constantly received big transfers of funds”.
 
The Observatory
recalls that Mr. Ales Bialiatski,
Chairman of the Human Rights Centre “Viasna”, was charged under the same
article in 2011 and was subsequently sentenced to four and a half years in
prison for “tax evasion”. In 2013, the United Nations (UN) Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention concluded that his detention was arbitrary adding that the
“fund raising undertaken by Mr. Bialatski for the purposes of allowing the
very existence of Viasna and continuation of its activities is in conformity
with […] article 20, paragraph 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights”, and concluded that “the criminal provisions
as applied to Mr. Bialatski do not take account of the aforementioned
standards” and that Belarus was therefore in breach of its international
obligations”[1]. The
UN Human Rights Committee (CCPR) subsequently confirmed the arbitrariness of
Ales Bialiatski’s detention on the same grounds[2].
 
The Observatory would like to recall that Belarusian legislation unduly restricts the right to
freedom of association. Indeed, authorities have been arbitrarily refusing to
register civil society organisations, especially those critical of the
Government. Furthermore, citizens involved in the activities of unregistered
associations are liable to criminal prosecution. Moreover, registered
organisations must register all foreign donations received with the Department
of Humanitarian Affairs of the Presidential Administration. The International
Labour Organisation (ILO)[3] has previously called the
Belarusian authorities to amend Presidential Decree No. 24 concerning the
use of foreign gratuitous aid since it prohibits the use of foreign gratuitous
aid for, among others, carrying out public meetings, rallies, street
processions, demonstrations, pickets, strikes and the running of seminars and
other forms of public events [4]. The latter
recommendation has never been brought into effect by Belarus.
 
The Observatory fears
that REP and BITU leaders are being targeted in reprisal for their human rights
activities and calls for the immediate release of Mr. Komlik, as well as ending
all judicial harassment against REP and BITU leaders, in particular Messrs
Komlik and Fiadynich, in so far as it appears to only aim at sanctioning their
peaceful and legitimate human rights activities. 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Belarus,
urging them to:
 
i. Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Ihar Komlik;
 
ii.
Drop all the charges brought against Messrs. Ihar Komlik and Henadz Fiadynich;  
 
iii. Put an end to any form of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Messrs. Ihar Komlik and Henadz Fiadynich as well as all human rights defenders in Belarus;
 
iv. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical
and psychological integrity of Messrs. Ihar Komlik and Henadz Fiadynich ;
 
v. Comply
with all their international obligations to respect the exercise of the citizens'
right to freedom of association, as established in the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, in particular its Article 22, and Article 3 of ILO Convention on Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to
Organise Convention No. 87;
 
vi. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, in particular with its Articles 1, 2, 5 and 12.2;
 
vii. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards
and international instruments ratified by Belarus;
 
viii. Cease any acts of pressure against the
independent trade union movement and abandon the unlawful interference in the
trade unions' activities.
 
Addresses:
 
·               
President Aliaksandr Lukashenka, Belarus, Fax: + 375
172 26 06 10 or + 375 172 22 38 72, Email: contact@president.gov.by
·               
General Prosecutor, Alexander Konyuk, Belarus, Fax: +
375 17 226 42 52
·               
Minister of Justice of Belarus, Mr. Oleg
Slizhevsky, Email: kanc@minjust.by, Fax: + 375 17 200 86 87
·               
Chairman of the State Control Committee of Belarus,
Mr. Leonid V Anfimov, Email:
kgk@mail.belpak.by
·               
H.E. Mr. Yury Ambrazevich, Permanent Mission of
Belarus to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 748 24 51.
Email: mission.belarus@ties.itu.int
·               
H.E. Mr. Aleksandr Mikhnevich, Embassy of Belarus in
Brussels, Fax: + 32 2.340.02.87, Email: belgium@mfa.gov.by
 
Please also write to
the diplomatic representations of Belarus in your respective countries.
 
***
 
Paris-Geneva, August 10, 2017
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The
objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu
, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented
by international civil society.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·           
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·           
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]                 See UN WGAD Opinion, August 31,
2012:
https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G12/183/14/PDF/G1218314.pdf?OpenElement


[2]                
See CCPR Views CCPR/C/112/D/2165/2012, October 24, 2014:
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CCPR/C/112/D/2165/2012&Lang=en


[3]                
ILO is a United Nations agency that brings together governments, employers and
workers representatives, to set labour standards, develop policies and devise
programmes promoting decent work for all women and men. 


[4]                
See International Labour Conference Observation (CEACR) - adopted 2014,
published 104th ILC session (2015), Freedom of Association and Protection of
the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 (No. 87) - Belarus, http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:13100:0::NO::P13100_COMMENT_ID:3186994 