Fighting torture more necessary than ever, UN Human Rights Commissioner tells activists
November 25, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2016 / NovemberFighting torture more necessary than ever, UN Human Rights Commissioner tells activistsGeneva, November 25
(OMCT) – Given the
rising recourse to torture and of political narratives that condone or even
incite it, fighting against this inhumane practice is more necessary than ever,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights told activists and human
rights defenders at a World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) forum.
 
Zeid Ra'ad Al-Hussein addressed the
audience on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the creation of OMCT,
which today welcomed in Geneva some 100 human rights experts, advocacy
specialists, and members of its SOS-Torture network of NGOs from all over the
world to discuss issues ranging from the refugee crisis to innovative methods
of reporting torture because, as OMCT President Yves Berthelot put it: “only joint efforts matter
in the fight against torture.”
 
OMCT and its SOS-Torture network share Zeid
Ra'ad Al-Hussein’s expressed concern that many countries were “returning
to authoritarianism”, human rights defenders around the world were under “enormous
pressure”, and that reprisals and arbitrary detentions were increasingly done
under the pretext of fighting terrorist activities. The High Commissioner said he feared declarations such as
United States President-elect Donald Trump’s campaign declarations might
inspire other Governments to resume resorting to torture, hence exacerbating
the practice around the world. 
 
“So there is no doubt that the fight is on, and
no one should have any illusions about this. This is now a real struggle and we
will depend a great deal on the world organization or the NGOs that are part of
this, with the leadership of everyone here, to stave off an intensification of
what is already a troubling situation.” 
 
Though he has since tempered his stance, Trump before his election
repeatedly endorsed torture against suspected terrorists, saying for instance he would approve of waterboarding
“in a heart beat”. Zeid Ra'ad Al-Hussein, who himself
acknowledged he had
been “extremely vocal” about Trump’s willingness to condone this inhumane
practice during the campaign, said “recent appointments
had left (him) very hesitant as to what is happening.” 
 
As a number of States such as South Africa, Burundi, Gambia and Russia have recently announced they were withdrawing from the
International Criminal Court –– “to shield their leadership from potential
scrutiny and criminal investigations,” according to Zeid Ra'ad Al-Hussein ­– he warned the world was
at a dangerous point where
more Governments were willing to renege their commitments to fight such
violations.
 
“It took two world wars to produce the system
that we have, the codification of customary law, in many respects, the setting
up of a declaration, the establishment of the two-party system, setting up of a
declaration, two world wars to produce it,” he added. “If we find it unwinding
it may be impossible to rewind it. Would we need another world war to shake
ourselves into the realization that we cannot do without it?”
 
Nils Melzer, the new
UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, concurred that torture is still rampant and far from improving. He said
there really is no better solution to torture than a “strong and coherent will
to combat this abuse”.
 
“This is not a time to falter and run, but a
time to renew our spirits and focus and to move ahead,” he said. “Torture is
endemic and can never be eradicated, I have never heard of a doctor who has
never tried to fight a disease because of the prospect of finding a cure is
bleak. Torture is the worst disease that has ever fallen upon society and there
are no other doctors than us.”
 
Among the other speakers present at the opening
of the two-day forum, François
Longchamp, President of the Geneva Canton Conseil d’État, said: “A state
that tortures does not have any self-confidence. It is not in good shape.”
 
“Terrorism
has become a convenient excuse for politicians to limit democracy and people's
rights," said OMCT Vice President
Dick Marty, a former
state prosecutor of the canton of Ticino, a member of the Swiss Council of
States, and is a former member of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe.
 
“Our
biggest enemy has been the fight against terrorism, which has been used as an
excuse for practicing torture, said Jens
Modvig, the new Chair of the Committee Against Torture, the UN body in
charge of examining State’s compliance with the key international instrument
upholding the absolute prohibition of torture, the Convention Against Torture.
 
With offices in Geneva, Brussels, and Tunisia, OMCT
runs programmes to favour State compliance with anti-torture legislation,
support victims of torture, with particular attention to children in detention
and women, and protect human rights defenders worldwide.
 
OMCT was founded in 1986 in Geneva, and functions
also thanks to the support of Switzerland. Ambassador
Heidi Grau, Head Human Security Division
of Switzerland stressed that it was the duty of States to make sure that
torture does not happen and underlined that her country saw as an utmost
priority the protection of human rights and those who uphold them – such as the
dedicated NGOS of the SOS-Torture network.
 
“The fight against torture is an uphill
struggle,” she said. “There will be work to do for at least the next 30 years.”
 
The Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, another
longstanding supporter of OMCT, also expressed its alignment with the
commitment to combat torture – which it too saw as on the rise – and stand
behind all the OMCT network members present at the event. 
 
“The figures are worrying, and
they might not even reflect the true state of things given the difficulty of
collecting testimonies,” said Permanent Representative
Ridha Bouabid. 
 
 
More Zeid Ra'ad
Al-Hussein Quotes
 
For a live stream of
the High Commissioner’s speech please go our Facebook page.
 
“The human rights movement has
achieved a huge amount in the last 70 years, but it also means we have so much
more to lose, so much more to lose, and we have to be very aware of that. And
it can go very quickly. The architecture can disappear very quickly.”
 
“We must make an appeal to our
public, to our people, to resist these centrifugal forces tearing away at the
multilateral system.”
 
 “The
struggle within countries, and internationally, is really on. Because if we
were to assume, I think it’s wrong to always point out the negatives and then
say we haven’t achieved, you know, we have achieved, but the danger is that if
we say that, it leads to complacency because if you lose at the margins,
and when you lose at the margins you don’t know when you can lose everything.” 
 
“I think we need to be vigilant about this and
not take any of the rights we have, the rights others have, for granted and we
have to stand up for the rights of others, if we are going to make this world
somewhat of a safer place. But I feel that no one can not feel the sense of insecurity that globally we are experiencing.
It really imposes on us the demand to act.”
 
“Torture
is an unequivocal crime, prohibited under all circumstances, bar none. No
matter what threat to society, it is unjustifiable and illegal to cause pain to
defenceless men, women and children. Torture is beneath contempt, and unworthy
of any decent society.”
 
"In
many countries, we are also witnessing a growing and shocking narrative that
condones and even incites the use of torture. Torture is portrayed as an
effective short-cut and a lesser evil. But torture is the infliction of pain by
a coward, on men, women and children who are captive and defenceless. It
extracts no useful information, because people in extreme pain will say anything
at all. Torture will bring no good to anyone, but it will inflict great evil on
many individuals – and it will corrupt and warp every society where it is
commanded, inflicted and condoned. As a psychologist working in northern Iraq
recently told me, “Take one member of society, torture him, send him back to
society, and it is as if you had tortured the entire society.”
 “Moreover, there needs to be much
broader understanding of the specific harms and trauma caused by torture, and the assistance required for its
healing. Many migrants, including unaccompanied children, have faced torture,
either before they left, on their journey or even – perhaps most shockingly –
on their arrival. They require careful interviewing and attentive
rehabilitation, and the expertise on these and related issues should be coming
from you. I hope more can be done to disseminate your experience and knowledge
on these topics, including to migrant destination countries. “
 
“We must
strengthen our advocacy and action for a stronger and wider space for action by
civil society – a space that is under threat in many societies. Last year, the
Treaty Body Committees adopted the San José Guidelines Against Intimidation or
Reprisals, which remind States of their responsibility to prevent and
investigate acts of reprisals against people who have cooperated with UN human
rights bodies.”
 
What torture is
Torture is an act of cruelty that denies one’s
fundamental human dignity, leaving profound and indelible traces on individuals
and societies. Specifically, it is done in the name of the State or with the
State’s tacit consent. It is prohibited anywhere and anytime, during all
circumstances; however, torture happens in all areas of the world for both
political and non-political reasons.  
 
Torture finds its most fertile breeding grounds
in places of custody or detention, such as police stations, prisons, or other
places with imbalances of power outside public scrutiny. Anyone can be a victim
of torture, and minorities and marginalized individuals face a heightened risk
due to ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, or economic status.  The
consequences extend beyond direct suffering; survivors often face long-term
medical and psychological effects. 
 
 
For the full programme of the OMCT Forum, please
visit here. Forum list of speakers List of Forum participants.
 
About the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
 
OMCT is short for the
World Organisation Against Torture – in French, as the organization created in
1985 is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. OMCT works for, with and through
an international coalition of over 200 non-governmental organizations – the
SOS-Torture network – fighting torture, summary executions, enforced
disappearances, arbitrary detentions, and all other cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment in the world. 
 
For more
information, please visit: www.omct.org. 
 
For our latest
campaign #HumanAgainstTorture: www.joinhat.org. 
 
Follow #OMCT30Forum this week and read us
online: Twitter, Facebook, https://vimeo.com/omct, Instagram.
 
For all media inquiries: Lori Brumat, OMCT Head of +41 78 823 0669 or lb@omct.org. 