Kazakhstan:  Press Release: UN body declares the detention of Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov arbitrary
August 24, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2017 / AugustKazakhstan: Press Release: UN body declares the detention of Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov arbitrary
Geneva-Paris, August 24, 2017 – The Kazakh
authorities should immediately comply with the Opinion of the UN Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) on the case of Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov
which demands their release and appropriate compensation following a submission
made by the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
(OMCT-FIDH).
 
During its seventy-eight session[1],
the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (UNWGAD), adopted the
Opinion No. 16/2017 qualifying the detention of Messrs. Max
Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov as arbitrary. The UNWGAD recognises that “the
detention of Mr. Bokayev and Mr. Ayanov was due to their exercise of the rights
to freedom of expression and freedom of assembly and was contrary to Article 26
of the Covenant” [2].
 
“The trial against Max Bokayev ant Talgat Ayanov was a
precedent-setting one where the very right to peaceful protest in Kazakhstan
was at stake and their conviction sent a clear message regarding the lack of
commitment to human rights in the country. This Opinion is a chance for
Kazakhstan to revert their shameful conviction and we hope that the authorities
will seize it”,
declared Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
               
The judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr.
Max Bokayev[3],
a prominent civil society activist who heads the NGO “Arlan”[4],
and Mr. Talgat Ayan, a lawyer and activist, has been ongoing since May 17,
2016. On that day, they were both arrested in Atyrau, Western Kazakhstan in
retaliation for their role in peaceful protests against controversial
amendments to Kazakhstan’s Land Code that took place in Kazakhstan in April and
May, 2016, as well as their critical statements on this issue on social media
platforms. In response to the peaceful land reform protests, the Kazakhstani
authorities adopted a predominantly repressive approach including by detaining
well-known civic activists and civil society leaders, as well as by refusing to
grant authorisation for peaceful rallies.
 
On November 28, 2016, Messrs. Max Bokayev and Talgat
Ayanov were convicted to five years in prison and three years of ban to engage
in social activities after their release on charges of “institution of social
discord”, “dissemination of knowingly false information” and “violation of the
procedure of organisation and holding of meetings, rallies, pickets, street
processions and demonstrations”. The conviction was subsequently confirmed on
January 20, 2017, by the Criminal Division of the Atyrau Regional Court and on
February 20, 2017, the Supreme Court dismissed the application for review filed
by the legal defence.
 
“The Observatory has closely followed this case since
the very beginning through various advocacy actions, the monitoring of the
trials and by filing the submission to the UN body. We will not rest until this
Opinion is fully implemented and Max Bokayev and Talgat Ayanov are released and
compensated once and for all”,
declared Dimitris Christopoulos, FIDH President.

The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997
by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of
this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against
human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders
Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
For more information, please contact:
• OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +41 22 809 49 39
• FIDH: Samuel Hanryon: +33 6 72 28 42 94
 



[1]                
The session took place in Geneva between April 19 and 28, 2017.


[2]                 The Opinion is available here: http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Detention/Opinions/Session78/A_HRC_WGAD_2017_16.pdf


[3]                 Mr. Max Bokayev is a member of the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) since 2011, a member of the
“Zhanaozen-2011” International Committee under the “Journalists in Trouble”
Public Foundation, the initiator of the “Azat” Coalition (freedoms and
liberties on the Internet), and an active participant in the National
Preventive Mechanism (NPM) on the prevention of torture in prisons. In 2016, he
was appointed as head of the NPM regional group in Atyrau oblast.


[4]                 Arlan focuses on public scrutiny over governmental
actions and the right of citizens to participate in public life, environmental
protection especially in the context of the operation of oil companies, and
various social issues both at the local and national levels. 