Lesotho:  Harassment and attack against Mr. Lloyd Mutungamiri and other staff members of the Lesotho Times
July 15, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Lesotho / 2016 / JulyLesotho: Harassment and attack against Mr. Lloyd Mutungamiri and other staff members of the Lesotho Times

LSO
001 / 0716 / OBS 062
Killing attempt / Judicial harassment
Lesotho
July 15, 2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint partnership
of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Lesotho.

 
Brief
description of the situation:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continuous
harassment and attack against Mr. Lloyd
Mutungamiri, a Zimbabwean journalist and Editor of the Lesotho Times,
as well as various staff members of the Lesotho Times, in relation to an
article published in the newspaper Issue No. 12 of June 23-29, 2016 about
Lieutenant General Tlali Kamoli, current commander of the Lesotho Defence Force
(LDF)[1].
 
According
to the information received, on July 9, 2016, at around 11pm, Mr. Lloyd
Mutungamiri was attacked by unknown gunmen upon arrival to his home at Ha
Thamae, in Maseru, the capital of Lesotho, who shot at him four times. Mr. Lloyd
Mutungamiri sustained gunshots wounds and a bullet is still lodged in his jaw. He
was first treated at Queen Mamohato Memorial Hospital in Maseru, under constant
police and military watch, before being transferred on July 12 to a hospital in
Bloemfontein, South Africa. His condition remains critical. The soothing of Mr.
Mutungamiri is the high point of a series of continuous harassment and
intimidation he has recently faced, along with various staff members of the Lesotho
Times.
 
On June 23, 2016, at around 5pm, Ms.
Keiso Mohloboli, investigative
journalist at both Lesotho Times and the Sunday Express, received
a phone call from a police officer named Khesa inquiring about her whereabouts.
As soon as she informed the police officer of her location, two police officers
came to pick her up and bring her to Maseru police headquarters, where
Assistant Commissioner of the Police Tutuoane and five other police officers
interrogated her regarding the above-mentioned article she had written about
the Lesotho Defence Force (LDF) Lieutenant
General Tlali Kamoli. At around 10 pm, Ms. Mohloboli was released on the
condition that she writes an apology letter to the LDF Lieutenant General Tlali Kamoli as well as apologised publicly
in the Lesotho Times and Sunday Express newspapers.
 
In the
morning of June 24, 2016, three police officers arrested Ms. Keiso Mohloboli
and Mr. Lloyd Mutungamiri at the Lesotho Times office and brought them
to the Mabote police station, where they were interrogated and asked to
disclose their sources for the above-mentioned article. Ms. Mohloboli and Mr.
Mutungamiri were denied the right to a lawyer despite their requests. Both were
released later that day. While Ms. Mohloboli was released without condition,
Mr. Mutungamiri was released
on condition that he reports himself again on June 27, 2016 with the
Lesotho Times Chief Operations Officer Tshepo Tlapi, owner and Publisher Basildon
Peta and Head of Production Mr. Ngoni. The police confiscated Mr
Mutungamiri’s Zimbabwean passport without any reasons and court order or as
part of bail conditions.
 
On June 27,
2016, Mr. Mutungamiri reported to the police alone, where he was briefly
interrogated before being released. He was also given back his passport.
 
On
July 5, 2016, Mr. Peta and Mr. Mutungamiri reported again to the police. Mr. Basildon Peta
was subsequently taken to the Magistrate Court, where he was charged for
"defamation" and "crimen injuria", under Section 104 of the
Penal Code Act No 6 of 2010.
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the shooting of Mr. Lloyd Mutungamiri and the
ongoing harassment against him, Mr. Basildon Peta, Ms. Keiso Mohloboli and
other staff members of the Lesotho Times, which seems to be aimed at
hindering their legitimate human rights activities, and calls on the
authorities of Lesotho to guarantee in all circumstances their physical and
psychological integrity and to put an end to any kind of harassment - including
at the judicial level - against them.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities of Lesotho asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Lloyd
Mutungamiri, Ms. Keiso Mohloboli,
Mr. Basildon
Peta as well as of all staff members of the Lesotho
Times and all human rights defenders in Lesotho;
 
ii. Carry
out an immediate, thorough, impartial and transparent investigation into the
above-mentioned attack against Mr. Lloyd Mutungamiri in order to identify all
those responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and sanction them
in accordance with the law;
 
iii. Put an
end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr.
Lloyd Mutungamiri, Ms. Keiso Mohloboli,
Mr. Basildon
Peta as well as all human rights defenders in Lesotho, and
ensure in all circumstances that they are able to carry out their
legitimate activities without any hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
iv. Comply
with the national and international legislation safeguarding the independence
of lawyers and protecting them from unlawful interference in their professional
activities;
 
v. Conform
with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially
its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
vi. Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Lesotho.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
H.M. King Letsie III, the Royal Palace Secretariat, P.0. Box 527,
Maseru, Lesotho, Email: sps@palace.org.ls
·    
Hon Dr. Bethuel Pakalitha Mosisili, Prime
Minister of the Kingdom of Lesotho, Fax: +266-22310444
·    
Mr.
Moeketse Malebo, Minister of
Justice,
Human Rights and Correctional Service of the Kingdom of Lesotho, Fax: +266
22310365 Email : info@justice.gov.ls 
·    
Mr. Tlohang Sekhamane, Minister of
Foreign Affairs and International Relations of the Kingdom of Lesotho, Fax: (+266) 2231 0178 / 2231 0642 Email: moeketsim@foreign.gov.ls 
·    
Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Lesotho
to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 900 05 25; Email: mission.lesotho@ties.itu.int
·    
Embassy of Lesotho in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax:  +32 2 705 6779 / 3675 / 3976; Email: lesothobruemb@skynet.be; lesothobrussels@hotmail.com

 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy
of Lesotho in your respective country.



[1]
The article, entitled “Exit Strategy for Kamoli”, was about Lieutenant General
Tlali Kamoli, current commander of the Lesotho Defence Force (LDF), who is accused of plunging Lesotho into
political and security crisis by attempted coup in 2014, kidnapping and
severely torturing of some soldiers suspected of a mutiny plot and killing of
former army commander Lt. Gen Maaparankoe Mahao. 