Thailand:  Drop Defamation Complaints Against Rights Defenders
December  1, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2018 / DecemberThailand: Drop Defamation Complaints Against Rights DefendersDecember 3, 2018 - We, the 16 undersigned organizations,
call on the Thai authorities and Thammakaset Company Limited to ensure that the
criminal and civil defamation complaints brought by the company against human
rights defenders Nan Win and Sutharee Wannasiri for bringing
attention to labor rights violations at a Thammakaset-owned chicken farm in
Thailand do not proceed. The Bangkok Criminal Court is scheduled to hold
preliminary hearings on the criminal defamation complaints on December 3.
The company - a Thai-owned poultry company in
Lopburi Province - should also withdraw all criminal complaints and
unsubstantiated civil complaints against other migrant workers and human rights
defenders for their involvement in peaceful activities protected by
international human rights law. 
We further call on the Thai authorities to
ensure that no person is prosecuted or held criminally liable for defamation
for activities protected under international law. The government should decriminalize
defamation in Thai law and protecting individuals and human rights defenders from
abusive litigation aimed at curtailing the exercise of freedom of expression. 
The complaints relate to a 107-second film produced by the non-governmental organization Fortify
Rights about previous defamation complaints brought by Thammakaset against 14 of
its former workers from Myanmar. In the film, released in October 2017, three former
workers described how the company brought criminal defamation charges against
them after the workers reported labor violations to the Thai authorities,
including unlawfully low wages, failure to pay overtime wages, and confiscation
of their identity documents, including passports. In the film, Fortify
Rights urged that the company drop the criminal charges against the 14 migrant
workers and called on Thailand to decriminalize defamation. 
In October 2018, Thammakaset filed criminal
and civil defamation complaints against Nan Win, one of the migrant workers
featured in the film, and Sutharee Wannasiri, a woman human rights defender and
a former Human Rights Specialist with Fortify Rights. 
If convicted of the criminal defamation
charges filed in the case, Nan Win faces up to four years in prison and up to 400,000
Thai Baht (US$12,100) in fines and Sutharee Wannasiri faces up to six years in
prison and up to 600,000 Thai Baht (US$18,150) in fines. Thammakaset also
brought civil defamation complaints against Sutharee Wannasiri, seeking five
million Thai Baht (US$151,400) in compensation for alleged damage to the company’s
reputation. 
We are deeply concerned by Thammakaset’s continued attempts to misuse laws
in Thailand to stifle the peaceful activities of human rights defenders protected
under international human rights law and Thai law, curtailing the exercise of free
expression in Thailand. 
Prior to these most recent complaints, Thammakaset brought criminal
defamation complaints against 14 migrant workers and former employees in
October 2016, criminal defamation complaints against labor rights activist Andy
Hall in November 2016, theft charges against two migrant workers in August
2017 for removing timesheets from company grounds, and similar alleged theft
charges against woman human rights defender and coordinator of the Migrant
Worker Rights Network (MWRN) Suthasinee Kaewleklai. 
Thailand should act to ensure all persons, including migrant workers and
human rights defenders can freely exercise their rights without fear of
reprisals, including harassment by specious legal complaints through Strategic
Litigation Against Public Participation (SLAPP) lawsuits. The complaints
brought by Thammakaset appear to be designed to intimidate and harass workers
and human rights defenders and constitute an unnecessary and disproportionate
interference on the rights to freedom of expression and access to information. Thai
authorities should pro-actively intervene with Thammakaset management and
discuss the range of steps the Thai government is ready to take against the
company for bringing spurious complaints targeting its workers and rights
defenders at the courts. 
As noted above, we further call on the Thai government to make defamation
exclusively a civil and non-legal infraction. Under international human rights law,
including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to
which Thailand is a party, imprisonment for acts of defamation is inherently
disproportionate and therefore can never be an appropriate sanction. The UN
Human Rights Committee, the body tasked with overseeing the implementation of
the ICCPR, has recommended that
States decriminalize defamation and has clarified that defamation laws must
ensure they do not serve, in practice, to contravene the rights to freedom of
expression and information protected under article 19 of the Covenant and
enshrined under articles 34, 35 and 36 of the 2017 Constitution of Thailand.
While civil measures such as penalties may be appropriate to achieve the lawful
aim of protection of reputation, the imposition of such measures must be
proportionate and strictly necessary to that end. 
The UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders also affirms the obligation
of States to ensure human rights defenders are able to exercise their rights. On December 24, 2017, Thailand joined the latest consensus
UN resolution on human rights defenders, affirming its commitment to respect
the rights of human rights defenders and address adverse human rights impacts
related to their activities. This reinforces
the existing commitments of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, which
affirms that all States must protect the right to seek, obtain, receive and
hold information relation to human rights and to impart that information to
others, and to ensure that human rights defenders can exercise this right. 
To uphold its commitments under domestic and international law, the Thai
authorities should act to prevent further spurious SLAPP complaints being filed
by Thammakaset and other companies that target workers and human rights
defenders. Action to end SLAPP lawsuits is in line with the promoting
responsible, rights respecting business practices that the current Thai
government is supporting as part of developing a national action plan on
business and human rights. We urge Thai authorities in this regard to enact
legislative protections to protect individuals from legal harassment through
SLAPP lawsuits including, but not limited to, instituting effective protective
provisions in the Thai Criminal Procedure Code. 
Under the
ICCPR and international human rights law more generally, Thailand also has an
obligation to protect people from having their rights interfered with by
private actors, including businesses. This protective obligation is affirmed by the UN Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights (UN Guiding Principles) as well as domestic Thai law. In that regard, we further encourage the Thai government to remind
business entities in Thailand of their responsibility to uphold human rights
under international law, including the UN Guiding Principles, as well as domestic
Thai law. In August 2018, Thailand launched a revised draft National Action Plan on Business and Human Rights in
order to implement the UN Guiding Principles.
On its first official visit to Thailand, the UN Working
Group on Business and Human Rights called on the Thai government to “ensure
that defamation cases are not used by businesses as a tool to undermine
legitimate rights and freedoms of affected rights holders, civil society
organizations and human rights defenders.” 
The complaints against Nan Win, Sutharee Wannasiri, and others facing
legal harassment must immediately be dismissed and any further injustice to human
rights defenders stopped. 
Background:
Prior to these most recent complaints, Thammakaset Co. Ltd. brought
criminal defamation charges against 14 migrant workers and former employees in
October 2016 after the workers alleged that the company had committed serious
labor law violations. On November 4, 2016, Thammakaset Co. Ltd. also filed
criminal defamation complaints against Andy Hall for social media posts about
the charges against the workers. In August 2017, Thammakaset Co. Ltd. filed
criminal suits against two migrant workers for alleged theft of their
employment timecards, which they had presented as evidence of labor
violations. In October 2017, Thammakaset
Co. Ltd. filed a criminal suit against Ms. Suthasinee Kaewleklai for a similar
alleged theft of employment timecards. 
In these previous cases, Thai courts rightly dismissed the charges
brought by Thammakaset. In July, the Don Muang Court dismissed the criminal
defamation charges against the 14 migrant workers, finding that the migrant
workers filed the complaints of labor violations to the National Human Rights
Commission of Thailand in good faith and without false information. In
September 2018, the Lopburi Provincial Court also dismissed complaints
regarding the alleged theft of timecards filed by the company against the two
migrant workers and Suthasinee Kaewleklai. In addition, in September, the
Supreme Court upheld an order issued by the Department of Labor Protection and
Welfare in Lopburi Province in August 2016 requiring Thammakaset Co. Ltd. to
pay 1.7 million Thai Baht (US$51,470) in compensation to the 14 workers for
violations of Thailand’s Labor Protection Act.
In a similar case of legal harassment launched by Natural Fruit Company
Ltd. against labor activist Andy Hall in May 2018, Thailand’s Court of Appeal
acquitted him of criminal charges filed against him under criminal defamation
laws and the Computer Crimes Act. In its judgment, the Court importantly ruled
that his research on labor rights violations in Thailand was in the public
interest for the benefit of consumers. 
Signed: 
1.    
Amnesty International 
2.    
Article 19
3.    
ASEAN Parliamentarians
for Human Rights
4.    
Asia Pacific Forum on
Women, Law and Development
5.    
Community Resource
Centre Foundation
6.    
Cross Cultural
Foundation
7.    
Environmental Justice
Foundation
8.    
FIDH (International
Federation for Human Rights), within the framework of the Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
9.    
Fortify Rights
10. Forum Asia
11. Human Rights Watch
12. International
Commission of Jurists
13. International
Federation of Journalists
14. Liberty Shared
15. Migrant Workers Rights
Network16. World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within
the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 