Kazakhstan:  Kazakhstan: arrest and incommunicado detention of Kazakh journalist, Daniar Rahmanovich Ashimbaev
November 28, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kazakhstan / 2001 / NovemberKazakhstan: Kazakhstan: arrest and incommunicado detention of Kazakh journalist, Daniar Rahmanovich AshimbaevCase KAZ 281101 Risk of torture/Incommunicado detention/Freedom of expression   Geneva, November 28, 2001  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kazakhstan.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights, a member of the OMCT network, of the arrest and incommunicado detention of Kazakh journalist, Daniar Rahmanovich Ashimbaev, on November 14th, 2001 in Alma-Aty, Kayakhstan.  Since this date, no further information has been received regarding Mr. Ashimbaev whereabouts and it is feared that he is at risk of torture.  According to the information received, at roughly 5:00pm on November 14th, several militia officers along with unidentified civilians arrested Mr. Ashimbaev, a journalist and editor of the reference book, Who is Who in Kazakhstan, on the street near his home in Alma-Aty.   It is alledged that Mr. Ashimbaev was carrying a drug like substance and was thus arrested on grounds of drug possession.  According to the information received, Mr. Ashimbaev’s arrest is also largely motivated by his alleged defamation against the state, as he is one of the founders of the Russian based web site Aziopa.ru, which has been critical of the present administration.  On November 7th, however, a local pro-government Alma-Aty newspaper, Vremia po, accused Mr. Ashimbaev of cooperating with special agencies, as well as participating in acts of conspiracy against the government, however, no evidence was used in support of this claim.  In response, Mr. Ashimbaev held a public press conference the following day to refute the newspaper’s allegations.  On November 14th, the same newspaper published a similar article against Mr. Ashimbaev.  That same day, Mr. Ashimbaev filed a lawsuit against the newspaper with the regional court of Alma-Aty in order to protect his honor and dignity.  Several hours later, Mr. Ashimbaev was arrested.  According to the information received, neither his family, nor his lawyer has knowledge of Mr. Ashimbaev’s whereabouts.  Mr. Ashimbaev’s wife was refused general visitation rights on the alleged pretext of a rash outbreak that has stricken all pretrial detainment facilities in the town.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is deeply concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Daniar Rahmonovich Ashimbaev due to his incommunicado detention, which appears to have been conducted primarily for political reasons.  Furthermore, OMCT fears that Mr. Ashimbaev may be subjected to torture while in detention.   Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Kazakhstan urging them to:  i.   take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Daniar Rahmonovich Ashimbaev; ii.   intervene with the appropriate authorities in order to secure that Mr. Ashimbaev be allowed to meet with his relatives and lawyers; iii.  guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, Office of the President, 11 Beibitshilik Street, 473000, Kazakhstan.  Fax: [7] (3172) 32 72 74  Prime Minister Kazymzhomart Tokayev, Office of the Prime Minister, 10 Beibitshilik Street, 473000, Kazakhstan.  Fax: [7] (3172) 32 49 02  Please also write to the embassies of Kazakhstan in your respective country.  Geneva, November 28, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 