Azerbaijan:  Ongoing judicial harassment against prominent human rights lawyer Mr. Khalid Bagirov
July 17, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JulyAzerbaijan: Ongoing judicial harassment against prominent human rights lawyer Mr. Khalid Bagirov


 

URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
AZE 004 / 0215 / OBS 009.1
Disciplinary harassment
Azerbaijan
July 17, 2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Azerbaijan.
 
New information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial
harassment against Mr. Khalid Bagirov, prominent human rights
lawyer who represented human rights defenders Ms. Leyla Yunus[1],
Mr. Arif Yunusov[2]
and Mr. Rasul Jafarov[3].
 
According
to the information received, on July 10, 2015, the Nizami District Court upheld
the request filed by the Presidium of the Azerbaijan Bar Association (ABA) to
order the disbarment of Mr. Bagirov for alleged inappropriate conduct in court.

 
Mr.
Bagirov was notified of the date of the hearing on the eve of July 10. As a consequence,
he did not have sufficient time to prepare his defence and alert potential
independent trial observers, which constitutes a violation of his right to a
fair trial. 
 
During
the hearing, Mr. Bagirov filed a motion requesting the suspension of the trial
pending the Baku Administrative-Economic Court No. 2 (BAEC2)'s review of his
lawsuit against the ABA Presidium. Mr. Bagirov argued in his lawsuit before the
BAEC2 that the Presidium had no legal personality, and therefore no
civil-procedural action capacity (as provided under Article 259.0.2 of the
Civil Procedure Code of the Azerbaijan Republic[4])
to file a lawsuit. The motion was rejected by the judge. 
 
Mr.
Bagirov's motion to remove the judge was dismissed by the judge himself hereby
violating the Сode of Arbitration Procedure which provides that the removal of
a judge has to be reviewed by the Chairman of the Court. 
 
Finally,
the Court rejected Mr. Bagirov's request to suspend the hearing until the
following week in order to prepare his closing arguments. The judge only gave
him 15 minutes for preparation. Shortly after Bagirov's arguments, the court
upheld the request of the ABA Presidium. 
 
On
July 13, 2015, the Baku Administrative-Economic Court No. 2 dismissed Mr.
Bagirov's petition against the ABA Presidium. The trial lasted seven
minutes.   
 
On
July 13, 2015, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) informed Mr. Bagirov
about its decision to study his application as a priority. Mr. Bagirov had filed a complaint to the ECtHR in January 2015
following his suspension from ABA requesting the court to recognize violation of his rights under
Article 10 (freedom of expression) of the European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
 
The Observatory is deeply concerned about the
number of violations of fair trial standards that occurred during both
hearings, and deems that these actions only aim at hindering his legitimate
professional activities as a human rights lawyer. The Observatory highlights
that the accusations against Mr. Bagirov and the judicial harassment he
has been facing bring serious concerns on the independence of the Azerbaijan
Bar Association (ABA) as well as on its ability to protect the interests of the
legal profession in the country. 
 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern
about the disbarment of Mr. Bagirov as the number of human rights lawyers
in the country is decreasing alarmingly thus denying human rights defenders and
activists their right to legal defense.  
 
Background information:
 
In
the autumn of 2014, Mr. Bagirov was removed from defending his client Ms.
Leyla Yunus. Mr. Bagirov was not immediately informed about the decision until
he was denied visit to Ms. Yunus on November 5, 2015. The management of the
remand facility explained the denial by referring to a letter from the Investigation Department on Grave Crimes of the
General Prosecutor's Office informing
about K. Bagirov's dismissal. Mr. Bagirov was not shown the letter nor informed
about the reasons of the removal.
 
On
December 10, 2014, the ABA Presidium suspended his lawyer’s license for alleged
inappropriate conduct in court and filed a lawsuit requesting his disbarment,
thus depriving him from the right to defend his other clients, including
Messrs. Yunusov and Jafarov, as well as opposition leader Ilgar Mammadov[5].
Mr. Bagirov was also planning to defend human rights defender Intigam
Aliyev[6].

 
During a preliminary hearing scheduled on
February 2, 2015 before Nizami District Court, all the motions filed by
Mr. Bagirov were rejected.
 
First, the Court refused to grant him the
5-10 minutes break he requested to familiarise himself with the protocols of
the preparatory hearing.
 
Secondly, Mr. Bagirov argued that while
the ABA is a legal entity according to Article 9 part 2 of the Law on Lawyers
Activities, its Presidium has no legal personality, and therefore does not
possess any civil-procedural action capacity (as provided under Article 259.0.2
of the Civil Procedure Code of the Azerbaijan Republic). However, the Court also
rejected this motion.
 
Thirdly, Mr. Bagirov’s request to
replace the wrong plaintiff, i.e. the Presidium, by the valid plaintiff, i.e.
the ABA itself as a legal entity, was not satisfied either. Rather, the Court
followed the Presidium representative’s comment that the lawsuit had been filed
by the valid plaintiff.
 
Finally, Mr. Bagirov further
demonstrated that the present case did not fall within the jurisdiction of
civil courts as defined by the Azerbaijan Civil Procedure Code, and requested
the Nizami District Court to refer the matter to the Baku Administrative
Economic Court. However, his argument was also rejected by the Court. Several
hearings were postponed. 
This is not the first time that the ABA has
attempted to revoke Mr. Bagirov’s license. In August 2011, his license was
suspended for a year after he was accused of “spreading information
discrediting the police”. 
 
Action requested:
Please write to the authorities in Azerbaijan,
urging them to:
 
I. Immediately review and cancel the decision
to disbar Mr. Khalid Bagirov, immediately return his lawyer’s license, and
put an end to any obstacle to the exercise of his professional activities;
 
II. Put an end to any kind of harassment -
including at the disciplinary level - against Mr. Khalid Bagirov, and more
generally against all human rights defenders in Azerbaijan;
 
III. Conform with the provisions of all
international and European human rights instruments ratified by Azerbaijan,
including article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, which states that “all persons shall be equal before the courts and the
tribunals” and that “everyone shall be entitled to a fair and public hearing by
a competent, independent and impartial tribunal established by law”, as well as
article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,
which states that “everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a
reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law”;
 
IV. Conform with the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
 Article 1, which states that “everyone
has the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive
for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at
the national and international levels”;
 Article 5, which underscores the right
of every individual to form, join, and participate in non-governmental
organisations; 
 Article 11, which provides that
“Everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to the
lawful exercise of his or her occupation or profession. Everyone who, as a
result of his or her profession, can affect the human dignity, human rights and
fundamental freedoms of others should respect those rights and freedoms and
comply with relevant national and international standards of occupational and
professional conduct or ethics”; and
 Article 12.2, which provides that the
State shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others,
against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his
or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”;
 
V. Ensure in all circumstances respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Azerbaijan.
 
Addresses:
 
• Mr. Ilham
Aliyev, President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Office of the President of the
Republic of Azerbaijan, 19 Istiqlaliyyat St., Baku AZ1066, Azerbaijan, Fax:
(+994) 12 492 06 25, (+994) 412 92 28 68, E-mail: office@pa.gov.az,
office@apparat.gov.az
• Mr. Zakir
Garalov, Prosecutor General of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Prosecutor’s Office,
7 Nigar Rafibeyli St., Baku, Azerbaijan, Fax: (+994) 12 492 06 82, (+994) 12
492 26 63, E-mail: z.qaralov@prosecutor.gov.az, info@prosecutor.gov.az
• Mr. Eldar
Mahmudov, Minister of National Security, Ministry of National Security of the
Republic of Azerbaijan, Parliament Avenue 14, Baku AZ1006, Azerbaijan, Fax:
(+994) 12 493-76-22, E-mail: cpr@mns.gov.az
• Mr. Ramil
Usubov, Minister of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Internal Affairs of the
Azerbaijani Republic, Fax: (+994) 12 492 45 90
• Mr. Elmar
Mammadyarov, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Azerbaijan, E-mail: katiblik@mfa.gov.az
• Mr.
Fikrat F. Mammadov, Minister of Justice in Azerbaijan, Inshaatchilar Prospekti,
1 Baku, Azerbaijan, e-mail: contact@justice.gov.az; Fax (+994) 12 430 09 81
• H.E. Mr.
Murad N. Najafbayli, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the United
Nations in Geneva, Route des Fayards 237, CH-1290 Versoix, Switzerland, Fax:
(+41) 22 901 18 44, E-mail: geneva@mission.mfa.gov.az
• Embassy
of Azerbaijan in Brussels, Avenue Moliere 464, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax:
(+32) 2 345 91 85
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Azerbaijan in your
respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in
Azerbaijan.
 
***
Paris-Geneva,
July 17, 2015
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
• E-mail:
Appeals@fidh-omct.org
• Tel and
fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
• Tel and
fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]      Ms.
Leyla Yunus is the Director of the Institute of Peace and Democracy (IPD) and a
member of OMCT General Assembly. She is currently in pre-trial detention and
her trial is ongoing.


[2]      Mr. Arif
Yunusov is the Head of the Conflictology Department of IPD. He is currently in
pre-trial detention and his trial is ongoing.


[3]      Mr.
Rasul Jafarov is the Head of the Human Rights Club and was an active
participant in "Sing for Democracy" and "Art for Democracy"
campaigns. He is currently in arbitrary detention and his appeal trial is
ongoing.


[4]      This article provides that “the court
shall leave petition without consideration where a petition is filed by a
person lacking action capacity”.


[5]                
Mr. Mammadov is currently serving a seven-year prison sentence for “organising
mass disturbances” and “resisting the police”. On May 22, 2014, the European
Court of Human Rights held Azerbaijan responsible for violating articles 5§1
§4, 6§2 and 18 of the Convention in arresting and sentencing Mr. Mammadov.


[6]                
Mr. Intigam Aliyev is a human rights lawyer, Head of the Legal Education
Society. He is currently in arbitrary detention and his appeal trial is
ongoing. 