Brazil:  Concerns about the postponement of the trial to establish the criminal responsibility of the perpetrators of Mr. Manoel Bezerra de Mattos’ assassination
November 22, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Brazil / 2013 / NovemberBrazil: Concerns about the postponement of the trial to establish the criminal responsibility of the perpetrators of Mr. Manoel Bezerra de Mattos’ assassination

BRAZIL:
Open Letter to the Minister of Justice, Mr. José Eduardo Cardozo, and the
President of the Superior Court of Justice of Brazil, Mr. Felix Fischer
 
Attn
Mr. José Eduardo Cardozo 
Minister
of Justice of Brazil 
Email:
sic@mj.gov.br 
Fax:
+ 55 61 2025 3587
 
Mr. Felix Fischer
President
of the Superior Court of Justice of Brazil
Email: presidencia@stj.jus.br
Fax: +55
61 3319 7040
 
Geneva-Paris,
November 22, 2013
 
Re: Concerns about the
postponement of the trial to establish the criminal responsibility of the
perpetrators of Mr. Manoel Bezerra de Mattos’ assassination
 
Your Excellencies,
 
The
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for
Human Rights (FIDH), in the framework of their joint programme, the Observatory
for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, are respectfully writing to you
to express concern regarding the deferral of the initiation of the trial that would
determine the criminal responsibility of Messrs. José da Silva Martins, Sérgio
Paulo da Silva, Flávio Inácio Pereira, Cláudio Roberto Borges and José Nílson
Borges, the five alleged perpetrators of the assassination on January 24, 2009 of
Mr. Manoel Bezerra de Mattos, a lawyer and human rights
defender who denounced the actions of death squads that operate on the border
between Paraiba and Pernambuco States.
 
Although the trial was expected to be held on November 18,
2013, it was postponed until December 5, 2013 due to the lack of the needed
quorum of 15 present jurors. Out of 25 pre-selected jurors, seven were not
notified because their addresses were missing and out of the 18 that were
present on November 18, six asked for an exemption based on health reasons. The
President of the Human Rights Commission of the Brazilian Bar Association in
Paraíba hinted that the members of the jury who requested a dispensation would
be scared of participating in such an emblematic process, which could set a precedent
in the country.
 
The Observatory recalls that in August 2009, the
Attorney General of the Republic accepted to transfer the investigation and
trial for the assassination of Mr. Manoel Bezerra de Mattos to Federal Justice.
In October 2010, the Supreme Court of Justice decided to federalise the case, through
the Incidente de Deslocamento de Competência (IDC), which allows serious
violations of human rights to be tried by Federal Courts rather than by State
Courts, pursuant Article 109 of the Brazilian Federal Constitution. This became
the first case to be federalised in Brazil, a big milestone. 
 
The Observatory further recalls that despite the fact that Mr. Manoel Bezerra
de Mattos had been benefiting from Inter-American Commission of Human Rights (IACHR)
precautionary measures since 2002, Brazil had not implemented them in a
satisfactory manner. Moreover, organisations that played a key role in the
federalisation of the investigation into the killing of Mr. Bezerra Mattos in Itame city, such as the human rights non-governmental organisations
Dignitatis - Technical Advisory People (Dignitatis- Assessoria Técnica
Popular) and Global Justice (Justiça Global), have been harassed as reprisals[1].
 
The Observatory expresses its concerns about the delay of the above-mentioned
hearing and wishes to emphasise that this is an extraordinary opportunity for
the Brazilian Government to show its commitment to respect for human rights,
acknowledgement of the importance of the work of human rights defenders and
determination to end impunity in Brazil, in conformity with international human
rights standards and Brazil's obligations.
 
Accordingly, the Observatory calls upon the Brazilian
authorities to take all necessary steps to ensure that those responsible for the
assassination of Mr. Manoel Bezerra de Mattos are brought before an
independent tribunal and that the sanctions provided by the law are
applied to them; as well as to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Bezerra
de Mattos’ family and, in general, of all human rights defenders in Brazil.
 
More generally, the Observatory calls upon the authorities
in Brazil to conform with the provisions of the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on
December 9, 1998, and to ensure in all circumstances the respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Brazil.
 
We
express our sincere hope that you will take these considerations and requests
into account. 
 
Yours
sincerely,
 



Gerald Staberock
OMCT Secretary General 


Karim Lahidji
FIDH President



 



[1] See
Observatory Urgent Appeal BRA 001 / 0311 / OBS 048, March 25, 2011 and Annual
Report 2011. 