Nepal:  Nepal: Arbitrary arrest and disappearance of Ms. Sarita Dhungana
December  1, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2005 / DecemberNepal: Nepal: Arbitrary arrest and disappearance of Ms. Sarita DhunganaCase NPL 011205Arbitrary arrest / disappearance  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Nepal.   Brief Description of the SituationThe International Secretariat of OMCT has received information confirmed by the Informal Sector Service Centre (INSEC), a member of the OMCT network, that Ms. Sarita Dhungana, 19 years old, a farmer and permanent resident of Nuwakot District Balkot VDC Ward No. 4, was arrested on November 23rd 2005 by security forces and her whereabouts are currently unknown.  According to the information received, on 23rd November 2005, at around 2pm, whilst she was buying some goods at a grocery store of Chauthe VDC, she was arrested by a group of 35-40 army personnel. She was then taken to Birendra Secondary School with her arms tied behind her back and kept there for the first night. The following day, she was taken to Thulobesi of Kiwanpur VDC and held one night. On November 25th she was reportedly taken to khanikhola Base Camp. According to her brother, he was told informally by army personnel that Ms. Dhungana was in Chauni Barrack, Kathmandu. However, her whereabouts are still unknown and have not been confirmed. According to the information received, Ms. Sarita Dhungana supported the Nepal Communist Party (Maoist).  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Dhungana. Action Requested:Please write a letter to the authorities in Nepal urging them to: i.	Immediately locate the whereabouts of Ms. Dhungana and guarantee her physical and psychological integrity; ii.	Order the immediate release of Ms. Dhungana in the absence of valid legal charges, and if such charges exist, to ensure that she be given a prompt and fair trial, in which her procedural rights are guaranteed at all times; iii.	Order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards. Addresses:His Majesty King Gyanendra, Narayanhity Royal Palace, Durbar Marg, Kathmandu, Nepal  c/o Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Nepal to the United Nations, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 733 27 22; E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int Mr. Nain Bahadur Khatri, Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email: nhrc@ntc.net.np  Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.  Geneva, 1st December, 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 