Press release: International Day in Support of Victims of Torture - The absolute prohibition of torture and ill-treatment must now become a reality!
June 26, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2011 / JunePress release: International Day in Support of Victims of Torture - The absolute prohibition of torture and ill-treatment must now become a reality!press release 26th june 20112 pages / 24 KB
Geneva, 26th of
June 2011. On the occasion of the International Day in Support
of Victims of Torture, the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and its SOS-Torture Network are joining
together on the International Campaign for the Absolute Prohibition of Torture
and Ill-treatment to denounce current attempts by some Governments to erode the
absolute legal prohibition of torture, and to strongly reaffirm, on this day
dedicated to the victims of torture and ill-treatment, that respect for human
dignity means that such practices are forbidden under all circumstances. 
On the 15th of June 2011, the European Parliament’s Subcommittee on Human Rights dedicated a public hearing to the OMCT to mark
the International Day in
Support of Victims of Torture that will take place on the 26th of June,
during which Mr. Eric Sottas, OMCT Secretary General, and Ms. Hina Jilani, Former
Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary General on the Situation
of Human Rights Defenders, human rights lawyer and founding member of the Human
Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP), were invited to speak.
«More than 20 years after the
entry into force of the Convention against Torture, an increasing number of
governments are allowing the practice of torture to spread, and public opinion
appears to tolerate the practice», recalled Ms. Heidi Hautala (Greens/EFA, FI), Chairperson of the
Subcommittee on Human Rights, at the opening of the hearing.
«During the
first decade of this century, we have witnessed a change in discourse within
democracies in relation to the use of torture and particularly of
ill-treatment», stressed Mr. Eric Sottas. 
Serious human rights violations, including torture and
ill-treatment, have been and are still today perpetrated with almost total
impunity, within the framework of the « war against terrorism » and/or in the
name of national security.
Moreover, too
often, public opinions, who are supposed to ensure greater respect for human
rights, have allowed themselves to be persuaded to tolerate practices
tantamount to torture and ill-treatment. 
«It is urgent to
mobilise all political stakeholders, as well as judges and the public opinion,
to avoid that the drifts that were observed undermine the principles and
safeguards entailed in the UN Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
and in other related international instruments», recalled Mr. Eric Sottas during the hearing. 
In the opinion of Ms. Hina Jilani, another alarming trend is
the military response to terrorism - through practices such as incommunicado
and secret detention, or forced disappearances, which are potentially allowing
torture insofar as they cannot be denounced or proven. This militarisation and
the expanded role of intelligence services in countering terrorism have lead to
«parallel
systems of justice, with very limited judicial and civil scrutiny», said Ms.
Jilani.
Moreover, according to Ms. Jilani, in most countries
"there is no legal basis for the transfer to secret services of power to
interrogate and detain", which de
facto guarantee the immunity of the perpetrators, who cannot be easily
identified or hold legally accountable for secret acts.
Regarding secret services, Mr. Eric Sottas replied: «We need to
ensure an effective control on intelligence services. Clear standards need to
be established and internationally adopted in order to regulate the obligations
of the security services, particularly regarding the use of information. It is
not enough to prohibit the use of information that are known to have been
possibly obtained under torture. It is also fundamental to ensure that each
intelligence service investigates on sources who are providing information to
them and in making sure that these information have not been obtained under
torture.»
It is in this
perspective that the OMCT has decided to launch a Campaign for the Absolute
Prohibition of Torture and Ill-treatment, notably through the Manifesto
entitled “Nothing can justify torture under any circumstances”, which has already been signed by more than 2,000
signatories, including ten laureates of the Nobel Prize. In order to raise
awareness and mobilise public opinions all over the world against such
practices, members of the SOS-Torture Network will organise specific activities
on the 26th of June that will be published on OMCT’s website. 
Indeed, the 26th
of June should not only serve to remind States of their obligations to respect
and guarantee the absolute prohibition of torture and ill-treatment, but it
also should remind the public at large to mobilise in order to denounce such
practices.
Finally, on this day
dedicated to the victims of torture and ill-treatment, OMCT also wishes to
recall that, too often, the victims fail to obtain justice and reparation. Yet,
both are instrumental in the restoration of victims’ dignity. 
For further information, please contact: 
Eric Sottas, Secretary General, Tel. +41 22 809 49 39
Gerald Staberock, Deputy Secretary General, Tel. +41
(0) 79 377 54 46
For further
information on OMCT’s Campaign:
“Nothing can justify torture under any
circumstances”
www.omct.org/international-campaigns/campaign-prohibition-torture/manifesto/page of OMCT about the June 26th 