Belarus:  Imminent expulsion of human rights defender Andrey Yurov
March 18, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2011 / MarchBelarus: Imminent expulsion of human rights defender Andrey Yurov

URGENT 
APPEAL – THE OBSERVATORY
BLR 
004 / 0311 / OBS 038
Expulsion 
/ Obstacles to freedom of movementBelarus

March 
18, 2011
The 
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of 
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation 
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your intervention in the following situation in 
Belarus.
Description 
of the situation:
The 
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the imminent expulsion of 
Mr. Andrey Yurov, a Russian citizen, Head of the International 
Observation Mission of the Committee on International Control over the Situation 
with Human Rights in Belarus. [1]

According 
to the information received, on March 16 around 9 p.m., the apartment of the 
Head of the International Observation Mission in Minsk, which operates under the 
mandate of the Committee on International Control over the Human Rights 
situation in Belarus, was visited by the Belarusian police and migration 
service.
Mr. 
Andrey Yurov, who was present at this time, was taken to the "Soviet" police 
station of Minsk. No information could be obtained as to whether a mandate was 
handed to him. He 
was released from custody on March 17, 2011 at 11 a.m. but was reportedly given 
a document by a police officer, mentioning that the Belarusian authorities will 
not initiate proceedings against him for “illegal crossing of state borders by a 
person who previously was denied entry into the country” (Article 371.2 of the 
Criminal Code), but requesting him to leave Belarus within 24 hours, as he was 
included on a list of persons, reportedly drafted by KGB (the Belarusian State 
Security Agency), whose entry to the territory of Belarus is forbidden or 
undesirable.On 
March 17, 2011, the Observatory was informed that Mr. Yurov intended to appeal 
his persona non grata status in Belarus.
The 
Observatory was further informed that on March 9, 2011, the entry into Belarus 
was denied by a border guard to Mr. Maxim Kitsyuk, a representative of 
the International Observation Mission from 
Ukraine, 
as he was trying to cross the Ukrainian – Belarusian 
border.
The 
Observatory recalls that Ukrainian citizens - like Russian ones - do not need a 
visa to enter Belarus. The Observatory therefore fears that such obstacles to 
freedom of movement merely aim at hindering Messrs. Yurov and Kitsyuk human 
rights activities in the framework of the Committee on International Control 
over the Situation with Human Rights in Belarus.
The 
Observatory recalls that Belarus must 
conform to Article 13 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR) to which Belarus is a party since November 12, 1973, 
as well as to the United 
Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly 
on December 9, 1998.
Actions 
requested:
The 
Observatory urges the authorities of Belarus to:
i. 
Put an end to the obstacles to freedom of movement of Messrs. Yurov and Kitsyuk, 
as they seem to merely aim at sanctioning their human rights 
activities;
ii. 
Refrain from expulsing Mr. Yurov, as this seems to only aim at sanctioning his 
human rights activities;
 
iii. 
Put an end to all forms of harassment against the above-mentioned human rights 
defenders, and more generally against all human rights defenders in the country, 
and ensure that they are able to carry out their work freely without any 
hindrances all circumstances;iv. 
Comply with all the provisions of the ICCPR and in particular its Article 
13 which state that “An alien lawfully in the territory of a State Party to the 
present Covenant may be expelled there from only in pursuance of a decision 
reached in accordance with law and shall, except where compelling reasons of 
national security otherwise require, be allowed to submit the reasons against 
his expulsion and to have his case reviewed by, and be represented for the 
purpose before, the competent authority or a person or persons especially 
designated by the competent authority.” 
v. 
Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, in particular with:
- 
its Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in 
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and 
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and 
international levels”, 
- 
its Article 
12.2, which states that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure 
the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in 
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or 
de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a 
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the 
present Declaration”;
vi. 
Comply with the provisions of the Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the 
2nd Conference on the Human Dimension of the Cooperation and Security 
Conference in Europe (CSCE) (1990), and uphold in all circumstances the 
principles and provisions enshrined in the international and regional human 
rights instruments ratified by Belarus and which, in particular, guarantee 
freedoms of association, demonstration, expression and opinion, in particular 
the European Convention on Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights;
vii. 
More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and 
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by 
Belarus.
Addresses:
·President 
Alexander Lukashenko, ul .Karla Marksa, 38, 220016 Minsk, Belarus, Fax: + 375 
172 26 06 10 or + 375 172 22 38 72, Email: infogrp@president.gov.by 

·Administration 
of the President of Belarus
·Head 
of the Administration of the President of Belarus, Mr. Vladimir Vladimirovich 
Makei, Ul. K. Marksa 34, 220016 Minsk, Fax: + 375 17 
226-06-10
·General 
Prosecutor, Grigory Alekseevich Vasilevich, Internatsionalnaya str. 22, 220050 
Minsk, Belarus, Fax: + 375 17 226 42 52
·Minister 
of Justice of Belarus, Mr. Viktor Grigorevich Golovanov, Ul. Kollektornaya, 
10, 220004 Minsk, Belarus, Email kanc@minjust.by 
·President 
of the Supreme Court of Belarus, Mr. Valentin Olegovich Sukalo, Ul. Lenina, 
28, 220030 Minsk, Belarus, Email: scjustrb@pmrb.gov.by
·Permanent 
Mission of Belarus to the United Nations in Geneva, 15 avenue de la paix, 1211 
Geneva 20, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 748 24 51. Email: 
mission.belarus@ties.itu.int
·Embassy 
of Belarus in Brussels, 192 avenue Molière, 100 Ixelles, Belgium, Fax : + 32 
2.340.02.87, Email : embbel@skynet.be
Please 
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Belarus in your respective 
country.
***
Paris-Geneva, 
March 18, 2011
Kindly 
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your 
reply. 
To 
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
E-mail: 
Appeals@fidh-omct.org

Tel 
and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
Tel 
and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]              On December 27, 2010 the Committee 
on International Control over the Human Rights Situation in Belarus was 
established by a coalition of non-governmental organisations of the OSCE region. 
It was triggered by the need to address flagrant and systematic human rights 
violations after Presidential elections in Belarus. It demands, inter alia, 
freedom from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, the right to 
fair trial, freedom of assembly and association, and freedom of speech. It is 
engaged in monitoring and controlling over the observation of fundamental human 
rights, and the conditions in which human rights defenders and human rights 
organisations operate in the country. See http://hrwatch-by.org. 