Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Arbitrary arrest of the leader of the Myanmar Farmers Union Ms. Su Su Nway
December 14, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2015 / DecemberMyanmar (ex-Burma): Arbitrary arrest of the leader of the Myanmar Farmers Union Ms. Su Su Nway​















URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
MMR 004 / 0715 / OBS 061.2
Arbitrary
detention /
Judicial
harassment
Burma / Myanmar
December 14, 2015
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Burma / Myanmar.
 
New
information: 
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary arrest of
the leader of the Myanmar Farmers Union Ms. Su Su Nway.
 
According
to the information received, on December 8, 2015, Su Su Nway appeared before a
court in Pyin Oo Lwin Township, Mandalay Division, to face charges under
Article 18 of the Act on the Right to Peaceful Assembly and Peaceful Procession
for organising an unauthorised protest against land confiscation in mid-2014. 
 
Police
arrested Ms. Su Su Nway on December 6, 2015, at around 4:30 pm, after
participating in a human rights workshop for local farmers at Pyin Oo Lwin Eden
Hotel. She was then taken to the Pyin Oo Lwin Myoma
police station.
 
Eight farmers who took part in the 2014 protest
were also charged under Article 18 of the Act on the
Right to Peaceful Assembly and Peaceful Procession. However, Ms. Su Su
Nway is the only one to remain in custody. 
 
The Observatory condemns the new arrest,
judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Ms. Su Su Nway, which seem
merely aimed at sanctioning her peaceful human rights activities, and calls
upon the Burmese authorities to release her immediately and unconditionally.

Background
information:
 
In early
June 2015, police in Intagaw, Pegu Township, Pegu
Division, informed Ms. Su Su Nway that
a local Army commander, Captain Hein Zaw, had filed charges against her for
trespassing. She had refused to answer the charge.

On
July 23, 2015, police in Intagaw arrested Ms. Su Su Nway after she had met with
farmers seeking the return of land that the military had confiscated from them
in Nyaunglebin Township in 2003. Ms. Su Su Nway was on her way back to Rangoon
when she was arrested.
 
The
same day, a court in Pegu Division charged Ms. Su Su Nway under Article 447 of
the Criminal Code (trespassing) and sent her to Pegu Prison. Ms. Su Su Nway
denied the charges and turned down bail, which had been granted by the court.
 
On August 17, 2015, Ms. Su Su Nway was released from Pegu Prison, Pegu
Division, on time served.

Ms. Su Su Nway had previously been detained on
various occasions between 2005 and 2007. She was eventually released along with
hundreds of other political prisoners during a presidential amnesty allowed on
October 12, 2011.

Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the Burmese authorities, urging them to:
 
i.              
Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of Ms.
Su Su Nway, and all human rights defenders in Burma;
 
ii.             
Immediately and
unconditionally release Ms. Su Su Nway since her detention is arbitrary and
only aimed at sanctioning her human rights activities;
 
iii.           
Put an end to acts of
any acts of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Su Su Nway and all human rights defenders in Burma;
 
iv.            
Comply with all the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular with its:
 
-       
Article 1, which
stipulates that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-       
Article 12.1, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-       
Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v.             
More generally, ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and ratify
international and regional human rights instruments. 

Addresses:
 
·      
U Thein Sein, President
of Myanmar, President Office, Office No.18, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR
·      
Lt Gen Ko Ko, Minister
for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No. 10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR
·      
U Win Mra, Chairman of
the Myanmar National Human Rights Commission, 27 Pyay Road, Hline Township,
Yangon, Republic of the Union of Myanmar; Email: chmyanmarnhrc@gmail.com
·      
Dr. Tun Shin, Attorney
General, Office of the Attorney General, Office No. 25, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR;
Email: ago.h.o@mptmail.net.mm
·      
U Tun Tun Oo, Chief
Justice, Office of the Supreme Court, Office No. 24, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Email:
scunion@mptmail.net.mm
·      
Maj Gen Zaw Win,
Director General, Myanmar Police Force, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No.
10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR
·      
H.E. Mr. Maung Wai,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative to the
United Nations in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 47, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41
22 732 89 19, +41 22 732 73 77, Email: mission@myanmargeneva.org
·      
Embassy of Myanmar in
Brussels, Boulevard Général Wahis 9, 1030 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 (0)32 2
705 50 48, Email: mebrussels@skynet.be
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Burma in your respective
countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, December 14, 2015
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·    
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·    
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1
43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·    
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22
809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29 