Malaysia:  Escalating harassment of several members of SUARAM
October 19, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2012 / OctoberMalaysia: Escalating harassment of several members of SUARAMMYS 001 / 1012 / OBS 095Ongoing harassment /Obstacles to freedom of associationMalaysiaOctober 19, 2012The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and 
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new 
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following 
situation in Malaysia.New information:

The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the ongoing
 and escalating harassment of several members of Suara Rakyat Malaysia 
(SUARAM).

According to the information received, between September 19 and 
October 4, 2012, several leaders and staff of SUARAM, including Dr. Kua Kia Soong, Director, Dr. Yeoh Seng Guan, Director, Ms. Nalini Elumalai, Executive Director, Ms. Danapakiam Savari, Finance Manager, Ms. Cynthia Gabriel, secretariat and former FIDH Vice President, Mr. Arumugam Kalimuthu, Chairman, Mr. Sivarasa Rasiah, Dr. Mohd Nasir bin Hashim, co-founders, deceased Fan Yew Teng and Charles Hector, and Ms. Sarah Devaraj,
 Refugee Coordinator, were served multiple notices from either or both 
the Companies Commission of Malaysia (CCM) and the Registrar of Society 
(ROS)[1] regarding inspection and investigation conducted by the two 
administrative bodies on SUARAM’s registration, accounts and activities.
 A total of 16 notices were served by CCM and eight notices were served 
by ROS since July 2012.

In many instances, the CCM did not allow SUARAM sufficient time to 
respond to their requests. For instance, on October 2, 2012, the CCM 
requested SUARAM to produce within less than 24 hours an extensive list 
of documents related to all grant agreements and offer letters concluded
 with the National Endowment for Democracy (NED) and the Open Society 
Institute (OSI) and all payment vouchers and receipts related to 
campaign expenses between 2006 and 2011. SUARAM’s lawyers subsequently 
sent a letter to the CCM to condemn this new request as being both 
unreasonable and unrealistic, and constituting a clear act of 
harassment. Despite such short delays, SUARAM nevertheless did produce 
the documents requested. More generally, SUARAM complied with all orders
 served by CCM and ROS.

Since July 2012, SUARAM has been the target of ongoing harassment by
 the Malaysian authorities through investigations, public vilification 
and threats to charge SUARAM for alleged financial irregularities, 
receipt of foreign funds and non-registration as a society (see 
background information).

Moreover, acts of harassment have also been perpetrated by other 
pro-government entities. On September 28, 2012, a coalition of 30 
pro-government Malaysian NGOs calling themselves Gerakan NGO Bertindak 
1Malaysia reportedly requested that SUARAM be declared illegal and 
treated the same as other illegal entities such as Al-Arqam, the Malayan
 Communist Party and the human rights NGO Hindu Rights Action Force 
(Hindraf). In addition, in a Joint Memorandum submitted to the Prime 
Minister’s Office on September 27, 2012, the same coalition of NGOs also
 called for legal actions to be taken by the Home Ministry, the Attorney
 General’s Chambers, the Central Bank (Bank Negara), the CCM and the 
Inland Revenue Board against SUARAM members under their respective 
mandates. The coalition in particular accused SUARAM of having committed
 “offences against the State" and “offences against the person of the 
King”.

On October 4, 2012, right-wing group Jaringan Melayu Malaysia (JMM) 
also declared during a press conference that SUARAM had bribed 
Government officials to cover up information on its foreign funding.

The Observatory strongly denounces the escalating harassment of 
SUARAM, as well as the Malaysian Government’s attempts to discredit 
those who receive foreign funds for their human rights work. Indeed, as 
recalled by the UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders in her 
Commentary to the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders “Governments 
[should] allow human rights defenders, in particular NGOs, access to 
foreign funding as a part of international cooperation, to which civil 
society is entitled to the same extent as Governments. The only 
legitimate requirements imposed on defenders should be those in the 
interest of transparency”.

Such acts of harassment seem to merely aim at sanctioning and 
hindering SUARAM human rights activities. The Observatory therefore 
reiterates its call on the Malaysian authorities to put an end 
immediately to the continuing harassment against SUARAM and, more 
generally, against all human rights defenders and organisations 
operating in the country.

Background information[2]:

On July 3, 2012, a team of officers from the CCM attempted to serve a
 notice of inspection to SUARAM, but the organisation pointed out that 
said notice was defective and hence, invalid. An officer from the CCM 
subsequently informed SUARAM that the CCM team would come back at 10:30 
am on the following day to serve a proper notice. On July 4, 2012, the 
Directors, Chairman, secretariat members and staff of SUARAM together 
with lawyers arrived at the SUARAM’s office around 10:00 am in 
anticipation of the CCM’s scheduled visit. However, the team of officers
 arrived at 5:53 pm, a long time after the persons authorised to receive
 the notice had left the office.

Between July 6, 2012 and September 17, the CCM served notices of 
inspection to different SUARAM leaders and staff on at least five 
occasions, requesting them to produce information and documents related 
to the organisation’s activities and/or summoning them to the CCM 
offices for interrogation.

On August 3, 2012, SUARAM received a letter from the Social Security
 Organisation (PERKESO), an agency under the Ministry of Human 
Resources, ordering them to bring a list of documents to its office on 
August 30. It is to be noted that the said letter stipulated a fine up 
to RM10,000 (approximately 2,500 Euros) or two-year imprisonment or both
 in case of non-compliance

In addition, on August 3, 2012, Mr. Ismail Sabri Yaakob, Domestic 
Trade, Cooperatives and Consumerism Minister, stated in a press 
conference that SUARAM’s accounts were highly suspicious and maintained 
that CCM’s investigation on the human rights organisation was not 
politically motivated. A lawyer from the United Malays National 
Organisation (UMNO), the largest political party headed by the current 
Prime Minister Najib Razak, also suggested that SUARAM would act as a 
money laundering terrorist organisation and called upon Bank Negara 
(Central Bank) to take immediate actions against it.

On September 7, 2012, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Wisma Putra) 
expressed its intention to summon the German Embassy in Kuala Lumpur to 
explain the alleged channelling of funds to SUARAM for activities which 
purportedly show its “partiality to certain issues that have 
implications on Malaysia’s domestic situation”.

On September 8, 2012, Mr. Ismail Sabri Yaakob said that the CCM had 
identified five charges under the Companies Act 1965 that could be made 
against SUARAM. In addition, the Malaysian Government also announced 
that investigations would be undertaken by several other government 
agencies, including the ROS that has publicly alleged that SUARAM is not
 legally registered as a society.

On September 11, 2012, a meeting was held between the CCM, the ROS, 
the police, Bank Negara, the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia 
Commission, and the Home Ministry, reportedly to determine the 
jurisdiction and actions to be taken by the respective government 
agencies against SUARAM.

On September 13, 2012, former SUARAM staff’s family home was visited
 by officers believed to be from CCM, had enquired about matters 
pertaining to registration of businesses. The alleged officers obtained 
the staff’s mobile number from the family members upon learning that the
 staff was not at home.

Action requested:

Please write to the authorities in Malaysia, urging them to:

i. Put an end to any kind of harassment against all SUARAM staff and
 leaders mentioned above and more generally against all human rights 
defenders in Malaysia;

ii. Ensure in all circumstances that SUARAM and its members are able
 to carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance and fear
 of reprisals;

iii. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human 
Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations 
on December 9, 1998, especially its Article 1, which states that 
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
 promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international 
levels”, as well as its Article 12.2, which provides that the State 
shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the 
competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with 
others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure 
adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a 
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”;

iv. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and 
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights 
standards and international instruments ratified by Malaysia.

Addresses:

·       Dato’ Sri Mohd Najib bin Tun Abdul Razak, Prime Minister, 
Prime Minister’s Office Malaysia, Main Block, Perdana Putra Building, 
Federal Government Administrative Centre, 62502 Putrajaya, Selangor, 
Malaysia. Tel:  + 60 3 8888 8000, Fax: + 60 3 8888 3444, Email: 
ppm@pmo.gov.my
·        Dato Seri Hishammuddin Tun Hussein, Minister of Home Affairs – 
Security Collective responsibility, Blok D1 & D2, Kompleks D, Pusat 
Pentadbiran Kerajaan Persekutuan, 62546 Putrajaya, Malaysia.;Fax:  
03-88891613/03-88891610, Email : webmaster@moha.gov.my
·        Tan Sri Hasmy Agam, Chairman of the Human Rights Commission of 
Malaysia (SUHAKAM),Tingkat 11, Menara TH Perdana, Jalan Sultan Ismail, 
50250 Kuala Lumpur, 50250 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Fax: + 603-26125620; 
Email: humanrights@suhakam.org.my
·       H.E. Mr. Mazlan Muhammad, Ambassador, Permanent Representative 
of Malaysia to the United Nations in Geneva, International Centre 
Cointrin (ICC), Bloc H (1st floor), Route de Pré-Bois 20, 1215 Geneva 
15, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 710 75 01. Email: malgeneva@kln.gov.my
·        Embassy of Malaysia in Brussels, 414 A avenue de Tervueren, 
1150 Woluwe-Saint-Pierre, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 762 50 49. Email: 
malbrussels@kln.gov.my

Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of 
Malaysia in your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic 
missions or embassies in Malaysia.

***

Paris-Geneva, October 19, 2012

Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.

The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the 
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete 
support in their time of need.

To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·       E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
·       Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29

[1] Owing to restrictive provisions and wide powers of the Minister 
and Registrar to suspend, ban and cancel any societies deemed to be a 
threat to national security under the Societies Act 1966, SUARAM has, 
like a number of other Malaysian human rights NGOs, registered under the
 Registrar of Companies (ROC) since 2002.

[2] See Joint Press Statement, Asian and International Human Rights 
Groups Urge Government to End Harassment against SUARAM, September 17, 
2012. 