Cambodia:  Revise or Abandon Draft NGO Law - Donors Should Insist on Protections for Civil Society
December 22, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2011 / DecemberCambodia: Revise or Abandon Draft NGO Law - Donors Should Insist on Protections for Civil SocietyFor immediate 
release
 
Cambodia: 
Revise or Abandon Draft NGO Law
Donors Should 
Insist on Protections for Civil Society
 
(Bangkok, December 22, 2011) – Donors, who provide approximately half 
of Cambodia’s national budget, should make clear to the Cambodian government 
that the fourth draft of the Law on Associations and NGOs (LANGO) must be 
revised to protect civil society or be withdrawn, a group of concerned 
international human rights organizations said today. Any revisions should 
involve meaningful consultation with civil society organizations and aim to 
support their activities instead of creating a legal framework allowing for 
arbitrary closure of organizations or the denial of registration. 

 
The groups involved are Human Rights Watch, Global Witness, Freedom 
House, Asian Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA), Article 19, 
Southeast Asian Press Alliance (SEAPA), Civil Rights Defenders, Lawyers’ Rights Watch Canada, Centre for Law and 
Democracy, Protection International, and the Observatory for the Protection of 
Human Rights Defenders (a joint program of the International Federation for 
Human Rights - FIDH, and the World Organisation Against Torture - OMCT).  
 
“The Cambodian government is pressing forward with a draft law that 
grants it broad authority to make arbitrary decisions about which groups can 
operate and which cannot,” said Brad Adams, Asia director at Human Rights Watch. 
“Civil society delivers essential services and acts as a constructive watchdog 
over government and private sector activities. This law is hardly the sort of 
‘reform’ that will benefit Cambodian citizens. Donors should say no to this 
farce.” 
 
The 4th draft of the LANGO contains vague and unspecified terms that 
will enable the government to target critics by ordering their closure or 
denying them registration, the groups said. These terms should be clarified, and 
new and unnecessary barriers to the registration and operations of international 
NGOs should be eliminated. Furthermore, protections should be established to 
ensure that if an organization decides not to register, it is not denied legal 
status and therefore rendered incapacitated. Provisions placing burdensome 
notification requirements on community-based organizations should be removed. 

 
Governments have a legitimate regulatory interest in providing 
benefits to organizations that become legal entities and preventing criminal 
activity. But such regulations cannot be used as a cover to undermine rights to 
freedom of association, expression and assembly, which are protected under the 
Cambodian constitution and international treaties to which Cambodia is a 
party.
 
The Cambodian context is critical for understanding the risk to 
Cambodia’s civil society should the current draft of LANGO pass, the groups 
said. Cambodian governance is still missing the checks and balances found in 
functioning democracies that limit arbitrary action by the executive branch of 
government. Government officials who react most harshly to NGO criticisms 
frequently are found to have a financial stake in the case at hand. Therefore, 
to argue that Cambodia should have a specific law on NGOs simply because other 
countries have one ignores the Cambodian government’s increasing actions to 
constrict public space for pluralistic debate and peaceful expression of 
views.
 
The fourth draft of LANGO fails to establish clear provisions to 
justify denial of registration to associations or NGOs. It violates Cambodia’s 
obligations under international law, such as under article 22 of the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Cambodia is 
party. LANGO also fails to include clear and objective standards in articles 28 
and 29 concerning suspension or termination of registration. Article 28 provides 
that domestic organizations can be “dissolved by court decisions” but no further 
details are given, leaving matters to the discretion of a judiciary where 
political interference is common. 
 
There are no provisions for appealing a suspension or termination and 
the law lacks procedural safeguards such as advance notice of regulatory action, 
opportunities to resolve problems prior to termination or suspension, or 
limiting termination to a sanction of last resort. Such provisions are extremely 
worrisome given the political and governance context of Cambodia, which is 
characterized by endemic corruption, arbitrary application of punitive 
legislation and an absence of judicial independence, the groups said. The 
Ministry of Interior’s suspension in August of the NGO Sahmakum Teang Tnaut 
(STT) is a harbinger of the sudden, unilateral, and non-transparent actions this 
law will legitimize. The government has still failed to adequately indicate the 
legal basis for STT’s suspension.  

 
“Many officials in the Cambodian government have never accepted that 
civil society should operate independently or criticize their decisions,” said 
Sue Gunawardena-Vaughn, the director of Southeast Asia Program at Freedom House. “A major success of the UNTAC peacekeeping 
mission 20 years ago was to create this space for civil society. Now it is up to 
donors to protect it and ensure NGOs can continue to independently provide their 
essential services to Cambodians.”
 
Despite promises by the Cambodian government to eliminate mandatory 
registration, the fourth draft makes legal status dependent on registration, and 
thus essentially maintains the requirement. The fourth draft represents a 
bait-and-switch by removing the mandatory clause but then requiring an 
organization to register if it wants to obtain legal status. Without legal 
status, it is unclear under the draft law whether an association or NGO will be 
able to operate in Cambodia since that status is required to enter into legal 
contracts, open bank accounts, hire staff, import materials, and collaborate 
with partners “for implementing aid projects according to the existing laws.” 
 
 
This arrangement effectively undermines respect for the right to 
freedom of association and cynically presents local associations and NGOs with 
the choice of either registering or facing constant bureaucratic roadblocks in 
their work. Although community-based organizations will no longer have to 
register, under article 5 of the draft law they will be required to provide 
prior written notice to local authorities who could be easily used to restrict 
their work. 
 
The groups also expressed serious concerns that this fourth draft 
specifically targets international NGOs (INGOs) and would severely hamper both 
their projects and their advocacy efforts to promote good governance and 
development approaches that respect human rights. Article 17 of the draft law 
sets out an overly broad and vague standard that will allow the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (MoFAIC) to use wide discretion in 
dealing with INGOs, including terminating a group’s registration if the ministry 
decides that the INGO has conducted activities that “jeopardize peace, stability 
and public order…or harm the national security, national unity, culture, customs 
and traditions of the Cambodian national society.” Moreover, the Memoranda of 
Understanding that INGOs would have to negotiate with ministry is valid for only 
three years, resulting in a de facto re-registration process. INGOs also will 
have no right to appeal any termination of their registration. 

 
“This latest version of the law can be arbitrarily misused to root 
out international NGOs who employ rights-based development approaches and offer 
constructive but critical opinions and critiques of the government’s policies 
and practices,” said Yap Swee Seng, Executive Director of the Asian Forum for 
Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA).  
 
Finally, passage of this law is not necessary in light of existing 
Cambodian legislation addressing legitimate regulatory concerns: NGOs can obtain 
legal status through the newly effective Civil Code. Civil Code sections 46-118 
provide details on registration and dissolution of non-profit legal entities, 
the right to appeal government decisions, and far less burdensome registration 
requirements. The Penal Code and Anti-Corruption Law address fraud; meanwhile 
INGOs already obtain legal standing through Memoranda of Understanding with the 
government. 
 
“Cambodia’s 
donors should press the Ministry of Interior to extend the consultation period 
on the fourth draft of 
LANGO so that all viewpoints and voices are heard,” said FIDH President Souhayr 
Belhassen and OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.  
 
Simon Taylor, 
Director of Global Witness, concluded “At stake now is the last 17 years of development assistance in 
Cambodia and the extent to which the donors will be remembered for failing to 
prevent the removal of one of the few instruments of accountability in Cambodia, 
nurtured to a great extent thanks to their investments.”   
 
For more 
information, please contact: 

 
In Bangkok, Yap Swee Seng, Executive Director, Asian Forum for Human 
Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA):  
+66-81-868-9178 (mobile), yap@forum-asia.org 
 
In Bangkok, Phil Robertson, Deputy Director, Asia Division, Human 
Rights Watch: +66-85-060-8406 (mobile), robertp@hrw.org 
 
In Bangkok, 
Gayathry Venkiteswaran, Executive Director, Southeast Asian Press Alliance:  +66-88-017-4810 (mobile), gayathry@seapa.org 
In Geneva, Delphine Reculeau, Coordinator, the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, 
OMCT:  +41-22-809-4939, dr@omct.org
 
In Halifax, Canada, Toby Mendel, Executive Director, Centre for Law 
and Democracy: +1-902-431-3688, toby@law-democracy.org
 
In London, 
Mona Samari, ARTICLE 19 Senior Press 
Officer: + 44 (207) 324 2510, mona@article19.org
 
In London, Brad Adams, Director, Asia Division, Human Rights Watch: 
+44-7908-728-333, adamsb@hrw.org 
 
In Paris, Arthur Manet, Press Officer, FIDH: +33-14-355-2518, amanet@fidh.org
In Stockholm, Brittis Edman, Program Director, Southeast Asia, Civil 
Rights Defenders: +46-70-722-6086, Brittis.Edman@civilrightsdefenders.org
 
In the United Kingdom, Jenny Bromley, Senior Campaigner, Global 
Witness: +44 7540 891 837,  cambodia@globalwitness.org
 
In Vancouver, Gail Davidson, Executive Director, Lawyers’ Rights 
Watch Canada (LRWC): +1-604-738-0338, lrwc@portal.ca

 
In 
Washington, DC,  Sue Gunawardena-Vaughn, Southeast Asia Program/International 
Religious Freedom Consortium, Freedom House: +1-202-489-2578, vaughn@freedomhouse.org 