India:  Head of the organization Citizen for Justice and Peace prevented from communicating with the OHCHR
March 11, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / India / 2011 / MarchIndia: Head of the organization Citizen for Justice and Peace prevented from communicating with the OHCHR
URGENT APPEAL- THE OBSERVATORY
IND 002 / 0311 / OBS
032
Restriction on
communication with an international body
India
March 11, 2011

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
India.
Description
of the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
that Ms. Teesta Setalvad, Head of the organization Citizen for Justice
and Peace (CJP), a human rights organisation involved in the legal support of
victims of the Gulbar Society Massacre of February 2002, has been prevented
from communicating with the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) in Geneva.
According to the information received, on March 3,
2011, the Supreme Court of India reportedly issued a public written order,
stating that Ms. Teesta Setalvad should not send any communication to the OHCHR
in Geneva anymore concerning the investigation of the Gulbar Society Massacre
of February 2002. No information could be obtained as to the reasons provided
by the court to justify this restriction.
This massacre, causing the death of 69 people,
happened during the riots in the state of Gujarat in 2002. The proceedings of
investigations of the Gulbar Society Massacre are led by a Special
Investigation Team (SIT) appointed within the Gujarat police by the Supreme
Court. 
Ms. Teesta Setalvad has been actively involved into
the investigation of the massacre through legal support to victims, including
the documentation of several cases and their defence in hearing sessions at the
Supreme Court. 
Ms. Teesta Setalvad has also been denouncing the lack
of protection given by the SIT to witnesses and victims. In this context, she
had sent two communications to OHCHR to keep it informed about the letters that
she had sent to the SIT in which she called for more protection:
-       
On October 5, 2010, Ms. Teesta Setalvad
wrote a letter to Mr. RK. Raghavan, the Chairman of the SIT, regarding the lack
of protection provided to Mr. SM Vora, a senior advocate, witness and survivor
of the massacre, who had received threatening phone calls allegedly related to
his involvement into the investigations. Ms. Setalvad also sent a copy of this
letter to the OHCHR in Geneva.
-       
On October 7, 2010, Ms. Setalvad wrote
another letter to Mr. RK. Raghavan regarding her safety since she had been
facing reportedly false allegations that she had tutored several victims of the
massacre to give false testimonies before the Supreme Court. Here again, Ms. Teesta
Setalvad sent a copy of this letter to the OHCHR.
On February 17, 2011,
Mr. Harish Salve, a senior advocate appointed at the Supreme Court of India,
submitted an amicus curiae to the Court drawing its attention on Ms. Setalvad’s
practice of furnishing copies of her letters to the OHCHR, thus triggering the
decision of the Supreme Court of India. 
The Observatory expresses its deepest concern about
the prohibition faced by Ms. Setalvad to communicate with the OHCHR, which
merely aims at sanctioning her human rights activities.
The Observatory recalls that such act is in flagrant violation of article 5(c) of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, which states that “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, at the national and international levels to
communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental organizations.”
The Observatory further recalls that of the Resolution
12/2 on cooperation with the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms
in the field of human rights, adopted by the Human Rights Council on October
12, 2009. Its article 1 urges “Governments to prevent and refrain from all acts of
intimidation or reprisal against those who (a) Seek to cooperate or have
cooperated with the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms in the
field of human rights, or who have provided testimony or information to them;
(…) (c) Submit or have submitted communications under procedures established by
human rights instruments, and all those who have provided legal or other
assistance to them for this purpose”.
Actions
requested:
The
Observatory urges the authorities of India to:
i.          Put an end to all forms of harassment and restrictions on Ms. Teesta Setalvad, as well as of all human
rights defenders in India, and guarantee in all circumstances that human rights defenders and
organisations are able to carry out their work, including through communication
with non-governmental and intergovernmental organisations;
ii.         Comply with the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General
Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially:
-   
Article 1, which states that “Everyone has the right, individually or in
association with others, to promote the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-         
Article 5(c), which states that “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, at the national and international levels: (c) To
communicate with non-governmental or intergovernmental organizations”;
-          Article 6, which
provides that: “Everyone has
the right, individually and in association with others: (a) to know, seek,
obtain, receive and hold information about all human rights and fundamental
freedoms (…); (b) freely to publish, impart or disseminate to others views,
information and knowledge on all human rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-          Article 9 (c), which states that
“everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to offer
and provide professionally qualified assistance in defending human rights and
fundamental freedoms”;
-         
Article 12.2 which provides that “The State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
iii.        Ensure in all circumstances the respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments
ratified by India.
iv. Comply with theResolution
12/2 of the Human Rights Council on cooperation with the United Nations, its
representatives andmechanisms in the field of human rights. 
Adresses:
·        
Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister’s Office, Room
number 152, South Block, New Delhi, Fax: + 91 11 2301 6857 E-mal: pmosb@pmo.nic.in
·        
Dr. P. Chidambaram, Union Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs,
104-107 North Block, New Delhi 110 001 India, Fax: +91 11 2309 2979. hm@nic.in
·        
Justice Kapadia, Chief
Justice of India and RK. Raghavan, Chairman
of the Special Investigation Team, Supreme Court, Tilak Marg, New Delhi -1,
Fax: +91 11 233 83792, Email: supremecourt@nic.in 
·        
Justice K. G. Balkrishnan,
Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of India, Faridkot House,
Copernicus Marg, New Delhi 110 001, Tel: +91 11 230 74448, Fax: +91 11 2334
0016, Email: covdnhrc@nic.in ; ionhrc@nic.in 
·        
A. Gopinathan, Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Permanent Representative to the United
Nations (Geneva), Rue du Valais 9, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Tel: +41 22 906 86
86, Fax: +41 22 906 86 96, Email: mission.india@ties.itu.int
·        
Embassy of India in
Brussels, 217 Chaussée de Vleurgat, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 (0)2
6489638 or +32 (0)2 6451869
Please also write to the diplomatic
representations of India in your respective countries.
*** 
Geneva-Paris, March 11, 2011 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: 
·        
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·        
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·         Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 