Gambia:  Arbitrary arrest and judicial harassment of two journalists
September 13, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Gambia / 2012 / SeptemberGambia: Arbitrary arrest and judicial harassment of two journalists


URGENT
APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
GMB 001 / 0912 / OBS 085
Arbitrary arrest/
Detention/
The Gambia
September 13, 2012
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) and the International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in The
Gambia.
 
Description
of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by
reliable sources of the
arbitrary arrest and judicial harassment of two journalists, Messrs. Babucarr
Ceesay, First Vice-President of the Gambia Press Union (GPU)[1],
and Abubacarr Saidykhan, a freelance journalist who often
investigates and reports on cases of human rights violations.
 
According to the information
received, in the afternoon of September 6, 2012, Messrs. Ceesay and Saidykhan
were invited to the police headquarters in Banjul to allegedly collect a permit
they had solicited in the morning of the same day in order to organise a peaceful
protest against the recent execution of nine death-row detainees in the country[2].
However, both were arrested upon arrival at the police station and kept in
custody, without any explanation given to them.
 
Messrs.
Ceesay and Saidykhan spent four days in
detention, during which they were reportedly separated, transferred to a
different police station every night and intensively interrogated. In addition,
the police escorted them to their
houses to conduct a search. On September 7, 2012, the executive members of the
GPU as well as their lawyer were denied access to visit them.
 
On September 10, 2012, Messrs.
Ceesay and Saidykhan, were released on bail after signing a bond of GMD 250,000
(approximately 6,300 Euros). They are further required to report to the police
headquarters on September 17, 2012.
 
On the same day, the initial charges
of “inciting violence” that had been brought against them were dropped, and
they were instead charged with “conspiracy
to commit felony” in violation of Section 368 of the Criminal Code. They
face up to seven years’ imprisonment. However, as of September 12, 2012, no
charge sheet had been delivered to them and the police reportedly stated that
they would not do so until they had completed the investigation.
 
The Observatory expresses its
deepest concern about the arrest and detention of Messrs. Babucarr Ceesay and
Abubacarr Saidykhan, since those acts seem to merely aim at hindering their
human rights activities. The Observatory therefore calls upon the Gambian
authorities to refrain from any judicial actions against the two human rights
defenders and to put an end to all acts of harassment against them as well as
against all human rights defenders in the Gambia.
 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Gambian
authorities and ask them to:
 
i.    Put an end to all acts of harassment
– including at the judicial level – against Messrs. Ceesay and Saidykhan as well as against all human rights
defenders and their organisations in the Gambia;
 
ii.   Guarantee in all circumstances the
physical and psychological integrity of all human rights defenders, in
particular that of Messrs. Babucarr Ceesay and Abubacarr Saidykhan;
 
iii. Conform with the provisions of the
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the
United Nations General Assembly, and in particular :
-     
Article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to
promote the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms
at the national and international levels”, 
-   
 and Article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence,
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise
of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.
 
iv. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by the Gambia.
 
Addresses:
 
·       Captain (retd.) Alhaji
Yahya A. J. J. Jammeh, President and Minister of Defence, Office of the
President, State House, Banjul, Republic of The Gambia. Fax: +220 4227 034.
mail: info@statehouse.gm.
 
·      
Mr. Lamin A. M. S.
Jobarteh, Attorney General and Minister of Justice, Department of State for
Justice, Marina Parade,
Banjul, Republic of The Gambia. Fax: +220 4229 908
 
·       Mr. Ousman Sonko,
Minister of the Interior, Office of the President, State House, Banjul,
Republic of The Gambia. Fax: +220 4223 718
 
·       Ambassador Mr. Ousman Badjie, Permanent Mission of The Gambia to the
United Nations in Geneva, c/o Embassy of the Republic of the Gambia, 117, rue
Saint Lazare, 75008 Paris, France. Fax: +33 1 53 04 05 99. Email: ambgambia_france117@hotmail.com
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
representations of the Gambia in your respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, September 13, 2012
 
Kindly inform us of any action
undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture,
is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them
concrete support in their time of need.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the
emergency line: 
·  
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org

·    
Tel and fax FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80
·    
Tel and fax OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29



[1]            Among
the GPU's aims are the promotion and defence of the rights to freedom of
expression and of information.


[2]            See FIDH and World
Coalition Against The Death Penalty (WCADP) Joint Press Release, FIDH and the
World Coalition against The Death Penalty call upon the African Union to
relocate the seat of the ACHPR in another country, released on August 31, 2012,
available at: http://www.fidh.org/FIDH-and-the-World-Coalition. 