Azerbaijan:  Open Letter: Call for an external, independent, and impartial investigation into allegations of corruption and other violations of PACE's code of conduct in connection with its work on Azerbaijan
April 20, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2017 / AprilAzerbaijan: Open Letter: Call for an external, independent, and impartial investigation into allegations of corruption and other violations of PACE's code of conduct in connection with its work on Azerbaijan

Members of the Bureau of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
All members of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
 
 Copy to: 
- Secretary General
of the Council of Europe 
- Commissioner for
Human Rights of the Council of Europe
 
20
April 2017
 
We,
representatives of international and national non-governmental organisations, issue
this appeal prior to a discussion of the investigation into allegations of
corruption at the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) in
connection with its work on Azerbaijan, at the Assembly’s April 2017 session
and a meeting of the Bureau of the Assembly before the session. We call upon
you to support a full, thorough and independent investigation into the corruption
allegations, with full civil society oversight.  
 
We are
extremely concerned about credible allegations presented in a December 2016 report
by the European Stability Initiative (ESI), “The European Swamp: Prosecutions,
corruption and the Council of Europe”[1]
building on previous findings by ESI and others published in 2012-16[2], detailing improper
influencing of Assembly members by representatives of the Azerbaijani
government. In particular, the reports include credible allegations that PACE
members from various countries and political groups received payments and other
gifts with a view to influencing the appointment of Assembly rapporteurs on
Azerbaijan, as well as reports and resolutions of the Assembly on Azerbaijan, most
notably the PACE vote on the draft resolution on political prisoners in
Azerbaijan in January 2013. 
 
The
allegations regarding improper conduct of PACE members are serious, credible,
and risk gravely undermining the credibility of the Assembly, as well as the
Council of Europe as a whole. It is essential that these allegations are
investigated thoroughly and impartially. Calls and
recommendations for independent investigation into these allegations put
forward by ESI have been echoed by many civil society actors, including Amnesty
International,[3]
Transparency International,[4]
and a group of 60 members of Azerbaijani civil society actors and 20
international NGOs.[5]
 
We
welcome the decision of the PACE Bureau on 27 January 2017 to set up an
independent investigation body to shed light on hidden practices that favour
corruption.[6] The
Bureau has also committed to revising the Assembly’s Code of Conduct and invited
GRECO (the Council of Europe’s Group of States against Corruption) to provide
advice to the Rules Committee, charged with the investigation. 
 
On
3 March, Wojciech Sawicki, PACE Secretary General, presented the Assembly
Bureau with a draft terms of reference for the external and independent
investigation at the Bureau meeting in Madrid. The proposal is credible, defining
a wide mandate and competences and including strong guarantees for the
independence of the investigation and safeguards against non-compliance with
its work.[7]

 
Unfortunately,
the proposal was met with resistance at the meeting, and no agreement was made
on its substance. The proposal was further discussed at a meeting of the heads
of the PACE Parliamentary groups on 28 March in St Petersburg: again, no
consensus was reached on its content, and whether it should be adopted. 
 
A
thorough investigation is essential to restore PACE’s credibility and allow it
to effectively address human rights violations across the Council of Europe,
including in Azerbaijan. The chairman of Azerbaijani NGO the Institute for
Reporters Freedom and Safety, Mehman Huseynov is already facing reprisals for
raising the corruption allegations during the January PACE session. A day after
his NGO sent a letter about the corruption allegations to PACE members in
January, he was abducted and tortured by police and later sentenced for 2 years
on defamation charges for allegedly making false allegations about torture.[8]
For PACE to be in a position to respond to such violations, it must be seen as
independent and not under the influence of states wishing to influence their
conduct. 
 
We call
upon members of the PACE Bureau to commit to the Sawicki proposal and to call
for a full plenary debate on the proposal at the April session of PACE. We also
call on the PACE Bureau to include a mechanism of civil society oversight of
the investigation to ensure its full independence and impartiality.
 
We call
upon all Members of the Assembly to support in the strongest possible terms an
independent, external and thorough investigation. This can be done by signing a
written Declaration on the Parliamentary Assembly Integrity introduced on 25
January 2017 by PACE members Pieter Omtzigt (The
Netherlands, Christian Democrat), and Frank Schwabe
(Germany, Social Democrat) urging the PACE President Pedro Agramunt
(Spain, EPP) to launch a “deep, thorough investigation by an independent panel”
that makes its findings public.[9]
More than one fifth of the Assembly members have joined the declaration. More
voices in support of the Assembly integrity are needed. Moreover, PACE members
must insist on their right to discuss the Sawicki proposal at the April session
of the Assembly, to ensure that PACE has the mechanisms in place to adequately
deal with corruption allegations. 
 
We call on
the Secretary General of the Council of Europe Thorbjorn Jagland to make a very
strong statement to affirm that there will be no tolerance of any corruption,
including bribery, trading in influence or taking up of roles that imply a
conflict of interest, in the Parliamentary Assembly and the
Council of Europe in general.
 
Commitment
to the rule of law, integrity, transparency, and public accountability should
be effectively enforced as the key principles of the work of the Parliamentary
Assembly. If such a decision is not made now, reputational damage to PACE may
become irreparable, preventing PACE from fulfilling its role as a guardian of
human rights across the Council of Europe region. 
 
Signatures:
1.     
The Netherlands
Helsinki Committee
2.     
International
Partnership for Human Rights (Belgium) 
3.     
Centre for the
Development of Democracy and Human Rights (Russia)
4.     
Freedom Files
(Russia/Poland)
5.     
Norwegian
Helsinki Committee
6.     
Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights
Union 
7.     
Analytical Center for
Interethnic Cooperation and Consultations (Georgia)
8.     
Article 19 (UK)
9.     
The Barys Zvozskau Belarusian
Human Rights House (Belarus/Lithuania)
10.  
Index on Censorship (UK)
11.  
Human Rights House Foundation
(Norway)
12.  
Human Rights Movement “Bir
Duino-Kyrgyzstan”
13.  
PEN International (UK)
14.  
Crude Accountability (USA)
15.  
Legal Transformation Center
(Belarus)
16.  
Bulgarian Helsinki Committee 
17.  
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) (Switzerland)
18.  
The Kazakhstan International
Bureau for Human Rights and the Rule of Law
19.  
Belarusian Helsinki Committee
20.  
Center for Civil Liberties (Ukraine)
21.  
Promo LEX (Moldova)
22.  
Libereco –
Partnership for Human Rights (Germany/Switzerland) 
23.  
Public Association “Dignity”
(Kazakhstan) 
24.  
Human Rights Monitoring
Institute (Lithuania)
25.  
Swiss Helsinki
Committee
26.  
Human Rights Information Center
(Ukraine)
27.  
Public Verdict Foundation
(Russia)
28.  
Albanian Helsinki Committee
29.  
Kharkiv Regional Foundation
“Public Alternative” (Ukraine)
30.  
Helsinki Foundation for Human
Rights (Poland)
31.  
Women of Don (Russia)
32.  
DRA - German-Russian Exchange (Germany)
33.  
Association UMDPL (Ukraine)
34.  
European Stability Initiative
(Germany)
35.  
International
Media Support (IMS) (Denmark)
36.  
Civil Rights Defenders (Sweden)
37.  
International
Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) (France)
38.  
Sova Center
for Information and Analysis (Russia)
39.  
Kosova
Centre for Rehabilitation of Torture Victims (Kosovo)
40.  
Truth
Hounds (Ukraine)
41.  
People in Need Foundation (Czech Republic)
42.  
Eastern Partnership Civil Society
Forum (Belgium)
43.  
Macedonian Helsinki Committee
Properties Date: April 20, 2017Activity: Monitoring Protection MechanismsType: Urgent InterventionsCountry: AzerbaijanSubjects: Arbitrary arrests and enforced disappearances, Human Rights Defenders, Justice system, Threats, intimidation and harassment, Torture and violenceShare thisTweetRelated articlesAzerbaijan:  Azerbaijan: Crackdown on Free Expression Accelerates With Conviction of Prominent Blogger
Urgent Interventions / March  6, 2017Azerbaijan:  Letter to the Members of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) RE: Bribe accusations
Statements / January 16, 2017LanguagesThis page is available in:EnglishYou can also translate it on the fly: 
  function googleTranslateElementInit() {
    new google.translate.TranslateElement({
      pageLanguage: "en",
      autoDisplay: false
    }, "google_translate_element");
  }
  Recently Viewed Articles 