United Arab Emirates:  Speech Charges Violate Academic’s Rights
October 13, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / United Arab Emirates / 2016 / OctoberUnited Arab Emirates: Speech Charges Violate Academic’s Rights UAE_Joint Press Release_ARABIC VERSION2 pages / 6.95 MB

Nasser bin Ghaith Held Incommunicado for 9 Months


(Beirut, October 13, 2016) – United Arab Emirates authorities have violated
basic rights in their prosecution of the Emirati academic Nasser bin Ghaith, a coalition of nine human rights organizations
said today. Bin Ghaith faces charges stemming from his peaceful criticism of
Egyptian and Emirati authorities. Authorities also accuse him of violating the
country’s repressive counterterrorism law by collaborating with local groups the
authorities have classified as terrorist.

Authorities held bin Ghaith in incommunicado detention for nine months after his
arrest in August 2015, and did not let him see a lawyer or inform him of the
charges against him until the second session of his trial on May 2, 2016, during
which he complained to the judge that he had been tortured in detention. Three of
the five charges against him clearly violate his right to freedom of expression.
Authorities have kept bin Ghaith in solitary confinement since his transfer to
the maximum security block in Al-Sadr jail on May 18. The next session of his
trial is on October 17, at the State Security Chamber at the Federal Supreme
Court, whose verdicts are not subject to appeal, in violation of fair trial
standards.

“The charges against Nasser bin Ghaith and serious violations of his right to a
fair trial demonstrate again that the UAE regards peaceful dissent as a crime,”
said Joe Stork, deputy director at Human Rights Watch. “The laws authorities
accuse bin Ghaith of breaking violate international standards of free speech
and freedom of association.”

The coalition supporting bin Ghaith consists of the
Arabic
Network for Human Rights Information (ANHRI); the Cairo Institute for Human
Rights Studies (CIHRS); the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders; Front Line Defenders;
Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR); Human Rights Watch; International Service
for Human Rights (ISHR); and Scholars at Risk. 
 
Security officers in civilian clothes arrested bin Ghaith in Abu
Dhabi on August 18, 2015, four days after he posted a series of tweets that
directly or implicitly criticized Egyptian authorities. On August 13 and 14, he
posted three comments critical of Egyptian security forces’ mass killing of
demonstrators at Raba’a Square two years earlier. Article 166 of the UAE penal
code provides for a maximum of 10 years in prison for anyone who commits any
“hostile act” against a foreign country that could expose the UAE to the danger
of war or the severance of diplomatic relations. 

Bin Ghaith also faces
charges that he posted information “intended to damage the UAE” by “claiming
that he was tortured and unjustly accused during a previous trial.” In 2011,
bin Ghaith was one of five men convicted of “publicly insulting” UAE officials
in relation to their alleged criticism of the UAE’s de facto ruler, Crown
Prince Mohamed bin Zayed Al-Nahyan. Human rights organizations concluded that
bin Ghaith’s 2011 trial was “fundamentally unfair.” Bin Ghaith is also
accused of violating article 29 of the UAE’s 2012 cybercrime law, which
provides for a maximum of 15 years in prison for publishing material online
with “sarcastic intent” or to “damage the reputation” of the state or its
leaders.  
 
Authorities also charged bin Ghaith
in connection with a tweet that he posted on August 17, 2015, in
which, local media reports said, he made “remarks
ridiculing the UAE’s decision to allot land to build a Hindu temple.” Article
28 of the UAE’s cybercrime law provides for between three and 15 years in
prison for anyone who posts online anything that “may endanger the national
security and the higher interests of the State or afflicts its public order.”  
 
The fourth and fifth charges relate
to his apparent association with the Ummah and Al-Islah parties, Emirati
organizations that the authorities classified
as “designated terrorist
organizations” in November 2014. The Khaleej Times reported that bin Ghaith had given lectures “that promote
these groups.” Video recordings of one such presentation,
made in Istanbul and available online, show the Ummah secretary-general, Hassan
al-Diqqi, introducing bin Ghaith as an academic. 
 
In a May 5, 2016 Twitter statement
attributed to bin Ghaith’s family, they rejected Ummah party claims on social media
several days earlier, the day before bin Ghaith’s trial session, that bin
Ghaith was the party chairman.
 
In July 2013, the UAE Federal
Supreme Court found 69 people with links to al-Islah guilty of attempting to overthrow the country’s political
system. From the court’s reasoning, it appears that those
convicted simply exercised their legitimate rights to free expression and
association. The only evidence in the judgment that suggests any intention to
overthrow the government is a confession by one defendant, Ahmed al-Suweidi,
whom authorities had forcibly disappeared for five months after his arrest on
March 26, 2012. In court al-Suweidi recanted his confession and denied all the
charges. During the trial, 22 of the defendants smuggled out handwritten notes
alleging that they had endured mistreatment that in some cases amounted to torture.  
 
Article 21 of the UAE 2014 counterterrorism law provides for the death
penalty or life in prison for anyone who organizes or manages “a terrorist
organization.” The law’s broad definition of terrorist activity allows authorities
to designate any act that courts deem to have opposed the state, incited fear,
or threatened national unity as terrorism. Article 180 of the penal code
provides for a maximum of 15 years in prison for anyone who “administers an
association, corporation, organization or any branch thereof, with the aim of
overthrowing the regime of the State.” The counterterrorism law also authorizes
the death penalty for people whose activities are found to “undermine national
unity or social peace,” neither of which are defined in the law.  
 
At the most recent session of bin
Ghaith’s trial, on September 27, 2016, court officials prevented a United
Kingdom-based lawyer from entering the court to observe the trial on behalf of
the coalition of nongovernmental groups, telling him that he needed prior
authorization, and that only family members, lawyers, and accredited
journalists could attend. UAE residents who the authorities suspect have spoken
with human rights groups are at serious risk of arbitrary detention and imprisonment.
 
“Only the lawyers, family, and press
from the UAE were admitted to the court, on the basis that the trial covered a
matter of national security, but what this case is actually about is Dr. bin Ghaith’s
peaceful expression of his opinions on reform in the UAE and Egypt. Another
adjournment is justice delayed and justice denied,” said Khalid Ibrahim, co-director of the Gulf Center for Human Rights.

On October 4, the Arabic Network for Human
Rights Information (ANHRI), the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies
(CIHRS), FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the
framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,
Front Line Defenders, Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR), International
Service for Human Rights (ISHR), and Scholars at Risk, submitted information on
Nasser bin Ghaith’s case to variety range of United Nations human rights bodies
and experts. 

For more
information, please contact:
·    FIDH: Audrey Couprie / Arthur Manet: + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18
·    OMCT: Delphine Reculeau / Miguel
Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 