Iran:  Repression of human rights defenders goes on uninterrupted
September 11, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2012 / SeptemberIran: Repression of human rights defenders goes on uninterrupted​





















PRESS RELEASE - THE OBSERVATORY

 
IRAN: Repression of
human rights defenders goes on uninterrupted
 
Paris-Geneva, September 11, 2012. The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), was informed of four new cases of arbitrary detention
against human rights defenders in Iran. Several rights activists and  journalists have been taken into custody to
serve prison sentences, while charges have been brought against others.
 
 
On September 8,
2012, Ms. Shiva Nazarahari, a founding member of the Committee of Human
Rights Reporters (CHRR) and member of the Campaign for Equality and child
rights activist, was taken into custody at Evin prison. She had been summoned
in late August 2012 to serve a four-year prison sentence upheld on appeal
against her on January 8, 2011 on charges of “propaganda against the State”,
“assembly with intention of conspiring against the Islamic government”,
“disturbing the public mind” and “waging war against God”. The Observatory
recalls that Ms. Nazarahari has been arrested many times over the past decade
for her activities as a human rights defender: 20 days in 2002, three weeks in
2004, three months in 2009 and almost nine months in 2010[1].
 
In addition, on
August 22, 2012, Mr. Navid Khanjani, also a founding member of the CHRR
and a founding member of the Association to Oppose Discrimination in Education,
and Mr. Hossein Ronaghi Maleki, blogger and human rights activist, were
arrested along with dozens of other activists who had travelled to East
Azerbaijan province to help the earthquake victims. Both have remained in
detention although a number of other persons arrested with them have been
released on bail. 
 
In Mr. Khanjani's
case, his arrest and subsequent transfer to Evin prison in Tehran on September
8 raises fears that the authorities have decided to implement the 12-year
imprisonment sentence against him that was upheld on appeal in August 2011. Mr.
Khanjani was sentenced on charges of “spreading lies”, “creating unease in the
public mind”, “propaganda against the system”, “membership of the CHRR” and
“forming the Association to Oppose Discrimination in Education”. He indeed
contributed in establishing this association after he was banned from
continuing his academic studies for being a follower of the persecuted Baha'i
faith. The Observatory recalls that he was previously detained for 65 days in
2010[2]. 
 
As for Mr. Ronaghi
Maleki, he has been serving a 15-year prison sentence after being arrested on
December 13, 2010 and convicted on charges of “membership of Iran-Proxy
Internet Group”, “propaganda against the system”, “insulting the Iranian
Supreme Leader and the President”. At the time of his latest arrest in August
2012, he had been on sick leave after undergoing several operations on his
kidneys that were damaged after being repeatedly tortured during his detention,
including 13 months in solitary confinement. His most recent arrest raises concerns
about his physical and psychological integrity. His whereabouts remain unknown.
 
On September 8, 2012, Mr.Issa Saharkhiz, a journalist and
founding member of the Iranian Association for the Defence of Freedom of Press, went on hunger strike and refused to take food and
medicine after being transferred to the Rajaishahr prison far from his
residence in Tehran. Mr. Saharkhiz had been in hospital for about six months
until August 28 when he was sent to solitary confinement in Evin prison at the
start of the Non-Aligned Movement summit in Tehran. He was arrested on July 3,
2009 and sentenced to three years imprisonment on charges of “insulting the
leader” and “propaganda against the system.” In August 2011, the authorities
brought up a case dating back to 11 years ago, and sentenced him to two more
years imprisonment on unspecified “press-related charges”. The sentence was
reduced to 1.5 years by the appeals court.
 
Ms. Zhila
Baniyaghoub, an award-winning journalist and women's right activist, was
taken into custody at Evin prison on September 2, 2012 to serve the one-year
imprisonment sentence imposed on her in June 2010 after she was convicted on
charges of “spreading propaganda against the system” and “insulting the
president”. The sentence, along with a 30-year ban from professional
journalistic activities, was upheld on appeal in October of the same year. Ms.
Baniyaghoub's husband, economic journalist Mr. Bahman Ahmadi-Amou'i, has
been serving a five-year prison sentence after being arrested on June 20, 2009
and convicted of “gathering and colluding with intent to harm national
security”, “spreading propaganda against the system”, disrupting public
security” and “insulting the president”. In mid-June 2012, when political
prisoners in Evin prison’s Section 350 organised a ceremony to commemorate the
anniversary of demise of the late political prisoner Mr. Hoda Saber, prison
officials sent Mr. Ahmadi-Amou’i and several other prisoners to solitary
confinement. He was subsequently banished to the remote Rajaishahr prison.
There, he was insulted and confined to an isolation cell for nearly 20 days. He
remains in the same prison, even though his sentence does not provide for
‘imprisonment in exile.’
 
The Observatory is gravely concerned at
this new series of arrests and
detentions of human rights defenders, which merely aim at sanctioning their legitimate human rights activities and peaceful exercise of their
freedom of expression. It particularly fears for their physical and
psychological integrity in a context of widespread acts of torture and
ill-treatment sufferedby human rights defenders while in detention. More generally, this ongoing repressive
climate also aims at intimidating and silencing all human rights
defenders in Iran.
 
The Observatory
therefore urges the Iranian authorities to immediately and unconditionally put
an end to the judicial harassment of and drop all the charges against Ms. Shiva
Nazarahari, Ms. Zhila Baniyaghoub and Messrs. Navid Khanjani, Hossein
Ronaghi-Maleki, Issa Saharkhiz and Bahman Ahmadi-Amou'i, and to guarantee their physical and psychological
integrity under all circumstances. The Observatory more generally calls upon
the authorities to release all human rights defenders arbitrarily detained and
to conform to the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights
instruments ratified by Iran.
 
For
further information, please contact:
·      
FIDH: Arthur Manet : +
33 1 43 55 25 18
·     
OMCT: Isabelle Scherer : + 41 22 809 49 39



[1]                  See the Observatory Urgent Appeals IRN 007 / 0910 /
OBS 111 and IRN 007 / 0910 / OBS 111.1.


[2]                  See the Observatory Urgent Appeal IRN 006 / 0811 /
OBS 108.1 and Press Statement, February 8, 2011. 