Nepal:  Severe beatings inflicted on a group of five villagers, including one minor
May  3, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionRights of the child / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2011 / MayNepal: Severe beatings inflicted on a group of five villagers, including one minor
NPL 030511.CC/ NPL 030511
CHILD CONCERN/ URGENT CAMPAIGN
Torture and other forms of
ill-treatment/ Risk of impunity
                                               
The International Secretariat of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in
the following situation in Nepal.
Brief description of the
situation
The
International Secretariat of OMCT has been
informed by a reliable source and Antenna International, a member organisation
of OMCT SOS-Torture Network, about severe beatings inflicted on a group of five
villagers, including one minor, namely Umesh Lal Sah, 14 years old, Mr. Bilachhan
Yadav, 50 years old, Mr. Budheshwor Yadav, 40 years old, Mr. Jagadish
Sah, 45 years old and Mr. Bachha
Lal Mandal,50 years
old, from Kamalpur, Saptari district. 
According to the information received, on
20 April 2011, Mr. Umesh Lal Sah, Mr. Bilachhan Yadav, Mr. Budheshwor Yadav,
Mr. Jagadish Sah and Mr. Bachha Lal Manda went to Koshi Tappu, Conservation
area (which is located some 200 km south east of Kathmandu) looking for Mr.
Bilachhhan Yadav’s lost bulls and buffalos. At around 2:30 p.m., they met a
team of officials composed of two unidentified army soldiers, a forest guard
from Kamalpur Range Post and the president of Odraha Kamalpur mid-area
Management Committee.
After
verbally abusing the group of villagers, it is reported that one of the soldiers
beat Mr. Bilachhan Yadav with a rifles butt, army boots and punched with his
fists until Mr. Bilachhan Yadav fell semi-conscious to the ground. Furthermore,
the same soldier reportedly kicked Mr. Jagadish Sah two or three times on his
chest with his army boots until he also fell to the ground. Medical examination
later revealed that one of Mr. Jagadish Sah’s chest bones had been broken.
Then, the same soldier punched on Mr. Umesh Lal Sah’s mouth for three times,
until he also fell unconscious to the ground. Mr. Umesh Lal Sah’s mouth was
severely bleeding, one tooth was broken and two teeth were lost. Mr. Bachha Lal
Mandal and Mr. Budheshwor Yulav were also severely beaten till they fell to the
ground.
According
to the same information, more than one hour later, Mr. Bilachhan Yadav and Mr.
Bachha Lal Manda regained consciousness. Then they
ran to the village to get help. Several villagers, including Mr. Umesh Lal
Sah’s father, followed them to the place of the incident and rescued the three
other victims and took them all to Arogya Community Hospital, Fattepur, Saptari
district. Mr. Bilachhan Yadav, Mr. Bachha Lal Mandal and Mr. Budheshwor Yadav
were discharged after medical treatment. Due to the beatings, it is reported
that Mr. Bilachhan Yadav cannot walk properly. Mr. Umesh Lal Sah and Mr. Jagadish Sah were the most seriously injured. Mr. Umesh Lal Sah had a broken
tooth removed and the doctor advised to also remove the other two teeth. He was
later transferred to a dental clinic. He continues to take medicine regularly
and to rest at home. Due to the pain, he is only able to swallow liquid food.
Mr. Jagadish Yadav reportedly had a rip broken and was transferred to another hospital.
It
is also reported that, on 20 April 2011, the dentist who was treating Mr. Umesh
Lal Sah was threatened by a Captain of the Nepal Army from Saptari district. As
a consequence the doctor refused to continue Mr. Umesh Lal Sah’s treatment.
On
22 April 2011, the aforementioned victims reportedly informed the District
Administration Office[1]
of Saptari district about the incident. An application was registered before
this authority, urging for an investigation into the case, punishment of the
perpetrators and compensation for the victims. To date, there has been
reportedly no investigation into the aforementioned events.
The
International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern about the
allegations of ill-treatment inflicted upon the minor Umesh Lal Sah,
Mr. Bilachhan Yadav, Mr. Bundheshwor Yadav, Mr. Jagadish Sah and Mr. Bachha Lal
Mandal.
OMCT recalls that
the authorities are legally bound to effectively ensure the physical and
psychological integrity of all persons in accordance with international human
rights law, and in particular, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the Right of the Child when
child victims are involved.
OMCT recalls that, in line with their obligations
under the abovementioned treaties, it is incumbent on the competent Nepalese
authorities to consider seriously any allegations of torture and other forms of
ill-treatment, and to undertake a prompt,
effective, thorough, independent
and impartial investigation in this
regard, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them to trial and
apply adequate sanctions. 
Action requested
Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee,
in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Umesh Lal Sah, Mr. Bilachhan Yadav, Mr. Bundheshwor
Yadav, Mr. Jagadish Sah and Mr. Bachha Lal Mandal; 
ii.         Carry
out a prompt, effective, thorough, independent and impartial investigation
into the     aforementioned facts,
including the
allegations of ill-treatment inflicted upon Umesh Lal Sah, Mr. Bilachhan Yadav,
Mr. Bundheshwor Yadav, Mr. Jagadish Sah and Mr. Bachha Lal Mandal, in accordance with international human rights
standards, the
result of which must be made public, in orderto bring those responsible before a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal and apply penal, civil and/or
administrative sanctions as provided by law;
iii.        Ensure that adequate, effective and
prompt reparation, including adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is
granted to the victims concerned;
iv.        Ensure the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms
throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human
rights standards, in particular ensure that all acts of torture, and cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment are clearly defined in law as
offences in accordance with the provisions set out in Articles 1, 4 and 16 of
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment and that they be made punishable with appropriate penalties which
take into account the grave nature of the crimes as required.
Addresses
Ø Ministry of Home Affairs,
Singha Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: +977 1 4211211 / 4211264, Fax: +977 1 42
11 232
Ø Inspector General of Police,
Ramesh Chand Thakuri, Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal, PO. Box
No.: 407, Fax: +977 1 4 415 593. Email: info@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø Attorney General, Mr. Yuv Raj
Sangraula, Office of Attorney General Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +977
1 4262582, Email: attorney@mos.com.np, info@attorneygeneral@gov.np
Ø DSP Bishwa Adhikari, Human
Rights Cell, Nepal Police, Kathmandu, Nepal PO. Box. No.: 407, Fax: +977 1
4415593 E- mail: hrcell@nepalpolice.gov.np
Ø Chairman of the National Human
Rights Commission, Mr. Kedar Nath Uppadhya, Pulchowck, Lalitpur, Nepal; Email:
nhrc@nhrcnepal.org and also complaints@nhrcnepal.org, Fax: +977 1 5547973
Ø Chief of Army
Staff (CoAS), Mr. Gen Chhatra Man Singh Gurung, Nepalese Army HQ, Bhadrakali,
Kathmandu, Tel: 977-1-4246140,4241731(DPR), Fax: 977-1-4269624, Email: dpr@nepalarmy.mil.np
Ø Ministry of
Defense, Mr. Singha Durbar, Kathmandu, Tel: 977-1-4211290, 4211289, Fax:
977-1-4211294, Email: mod@mos.com.np
Ø Permanent Mission of Nepal, 81 rue de la
Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland,
Fax: +4122 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int 
Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your
respective country.
***
Geneva, 3 May 2011
Kindly inform us
of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 



[1] The District Administration Office (DAO) is the main governing body
of the district that is in charge of the overall administration of the
district, including security issues. The head of the DAO is the Chief District
Officer (CDO) who has quasi-judicial power, which includes hearing public
offence and arms and ammunition cases as well as passing verdicts and sentences
up to 7 years of imprisonment and/or 21’000 rupees. 