Rwanda:  Rwanda: disappearance of Mr. Léonard Hitimana
June 27, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Rwanda / 2003 / JuneRwanda: Rwanda: disappearance of Mr. Léonard HitimanaCase RWA 270603 Disappearances   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Rwanda.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by a Agir Ensemble pour les Droits de l'Homme, a member of the OMCT network, of the disappearance of Mr. Léonard Hitimana, a member of the transitional National Assembly in Rwanda.  According to the information received, Mr. Hitama’s car was found on April 9th, close to the the Ugandan border. Security forces have carried out an investigation at the President of the National Assembly's request, but it has been unsuccessful.   It appears that Mr. Hitimana's disappearance is linked to his activity at the MDR political party's centre. On March 17th, 2003, the Parliamentarian Commission charged with investigating the MDR, a party whose existence was permitted at that time, drafted a report accusing Mr. Hitimana of belonging to a group of people spreading ethnic discrimination and division. There was no proof, however, supporting this accusation.   OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Hitimana, particularly as incommunicado detention carries a heightened risk of torture and ill-treatment.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Rwanda urging them to:  i.	to take all measure necessary to locate Mr. Hitimana and guarantee his physical and psychological integrity. ii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	Major General Paul Kagame, President of the Republic, Presidency of the Republic, BP 15, Kigali, Rwanda, Fax : 250 84 769, 250 84 390  ·	M. Jean de Dieu Mucyo, Minister of Justice and of Institutional Relations, Ministry of Justice, BP 160 Kigali, Rwanda, Fax : 250 86 509   ·	Ambassador Valentine Rugwabiza, Rue de la Servette 93, CH-1202, Genéve, Suisse, e-mail : mission.rwanda@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 919 10 01  Please also write to the embassies of Rwanda in your respective country.  Geneva, June 27th, 2003  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 