Egypt:  Egypt: death in detention of Mr. Amr Atress Hassan
October  1, 2004
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2004 / OctoberEgypt: Egypt: death in detention of Mr. Amr Atress HassanCase EGY 011004 Death as a result of torture   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Egypt.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Egyptian Organisation for Human Rights (EOHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the death of Mr. Amr Atrees Hassan, reportedly as a result of torture, in Imbaba Police Station, Egypt.  According to the information received, Mr. Amr Atress Hassan was arrested on 9 September 2004 and presented the next day to the Prosecutor General who ordered that he be detained for four days during the course of investigations. On 12 September 2004, when he appeared before the Prosecutor General his mother was shocked by the state of his health. Mr. Amr Atrees Hassan told his mother that he had been tortured, beaten with a stick and hung by his feet from a door.   According to the information provided, Mr. Amr Atress Hassan was then taken back to Imbaba Police Station after the Prosecutor General renewed his detention. The family then received a telephone call informing them that their son had been taken to Imbaba Central Hospital. Upon reaching the hospital the family were informed that Mr. Amr Atress Hassan had died and that his body was in the hospital post mortem room. When the victim’s brother examined the body he found bruising to the wrists and ankles and the right ear and bruising to and inflammation of the abdomen area.   The family reportedly presented a report to the Prosecutor General who appointed a forensic doctor to conduct an autopsy, corroborate the injuries and determine the cause of death.   The International Secretariat of OMCT expresses its deep concern for the death of Mr. Amr Atrees Hassan, notably given the serious allegations that he was subjected to torture during his detention. OMCT calls on the authorities to immediately order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of his arrest, torture and death, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial, apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law, and award adequate reparation to his family.   Action requested Please write to the authorities in Egypt urging them to:  i. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of the arrest, the allegations of torture, and the death of Mr. Amr Atrees Hassan, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  ii. guarantee that adequate reparation is provided to the victim’s family;  iii. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, His Excellency Mohammad Hosni Mubarak, Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: webmaster@presidency.gov.eg, Fax:+202 390 1998  Minister of the Interior, His Excellency General Habib al-Adeli, Ministry of the Interior, Al-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 579 2031  Minister of Justice, His Excellency Mr Faruq Sayf al-Nasr, Ministry of Justice, Midan Lazoghly, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 795 8103   Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Maher 'Abd al-Wahid, Dar al-Qadha al-'Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 577 4716  Ambassadeur Gabr, Naéla, Av. Blanc 49 (2ème), CH-1202, Genève, Suisse, e-mail: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, fax: +4122 738 44 15  Please also write to the embassies of Egypt in your respective country.    Geneva, October 1st, 2004  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 