Nepal:  At the occasion of the Universal Periodic Review NGOs call on Nepal to end impunity for torture and other serious human rights violations
November  6, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionReports and Publications / Nepal / 2015 / NovemberNepal: At the occasion of the Universal Periodic Review NGOs call on Nepal to end impunity for torture and other serious human rights violationsStakeholderSubmission2 pages / 434 KB

Geneva, 3 November 2016. Advocacy Forum-Nepal (AFN),
the Asian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), REDRESS and the World Organisation
against Torture (OMCT) made a stakeholder submission to the Universal Periodic
Review of Nepal taking place on 4 November 2015. The submission details the
continued impunity for serious human rights violations committed during the
armed conflict and highlights the ongoing and systematic practice of torture in
detention. 
Although
Nepal has been facing various challenges, justice cannot be sacrificed. We are
deeply concerned about the government’s continuous refusal to address impunity
and the denial of justice for victims of human rights violations during armed
conflicts.
From 1996 to
2006, Nepal was gripped by an internal armed conflict between security forces
and the Communist Party of Nepal, with both sides being responsible for serious
human rights violations. Despite promises made during the last UPR review in
2011 to investigate and prosecute those crimes, Nepal has failed to take
effective actions. No members of the military, the police, the Armed Police Force
or Maoist groups have been brought to justice. Furthermore, those accused of
serious human rights violations are promoted to higher government position. Legislation
passed last year to establish a Truth and Reconciliation Commission and Enforced
Disappearances Commission circumvents justice processes and paves the way for
further impunity. 
At the same
time, victims face numerous obstacles when seeking justice. The police have
systematically refused to register complaints, which is indispensible for the
prosecution of any crime. In addition, the previous Attorney General, the Nepal
Army and the Communist Party of Nepal have interfered with police
investigations by threatening key witnesses or by misusing the power to
withdraw charges.
The entrenched
impunity for past crimes committed allows for ongoing human rights violations
in the country. The stakeholder submission details Nepal’s systemic practice of
torture in detention and the lack of implementation of recommendations by the
Committee against Torture. Nepal has neither passed legislation that
criminalizes torture, nor has it put a system in place that allows for meaningful
redress or adequate compensation for torture victims. Torture and ill-treatment
for the purpose of obtaining confessions is still practiced as a method of
criminal investigation. 
 
The organisations
call on the international community to recommend Nepal to:-     amend
the legislation establishing transitional justice mechanisms to expressly
prohibit amnesty for crimes under international law and in line with Supreme
Court decisions;-     
establish
a special unit of appropriately trained police and prosecutors to investigate
and prosecute serious human violations committed in Nepal;
-      criminalise
torture and other forms of ill-treatment, enforced disappearance, crimes
against humanity and war crimes;
-     combat
impunity by bringing to justice any individual alleged to be responsible for
torture and other serious human rights abuses committed during the armed
conflict and since;
-     
take
effective measures to prevent interference with police investigations and to
introduce severe penalties for any such interference;
-     ratify
the Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture, establish an effective
National Preventive Mechanism, and provide for full redress to victims of
torture in compliance with the Convention against Torture.
 
The universal
periodic review of Nepal will take place in Geneva on Wednesday, 4 November
2015 at 2:30 pm (GMT+1). It can be followed live at http://webtv.un.org. NGOs will also be reporting from Geneva using Twitter
- follow #NepalUPR.
The
organistions’ submission to the UPR is available here: www.omct.org/files/2015/03/23060/upr_nepal_22march2015.pdf.
 
For more information, please contact: 
- AFN: Dr. Trilochan Upreti (Executive
Director) on +977 9841351286 or upretitrilochan252@gmail.com
- AHRC: Prakash Mohara (Programme Coordinator –
Nepal Desk) at prakash.mohara@ahrc.asia 
- REDRESS: Eva Sanchis (Communications Officer) on +44
(0)20 7793 177 or eva@redress.org
- OMCT: Nicole Bürli (Human
Rights Advisor) on +41 (0)22 809 49 26 or nb@omct.org 