Philippines:  Extrajudicial killing of Mr. Antonio “Dodong” Petalcorin, Sr.
August  7, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Philippines / 2013 / AugustPhilippines: Extrajudicial killing of Mr. Antonio “Dodong” Petalcorin, Sr.

PHL
001 / 0813 / OBS 070
Extrajudicial killing
Philippines
August 7, 2013
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in The Philippines.
 
Brief description of the
situation:
 
The Observatory has been informed by Task Force
Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) about the killing of Mr. Antonio “Dodong” Petalcorin, Sr., President of the Network of
Transport Organizations (NETO), a member of the Alliance of Progressive Labor
(APL) and of Akbayan political party, in Davao.
 
According to the information received, on July 2,
2013, at around 8:15 am, Mr. Antonio “Dodong”
Petalcorin, Sr. was shot three times by an unknown gunman at his home garage in
Maharlika village, Matina Aplaya, Davao city. The gunman was allegedly caught
on a closed-circuit television (CCTV) camera as he walked away from the scene
and rode a motorcycle. Reportedly, a sketch of the suspect is currently in the
hands of the police.
 
According to Mr.
Petalcorin’s wife, her husband has not received any death threats. However,
prior to his death, another leader of a transport group, Mr. Emilio Rivera, former Chair of Matina Aplaya Transport
Cooperative (MATRANSCO), was killed on January 25, 2013. Mr. Petalcorin and Mr.
Rivera both actively campaigned against the alleged corruption at the Land
Transportation Franchising Regulatory Board (LTFRB) and against its Director,
Mr. Benjamin Go.
 
Moreover, the name of
Mr. Petalcorin had previously appeared on a power
point presentation entitled “Know Thy Enemies” allegedly made and used by the
Armed Forces of the Philippines during information campaigns conducted in
communities in 2008. This document included names of many human rights
defenders.
 
The Observatory condemns in the strongest term the
murder of Mr. Antonio “Dodong” Petalcorin, Sr. as well as of Mr. Emilio Rivera, and
calls upon the authorities of the Philippines to order an immediate, thorough, effective and impartial investigation into
their murder in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before a
civil competent and impartial tribunal and apply the penal sanctions provided
by the law.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the Philippines authorities urging
them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and
psychological integrity of all human rights defenders and their families in the
Philippines;
 
ii. Order an immediate, thorough, effective and
impartial investigation into the murder of Messrs. Antonio “Dodong” Petalcorin, Sr.
and Emilio Rivera in order to identify all
those responsible, bring them before a civil competent and impartial tribunal
and apply the penal sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii. Provide adequate reparation to the relatives of
Messrs. Antonio
“Dodong” Petalcorin, Sr. and Emilio Rivera;
 
iv. Put an end to any kind of harassment against all
human rights defenders in The Philippines;
 
v. Comply with all the provisions of the Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations
General Assembly, in particular:
- its Article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually or in association with others, to
promote the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms
at the national and international levels”, 
- Article 12.1, which foresees
that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
participate in peaceful activities against violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”,
- and its Article 12.2 which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the
present Declaration.”
 
vi. Guarantee the respect of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and other international human rights instruments ratified by the Philippines.
 
Addresses: 
 
·      
Mr. Benigno S. Aquino III, President, Republic of
the Philippines, Malacañang Palace, JP Laurel St. San Miguel, Manila,
Philippines. Fax +632 7421641/9293968. Email: opnet@ops.gov.ph
/ corres@op.gov.ph 
·      
Police Director Alan LM Purisima, Chief of the
Philippine National Police, Camp General Rafael Crame, Quezon City,
Philippines. Fax +632 7248763. Email: feedback@pnp.gov.ph

·      
Atty. Leila M. De Lima, Secretary, Department of
Justice, Padre Faura St. Manila, Philippines. Fax: +632 5211614. Email: doj.delima@gmail.com
·      
Ms. Loretta Ann P. Rosales, Chairperson, Commission
on Human Rights of the Philippines (CHRP), SAAC Building, UP Complex, Commonwealth Avenue,
Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines. Tel/Fax: +632 929 5655. Fax +632 9290102. Email: chair.rosales.chr@gmail.com
·  Mr. Joseph Emilio Aguinaldo Abaya, Secretary,
Department of Transportation and Communication, The Columbia Tower. Ortigas
Avenue, Barangay Wack-wack, Mandaluyong City, Philippines. Fax + 632 7234925.
Email: webmaster@dotc.gov.ph 
·      
Atty. Winston M. Ginez, Chairman, Land
Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board, East Avenue, Diliman, Quezon
City 1100, Philippines. Fax +632 9257191. Email: contact@ltfrb.gov.ph 
·      
H.E. Mr. Denis
Y. Lepatan, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the United
Nations in Geneva, 47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 716
19 32, Email: geneva.pm@dfa.gov.ph 
·      
H.E. Ms.
Victoria Sisante Bataclan, Ambassador, Embassy of the Philippines in Brussels,
297 Avenue Moliere, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 345 64 25. Email: brussels@philembassy.be 
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations
of the Philippines in your respective countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, August 7, 2013
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting
the code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated
to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete
support in their time of need.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:

·      
Email: Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·      
Tel and fax
OMCT: + 41 22 809 49 39 / 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax
FIDH: +33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / 01 43 55 18 80 