China:  The draft Overseas NGO Management law must be substantially revised
June  3, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / China / 2015 / JuneChina: The draft Overseas NGO Management law must be substantially revisedPR China2 pages / 75 KBCHINA: The draft Overseas NGO Management law must 
be substantially revised
 
Geneva-Paris, June 3, 2015 
– The Observatory for the Protection of 
Human Rights defenders (a joint programme of the World Organisation against 
Torture –OMCT and FIDH), is 
extremely concerned about the draft Overseas NGO Management law, which is under 
discussion after its second reading by the National People
’s Congress (NPC) in April, as it would 
inevitably shrink the space for Chinese civil society and severely restrict 
freedom of association and expression in the country. 
 
In a context where overseas NGOs have been 
unable to register in China for the past twenty yeas, a new draft law proposes 
to restrict further the possibility for overseas NGOs to conduct activities in 
China. The draft law requires “overseas NGOs”that want to operate in China to 
obtain an approval from a Chinese professional supervisory unit prior to their 
registration, and bans the ones that are not registered[1]with the public security departments of the 
State Council and provincial public security departments (Art. 7) from funding 
any Chinese individual or organization (Arts. 5 and 6). Furthermore, it 
prohibits Chinese groups from conducting “activities”on behalf of or with the 
authorization of non-registered overseas NGOs, including those based in Hong 
Kong and Macau (Art. 38).
 
“The requirement for Overseas NGO 
to get approval from a professional supervisory unit before they can even start 
the registration process raises particular concern, since it represents a deeply 
worrisome provision that puts a high level of state oversight and control over 
all their activities and poses a serious threat to their freedom of 
association”said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary General.
 
The Observatory is particularly concerned by 
the broad and vague wording contained in the draft law, particularly regarding 
the definition of “activities”, and fears that this could easily open the 
legislation for abuse by the Chinese authorities.
 
Furthermore, for organizations found in 
violation of financial or tax regulationsover funding, the draft law foresees 
closure, a fine up to 50,000 RMB (US $8,000) and possible administrative 
detention for their staff members (Art. 56).
 
Despite the very controversial provisions 
contained in the draft overseas NGO Management law, the opportunity for public 
and civil society to comment on the law has been limited.
 
“The fact that at the same time the 
Chinese government is discussing two other draft laws on national security and 
counter-terrorism is particularly worrisome, since as the UN Special Rapporteur 
on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association clearly 
affirmed, putting 
constraints on NGO funding in the name of national 
security ’or 
‘
counter-terrorism’
is illegitimate”concluded Karim Lahidji, FIDH 
President.
 
The Observatory calls upon Chinese authorities 
to substantially revise the Overseas NGO Management law by opening and not 
restricting the space for civil society, in order to bring it into line with 
international human rights standards.The Observatory also generally calls on the 
Chinese authorities to respect and protect the independent work of civil society 
and human rights defenders in the country.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human 
Rights Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The objective of 
this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy to situations of repression 
against human rights defender.
 
For more  
information, please  contact:
·         
FIDH: Arthur Manet / 
Audrey Couprie: + 
33(0)143 
552518
·         
OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: + 41 (0) 22 809 49 
24

 


[1]The requirements for registration of overseas 
NGOs depend on the kind of presence they want to have in China set-up of an 
office or conduct of temporary activities. The draft sets many requirements for 
registration. For more details on the content of the draft law, see HRIC Law 
Note “Draft Law on Foreign NGOs Undermines Chinese Civil Society and China’s 
International Engagement”, May 21, 2015: http://www.hrichina.org/en/legal-resources/hric-law-note-draft-law-foreign-ngos-undermines-chinese-civil-society-and-chinas 