Kyrgyzstan:  UN calls for immediate release of human rights defender Azimjan Askarov
April 25, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2016 / AprilKyrgyzstan: UN calls for immediate release of human rights defender Azimjan Askarov

JOINT PRESS
RELEASE
 
Paris-Geneva-Bishkek, April 25,
2016 - In
a decision made public on April 21, the United
Nations (UN) Human Rights Committee (CCPR) confirmed that Azimjan Askarov was
tortured, subject to inhuman conditions while in pre-trial detention and that
his trial did not respect minimum international fair trial standards. The CCPR
urged Kyrgyzstan to immediately release Azimjan Askarov, sentenced to life
imprisonment in 2010 after mass disturbances in southern Kyrgyzstan.

                                                                                                 © RFE/RL


Arrested on June 15, 2010, Azimjan Askarov was
charged with participating in mass unrest, inciting racial strife, illegal
weapons trafficking, and being an accessory to the murder of a police officer.
Azimjan Askarov and his lawyers have repeatedly claimed the innocence of the
defendant, providing proof that he was not even present at the crime scene. In
its decision, the UN CCPR ordered the quashing of A. Askarov’s conviction on
the grounds that A. Askarov’s defence was obstructed during the judicial
process, through the prevention of the examination of witnesses on his behalf,
obstacles posed on A. Askarov’s lawyer from attending the first hearing, and
the little time allocated for the preparation of his defence.
 
Since his arrest in June 2010, A. Askarov has claimed that
he was tortured and ill-treated during the first days of detention, when he was
also denied access to a lawyer. His claims were never duly investigated by
Kyrgyzstan. On April 21, the UN CCPR also confirmed the inhuman treatment and
acts of torture suffered by Azimjan Askarov, and ordered the State to provide
compensation and remedy. 
 
“For the past six years, we have been
relentlessly denouncing the unfair trial and arbitrary detention suffered by
Azimjan Askarov, and most recently raised his case during an Observatory
fact-finding mission in Kyrgyzstan. We hope that this landmark UN decision will
make Kyrgyzstan stand up to its international commitments, and lead to the
release of A. Askarov”, said FIDH President Karim Lahidji. 
 
Prior to his detention in June 2010, A. Askarov, an ethnic
Uzbek, was investigating police brutality as well as detention conditions in
Kyrgyz prisons. During the ethnic clashes of June 2010 in southern Kyrgyzstan
that resulted in the death of nearly 500 Uzbeks and the displacement of
hundreds of thousands, A. Askarov notably documented violence in Bazar Kurgan. 
 
“The continuous harassment of
Azimjan Askarov
while in detention is not only unacceptable. It is a clear violation of
prisoners’ rights. To any objective observer it also underscores the political
nature of the case in the first place. There is really no justification
whatsoever to restrict his rights to receive parcels and to receive visits,
including family members and his lawyer”, said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
 
Since the award of the Human Rights Defenders Prize by the
United States State Department in July 2015, the Kyrgyz Government has been
declining all visit requests from Western diplomats, human rights defenders and
NGOs, including one from the Observatory in September 2015. 
 
The Observatory urges the international community to call
upon the Kyrgyz authorities to immediately release Azimjan Askarov in
conformity with the CCPR decision, and to refrain from further harassment
against the latter whose health keeps deteriorating. A. Askarov has been
diagnosed with severe heart diseases, and his vision and hearing have
deteriorated significantly during the last months. It is likely that these
symptoms are at least partially connected to the injuries he sustained in 2010
while in the hands of the police. 
 
Last week, the Director of the Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights (ODIHR) of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE) and
the European Union External Action
Service (EEAS) called on the Kyrgyz authorities to implement the CCPR decision. The OSCE/ODIHR Director specifically urged the authorities to release A. Askarov.
 
The UN CCPR is the body of independent
experts that monitors implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights by its State parties. The case of A. Askarov was considered under the
First Optional Protocol to the Covenant, which gives the CCPR competence to
examine individual complaints.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the
Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to intervene to
prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights defenders.

For more information, please contact:
• FIDH: Audrey Couprie: + 33143552518
• OMCT: Delphine Reculeau: +41228094939
• Bir Duino: Tolekan Ismailova:
+996 555 747 452
• Kylym Shamy:
Aziza Abdirasulova +996312351851, +996 502 366623 