Belarus:  Judicial harassment of Leanid Sudalenka and Anatolii Poplavnyi, members of the Human Rights Centre “Viasna”
March 16, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Belarus / 2017 / MarchBelarus: Judicial harassment of Leanid Sudalenka and Anatolii Poplavnyi, members of the Human Rights Centre “Viasna”​















 URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
BLR 001 / 0317 / OBS 027
Judicial
harassment
Belarus
March 16,
2017

The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Belarus.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has
been informed by reliable sources about the judicial harassment of Messrs. Leanid
Sudalenka and Anatolii


Poplavnyi, members of the Gomel chapter of the Human Rights Centre
“Viasna”. 
 
According to the
information received, on March 17, 2017, Leanid Sudalenka and Anatolii
Poplavnyi will appear before the Central District Court of Gomel on charges of
“participation in unsanctioned protests” (under Article 23,34 of the Code of
Administrative Offences) after participating in peaceful demonstrations that
took place on February 19, 2017, in Gomel where nearly 4,000 citizens took to
the streets to protest against Presidential Decree No. 3 "on the prevention
of dependency on social aid" which in violation of international human
rights law sanctions unemployment by imposing a penalty ranging from a fee
to  imprisonment on Belarusian citizens
who have worked less than a certain number of days[1] (see
background information). If found guilty as charged, both face an administrative fine up to 350
euros or risk being placed in administrative detention for up to 15 days. 
 
In addition, Mr.
Leanid Sudalenka has drafted and submitted to courts more than 200 complaints
on behalf of citizens against the provisions of the Decree in response to
notifications that citizens received in the beginning of the year 2017 urging
them to pay the fee. Mr. Leanid Sudalenka was also the first lawyer bringing a
successful claim against the fee, setting a precedent for approximately half a
million Belarusians who received a notification to pay a fee to the State. As a
result, he was publicly named by the authorities the “lawyer of spongers”. 
 
The
Observatory thus believes that the judicial harassment against Messrs. Leanid
Sudalenka and Anatolii Poplavnyi is a retaliation of their legitimate and
peaceful human rights activities.
 
The
Observatory urges Belarusian authorities to put an end to all forms of
harassment, including at the judicial level against Messrs. Leanid Sudalenka
and Anatolii Poplavnyi and to uphold international human rights standards to
which Belarus is bound with respect to freedom of assembly.
 
Background information: 
 
In April 2015,
President of Belarus Aleksandr Lukashenka signed Decree No. 3 “on the
prevention of dependency on social aid” as a means to “stimulate employment”.
This Decree violates international human rights law as it imposes fines and
imprisonment as a sanction for unemployment[2].

 
The Decree requires
citizens to work more than 183 days a year or to pay a special duty to finance
government expenditures. As provided by Decree No. 3, non-payment or partial
payment of such a levy entails administrative responsibility in the form of a
fine or administrative arrest. Thus, stimulation of employment is sought
through forced employment and the threat of short-term imprisonment rather than
through the implementation of competitive salaries, social benefits and
guarantees.
 
It should be noted
that the Belarusian authorities have been actively practicing forced labour,
which has repeatedly provoked criticism from both Belarusian and international
human rights organizations[3].
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Belarus, urging them to:
 
i. Put an end to
any form of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Messrs.
Sudalenka and Poplavnyi;
 
ii. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Messrs. Leanid Sudalenka and Anatolii Poplavnyi as well as all
human rights defenders in Belarus;
 
iii. Comply with all their international obligations to
respect the exercise of the citizens' right to peaceful assembly;
 
iv. Comply with the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular with its Articles 1, 2, 5 and 12.2;
 
v. Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Belarus.

Addresses :
 
·               
President Aliaksandr Lukashenka, Belarus, Fax: + 375 172 26 06 10 or +
375 172 22 38 72, Email: contact@president.gov.by
·               
General Prosecutor, Alexander Konyuk, Belarus, Fax: + 375 17 226 42 52
·               
Minister of Justice of Belarus, Mr. Oleg Slizhevsky, Email:
kanc@minjust.by, Fax: + 375 17 200 86 87
·               
President of the Supreme Court of Belarus, Mr. Valiantsin Alehavich
Sukala, Belarus, Email: scjustrb@pmrb.gov.by
·               
Administration of the Central District Court of Gomel, Tel/Fax: +375 232
77 68 77, Email: centr-gomel@court.by
·               
H.E. Mr. Yury Ambrazevich, Permanent Mission of Belarus to the United
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 748 24 51. Email:
mission.belarus@ties.itu.int
·               
H.E. Mr. Aleksandr Mikhnevich, Embassy of Belarus in Brussels, Fax: + 32
2.340.02.87, Email: belgium@mfa.gov.by
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
representations of Belarus in your respective countries.
 
 ***
 
Paris-Geneva, March 16, 2017
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The objective of this programme is to
intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu , the European Union Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency
line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80
Tel and fax OMCT + 41
(0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
 



[1]    Protests against the Presidential decree erupted in the
cities of Gomel, Brest and Mogilev at the end of February 2017 to express
massive public discontent with the Decree’s provisions. See “Online from the
spongers’ protests” (in Belarusian), Belsat TV channel: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lMitNEg1EGU


[2]    
See FIDH Press Release, “New presidential decree in Belarus uses fines and
imprisonment as a means to "stimulate" employment”, April 15, 2015, https://www.fidh.org/en/region/europe-central-asia/belarus/new-presidential-decree-in-belarus-uses-fines-and-imprisonment-as-a


[3]    
See FIDH-HRC "Viasna" Report, “Forced Labor and the Pervasive
Violation of Workers’ Rights in Belarus", December 2013: https://www.fidh.org/en/region/europe-central-asia/belarus/forced-labor-and-the-pervasive-violation-of-workers-rights-in-belarus 