Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Massive arrest and excessive use of force by security forces
September 27, 2007
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2007 / SeptemberMyanmar (ex-Burma): Massive arrest and excessive use of force by security forcesThe World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) expresses its deep concern over massive arrest and excessive use of force by security forces in different cities in Burma, including Rangoon and Mandalay, subsequent to peaceful protests which had begun in August.  Since curfew order was imposed in the evening of 25 September 2007 by the authorities, massive arrest was reported in a crackdown on anti-government protests launched by the ruling State Peace and Development Council (SPDC).  According to reports, at least five monks and two civilians were killed and several hundreds of peaceful demonstrators, including monks, nuns, students, civilians, members of the main opposition party, the National League for Democracy (NLD) and members of parliament, were arrested by security forces. OMCT fears that the detainees may be at risk of torture or other ill-treatment.  Furthermore, demonstrators were reportedly brutally attacked and beaten by security forces while taking the streets. Security forces reportedly used teargas and fired shots to disperse the crowd.  Early this morning at least three monasteries in Rangoon, the Sasan Gonyi Monastry, the Sasana Veikman Monastery and the Ngwe Kyar Yan Monastery, were reportedly raided by security forces and Buddhist monks were brutally beaten and dragged into waiting trucks.  Nationwide demonstrations had begun in August 2007 against the sudden increase by the regime of fuel prices, therefore leading to a deterioration of the standard of living. Buddhist monks had taken the lead in the protests.  OMCT expresses its deepest concern regarding these events, which evidence the extremely repressive environment in the country, and calls upon the Burmese authorities to guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all detained individuals and to release them immediately and unconditionally since their detention is arbitrary.  While the United Nations Human Rights Council currently meets in Geneva, OMCT urges Member States to urgently convene a special session on the serious human rights situation in Burma and calls upon the international community in particular States of the region to facilitate a peaceful resolution of the crisis abiding by international human rights law.  More generally, OMCT calls upon the Burmese authorities to ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and international instruments ratified by Burma.   For further information, please contact: Eric Sottas + 00 41 22 809 49 39 