Indonesia:  Human Rights Council: Join us to a panel discussion on "Human Rights and Indigenous Peoples in Asia: Cases in West Papua" on 25 September
September 24, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Events / Indonesia / 2013 / SeptemberIndonesia: Human Rights Council: Join us to a panel discussion on "Human Rights and Indigenous Peoples in Asia: Cases in West Papua" on 25 September Invitation_Side event1 page / 387 KB

Human Rights and Indigenous Peoples in
Asia:
Cases in West Papua 

25 September 2013,  12:00 – 14:00, Room XXII, Palais des Nations
This parallel event aims at critically reviewing the human
rights situation of Indigenous Peoples in Asia, with specific focus on West
Papua, in Indonesia. With considerably limited access to effective complaint mechanisms
to provide remedies, members of indigenous communities in Asia face state
violence, stigmatization and suffer from the exploitation of natural resources
they hold customary rights to. As marginalized groups indigenous peoples face
additional challenges to claim their rights, including institutional
discrimination and a context often marked by conflicts. 
The UN Special Rapporteur on the rights of the Indigenous
Peoples in his report mentioned on the “widespread
negative impacts of extractive projects that are implemented in or near
indigenous peoples’ territories in paces throughout Asia”. Further he also
made a reference on the cases of militarization of indigenous peoples’
territories and that the presence of military forces in he indigenous areas is
alleged to have resulted in a number of violation of human rights of indigenous
peoples. 
A serious example in Asia is the situation of
indigenous Papuans in Indonesia. There has been continuous violation of human
rights of the indigenous Papuans and the fact that the international access to
Papua has been made very difficult. UN Special Procedures, independent foreign
journalists and other international observers are not given access to this
conflict region. The panel will shed light on sources of the conflict and
ongoing impunity and will discuss strategies to ensure peace and protection of
rights.
Panelist
1.    
Mr. Gustaf Kawer, Human rights lawyer
Victimization based on ethnicity: Remedies for victims
of torture among indigenous Papuans
2.    
Ms. Answer Styannes, Asian Human Rights Commission
History of violence and prospects for conflict resolution: Case study of
history of mass violence in West Papua 
3.    
Mr. Leonard Imbiri, YADUPA
The use of Free Prior and Informed Consent in cases of natural resources
extraction affecting indigenous peoples
Discussant: 
 Mr.
Muridan S. Widjojo, Center for Political Studies, Indonesian Institute of
Sciences
Moderator
 Mr. Adrien-Claude Zoller, Geneva for Human
Rights – Global Training (tbc) 
Light
refreshment will be provided 
We are
very happy that the WCC will host a reception organized by the international
coalition for Papua on Monday. September 23, 18.00 – 19.30 at the Ecumenical
Centre, World Council of Churches, where you can have more in depth interaction
with the human rights defenders from Papua 