Global action plan calls for States at the UN General Assembly to ensure protection of human rights defenders worldwide
December 18, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2018 / DecemberGlobal action plan calls for States at the UN General Assembly to ensure protection of human rights defenders worldwideA plan of action 
for how to protect and promote the work of human rights defenders will 
be presented today to the UN General Assembly following a major 
international summit held at the end of October.  This effort to move 
the international community at the highest level on the need to ensure 
the effective safety and security of human rights defenders around the 
world comes at a time when their role is constantly challenged and 
undermined in blatant contradiction with international obligations and 
commitments.
The meeting will 
take place on 18 December 2018, twenty years on from when the first UN 
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders was created A representative from 
the recent Human Rights Defenders World Summit is set to present the 
outcomes at the UN General Assembly, shining a spotlight on the increasing levels of danger facing activists worldwide.  
”We can only 
attain peace, security, dignity and sustainable development if we 
advance justice, freedom and equality for all, the ultimate goals of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,” said Alice Mogwe, Director of 
Ditshwanelo - the Botswana Centre for Human Rights, on behalf of The 
Human Rights Defenders World Summit. 
States are the 
main perpetrators behind violations against human rights defenders, 
either directly or in complicity with other powerful non-State actors. 
They must take urgent action to recognise their essential role, protect 
those at risk, and take concrete measures to foster a safe and enabling 
environment for the defence of human rights without discrimination. 
“Governments, 
companies and other powerful figures are harassing, spying on, jailing, 
torturing and even killing human rights defenders – just for defending 
the fundamental rights of their communities. These people must be respected, protected and able to live and work in an environment where it is safe to claim human rights.” 
Marking the 20th anniversary of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the 70th
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, more than 150
human rights defenders from around the world gathered in Paris earlier 
this year to plan for the next 20 years of advancing human rights.
The Summit came
at a time when, on an almost daily basis, a human rights defender is 
reported killed, when criminalization and defamation have become 
standard risks, when illegitimate and abusive restrictions to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful assembly are routinely introduced 
into law and when governments are failing their commitments made in 1998
to respect and protect these people.
During
the summit, the participants adopted an Action Plan to be urgently 
implemented by States, businesses, financial institutions donors and 
intergovernmental institutions. https://hrdworldsummit.org/action-plan/
The Action Plan 
stresses that it is everyone’s responsibility to create an environment 
in which it is truly possible and safe to claim our human rights. 
However, it emphasises that those with power, state and non-state 
actors, must take the lead in creating a safe and enabling environment 
for those who defend human rights. 
Since the Summit, thousands of people around the world have signed the Summit’s petition urging those in power to Protect Human Rights Defenders Everywhere. 
Notes to editors
The Human Rights Defenders World Summit 2018 (www.hrdworldsummit.org)
The Human Rights Defenders 
World Summit 2018 brought together a diverse group of over 150 human 
rights defenders from around the world for three days of meetings, panel
discussions, networking and workshopping. These activists, who are at 
the forefront of struggles for social, political and environmental 
changes in their countries, had the opportunity to connect and engage 
with regional and international human rights organizations, global 
government leaders, the United Nations, donors and the private sector. 
The first Human Rights Defenders World Summit took place 20 years ago in
1998 at the Palais de Chaillot, Paris, the same location where this year’s closing ceremony was held.
About the organizations involved:
Amnesty International
Amnesty International is a global movement of more than seven million 
people who take injustice personally. We are campaigning for a world 
where human rights are enjoyed by all. We are funded by members and 
people like you. We are independent of any political ideology, economic 
interest or religion.          
Association for Women’s Rights in Development (AWID)
AWID is a global feminist 
organisation with over 5,000 individual and institutional members from 
164 countries. We support feminist, women’s rights and gender justice 
movements to thrive, to be a driving force in challenging systems of 
oppression, and to co-create feminist realities.
FIDH
FIDH 
(International Federation for Human Rights) is an international human 
rights NGO federating 184 organisations from 112 countries. Since 1922, 
FIDH has been defending all civil, political, economic, social and 
cultural rights as set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Front Line Defenders
Front Line Defenders works for
the protection, security and well-being of human rights defenders at 
risk around the world, providing grants, training and capacity building 
in physical and digital protection, advocacy and campaigning/visibility 
for HRDs.
International Service for Human Rights
The
International Service for Human Rights is an independent, 
non-governmental organisation dedicated to promoting and protecting 
human rights. We achieve this by supporting human rights defenders, 
strengthening human rights systems, and leading and participating in 
coalitions for human rights change.
OMCT
The World Organisation Against
Torture (OMCT) is the world’s largest coalition of non-governmental 
organisations fighting against arbitrary detention, torture, summary and
extrajudicial executions, forced disappearances and other forms of 
violence and provides a comprehensive system of support and protection for human rights defenders. 
ProtectDefenders.EU
ProtectDefenders.eu is the 
European Union Human Rights Defenders mechanism, established to protect 
defenders at high risk and facing the most difficult situations 
worldwide. Led by a consortium of 12 NGOs active in the field of human 
rights.
Reporters Without Borders 
Reporters Without Borders, or 
Reporters Sans Frontières, is an international non-profit, 
non-governmental organization based in Paris, France, that conducts 
political advocacy on issues relating to freedom of information and 
freedom of the press. 