Sri Lanka: OMCT presentes a report on state violence to the United Nations Committee on Human Rights
November  3, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Sri Lanka / 2003 / NovemberSri Lanka: Sri Lanka: OMCT presentes a report on state violence to the United Nations Committee on Human RightsSri Lanka: OMCT presents a report on state violence to the United Nations Human Rights Committee.   OMCT, in collaboration with the Asian Legal Resource Centre (ALRC), Centre for Rule of Law, Sri Lanka, and People against Torture (PAT), Sri Lanka and other groups, presented an alternative report on the effects of state violence on Sri Lanka to the United National Human Rights Committee on October 30th, 2003,   The report details persistent violations of human rights in Sri Lanka, due in part to failures in the operation of the police and the justice system. The police, in its functioning, is increasingly subjected to political influence and there is little effective control over and disciplinary action against police officers. There have not been any effective prosecutions of state officials by the Attorney general’s department to this date. The judiciary faces constraints in acting independently, particularly in relation to complaints of torture by state agents.   Special attention is given to the issue of forced disappearances; it is estimated that since 1982 there have been over 50,000 cases in the territory. It is noted with concern that the authorities have failed to implement the recommendations of the United Nations working group on enforced or involuntary disappearances and in particular to prosecute successfully the state officials and politicians responsible for disappearances.   The situation of children is disturbing as minors are also tortured, mostly by the police in police stations. These police offers appear to enjoy total impunity in relation to these acts. Chamila Bandara, a 17 year old, testified before the Committee about the torture he endured.   During the long civil war, a significant number of women were raped by soldiers or agents of the police force. These crimes remain unpunished to this day.  Consequently, OMCT, the Asian Legal Resource Centre (ALRC), Centre for Rule of Law, and People against Torture (PAT) recommend that the Sri Lankan authorities order a thorough and impartial investigation into the violations denounced in the report, to identify those responsible, bring them to a fair and impartial trial. The state should ensure that adequate reparation is provided to the families of the victims of these violations and take measures to prevent all forms of violence perpetrated by state agents.   Contact OMCT: Christine Ferrier    +4122 809.49.39 