OMCT E-Bulletin – May 2017
May 23, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionMonitoring protection mechanisms / Reports and Publications / 2017 / MayOMCT E-Bulletin – May 2017


OMCT E-Bulletin – May 2017
60th
session of the Committee Against Torture




This E-Bulletin is part of
OMCT’s “Convention Against Torture Programme”. OMCT mobilizes and coordinates
activities of civil society organizations during the sessions of the United
Nations Committee Against Torture (CAT). It facilitates the engagement of civil
society by building coalitions, sharing information, ensuring timely and
effective report submissions, advising on advocacy opportunities and supporting
effective access to the CAT. Find out more on our work on our website.
Contents: What’s new / OMCT submissions
/ Summaries of the CAT State reviews
/ Next sessions / Stay up-to-date / We thank



During its 60th session (12 April – 17 May
2017) the CAT considered the State reports of Afghanistan, Argentina, Bahrain, Lebanon, Pakistan and the Republic of
Korea. In accordance with Article 19 of the
Convention Against Torture, every four years State Parties submit a report to
the CAT on any new measures taken to implement the Convention. These reports
are reviewed in public sessions, in which the respective State Party has a constructive dialogue with the CAT. The day before the consideration of the report, NGOs
that have submitted an alternative report can raise and discuss their concerns during
a private NGO briefing with the CAT. At the end of each session, the CAT publishes its “Concluding Observations”, which make specific recommendations for each State reviewed and
issues for them follow up on within one year.

 
OMCT reception for CAT “members,
friends and family” at N’vy Hotel on April 19




WHAT’S
NEW



Discussion on the Draft Revised General Comment on
non-refoulement
On 28
April 2017, the CAT held a general discussion on the draft
revised General Comment « on the implementation of article 3 of the
Convention in the context of article 22 » with the
participation of representatives of States Parties, UN entities and specialized
agencies, NGOs and other interested organizations. Debates revolved around the
scope of extra-territoriality of the Convention, diplomatic assurances in
the context of transferring a person from one State to another, the connection
between article 3 and extradition treaties, and procedural safeguards, remedies
and rehabilitation to guarantee the principle of non-refoulement. Find our
joint NGO report.



OMCT
SUBMISSIONS



Alternative report on
Afghanistan
A
coalition of four NGOs, led by the Civil Society and Human Rights Network (CSHRN)
and with the support of OMCT,
submitted a joint alternative report on Afghanistan. The joint report underscores
the need to legally define and criminalize torture comprehensively in line with
the Convention. It denounces the prevalence of torture in detention of torture
by non-state actors particularly on women and girls, and of inhuman traditions
such as Bachabazi – the enslaving and abuse of boys for sexual purposes. Full report.
Alternative reports on
Pakistan
OMCT contributed to two
joint alternative reports on Pakistan. One report, written in collaboration
with Justice Project Pakistan and Reprieve, denounces a number of violations: the
recurrent use of torture on detainees; convictions to death penalty based on
confessions obtained under coertion; the absence of a definition of torture in
Pakistan’s legislation; poor prison conditions on death row; and the execution
of juvenile in conflict with the law and mentally-ill persons. Full
report.
The other
report, submitted with the Human
Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) and the Society for the Protection of the Rights of the Child (SPARC),
focuses on impunity and lack of investigation into allegations of torture and
extra-judicial killings; enforced disappearances; violence against women and
children; and prison conditions amounting to cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment. Full
report.



SUMMARIES
OF THE CAT STATE REVIEWS



Afghanistan
Alleged perpetrators of torture hold top government positions 
During
the second periodic review of
Afghanistan, the Committee welcomed some legal and
political advances such as the establishment of the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission (AIHRC) in 2002 or the adoption
of the National Plan on the Elimination of Torture. The Committee said it remains
concerned about the prevailing impunity allowing individuals responsible for
gross human rights violations to hold top government positions and recommended
that laws providing amnesty be repealed and that all perpetrators be prosecuted.
It
also reflected on the many reports about serious torture and other
ill-treatment of suspects, detained on national security grounds, while in
custody of the National Directorate of Security or the Afghan national and
local police. The situation is particularly worrisome in the Kandahar province,
where General
Abdul Raziq, ANP Commander, as being widely suspected of complicity, if
not of personal implication, in severe human rights abuses.
The Committee also
raised concerns about detention within prisons, particularly about reports that
at Parwan (Bagram) detention facilities detainees are routinely tortured and have
severely restricted access to their lawyers. The Committee also took note of reports
that at least 160 children are detained just like adults, being punished rather
than rehabilitated, and recommended that they be transferred to juvenile centres
instead.
The
Committee also condemned the high prevalence of domestic violence against
women, as well as corporal punishment and death imposed by Jirga Courts, informal
parallel judicial mechanisms which operate outside of the rule of law.
Other matters of
concern included death penalty; the insufficient support given to the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission; the threatening of human rights defenders
and activists; the harmful practices against children such as child marriages
and Bachabaazi, and the widespread
use of forced confessions as evidence in trials. 
Issues for follow-up
are: 
1.   
Ensure that all candidates for official executive
positions have not perpetrated any human rights violation.
2.   
Impartial investigation and punishment of all cases of
coerced confessions.
3.    Immediate
moratorium on executions and commutation of death sentences.
Read
more:
·       
Concluding Observations
·       
Webcast

Argentina
State of emergency in prisons due to overcrowding
During the
review of the State’s fifth and sixth reports, the Committee
noted that Argentina had adopted several laws and institutional initiatives to
apply the Convention. Nevertheless, it regretted that key recommendations from
the 2004 review, such as the creation of a national register on torture and
ill-treatment or the establishment of a National Mechanism of Prevention, had
not been implemented.
Torture
and ill-treatment are still a common practice in places of detention at the
hands of the security forces. Investigations are not being carried out
efficiently, and victims are reticent to file complaints for fear of reprisals.
The Committee recommended to establish a fully independent mechanism mandated
to receive and investigate complaints as well as a system to protect and assist
victims of torture and witnesses deprived of liberty.  
The Committee pointed out the dramatic increase in the number of
detainees since 2009 resulting in severe overcrowding and on-going degradation
of conditions of detention. The situation in the Buenos Aires province has been
qualified as an « emergency ». In this regard the Committee recommended
the development of a methodology to assess the capacity of prisons and bring
them in compliance with international standards. Concern was also raised about
prolonged detention in police stations, the widespread use of solitary
confinement, and the high number of deaths in custody.
With
regard to non-refoulement, the
Committee expressed concern about the recent decision of the Supreme Justice
Court allowing extradition under diplomatic guarantees of persons in risk of
being tortured or killed upon return. It also referred to the 3,470 complaints
filed in 2016 on cases of discrimination of migrants, Afro-descendants and
transgender persons, recommending the thorough investigation of arbitrary
detentions on discriminatory grounds.   
Other
issues raised were the need to bring the definition of torture in the Penal
Code in line with international standards; the use of violence and arbitrary
detentions by federal and provincial security forces against socially
marginalized young people and minors; the high number of pre-trial detainees, and
the alarming increase in gender-based violence. 
Issues to
follow-up are:
1.   
Investigate all complaints of death, torture and
ill-treatment by security forces
2.   
Create the National Prevention Mechanism 
3.    Establish
a national register of complaints, investigations, prosecutions, penalties 
Read more:
·       
Concluding Observations
·       
Webcast

Bahrain
Reports of torture of human rights defenders and journalists 
During the review of
the second and third periodic reports
of Bahrain, submitted 12 years after the consideration of its initial report,
the Committee remained concerned about reprisals and alleged torture and ill-treatment
of human rights defenders, journalists and their families. The allegations
received include serious acts of intimidation, threats, revocation of
citizenship, as well as arrests and arbitrary detention in retaliation for
their work. Specific concern was expressed with regard to the situation of Abdulhadi
Al-Khawaja, Naji Fateel, Nabeel Rajab, Abduljalil Al-Singace, Hussain Jawad and
Abdulwahab Hussain. 
The
Committee further condemned the widespread acceptance of forced confessions as
evidence in courts, even in cases where persons are sentenced to 25 years of
incarceration or the death penalty. Indeed, three persons were executed on 15
January 2017 whose sentences are reportedly based on confessions obtained under
torture. The Committee urged Bahrain to ensure that evidence obtained through
any form of coercion or torture is inadmissible in all judicial proceedings and
enact legislation for inquiries on allegations of torture when brought to the
attention of the judges by the defendant or their counsel. 
Regarding
the resumption of the application of the death penalty, the Committee
recommended the prompt re-establishment of a moratorium on the use of the death
penalty and to consider in this context to pardon, reprieve and commute
sentences for persons on death row. 
The
experts said they were concerned about the prevailing impunity of torture
crimes in Bahrain, as evidenced by the low number of convictions and sentences for
perpetrators of torture resulting in, inter
alia, death that were not commensurate with the gravity of the crime. 
Other
matters of concern included trials of civilians by military courts, violations
of fundamental legal safeguards for persons deprived of their liberty, poor
detention conditions, treatment of minors while in arrest, and domestic and
sexual violence against women, including marital rape. 
Issues for
follow-up are:
1.   
Prompt re-establishment of a moratorium on the use of
the death penalty
2.   
Regular visits of places of deprivation of liberty by
independent monitoring bodies 
3.    Accept the
visit of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture 
Read more:
·       
Concluding Observations
·       
Webcast

Lebanon
Initial report arrives over 14 years late
Lebanon
submitted its initial report 14 years late, preventing the Committee from
periodically reviewing the State’s compliance with the Convention since its
ratification in 2000. Over 2012 and 2013, the Committee conducted a
confidential inquiry on Lebanon under Article 20 of the Convention including a
visit to Lebanon (A/69/44, Annex XIII, paras 38 and 40).  
 
During the review of
Lebanon’s initial report, the
Committee called on the State to define torture in full conformity with article
1 of the Convention. Moreover, it added the absolute prohibition of torture ought
to be incorporated into its legislation and that no exceptional circumstances should
be invoked as a justification of torture. 
While
Lebanon articulated that torture is in no way a State policy, the Committee
referred to the consistent reports describing that security and military forces
routinely use torture against suspects in custody, including children, to
extract confessions or as a form of punishment. The Committee insisted that the
law should explicitly prohibit the non-validity at court of evidence obtained
through torture. Furthermore, the Committee noted with concern that reportedly these
allegations are not adequately investigated and reiterated that where there is
an allegation that the statement was made under torture, the burden of proof
does not lie with the victim, but with the State. In general, the Committee
regretted the lack of information from Lebanon on complaints of torture and
subsequent investigations.  
Whilst recognising
the extraordinary efforts to accommodate over 1,5 refugees, the Committee is
concerned about the detention policy applied to asylum seekers and refugees for
migration-related reasons. The Committee also pointed out that refugees had
reportedly been transferred contrary to the principle of non-refoulement under article 3. 
Other
matters of concern were the prisons’ overcrowding and deplorable detention conditions;
the lack of information on deaths in custody; trafficking in women and girls
and the abuses of domestic labour workers due to the kefala visa-sponsoring system, as well as other forms of
gender-based violence.
Issues for
follow-up are: 
1.   
Define and criminalize torture according to
international standards
2.   
Ensure access to fundamental legal safeguards
3.   
Establish the National Commission for Human Rights and
the National Preventive Mechanism. 
4.    Establish an
internal prison complaints system
Read more:
·       
Concluding Observations
·       
Webcast

Pakistan
Torture and impunity in the context of counter-terrorism efforts
During
this first review the Committee members expressed deep concern about the almost
complete lack of criminal investigations and punishment of torture despite
serious allegations of widespread torture by the police. The Committee further
regretted the fact that police are charged with investigating allegations of
torture committed by their own colleagues and that the Federal Investigation
Agency is not sufficiently independent.
Referring
to Pakistan’s legislation, the Committee noted the absence of a definition of
torture that incorporates all elements of article 1 of the Convention and
recommended that the State Party adopt a comprehensive anti-torture bill. 
The Committee further expressed concerns about Pakistan’s
counter-terrorism legislation and the very broad powers the army has to detain
people suspected of involvement in terrorist activities. Not only can military
courts try civilians for terrorism-related offences, but suspects of terrorism
can be deprived of their liberty for up to three months without judicial
oversight or the possibility of a habeas
petition and
be detained without trial of up to a year for being suspected of involvement in
the activities of a proscribed organization (1997
Anti-terrorism Act (ATA), 1997). Provisions of the Actions in Aid
of Civil Power Regulations 2011 provide for retroactive immunity for torture in internment centres by members of the military and paramilitary forces. It thus urged Pakistan to repeal or amend both texts.
The
experts also noted the inadequate investigations into allegations that military
and paramilitary forces and intelligence agencies have been implicated in a
significant number of cases of extra-judicial executions, torture, and enforced
disappearances. 
Other
matters of concern included access of justice for victims of torture, violence
against women, human trafficking, respect of the principle of non-refoulement, conditions of
detention, violations of fundamental legal safeguards for persons deprived of
their liberty, the inability for the National Commission for Human Rights to
carry out its mandate fully and in an effective and independent manner and
redress.
Issues for
follow-up: 
1.   
Prosecute and punish police officers who engage in
torture with penalties that are commensurate with the gravity of the crime of
torture
2.   
Establish and effectively operate police oversight
bodies
3.    Investigate
all allegations of torture or ill-treatment promptly, thoroughly and
impartially, and duly prosecute and punish the perpetrators
Read more:
·              
Concluding Observations
·              
Webcast

Republic of Korea
Excessive use of force by law enforcement officials
During the
third review of the Republic of
Korea, the Committee members expressed concern about the excessive use of force
by law enforcement officials, especially during demonstrations such as 2008
Candlelight Rally and 2015 Peoples’ Rally. One person (Mr. Baek Nam-Gi) died as
a result of being hit at the head by a blast from a police high-pressure water
cannon. The Committee highlighted the lack of access to medical assistance to
some of the wounded detained demonstrators and the lack of accountability for
the injuries and death. 
The
experts noted with concern that death sentences continue to be imposed by
courts despite the effective moratorium on the application of the death penalty
since 1977.  By the end of 2016, 61
persons were on death row. The Committee urged the State to abolish the death
penalty and commute all death sentences to prison terms. 
Concern
was raised about the significant number of suicides and sudden deaths in
correctional facilities. The Committee said it was seriously preoccupied that
most deaths in custody are due to the absence of adequate medical treatment for
inmates suffering from diseases and that the suicide cases may be a result of
coercive investigation procedures by police and prosecutors. The Committee
recommends that the Republic of Korea carry out an in-depth study in to the
causes of sudden deaths and suicide in its correctional facilities.  
In
addition, the Committee is worried about reports of many cases of violence,
including sexual, physical and verbal abuse among the military, which have
resulted in deaths. “Guardhouse detention” as a disciplinary measure is
alarming, as a soldier can be detained for 15 days without a warrant, based
only on the decision of the commanding officer. 
Other
matters of concern included the absence of a definition of torture in the penal
legislation conform to article of 1 in the Convention, violence against women,
violence against migrant workers, corporal punishment against children,
violations of fundamental legal safeguards for persons deprived of their
liberty, involuntary hospitalization in psychiatric institutions.
Issues for
follow-up are:
1.   
the outcomes of the investigations of the death of Mr.
Baek Nam-Gi and of any proceedings in relation to the Sewol Ferry Accident 
2.   
the closing of the remaining “substitute cells” 
3.    the
establishment of the office of military Ombudsman as an independent entity 
Read more:
·       
Concluding Observations
·       
Webcast




NEXT
SESSIONS



61th
session of the CAT: 24 July – 11 August 2017
Consideration of State
Reports: Antigua and Barbuda, Ireland,
Panama, and Paraguay
> 26 June 2017:
Deadline for NGO submissions for the State report reviews
62th
session of the CAT: 6 November – 6 December 2017
Consideration of State
Reports: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Italy, Mauritius, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, and Timor-Leste 
Lists of Issues prior to reporting: Austria, Slovakia, Spain, Switzerland, Malawi, Serbia,
and Somalia
Lists of Issues: Mauritania and Tajikistan
> 26 June 2017:
Deadline for NGO submissions for the List of Issues and List of Issues Prior to
Reporting  
> 9 October 2017:
Deadline for NGO submissions for the State report reviews
63th
session of the CAT: 16 April –11 May 2018
Consideration of State
Reports: Belarus, Chile, Czech Republic,
Norway, Qatar, and Tajikistan
Lists of Issues prior to reporting: Andorra, Azerbaijan, Denmark, Jordan, and Liechtenstein
> 22 January 2018:
Deadline for NGO submissions for the List of Issues Prior to Reporting
> 19 March
2018: Deadline for NGO submissions for the State report reviews



STAY
UP-TO-DATE 



OMCT Blog:
Engaging with the UN Committee against Torture

Our blog ‘‘Nothing can Justify Torture, engaging with the Committee Against
Torture’’ aims to provide greater awareness on the CAT and the
Convention Against Torture and to increase mobilisation of NGOs against torture
making a more effective use of the CAT procedures. 
If you are working on the Convention Against Torture
or the CAT (Committee members, representatives from NGOs, academics,
journalists…), we encourage you to share your experience and learning by
submitting an article. Please contact cbb@omct.org for more information.
Recent articles include: 
·              
Francisca
Ankrah (ALEF) : Torture on the Back Burner
·              
Grant Shubin (GJC): “Torture in plain sight: how
national laws violate women’s human rights
·              
OMCT: “Human rights defenders are the heroes of human
rights and of the CAT”
Live
Webcast of the CAT sessions
During the
sessions, the live stream is available at webtv.un.org. Sessions are also archived and can be viewed at a
later date.
And follow
us

         

          
          




WE
THANK 



This E-bulletin has been produced with
the financial assistance of the European Union, Irish Aid, Swiss Federal
Department of Foreign Affairs and the Sigrid Rausing Trust. The contents of
this document are the sole responsibility of OMCT and can under no
circumstances be regarded as reflecting the position of the European Union,
Irish Aid, Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs or the Sigrid Rausing
Trust. 





Nothing can justify torture
under any
circumstances 