Nepal:  Physical assault by security personnel from the Nepal Police, the Armed Police Force and the Riot Police against a group of six human rights defenders from different organisations
September 11, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2015 / SeptemberNepal: Physical assault by security personnel from the Nepal Police, the Armed Police Force and the Riot Police against a group of six human rights defenders from different organisations

 URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New Information
NPL 001 / 1015 / OBS 074
Physical Assault
Nepal
September 11, 2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Nepal.
 
New
information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Advocacy Forum –
Nepal of the physical assault by security personnel from the Nepal
Police, the Armed Police Force and the Riot Police against a group of six human rights
defenders from different organisations, i.e. Mr. Ajit Thakur, from the National Human
Rights Commission, Mr. Raj Kumar
Mahaseth from Advocacy Forum – Nepal, Mr. Dev Kumar Mahato from WOREC-Nepal, Mr. Dipendra Das from Manav Adhikar Surakshya Munch (FOPHUR), Mr. Nagendra Sah from Unnat-Nepal and Mr. Birendra Karn from the THRD Alliance, while they were monitoring a
demonstration in Danusha district, Janakpur, Nepal[1].
 
According to
the information, on September 1, 2015, at around 16:30 the six human rights
activists were monitoring a demonstration from the top of a building when a gas
cell was thrown to them. They contacted the Superintendent of Police (SP) to
report the incident and suggested the replacement of the police units arguing
that because they were tired and hungry they had become very aggressive. The SP
promised to enquire about the incident but refused to change the security force
arguing there was no other unit available. 
 
A few
minutes later, at 17:15, the human rights defenders decided to help one of the
demonstrators, whom, according to the information received, had been shot by
the police and was lying on the main road, which, at the time, was empty.
However, when they arrived, confrontations had started between the police and
some demonstrators. The latter tried to look for shelter in a small street, but
4-5 minutes after they were surrounded by 50 officers from the Nepal Police,
the Armed Police Force and the Riot Police. The six activists were wearing
human rights jackets and showed their identification documents. Nevertheless,
they were accused of helping the demonstrators and were verbally intimidated,
beaten with sticks and kicked by the security forces for about 7-8 minutes. The
intervention of four or five members of the Nepal police, who protected them
with their shields, prevented the defenders from being more severely injured,
and the assault ultimately ended when three Police Inspectors arrived on the
spot and stopped the security forces. However, as the human rights defenders
were being moved to a safe place, a group of security personnel threw stones at
them and hit Mr. Nagendra Sah’s back,
which required his transfer for medical treatment at the Janakput City
Hospital. 
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the physical assault against the six human rights
defenders as a result of their human rights activities, all the more so as they
had identified themselves as human rights defenders to the police. The
Observatory calls for an immediate, thorough and transparent investigation into
the assault, in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law.
 
Actions requested: 

The Observatory urges the authorities of Nepal to:
 
i.    Order an immediate, thorough, transparent investigation into the attack
against the 6 human rights defenders, in order to identify all those
responsible, bring them before an independent tribunal, and apply them the
sanctions provided by the law;
 
ii.
Provide compensation and redress to the injured human rights defenders and take
all necessary measures to provide guarantees of non-repetition;
 
iii.
Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the 6 human rights
defenders as well as that of all human rights defenders in Nepal;
 
iv.    Conform with the provisions of the UN
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially:
- Article 1, which states that “everyone has the
right, individually and in association with others, to promote and to strive
for the protection and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at
the national and international levels”;
- Article 5, which underscores the right of every
individual to form, join, and participate in non-governmental organizations;
and
- Article 12.2, which provides that the State shall
“take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against
any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination,
pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her
legitimate exercise of his or her rights”;
v.     Ensure in all
circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with international human rights standards and international instruments
ratified by Nepal.
 
Addresses: 
Mr. Sushil Koirala, Prime
     Minister, Office of the Prime Minister and Council of Nepal, Singha
     Darbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Fax: + 977-1-4211065,
     Email:  info@opmcm.gov.np, info@nepal.gov.np.Mr. Bam Dev Gautam, Home
     Minister and Deputy Prime Minister,
     Ministry of Home Affairs, Singha Durbar, Kathmandu, Nepal. Tel: +977-1- 4211261 Email: gunaso@moha.gov.np, info@moha.gov.np. Attorney General, Mr. Babu Ram Kunwar, Office of Attorney General
     Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, Nepal. Fax: + 977 1
     4262582 / 4218051, Email: attorney@mos.com.np,info@attorneygeneral.gov.np, socialjus@gmail.com. Mr.
     Anup Raj Sharma, Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission,
     (Headquarter-Kathmandu) Harihar Bhawan, Pulchowk, Lalitpur, Nepal G.P.O.
     Box:9182, Kathmandu, Nepal, Email: nhrc@nhrcnepal.org /
     complaints@nhrcnepal.org, Fax: +977-1- 5547973.Mr. Upendra Kant Aryal, Inspector General of Police,
     Police Head Quarters, Naxal, Kathmandu, Nepal. Fax: +977 1 4415593. Tel:
     +977 1 4412432. Email: phqigs@nepalpolice.gov.np H.E. Mr. Deepak
     Dhital, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
     Nepal to the United Nations in Geneva, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201
     Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 733 27 22 ,
     E-mail: mission.nepal@bluewin.ch. H.E. Mr. Ram Mani Pokharel, Ambassador of Nepal
     in Brussels, Avenue Brugmann 210, 1050 Brussels, Tel: +32 2 346 26 58 / 02 346 26 58, Fax: +32 2 344
     13 61,               E-mail: embn@skynet.be.
 
Please also write to diplomatic
representations of Nepal in your respective countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, September 11, 2015
 
Kindly
inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your
reply.
 
The
Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human
Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need.

 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org Tel and fax OMCT +
     41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33
(0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
 
 
 
 



[1]            On September 1, 2015, several
demonstrations took place and ended in violent outbreaks between the police and
the demonstrators. These events unfolded in the context of an indefinite
strike, called by the United Democratic Madhesi Morcha on August 16, 2015.
Basic services such as educational institutions, banks, markets have remained
closed in areas between Janakpur and Terai Madesh. 