Egypt:  Continuing judicial harassment against Mr. Negad El-Borai
May 17, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2016 / MayEgypt: Continuing judicial harassment against Mr. Negad El-Borai
EGY 002 / 0516
/ OBS 042
Judicial harassment /
Restrictions to freedom of
association
Egypt
May 17, 2016
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human
Rights (FIDH), requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
Description of
the situation:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the continuing judicial harassment against Mr. Negad El-Borai, human rights lawyer and Director of the “United
Group – Attorneys-at-law, Legal Advisors” (United Group)[1].
According to the information received, Mr.
Negad El-Borai will be summoned today, May 17, 2016, at 3 pm, for a fifth
investigation audience[2] for the complaint filed by
the High Judicial Council against him for drafting an anti-torture bill in
March 2015, organising a workshop to discuss it, and advocating before the
Egyptian authorities for its adoption in April 2015[3].

It has to be recalled that Mr. El-Borai
already attended four investigation sessions for this same case, the last one
on March 3, 2016, when he was arrested and subsequently released from custody
on his guarantee of residence, and charged with “establishing an unlicensed
entity for the intent of inciting resistance to the authorities”, “implementing
human rights activities without a license”, “deliberately spreading false
information with the purpose of harming public order or public interest” and “receiving funds from the National Center for
State Courts (NCSC)”.
The Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing
judicial harassment against Mr. Negad El-Borai for drafting an anti-torture
bill, which is particularly striking since the Egyptian government had
committed in March 2015 before the 28th session of the United
Nations Human Rights Council to carry out legislative amendments to help combat
the crime of torture effectively. This is a signal that this kind of civil
society initiatives are more relevant and necessary than ever.
Furthermore, the
Observatory expresses its concern that this is not an isolated case, but it is
one of the many in an increasing crackdown targeting human rights defenders and organisations
fighting against torture in Egypt. For instance, since February 2016, the
authorities have attempted several times to close El Nadeem Center for the
Rehabilitation for Victims of Violence and Torture[4],
with the accusation of performing unlicensed work, since some of its activities
did not fall within the mandate for which the Center had been licensed,
including its anti-torture advocacy activities[5]. This happened in
the aftermath of the international outrage provoked by the kidnapping,
torturing and killing of the Italian PhD student Giulio Regeni in Cairo.
It has to be noted that the criminalisation
of anti-torture work comes at a time of rising government pressure on human
rights defenders and organisations in Egypt[6],
in the context of a dramatic deterioration of the human rights situation in the
country, marked namely by a serious crackdown on civil society and a notable
increase in cases of torture, deaths in detention and enforced disappearances.
In the light of this worrying situation, the
Observatory warns about the ever shrinking space for anti-torture
organisations and defenders whose work in Egypt is of vital importance, and
calls upon the Egyptian authorities to put an end to any form of harassment to
the work of civil society fighting torture and promoting human rights in the country.

Actions requested:
Please write to the
authorities of Egypt asking them to:
i. Put an end to all forms
of harassment – including at the judicial level - against Mr. Negad El-Borai,
the United Group, anti-torture organisations, and all human rights defenders in
Egypt;
ii. Drop all charges
against Mr. Negad El-Borai, as they only aim at sanctioning his legitimate
human rights activities;
iii. Comply with all the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular with:
- its Article
1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
- its Article
5(b): “For the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental
freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association with others,
at the national and international levels (b) To form, join and participate in non-governmental
organizations, associations or groups;”
- its Article
12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
iv. Ensure in
all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Egypt.
Addresses:
·     
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi,
Abedine Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998
·     
Prime Minister, Mr. Sherif
Ismail, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202
2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·     
Minister of the Interior, General Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, Ministry of the
Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794 5529
•       Minister of Justice, Judge Hossam Abdel Rehim, Magles El Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo,
Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
•       Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Nabeel Sadek,
Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577 4716
•       Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National
Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
•       H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim, Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
•      
Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
Please also write to the diplomatic missions
or embassies of Egypt in your respective country.



[1]           
The United Group is
an Egyptian law firm established 50 years ago, which also works on model legislation to improve the
respect of human rights standards. 


[2]           
On March 3, 2016, attended his fourth investigation session, see the Observatory Urgent Appeal EGY 003 / 0615 / OBS 049.3 of April 22, 2016.


[3]           
After the submission, United Group received no response. Despite the ongoing
judicial harassment against its founder, on April 6, 2016 United
Group submitted its draft anti-torture bill to the House of Representatives’
Speaker, calling for its adoption.


[4]                 El Nadeem Center is registered in
Egypt since 1993 and has provided hundreds of torture victims with vital
services including counseling and legal assistance. The Center publishes
monthly reports on allegations of torture, deaths, and medical negligence in
police custody. Many of the Center’s patients say they have been tortured by
Egyptian security forces. 


[5]           
See the Observatory Urgent Appeal EGY 001 / 0216 / OBS 019.2 of April 6, 2016.


[6]           
For more information about the judicial harassment and restrictions to freedom
of association targeting various civil society organisations, by freezing their
assets on the pretext that they received unauthorised foreign funding, as well
as individual human rights defenders, by prosecuting and criminalising them,
see the Observatory Joint Press Release of March 23, 2016. See also the joint statement released by three UN Special
rapporteurs of May 9, 2016. 