Uzbekistan: Mr. Ruslan Rakhimov sentenced to five years in prison
January 13, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Uzbekistan / 2005 / JanuaryUzbekistan: Uzbekistan: Mr. Ruslan Rakhimov sentenced to five years in prisonCase UZB 100904.1 Follow up to case UZB 100904 Arbitrary arrests / Alleged torture/Unfair trial  Geneva, 13 January 2005  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Uzbekistan.   New Information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Legal Aid Society, a member of the OMCT network, of the sentencing of Mr. Ruslan Rakhimhov to five years in prison, under article 97 of the Criminal Code, for murder without aggravated circumstances.  OMCT is gravely concerned by this court decision. According to the Legal Aid Society, the conviction was based on evidence obtained through the use of torture. Furthermore, evidence and witness reports were ignored by the Judge. Mr. Rakhimhov’s lawyer was also not present at the sentencing as the court had conducted an “express hearing” during his absence which was for medical reasons.  The Legal Aid Society has submitted an appeal to the Court and the next hearing is scheduled for 18th January 2005.  Mrs. Albina Gaynulina, who was mentioned in appeal UZB 100904, and who was arrested with Mr. Ruslan Rakhimhov, was reportedly sentenced but immediately released on amnesty.   Brief reminder of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT was informed by the Legal Aid Society, a member of the OMCT network, of the detention and torture of Mr. Ruslan Rakhimhov in Uzbekistan. A statement obtained from the victim under torture is reportedly being used in a criminal case against them.  According to the information received, Mr. Ruslan Rakhimhov, a 23 years-old electrician, was arrested in the night of 29 to 30 January 2004, together with at least 17 other people. They were handed over to the Yunus Abad RUVD (regional department of the interior) of Tashkent city, where they were kept for 2 ½ days. The detainees were under investigation for the murder of Mr. Yakshigulov Ildar Nailevich.  Police officers, one of which is identified as Mr. Ruzmatov Ravshan Djuraevich, reportedly used interrogation methods involving physical pressure and ill treatment. From 29 to 31 January 2004, Mr. Rakhimhov, along with another person, Mrs. Gaynulina arrested for the same reason, was allegedly beaten and officers put a gas mask on him, while blocking the access of air. These allegations of ill-treatment were reportedly verified during a hearing before the criminal court of Yunus Abad district of Tashkent city (court of first instance which considered this case between March and May 2004) by the testimonies of the victims themselves and of two witnesses, Mrs. Gauss and Mr. Ochilov. These two witnesses had allegedly heard the victims shout for help from the room next door.  Unable to bear the acts of torture he was subjected to, Mr. Rakhimhov signed a document stating that he had a quarrel with Mr. Yakshigulov Ildar Nailevich in the night of the 28 to 29 January 2004. Furthermore, the statement declared that following the quarrel, he, Mrs. Gaynulina and Mrs. Smirnova took Mr. Yakshigulov out of his flat, struck him two or three times in his face and left. Mrs. Gaynulina and Mrs. Smirnova were also pressured into signing statements declaring that after a fight between  Mrs. Smirnova and Mr. Yakshigulov, Mr. Rakhimhov took the latter away and returned half an hour later saying he had taken Mr. Akshigulov home by taxi.  Except for Mr. Rakhimhov, all detainees were released after 2 ½ days of detention. Mrs. Gaynulina, who was among those released, is awaiting trial on charges of “failure to report” and for covering Mr. Rakhimhov who is himself charged with murder.  During the hearings which took place between March and May 2004 before the court of first instance, Mr. Rakhimhov and Mrs. Gaynulina rejected their statements, saying that they were forced into signing them under torture. According to the information received, the only sort of evidence provided in this criminal case, are the statements by Mr. Rakhimhov, Mrs. Gaynulina and Mrs. Smirnova given under torture.  On 7 April 2004, the defense lawyers reportedly filed a petition against the police officers suspected of acts of torture on the detainees. However, the petition has reportedly been refused on the grounds that it was premature.  OMCT recalls that article 7 of the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights, to which Uzbekistan is a state party, states that “[n]o one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment” and that article 15 of the Convention against Torture, to which Uzbekistan is also a state party, requires that “[e]ach State Party shall ensure that any statement which is established to have been made as a result of torture shall not be invoked as evidence in any proceedings (…)”.   Action requested Please write to the authorities in Uzbekistan urging them to:  i. take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Rakhimhov;  ii. ensure that the procedural rights of Mr. Rakhimhov are guaranteed at all times, including his right to access to counsel;  iii. ensure that an exhaustive and impartial inquiry be carried out into the alleged confession extracted under torture;  iv. order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, notably the allegations of torture, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law;  v. guarantee that no evidence obtained under torture be used in court cases;  vi. guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.   Addresses President of Uzbekistan, Islam Abduganiyevich Karimov, ul. Uzbekistanskaya 43, Rezidentsia prezidenta, 700163 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 133 7258, E-mail: presidents_office@press-service.uz  Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sodiq Solihovich Safoyev, Respublika Uzbekistan; 700029 g. Tashkent; pl. Mustakillik, 5; Ministerstvo inostrannykh del RU, S.S., Uzbekistan, Fax: + 998 71 139 15 17  Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights, Sayora Rashidova, ul. Xalqlar Dostligi 1, 700035 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 139 85 55, E-mail: office@ombudsman.gov.uz   Chairman of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Ubaydulla Mingbaev, Respublika Uzbekistan; 700183 g. Tashkent; ul. Abdulla Kodiri, 1; Verkhovny Sud Respubliki Uzbekistan  General Procurator of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Rashidjon Hamidovich Kodirov, ul. Gulyamova 66, 700047 Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan, Fax: +998 71 133 39 17, E-mail: prokuratura@lawyer.com  Ambassador of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Uzbekistan to the United Nations in Geneva, PO Box 1853, 1215 Geneva 15, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 799 43 02, E-mail: uzbekistan@bluewin.ch   Please also write to the embassies of Uzbekistan in your respective country.  Geneva, 13 January 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 