Lebanon:  Lebanon: detention of displaced Sudanese
August 16, 2000
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Lebanon / 2000 / AugustLebanon: Lebanon: detention of displaced SudaneseCase LBN 160800  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Lebanon.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has received information from the Sudanese Victims for Torture Group, (SVTG) a member of the OMCT network, regarding the conditions of detention of displaced Sudanese in Lebanon, who have been charged with illegal entry into Lebanon.  According to the information received, the persons listed below are in detention centres in Lebanon where the health and hygienic conditions are described as very poor.  The centres are underground buildings, with small cells and are poorly aerated.  The detention centres are under the authority of the general security and as they are not prisons (except for Alnabatya and Ba’abda) they do not have the rules of the rights of prisoners applied in them.  It is reported that there is currently a genuine health problem among detainees indicating a need for regular visits from a health official; They mostly suffer from joint pains, chest infections and chronic cough, as well as skin diseases such as lice and other communicable diseases.  In one case, a Sudanese reported that he was prevented from seeing a detained friend a few months ago. The explanation given to him was that the detainee was very ill. The guards advised him, if he wanted to really help his imprisoned friend, to bring him some medicines like antibiotics and so.   SVTG noted that the number of Sudanese in Lebanon exceed 10.000 individuals, 1000 of which are recognised as refugees.  The number who have benefited from resettlement programs are around 170.  OMCT was not informed of the date of detention of the below-listed persons:   Those detained in Forn El-Shibbak/ General security: Yusif Deng Kair, File number 12025  Majok Deng Mangor, File number 11603 Yehia Adam Isaac, File Number 13639 Abdalla Adam Ali, File Number 15279   William Joseph Akok, File Number 9592  David Jestin Jacoth, File Number 16805 Faisal Chol Daniel, File Number, 13602  Michael Andro Logo, File Number, 15774 Adil Jobara Saad, File Number, 15038  Mohamed Gibril Elkofi, File Number, 13460 Trapol Ibrahim Lako, File Number, 15779  Chol  Koagy, File Number, 12376 David Donato Deng, File number unavailable  Akwek Malith, File Number unavailable AbdelRahman Achwel, UNHCR Identity Card  Mario Elyab, File Number unavailable  Yahia Adam, File Number unavailable  Detained in Zagarta- tripoli: Omer Mohamed Abdalla, File number 14820  Detained in Mazra Yashoh/ General security: James Edward, Holding a UNHCR Identity Card Simon Bakhit, File number unavailable    Detained in Elnabatya / General Prison: Suliman Mohamed Tahameed, File number unavailable  Detained in Ba-abda  / General Prison Abdalla Harun Mohamed, File number unavailable  Detained in Mazra Yashoh/ General Security Chol Kody, File number unavailable  Makair Tut, File number unavailable     The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons and all other Sudanese displaced persons in Lebanese detention Centres.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Lebanon urging them to:  i.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of the above-mentioned persons and ensure immediate access to medical care; ii.	guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iii.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  President, Emile Lahoud, opendoor@presidency.gov.lb  Prime Minister Sélim El-Hoss, marasem@pcm.gov.lb  His Excellency Bahij Tabbara Minister of Justice Ministry of justice, Palais de justice, Beirut Republic of Lebanon. Fax: +961 1 422 957 (say "Fax, please")  His Excellency Michel Murr Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior Office of the Prime Minister Grand Serail, Rue des Arts et Metiers, Sanayehj, Beirut, Republic of Lebanon. Fax: +961 1 869 813  Mr. "Adnan" Addoum, Prosecutor General, Palais de Justice, Beirut Republic of Lebanon Fax: +961 1 423 790  Geneva, August 16, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 