Cambodia:  Upholding of the conviction of housing rights activist Yorm Bopha
June 18, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2013 / JuneCambodia: Upholding of the conviction of housing rights activist Yorm Bopha


URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY

 
New information
KHM 006 / 1212 / OBS 119.2
Conviction / Arbitrary detention
Cambodia
June 18, 2013
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)
and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Cambodia.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by the Cambodian
Center for Human Rights (CCHR) and the Cambodian
League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO) about
the upholding of the
conviction of Ms. Yorm Bopha, a housing rights activist
who was pivotal in the protests against forced evictions of residents from the
Boeung Kak Lake community in Phnom Penh.
 
According to the
information received, on
June 14, 2013, the Court of
Appeal in Phnom Penh decided to uphold the conviction of Ms. Yorm Bopha, but
suspended one year of her three-year original sentence, on the grounds that she
did not directly commit violence.
 
Ms. Bopha was sentenced on December 27, 2012 by
the Phnom Penh’s Municipal Court to three years in prison for “intentional
violence with aggravating
circumstances”. Much of the
so-called evidence produced at the appeal stage was based on the testimony of
the two alleged victims - civil parties to the case who sat in the court room
the whole time, who were not required to swear an oath and who stood to gain
considerable compensation pending a guilty verdict. The accounts of the alleged
victims were often convoluted and uncorroborated. The prosecution witnesses,
one of whom was the father of one of the alleged victims, continually changed
their stories and contradicted one another.
 
After the decision Ms. Bopha
was taken back to Prey Sar prison, where she will serve the rest of her sentence - fifteen months - until
September 2014.
 
On June 17, 2013, Ms. Yorm Bopha filed an appeal with the Supreme Court
in a bid to overturn or reduce her two-year prison sentence.
 
The Observatory expresses its
deep concern about the Court of Appeal’s decision to uphold Ms. Yorm Bopha’s conviction, and
reiterates its call on the Cambodian authorities for Ms. Yorm Bopha's immediate and unconditional release, as her detention seems aimed
merely at obstructing her human rights activities.
 
Background information:
 
The
families from the Boeung Kak Lake community have been battling forced evictions
since 2007, when the Government leased their land to a company, Shukaku Inc,
for development. In May 2012, after 15 members of the BKL community were
violently and arbitrarily arrested, Ms. Yorm Bopha was at the forefront of the
campaign for their release. She maintained a high profile presence at every
demonstration, became a media spokesperson for the campaign, and did not shy
away from publicly criticizing government officials. This new-found prominence
brought with it the attention of the authorities - she was verbally threatened,
harassed and intimidated.
 
On
September 4, 2012, Ms. Yorm Bopha was detained for allegedly ordering her
brothers to assault two
motorbike taxi drivers near her home on August 7, 2012. Ms. Bopha has denied the allegations. 
 
On December 27, 2012, Phnom Penh’s Municipal Court sentenced Ms. Yorm Bopha
to three years in prison for “intentional violence”
under Article 218 of the Penal Code, on
the basis of questionable allegations, and despite the fact that no credible
evidence was presented at her trial.
 
On
March 19, 2013, Prime Minister Hun Sen spoke about the Yorm Bopha
case in a speech at the Peace Palace, and said that it was not a political case
but that Ms. Bopha was in prison for committing a crime. 
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please
write to the Cambodian authorities urging them to:
 
i.
Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Yorm Bopha, as well as of
all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
ii.
Release Ms. Yorm Bopha immediately and unconditionally, since her detention is
arbitrary as it only aims at obstructing her human rights activities and
appears to be a result of exercising her right to freedoms of expression and
association;
 
iii.
Put an end to acts of harassment - including at the judicial level - against
Ms. Yorm Bopha and all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
iv.
Comply with all the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders,
adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United Nations General Assembly, in
particular:
- Article
1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or in association
with others, to promote the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, 
- Article
12.1, which foresees that “everyone has the right, individually and in
association with others, to participate in peaceful activities against
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms”,
- and
Article 12.2 which provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures
to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually
and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action
as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in
the present Declaration.”
 
v. Guarantee
the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international human rights
instruments ratified by Cambodia.
 
Addresses:

 
·      
Mr. Hun Sen, Prime
Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax:
+855 23 36 06 66 / 855 23 88 06 24 (c/o Council of Ministers), Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh/ cppparty@gmail.com 
·      
Mr. H.E. Ang Vong
Vathna, Minister of Justice, No 240, Sothearos Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of
Cambodia, Fax: 023 364119. Email: moj@cambodia.gov.kh
·      
Mr. Sar Kheng, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Interior, Ministry of Interior, 275 Norodom
Blvd, Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: + 855 23 212708. Email: moi@interior.gov.kh
·      
Mr. Hor Nam Hong, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, 161 Preah Sisowath Quay, Phnom
Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: + 855 23 21 61 44 / + 855 23 21 69 39. Email: mfaicasean@bigpond.com.kh
·    Ambassador Mr. Sun Suon,
Permanent Mission of Cambodia to the United Nations in Geneva, Chemin de
Taverney 3, Case postale 213, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22
788 77 74. Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh; cambodge@bluewin.ch 
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your
respective countries.
 
*** 
Geneva-Paris, June 18, 2013
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is
dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them
concrete support in their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail:
     Appeals@fidh-omct.org 
·     
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49
29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 