Russian Federation:  Attack on Igor Kalyapin, Head of the Joint Mobile Group (JMG) and the Committee for the Prevention of Torture, by a mob of unidentified people
March 23, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2016 / MarchRussian Federation: Attack on Igor Kalyapin, Head of the Joint Mobile Group (JMG) and the Committee for the Prevention of Torture, by a mob of unidentified peopleURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY


New
information
RUS 004 / 1214 / OBS 093.1
Attacks / Harassment
Russian Federation
March 23, 2016
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in the Russian Federation.
New
information:
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources
about the attack on Mr. Igor Kalyapin, Head of the Joint Mobile Group (JMG) and the Committee
for the Prevention of Torture, by a
mob of unidentified people. The JMG is a renowned human rights
organisation coordinated by the Russian NGO Committee for Prevention of Torture
that plays a crucial role in revealing and documenting continued violations of
human rights committed in Chechnya. In 2013, the JMG was awarded the Martin
Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders.
According to the information received, on March
16, 2016, Mr. Igor Kalyapin was informed by the manager of the
Grozny Citi Hotel, where he was staying, that he had to leave the hotel,
reportedly because of Mr. Kalyapin’s criticisms against Mr. Ramzan Kadyrov, the
President of Chechnya. As he was leaving the hotel, a group of around 15 masked
men threw flour, eggs and a bright disinfectant at him[1]. Mr.
Kalyapin reported having been kicked by the assailants several times, including
in the stomach.
Mr. Kalyapin was about to attend a press conference in Grozny to discuss
the attack that took place on March 9, 2016 against members of the Joint Mobile
Group and journalists (see background information). He left Chechnya after
reporting the assault to the police. The
Observatory was also informed that another flat used by the JMG in Grozny (flat
which belonged to human rights defender Natalia Estemirova, killed in
2009) was also raided. A video footage reportedly shows persons in plain
clothes and in uniforms of the Ministry of Emergency Situations breaking the
door of the apartment. Subsequently, access to the flat was reportedly blocked.
The Observatory considers these new attacks as a
clear acts of reprisals for the activities carried out by Mr. Kalyapin, the JMG
and the Committee for Prevention of Torture. 
The Observatory calls on the authorities of the
Chechen Republic and more generally of the Russian Federation to guarantee the
physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Igor Kalyapin, members of the JMG
and members of the Committee for Prevention of Torture, and to put an end to
any verbal and physical attacks and acts of harassment against human rights
defenders in Chechnya.
Background information:
The JMG has
already been subjected to attacks in the past. 
On December 5, 2014, in the aftermath of
terrorist attacks in Grozny where 26 people lost their lives, Mr. Kadyrov
announced on his website and on social networks that the houses of all
militants shall be burned, and their entire families expelled from Chechnya. In
connection with these statements, on December 8, 2014, Mr. Kalyapin requested
the Prosecutor General to start criminal proceedings against Mr. Kadyrov for
violating the Criminal Code (“abuse of power”, Art. 286) and several articles
of the Constitution (notably on the presumption of violence, freedom of
movement, the right to private property and the right to housing).
On December 10, 2014 the Head of the Chechen Republic, Mr. Ramzan Kadyrov
accused Mr. Kalyapin on Instagram of supporting recent terrorist attacks in
Chechnya. He notably suggested that Mr. Kalyapin received foreign funds from
sources linked to Mr. Ahmad Umarov, the brother of the late Doku Umarov, the
self-proclaimed Emir of the Caucasus Emirate and arch-rival of Mr. Kadyrov. Mr
Kalyapin was subsequently attacked during his press conference
in Moscow on December 11, 2014. On December 18, following statements of Mr.
Ramzan Kadyrov, the Investigative Committee opened an investigation against Mr.
Kalyapin. 
On December
13 and 14, 2014, the offices of JMG in Grozny (Chechnya) were set ablaze.
Activists were captured and searched by masked armed men. 
On June 3,
2015, the offices of the JMG in Grozny were again violently attacked and
destroyed by an organised mob. 
These
attacks were committed openly and videotaped, yet they remain unpunished. 
On March 9,
2016, masked assailants in three cars blocked a small bus carrying two members
of the Joint Mobile Group as well as six foreign and Russian journalists near
the border of Chechnya, violently beat them with bats, robbed them and set the
vehicle on fire. According to reports, the attackers called the defenders and
journalists by their names, and accused them to be in Chechnya to
“defend terrorists”. 
The human rights defenders and journalists were
participating in a tour organised by the Committee for Prevention of Torture to
report on human rights violations in Chechnya and Ingushetia. Reportedly,
the group had noticed they were under surveillance since the start of their
tour, on March 7. The police
investigating the bus attack reportedly did not find any trace of the computers
carried by the group in the bus, which would indicate that the assailants took
them. 
Several
hours after the attack, a group of unidentified camouflaged armed men who came
in five cars also broke in JMG’s offices in the Ingush town of Karabulak and
stole several computers and material. The Observatory fears that the aim of the
attacks was not only to intimidate and violently assault the activists and
journalists, but also to take possession of their data. 
Victims
included Mr. Ivan Zhiltsov and Ms. Ekaterina Vanslova, two
members of the Committee for Prevention of Torture; Mr. Oeystein Windstad,
a correspondent from the Norwegian Ny Tid newspaper; Ms. Lena Maria
Persson Loefgren, a Swedish public radio journalist; Ms. Aleksandra
Elagina from The New Times, Mr. Egor Skovoroda from Mediazona,
freelance journalist Mikhail Solunin and Mr. Anton Prusakov, from
the Kommersant
newspaper, as well as the bus driver.
Actions requested: 
Please write
to the authorities of Russian Federation, urging them to:
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Igor
Kalyapin, all members of the Joint Mobile Group and the Committee for
Prevention of Torture, as well as of all human rights defenders in the Russian
Federation;
ii. Carry
out a prompt, effective and independent investigation into the above-mentioned
attacks,
iii. Put an
end to any act of harassment and verbal and physical attacks against the JMG,
the Committee for Prevention of Torture, their members, including Mr. Igor
Kalyapin, as well as all human rights defenders in Chechnya and more generally
the Russian Federation, and ensure in all circumstances that they are able to
carry out their legitimate activities without any hindrance;
iv. Comply
with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, especially
its Articles 1 and Article 12.2;
v. Comply
with the provisions of the Declaration of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe on the protection of human rights defenders and the promotion
of their activities, and in particular with Article 2.i);
vi. More
generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and with international and regional human rights instruments ratified by
the Russian Federation.
Addresses:
·      
Mr. Vladimir Putin, President
of the Russian Federation, Faxes: + 7 495
606 5173; + 7 495 606 5173 / 630
2408
·      
Mr. Yurii Ya. Chaika,
Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation, Fax: +7 495 692 17 25, Email: prgenproc@gov.ru 
·      
Mr. Vladimir Kolokoltsev,
Minister of the Interior of the Russian Federation, Fax: + 7 495 637 49 25
·      
Mr. Alexander Konovalov,
Minister of Justice of the Russian Federation, Fax: +7 495 955 59 99.
Electronic appeals via website: http://minjust.ru/electronic-appeal/email 
·      
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Fax: + 7 495 644 2203
·      
Ms. Ella Pamfilova, Ombudsman of the
Russian Federation, E-mail: press-sl@ropnet.ru 
·      
Mr. Mikhail Fedotov, Head of
the Council under the President for Development of Civil Society and Human
Rights. Fax: +7 495 606-48-55. E-mail: president-sovet@mail.ru,
fedotov_MA@gov.ru 
·      
H.E. Mr. Alexey Borodavkin,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
in Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 734 40 44, E-mail: mission.russian@vtxnet.ch 
·      
Ambassador Alexander Romanov,
Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, Belgium. Fax: +32 2 374 26 13.
E-mail: amrusbel@skynet.be 
·      
Ambassador Alexander Alekseev,
Permanent Representation of the Russian Federation to the Council of Europe,
France. Fax: (+33) (0) 3 88 24 19 74. Email: representationpermderussie@wanadoo.fr
Please
also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Russian Federation in your respective country. 
***
Geneva-Paris, March 23, 2016 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·       Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1]            The bright disinfectant was
brilliant green, a dilute alcoholic solution sold in pharmacies as antiseptic,
severely injurious when in contact with eyes. 