Bahrain:  Continued judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Nabeel Rajab
April 27, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bahrain / 2015 / AprilBahrain: Continued judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Nabeel RajabURGENT APPEAL - THE 
OBSERVATORY
 
New informationBHR 001 / 0415 / OBS 
028.3Arbitrary detention / Judicial 
harassmentBahrainApril 27, 2015
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint 
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World 
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests 
your urgent intervention in the following situation in 
Bahrain.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the continued 
judicial harassment and arbitrary detention of Mr. Nabeel 
Rajab, President of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR), FIDH 
Deputy Secretary General and a member of the Advisory Committee of Human Rights 
Watch's Middle East Division.
 
According to the information received, on April 26, 2015, the Public 
Prosecution officially charged Mr. Rajab with “disseminating false news in time 
of war, which may undermine preparations and war operations”, as well as with 
“openly discrediting a statutory entity”. The Public Prosecution subsequently 
extended his detention for an additional fifteen days, pending the reception of 
a report currently prepared by the Ministry of Interior regarding the items 
seized from Mr. Rajab's house after his arrest, when the security forces raided 
his house and seized mobile phones, laptops and other electronic devices.
 
Mr. Rajab was arrested on April 2, 2015 after denouncing the torture of 
detainees at Jaw Prison and the Saudi-Arabia led coalition air strikes in Yemen 
via Twitter (see background information).
 
During a previous hearing at the Prosecutor's Office, Mr. Rajab was only 
able to meet with his lawyers a few minutes before the meeting started. The 
presence of an observer mandated by the Observatory, requested by Mr. Rajab, was 
denied. The Prosecutor refused to release him pending investigation, despite an 
existing travel ban against Mr. Rajab. Mr. Rajab's lawyers were allowed access 
to his criminal file only after the Public Prosecution decided to extend his 
detention. However, the lawyers were denied a copy of the file.
 Mr. Rajab currently remains in solitary confinement. The Observatory 
recalls that Mr. Rajab faces additional charges in two other criminal cases, and 
that the verdict in appeal for one of them is expected on May 4, 2015 (see 
background information). 
The Observatory denounces the continued arbitrary detention of Mr. Nabeel 
Rajab, and calls for his immediate and unconditional release, as he is targeted 
solely for his human rights activities.
 
The Observatory, more generally, urges the Bahraini authorities to put an 
end to all acts of harassment against Mr. Rajab, and to comply with relevant 
international human rights standards and instruments, in particular the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 1966, and the UN 
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on 
December 9, 1998.Background information:
 
Mr. Rajab has faced continuous judicial harassment for his legitimate human 
rights work since his first arrest in June 2012 . Mr. Rajab was sentenced to 
three months imprisonment for allegedly libelling the residents of Al Muharraq 
via several tweets posted on his twitter account. On August 23, 2012, Mr. Nabeel 
Rajab was acquitted by the Higher Appeal Court.
 
On August 16, 2012, the Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Nabeel Rajab to 
three years of imprisonment in relation to three cases related to his 
participation in peaceful gatherings in favour of fundamental freedoms and 
democracy.
 
In December 2012, the Appeals Court reduced the sentence to two years of 
imprisonment. Mr. Nabeel Rajab completed his sentence and was released in May 
2014.
 
On October 1, 2014, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was summoned by the General 
Directorate of Anti-corruption and Economic and Electronic Security of the 
Criminal Investigation Department for “insulting a public institution” via 
Twitter.
 
On October 9, 2014, Mr. Nabeel Rajab was informed that the Ministry of 
Defence had filed a complaint regarding the same tweet. On November 2, 2014, the 
Third Lower Criminal Court ordered Mr. Rajab’s release but barred him from 
leaving the country.
 
On January 20, 2015, the Third Lower Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Nabeel 
Rajab to six months of imprisonment on charges of “insulting public institutions 
and the army” via Twitter. Mr. Rajab’s lawyers appealed the sentence.
 
The trial before the Bahrain Criminal Court of Appeal is continuing and 
stands adjourned to May 4, 2015.
 
On February 26, 2015, Mr. Rajab was summoned for investigations in a 
different case for charges of “inciting hatred towards the regime”. To date, the 
police investigation is ongoing.
 
On April 2, 2015, at 4:00 pm, over twenty police cars surrounded Mr. 
Rajab's house and policemen arrested him on charges of “spreading false news”. 
The arrest relates to a tweet from Mr. Rajab denouncing the torture of detainees 
at Jaw Prison . Mr. Rajab was then sent to the General Directorate of Anti 
Corruption Economic and Electronic Security to be interrogated.
 
On April 3, 2015, Mr. Rajab was interrogated in the presence of his lawyers 
by the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) regarding two new charges 
brought against him. The first charge is “insulting a statutory body” (Article 
216 of the Bahraini Criminal Code) referring to the Ministry of Interior in 
relation to tweets he posted denouncing the torture of detainees at Jaw Prison . 
The second charge is “disseminating false rumours in time of war” (Article 133 
of the Bahraini Criminal Code) in relation to tweets he published about the 
Saudi-Arabia led coalition air strikes in Yemen. If sentenced on the second 
charge, Mr. Rajab could be facing up to 10 years imprisonment. Mr. Rajab refused 
to sign the police minutes of the investigations.
 
On April 4, 2015, Mr. Rajab was brought before the Public Prosecution, in 
the presence of his lawyers. The Prosecution ordered seven days detention 
pending investigation.
 
On April 5, 2015, security police confiscated all electronics devices 
belonging to Mr. Rajab and members of his family.
 
On April 5, 2015, the Court of Appeals held a hearing in the case against 
Mr. Rajab concerning “insulting statutory bodies”. Though the appeal proceedings 
had been closed and the verdict hearing had been scheduled for April 15, 2015, 
the court informed Mr. Rajab's lawyers on April 4, 2015, that the Court had 
decided to re-open the case after receiving from the Public Prosecution a 
“supplementary defence memorandum”. The court handed over a copy of that memo to 
Mr. Rajab's lawyers and adjourned the appeal to May, 4, 2015 in order to receive 
the reply to the Prosecution's memo. According to Mr. Rajab's lawyers, no new 
material arguments or grounds would justify the re-opening of the case.
 
On April 11, 2015, the prosecution ordered an additional fifteen days in 
detention for Mr. Rajab.
 
Actions requested:
 
The Observatory urges the authorities of Bahrain to:
 
i. Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Nabeel Rajab, as he is 
targeted solely for his human rights activities;
 
ii. Guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Nabeel Rajab 
and that of all human rights defenders in Bahrain;
 
iii. Put an end to any act of harassment, including at the judicial level, 
against Mr. Nabeel Rajab and against all human rights defenders in 
Bahrain;
 iv. Conform in any circumstances with the provisions of the 
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted on December 9, 1998 by the United 
Nations General Assembly, in particular: 
- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually or 
in association  with others, to promote the protection and realization of human 
rights and  fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels” 
;- its Article 6 (c) which states that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others to study, discuss, form and hold 
opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights and 
fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to draw 
public attention to those matters” ; 
- and its Article 12.2 which states that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, 
threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or 
any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of 
the rights referred to in the present Declaration”.
 
v.  Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental 
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and 
international instruments ratified by Bahrain.
 
Addresses:
• Cheikh Hamad bin Issa AL KHALIFA, King of Bahrain, Fax: +973 176 64 
587• Cheikh Khaled Bin Ahmad AL KHALIFA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tel: 
+973 172 27 555; Fax : 00973 17 21 05 75; ofd@mofa.gov.bh 
• Cheikh Khalid bin Ali AL KHALIFA, Minister of Justice and Islamic 
Affairs, Tel: +973 175 133 00; Fax: +973 175 31 284• Lt. Gen. Cheikh 
Rashed bin Abdulla AL KHALIFA, Minister of Interior, Tel: +973 17572222 and +973 
17390000. Email: info@interior.gov.bh 
• Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the United Nations in Geneva, 1 chemin 
Jacques-Attenville, 1218 Grand-Saconnex, CP 39, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: 
+ 41 22 758 96 50. Email: info@bahrain-mission.ch
• H.E. Ahmed Mohammed Yousif Aldoseri, Ambassador of the Kingdom of Bahrain 
to the Kingdom of Belgium, Embassy of the Kingdom of Bahrain, Avenue Louise 250, 
1050 Brussels, Belgium; Fax: 0032 (0) 26472274; E-mail: 
Brussels.mission@mofa.gov.bh
 
Please also write to diplomatic representations of Bahrain in your 
respective countries. 