Sudan:  Sudan: Violent attack on three women by armed men
March 23, 2005
Save as PDF Print versionViolence against women / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2005 / MarchSudan: Sudan: Violent attack on three women by armed menCase SDN 230305.VAW Violence Against Women Attack / Attempted rape / Extrajudicial killing  The International Secretariat of OMCT has requests your URGENT intervention concerning the following situation in Sudan.   Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Sudan Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), a member of the OMCT network, that at 3 p.m. on 9 March 2005, three women from Kalma IDP camp, 17 km east of Nyala in Southern Darfour, were attacked by five armed men wearing military uniform. The armed men reportedly attempted to rape the women, and shot dead one of them, Mrs. Meryem Abaker Abdel Raheam. The other two women managed to escape the attack and return to Kalma camp.  According to the information received, the women were attacked while fetching fire wood, two km from Kalma IDP camp. Meryem Abaker Abdel Raheam, 23 years old, was a member of the Fur tribe, married with three children and lived in Kalma camp centre No.7.  OMCT condemns sexual violence and urges all parties to the conflict in Darfour to cease perpetrating violence against women, and stop violations of the ceasefire agreement and subsequent agreements. OMCT recalls that the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, in article 4(c), states that States should "exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and, in accordance with national legislation, punish acts of violence against women, whether those acts are perpetrated by the State or by private persons."   Requested Action: Please write to the authorities in Sudan urging them to:   i.	launch prompt, thorough and impartial investigations into the attack on these three women and the death of Mrs. Meryem Abaker Abdel Raheam, in order to find those responsible for any violations of human rights and to bring them to justice and apply the penal and/or adminstrive sanctions as provided by law;  ii.	ensure women the right to be free from discrimination, including violence, in line with the international laws and standards;  iii.	ratify the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against Women as well as the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;  iv.	guarantee the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.   Addresses: His Excellency Lieutenant General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, President of the Republic of Sudan, President' s Palace, PO Box 281, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 783223  Mr. Ali Mohamed Osman Yassin, Minister of Justice and Attorney General, Ministry of Justice, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 788941  Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affair, PO Box 873, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 779383   Dr. Abdelmuneim Osman Mohamed Taha, Advisory Council for Human Rights, PO Box 302, Khartoum, Sudan. Fax: + 249 183 770883  His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mohamed Al- Hassan Ahmed Al-Haj, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 47, 1207 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +4122 731 26 56, E-mail: mission.sudan@bluewin.ch  Please also write to the embassies of Sudan in your respective country.   Geneva, 23 March 2005  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 