Thailand:  Joint Statement: End Impunity and Ensure Justice for Community under Attack
February 11, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Thailand / 2016 / FebruaryThailand: Joint Statement: End Impunity and Ensure Justice for Community under Attack Joint Statement Thailand2 pages / 127 KB
(Geneva/London/Paris/Brussels, 11 February 2016) - On the first 
anniversary of the death of land rights activist Chai Bunthonglek, the Asian 
Forum for Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA), Amnesty International 
(AI), FIDH and OMCT within the framework of the Observatory for the 
Protection of Human Rights Defenders and Protection International (PI)renew 
calls on the Royal Thai government to ensure justice for the crimes against 
Chai Bunthonglek and other members of the Southern Peasants Federation of 
Thailand (SPFT) - a community-based land rights organization. We also call 
on the authorities  to protect all human rights defenders at risk of 
intimidations, forced evictions, killings and other attacks throughout the 
country.

 

The first anniversary of Chai Bunthonglek’s killing marks another 
year of fear for SFPT community members, and impunity for perpetrators of 
crimes, in Klong Sai Pattana village, Chai Buri district Surat Thani, 
southern Thailand. The community, which has since 2008  been occupying 
land in Klong Sai Pattana has faced killings, death threats, judicial 
harassment, intimidation, destruction of property and crops, and threats of 
eviction. While the Supreme Court in 2014 ordered the Jiew Kang Jue Pattana 
Ltd palm oil company to vacate land in Chai Buri district, the company is 
still there.

 

Chai Bunthonglek, 61, was shot dead by a gunman who arrived on the back of 
a motorcycle at his relative’s home on the outskirts of Klong Sai 
Pattana community, on 11 February 2015. He is the fourth SPFT member in 
Klong Sai Pattana to be killed. The body of former motorcycle mechanic 
Somporn Pattanaphum was found in January 2010 on the village outskirts, 
riddled with bullet holes. In November 2012, two women human rights 
defenders, trader Montha Chukaew and manual labourer Pranee Boonrat, were 
shot dead, while travelling back from a local market. No one has been held 
accountable for any of these brutal killings.

 

Police investigating the killing of Chai Bunthonglek submitted evidence to 
the Public Prosecutor about three suspects, including the suspected gunman, 
an individual suspected to have employed him and the alleged motorbike 
driver. Only one suspect – the suspected motorbike driver - has been 
brought to trial –on charges of murder, jointly premeditated murder 
and possession of a firearm without permit.

 

While welcoming official moves to ensure justice, the Asian Forum for 
Human Rights and Development (FORUM-ASIA), Amnesty International (AI), FIDH 
and OMCT within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human 
Rights Defenders and Protection International (PI), remain concerned that 
only one person has been brought to trial for a crime that appears to have 
been part of a larger plot, and calls on the authorities to continue 
investigations to ensure all suspected perpetrators are prosecuted, in fair 
trials.

 

“Justice for the death of Chai Bunthonglek is of critical 
importance, not only for him, his family and SPFT, but also because it would 
signal a new determination by the police, the prosecution and the courts to 
ensure that human rights defenders’ peaceful activism is fully 
protected by the law. Ongoing impunity for threats, harassments and the 
deaths of human rights defenders perpetuates a deadly environment for human 
rights defenders who work on land rights and natural resources issues in 
Thailand” said Evelyn Balais-Serrano, the Executive Director of 
FORUM-ASIA. 

 

The persecution faced by SPFT members highlight lack of effective 
mechanisms to protect human rights defenders, particularly those operating 
in rural areas with limited resources and access to remedies.

 

Our organisations urge that Thailand follow its support for the 2015 
United Nations General Assembly resolution on the protection of human rights 
defenders with immediate and effective measures. In line with its 
international human rights obligations ensure that those who attack human 
rights defenders are held accountable and also to create a safe and enabling 
environment in which defenders may carry out their work. This includes 
ensuring that all branches of the Thai state, the executive, legislative and 
judicial, guided by the Department of Rights and Liberties and the National 
Human Rights Commission, provide effective protection – in law, policy 
and practice - for defenders at risk, and ensure remedies for those who have 
been physically attacked, intimidated or harassed. 