HRDN Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders Campaign: Featured case: Southern Peasants' Federation of Thailand
May 12, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / European Union (EU) / 2016 / MayHRDN Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders Campaign: Featured case: Southern Peasants' Federation of Thailand​The Human Rights and Democracy Network (HRDN), of which OMCT is a 
member, presents another case of a human rights defender, in the framework of its one year-long campaign: Stand 4 Human Rights Defenders. HRDN is an informal group of 48 NGOs operating at the EU level in the areas of human rights, democracy and peace building.


Description of the case

The Southern Peasants' Federation of Thailand – SPFT (Southern 
Peasant Cooperatives) is a network formed in 2008 to campaign for 
community land rights and safe livelihoods in the Surat Thani Province 
of Thailand. The SPFT actively supported the Khlong Sai Pattana community
 in a land dispute involving the oil company Jiew Kang Jue Pattana Co. 
Ltd, which has been illegally occupying the community’s land for for 
years.


In 2010, Khlong Sai Pattana secured official endorsement from the Prime 
Minister’s Office to remain on their land until land title deeds are 
formalized by the National Agricultural Land Reform Office (ALRO). The 
National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) publically recognized SPFT 
members as human rights defenders who fight for their rights to land 
within a legitimate human rights framework. UN Special Rapporteurs have 
alerted the Thai government regarding the risk and threat situations 
that the SPFT and Khlong Sai Pattana community are facing.
However, Community-based human rights defenders of the SPTF have been victims of targeted media and government campaigns to discredit their work. The Khlong Sai Pattana community has experienced endless intimidation by local authorities and non-state actors, repeated threats of forced eviction and disappearance, the destruction of homes
 by company bulldozers in 2010, and the murder of 4 Khlong Sai Pattana 
and SPFT land rights activists over the past five years with no justice 
being served for any of the murders or protection offered by national 
authorities despite the very real risk of a deadly attacks. Just in the 
last year, Mr. Pianrat Boonrit President of the SPFT-sister 
organization, Southern Peasants’ Cooperative, was detained incommunicado
 between 3-5 February and 61 years old SPFT member Mr. Chai Bunthonglek 
was shot dead on 11 February. More recently, SPFT leaders have received 
multiple threats of kidnapping.
Protection International has recorded more than 200 incidents of 
violence against environmental defenders in Thailand throughout the 
2011-2015 period. There have also been over 50 killings of environmental
 and land rights activists recorded during the past decade. 




EU’S PUBLIC DIPLOMACY
On 31 march 2015 MEP Barbara LOCHBIHLER from the GREENS/EFA 
group put forward a written question to the EU High Representative on 
the situation of HRDs in Thailand asking for an adequate, transparent, 
and comprehensive investigation on the killing of land rights activist 
and SPTF member Mr. Chai Bunthonglek.
The EU delegation (comprising members from the Swedish and Austrian 
Embassies) visited the SPFT ton 21 April 2015 and called on the Royal 
Thai Police to immediately set up a National Taskforce to coordinate and
 implement protection measures for the Khlong Sai Pattana community. 
On 8 October 2015 the European Parliament adopted an urgency 
resolution on Thailand asking that ‘the right to security, including 
that of human rights defenders, be respected and protected, and that all
 violations of the rights of human rights defenders be promptly, 
effectively and independently investigated’.


WHAT MORE COULD THE EU DO?

The continued lack of effective protection of community-based human 
rights defenders of the  SPFT is a permanent threat to their security 
and work. Thus, we call on EU  stakeholders to: 

Monitor the security situation of SPFT human rights defenders and continue to visit Surat Thani;Call on national authorities to take all necessary steps to put an 
end to the use of violence against the members of the Khlong Sai Pattana
 community and all members of SPFT and their families;Call for an investigation on the murders of SPFT members Mr. Chai 
Bunthonglek, Mr. Somporn Pattaphum, Ms. Montha Chukaew, and Ms. Pranee 
Boonrat;Undertake démarches and publicly express support for defenders from the SPFT;Raise concerns with the Secretary-General of the Agricultural Land 
Reform Office about their decision to label the Khlong Sai Pattana 
community as ‘encroachers’;Encourage the Working Group on the Protection of Human Rights 
Defenders at Risk of the Ministry of Justice to pay a visit to the 
community and conduct a needs-assessment on the protection needs;More in general, closely monitor the human rights situation in 
Thailand and put protection of human rights defenders at the centre of 
any diplomatic relations with Thailand. 