Saudi Arabia:  Judicial harassment of Ms. Samar Badawi
January 14, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Saudi Arabia / 2016 / JanuarySaudi Arabia: Judicial harassment of Ms. Samar Badawi

SAU 001 /
0116 / OBS 007
Arbitrary
arrest / Release /
Judicial
harassment
Saudi Arabia
January 14,
2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Saudi Arabia.
 
Description of the situation: 
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the arbitrary arrest, overnight detention and subsequent release
without charge of Ms. Samar Badawi, Vice-President of the Monitor of
Human Rights in Saudi Arabia (MHRSA), and a vocal and public advocate for
imprisoned human rights activists and women's rights in Saudi Arabia. 
 
According
to the information received, on January 6, 2016, Ms. Samar Badawi was summoned
by the Criminal Investigation Authority in Jeddah for interrogation concerning
activity on the Twitter account of her detained ex-husband, human rights lawyer
Mr. Waleed Abu Al-Khair[1].
Ms. Badawi waited for several hours before being asked to come back on January
12, 2016. On that date, officers started interrogating her at 11 am on
accusations that she had been managing her husband's Twitter account and
more particularly leaking a picture on January 8, 2016, of her husband and Mr. Fawzan Al-Harbi, a member of the Saudi
Civil and Political Rights Association (ACPRA) arbitrarily detained with Mr.
Abu Al-Khair at the Al-Malaz prison, before Mr. Abu Al-Khair's transfer to
Dhahban Central Prison in Jeddah in January 2016.
 
After being
interrogated for about four hours, she was placed in a police car and
transferred along with her two years old daughter, to Hayy al-Salam police
station. Upon arrival, she was formally placed under arrest and transferred
alone to Dhahban Central Prison where both her husband and her brother Mr. Raif
Badawi[2]
are detained. On January 13, 2016, she was released on bail in the early
morning. Later on the same day she appeared before the public prosecution, who
released her without charges. 
 
The Observatory recalls that this is not the first
time Ms. Samar Badawi is judicially harassed by the Saudi authorities. In
December 2014, she was intercepted at King Abdulaziz International Airport in Jeddah,
and prevented to board a plane to attend the EU NGO Forum on Human Rights in
Brussels, Belgium, before being informed of a travel ban issued by the Ministry
of Interior against her[3].

 
The Observatory expresses its utmost concern over
the continued judicial harassment against Ms. Samar Badawi. This case is a
clear illustration that the Saudi authorities are increasingly challenging and
threatening freedom of association, assembly and expression, further shrinking
space for civil society. Accordingly, the Observatory calls on the Saudi
authorities to drop all charges against Ms. Badawi, and put an end to all
ongoing acts of harassment against her and other human rights defenders in
Saudi Arabia. 
 
More generally, the Observatory condemns the
continued arbitrary detention of Messrs. Waleed Abu al-Khair and Raif Badawi,
which only aims at punishing them for their legitimate and peaceful human
rights activities, and calls upon the Saudi authorities to immediately release
them and drop all charges against them. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Saudi
Arabia asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Ms. Samar
Badawi, Waleed Abu al-Khair and Raif Badawi as well as all human rights defenders
in Saudi Arabia;
 
ii.  
Put an end to all acts of
harassment and intimidation, including at the judicial level, against Ms. Samar
Badawi, Waleed Abu al-Khair and Raif Badawi and all human rights defenders in
Saudi Arabia, and ensure in all circumstances that they are
able to carry out their work without unjustified hindrance and fear of reprisal;
 
iii.
Release Messrs. Waleed Abu
al-Khair and Raif Badawi immediately and unconditionally, as well as all human
rights defenders currently in detention, since their detention is arbitrary as
it only aims at curtailing their human rights activities; 
 
iv.  Comply in all circumstances with all the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, adopted by consensus by the
UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in particular its:
- Article 1, which provides that “everyone has the right, individually
and in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and
international levels”;
- Article 6(c), which foresees that “everyone has the right,
individually and in association with others, to study, discuss, form and hold
opinions on the observance, both in law and in practice, of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms and, through these and other appropriate means, to
draw public attention to those matters”;
- Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone,
individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats,
retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure
or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate
exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
 
v.  
More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, ratify international and regional human rights instruments and
harmonise its domestic law with international human rights instruments.
 
Addresses:
 
· His
Majesty, King Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia and
Custodian of the two Holy Mosques, Office of His Majesty the King, Royal Court,
Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Fax: (via Ministry of the Interior) +966 11
403 3125
· H.E.
Shaykh Dr Mohammed bin Abdulkareem Al-Issa, Minister of Justice, Ministry of
Justice, University Street, Riyadh 11137, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Fax: + 966
11 401 1741 / + 966 11 402 0311
· His
Royal Highness Prince Mohammed bin Naif bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud, Minister of
Interior, Ministry of the Interior, P.O. Box 2933, Airport Road, Riyadh 11134,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Fax: +966 11 403 3125
· H.E.
Mr. Faisal Bin Hassan Trad, Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations Office in Geneva,
Route de Lausanne 263, 1292 Chambésy, Switzerland. Fax: +41 22 758 00 00.
Email: saudi.mission.ch@mofa.gov.sa
·  H.E.
Mr. Abdulrahman bin Soliman Al-Ahmed, Ambassador, Embassy of Saudi Arabia in
Brussels, Avenue Franklin Rosevelt, 45 1050 Brussels – Belgium. Fax: +32 2
6468538. Email: beemb@mofa.gov.sa
 
Please also write to the diplomatic
representations of Saudi Arabia in your respective countries.



[1] Mr.
Waleed Abu al-Khair, also the founder and Director of MHRSA, has been
arbitrarily detained since April 15, 2014. See Observatory Urgent Appeal SAU
001 / 0415 / OBS 035.


[2] Mr. Raif Badawi, laureate of the 2015 Sakharov Prize for Freedom
of Thought, is a blogger and creator of the website Free Saudi Liberals. On
September 1, 2014, he was sentenced in appeal to 10 years of prison and 1,000
lashes. See Observatory Urgent Appeal SAU 001 / 0514 / OBS 048.3.


[3] The ban came only two months after Ms. Badawi's intervention at the 27th
Session of the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva, calling for the release of
human rights defenders imprisoned in Saudi Arabia. 