Thailand:  Arbitrary detention of pro-democracy activist Mr. Jatuphat Boonpattaraksa (aka Pai)
January 17, 2017
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2017 / JanuaryThailand: Arbitrary detention of pro-democracy activist Mr. Jatuphat Boonpattaraksa (aka Pai)





THA
001 / 0117 / OBS 006
Arbitrary detention /
Judicial harassment
Thailand
January 17, 2017
 
The Observatory for the
Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), requests your urgent intervention in the
following situation in Thailand.
 
Description of the situation:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary detention and judicial
harassment of student and pro-democracy activist Mr. Jatuphat Boonpattaraksa (aka Pai), a member of the Dao Din group[1]
and the New Democracy Movement (NDM)[2].
 
According to the
information received, on January 13, 2017, the Khon Kaen Provincial Court
refused to grant bail to Mr. Jatuphat for the fourth time. In addition, on
January 16, 2017, the same court rejected a request filed by Mr. Jatuphat’s
legal team that sought the release of their client so he could sit his final
exam at Khon Kaen University on January 17-18, 2017. The exam is mandatory to complete his
bachelor’s degree in law. On January 20, police are expected to request an
additional 12-day extension of Mr. Jatuphat’s detention.
 
Mr. Jatuphat is being
detained in Khon Kaen Provincial Correctional Institution on lese-majesté
charges under Article 112 of the Criminal Code and the Computer Crimes Act. The
charges stem from a Facebook post in which Mr. Jatuphat shared a profile of
Thai King Maha Vajiralongkorn Bodindradebayavarangkun, published on the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
Thai language service’s website on December 2, 2016.
 
The Observatory noted that, to date, Mr.
Jatuphat is the only individual who has been arrested and charged among the
approximately 3,000 web users who shared the BBC profile of the Thai King on Facebook. It is believed that the
charges against him are aimed at sanctioning his legitimate human rights
activities.
 
Arrested on December 3,
2016, Mr. Jatuphat was released on a 400,000 Thai baht (approx. 10,620 Euros)
bail the following day. However, on December 22, 2016, the Khon Kaen Provincial
Court approved a police request to revoke Mr. Jatuphat’s bail after he posted a
sarcastic Facebook message that read: “The economy is poor so they [the
authorities] took my bail money”.
 
On January 6, 2017, the Khon Kaen Provincial
Court read behind closed doors the Supreme Court’s decision to dismiss a motion
to overturn the bail revocation order filed by Mr. Jatuphat’s lawyers on
December 29, 2016. On the same day, the Khon Kaen Provincial Court approved the
police request to detain Mr. Jatuphat for another 12 days, from
January 9 to 20, 2017.
 
In addition, the
Observatory has been informed about abusive cavity searches to which Mr.
Jatuphat has been regularly subjected in Khon Kaen Provincial Correctional
Institution, every time he returns from a court hearing.
 
The Observatory condemns
the arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Mr. Jatuphat, which seem
only to be aimed at sanctioning his legitimate human rights activities.
 
The Observatory urges Thai
authorities to ensure Mr. Jatuphat’s physical and psychological integrity and
to immediately and unconditionally release him.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the Thai authorities asking them to:
 
i.     Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Jatuphat Boonpattaraksa, as well as that of all
human rights defenders in Thailand;
 
ii.    Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Jatuphat Boonpattaraksa
as his detention is arbitrary since it only seems to aim at sanctioning his
human rights activities;
 
iii.   Put an end to any kind of
harassment - including at the judicial level - against Mr. Jatuphat
Boonpattaraksa, as well as all human rights defenders in Thailand;
 
iv.  Conform
with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, in particular
with its Articles 1, 6, 9, and 12.2;
 
v.   Ensure
in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with international human rights standards and international
instruments ratified by Thailand.

Addresses: 


·    
Gen Prayuth Chan-ocha, Prime
Minister of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131
·    
Don Pramudwinai, Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·    
Suwaphan Tanyuvardhna, Minister of
Justice of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 953 0503
·    
Pol Gen Chaktip Chaijinda,
Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai Police, Fax: +66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66
(0) 2 251 8702
·    
Mr. Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of
the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand, Email: help@nhrc.or.th
·    
H.E. Mr. Thani Thongphakdi,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Thailand to the United Nations in Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 715 10 00 / 10 02; Email: mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·    
Embassy of Thailand in Brussels,
Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 648 30 66; Email: thaibxl@pophost.eunet.be

Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of Thailand in your
respective country


***
Paris-Geneva,
January 17, 2017
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in
your reply. 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and
OMCT. The objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of
repression against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of
ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society. 




[1] Dao Din is a human rights group that
supports communities in upholding their rights in relation to human rights
violations connected to development projects and extractive industries. The
group has been engaging in peaceful protests against the restrictions to the
right to freedom of assembly in the aftermath of the May 2014 military coup.


[2] The NDM is an organisation
advocating for the restoration of democracy, the end of trials of civilians
before military courts, and the respect of human rights and freedoms. NDM is
driven by five principles: democracy, human rights, justice, public
participation, and peaceful means (non-violence). 