Angola: Forced Evictions in Lubango
March 26, 2010
Save as PDF Print versionESCR / Urgent Interventions / 2010 / MarchAngola: Forced Evictions in LubangoDownload full article3 pages / 160 KB25 March 2010                                                                    

Att: Governador Provincial da Huíla Sr. Isaac Maria Francisco dos Anjos
Re: Forced eviction of
more than three thousand families in Lubango – seven or more deaths to be
confirmed – and other violent and illegal evictions and demolitions in Angola 
Excellency,The Centre on Housing
Rights and Evictions (COHRE) is an international human rights non-governmental
organisation based in Geneva Switzerland. COHRE has consultative status with
the United Nations and the Council of Europe and works to promote and protect
the right to adequate housing for everyone, everywhere, including preventing or
remedying forced evictions. In partnership with international civil society
organization Christian Aid and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) want to call your attention to the following:COHRE, Christian Aid and OMCT and our
Angolan partners are gravely concerned about the reported forced eviction of
more than three thousand families and demolition of houses in Lubango city,
Huíla province, since beginning of March 2010. 7 deaths were reported during
the demolition of houses. Many evicted families and their belongings were left
in the open–air where bad weather is damaging their property; and / or several
families are sharing a tent. 
There is no water, sanitation, food,
medical facilities, and schools, giving rise to a humanitarian emergency. At
night the evicted are robbed by bandits due to lack of police protection.
According to citizens affected by the eviction they will not receive any
compensation from the government for damages caused or assisted with building
materials for reconstruction. During the eviction process, His Excellency the
provincial Governor of Huila interfered with the media, forbidding them to
cover and report the eviction events. There are also registered or threatened
violent and illegal evictions of other citizens in Benguela, in Luanda, as well
as in other poor urban neighbourhoods and many rural communities in
Angola.  Indeed, COHRE, Christian
Aid and OMCT and our Angolan partners’ organizations
are concerned with the housing, land and human rights situation in Angola. In
the February 2010 Angola UPR review one of the recommendation given was on the
state of Angola to increase housing to low-income families and create laws
defining eviction and prevention of illegal evictions.
The international community has indicated forced evictions as a gross
violation of human rights, particularly affecting the right to adequate
housing. In its General Comment No. 4, the United Nations Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights states that “the instances of forced eviction are prima
facie incompatible
with the requirements of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (ICESCR).  COHRE, Christian Aid and OMCT remind the provincial Government of Huíla, the
Administration of Lubango and all relevant authorities in Angola that as a
State Party to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, it is bound to comply with the State Party obligations contained
within this international treaty, including the obligations to respect, protect
and fulfil the right to adequate housing enshrined in Article 11. 
COHRE,
Christian Aid and OMCT would like to remind the Angolan authorities that in
terms of international human rights law, for evictions to be considered as
lawful, they must satisfy legal requirements as articulated in General Comments
numbers 4 and 7 of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.  Evictions should not result in
rendering individuals homeless or vulnerable to the violation of other human
rights. Where those affected are unable to provide for themselves, Angola
government must take all appropriate measures, to the maximum of its available
resources, to ensure that adequate alternative housing, resettlement or access
to alternative land able to support the community livelihood, as the case may
be is available. In this case, not only has the eviction process not been
followed, but a human-made emergency was created.  The
state of Angola must cease immediately the illegal demolitions in the city
of Lubango and other
threatened evictions in other towns or rural areas in Angola. State authorities need to provide
housing, food water and sanitation facilities for the evicted families as
dialogue platforms are made available with Angola civil society organisations
and community groups, on compensation and other ways of enabling the families
to restart their lives in environment they feel comfortable with.The State of Angola must ensure that
further forced evictions will stop until basic standards, legislation and rules
on carrying out an eviction can be put into practice in all the territory and
protection is ensured to all Angolan Citizens.
Requests for further information or
electronic replies should be sent to salih@cohre.org.
Sincerely,   
Salih
Booker, Executive
Director, Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions
Paul Valentin, Director,
International Department, Christian Aid
Eric Sottas, Secretary General, World Organisation Against Torture 