Nepal:  Nepal: death in detention of journalist Krishna Sen after he was subjected to torture and the incommunicado detention of four other journalists
June 28, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Nepal / 2002 / JuneNepal: Nepal: death in detention of journalist Krishna Sen after he was subjected to torture and the incommunicado detention of four other journalistsCase NPL 280602 Incommunicado detention / Torture / Death in detention   The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Nepal.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Informal Sector Service Center (INSEC), a member of the OMCT network, of the death in detention of journalist Krishna Sen after he was subjected to torture while in police custody, and the incommunicado detention of four other journalists, in Nepal.  According to the information received, Krishna Sen was arrested on May 20th, 2002, in Battisputali, Kathmandu, by the Nepalese security personnel. He was reportedly detained incommunicado at an unknown location following his arrest and subjected to torture, which reportedly led to his death while in detention. The government has not yet confirmed or denied the events leading to Mr. Sen’s death. Mr. Sen’s funeral rites were reportedly completed by the Nepalese authorities without the presence and knowledge of his family.  According to the report, journalists Atindra Neupane, Sangita Khadka, Shiva Tiwari, and Meena Tiwari, are currently being detained incommunicado and their location is unknown.  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned by the alleged use of torture on Krishna Sen while he was being detained incommunicado at an unknown location, which led to his death. OMCT is also gravely concerned for the physical and psychological integrity of Atindra Neupane, Sangita Khadka, Shiva Tiwari, and Meena Tiwari, and fears that since they are currently being detained incommunicado they might also be subjected to torture. OMCT therefore calls upon the Nepalese authorities to immediately disclose the whereabouts of the aforementioned people and guarantee their physical and psychological integrity. Furthermore, OMCT fears that the perpetrators of these acts will not be brought to justice and that Mr. Sen’s family will not be awarded adequate reparations.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Nepal urging them to:  i.	immediately locate the whereabouts of Atindra Neupane, Sangita Khadka, Shiva Tiwari, and Meena Tiwari, and take all necessary measures to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity; ii.	guarantee adequate reparation to Mr. Sen’s family; iii.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the circumstances of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; iv.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights standards.  Addresses  Note: You may encounter difficulties with the fax numbers in Nepal, in which case please address you appeals to the Nepalese Ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva.  ·	Mr. Sher Bahadur Deuba, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Nepal, Office of the Prime Minister, Singha Durbar, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +977 1 227286   ·	Mr. Khum Bahadur Khadka, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Singha Durbar, Kathmandu, Nepal, Fax: +977 1 227186 or 1 227187, E-mail: homehmg@wlink.com.np  ·	Mrs Bindu Simkhada, Ambassador to the United Nations, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Nepal, 81 rue de la Servette, 1201 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 7332722, E-mail: mission.nepal@ties.itu.int   Please also write to the embassies of Nepal in your respective country.  Geneva, June 28th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 