Bangladesh:  Authorities threaten NGOs Odhikar and the Bangladesh Human Rights Commission (BAMAK) for denouncing human rights abuses
August  4, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Bangladesh / 2015 / AugustBangladesh: Authorities threaten NGOs Odhikar and the Bangladesh Human Rights Commission (BAMAK) for denouncing human rights abusesBangladesh_2015.08.04_PR_English2 pages / 291 KBBANGLADESH: Authorities threaten NGOs Odhikar and the Bangladesh Human Rights Commission (BAMAK) for denouncing human rights abusesGeneva, Paris, August 4, 2015 – The Observatory for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders strongly condemns the statement issued
by the Bangladeshi police which accuses NGOs Odhikar and the
Bangladesh Human Rights Commission (BAMAK) of acting illegally and
subversively, simply for having published reports on extrajudicial killings
supposedly committed by the authorities.
On August 2, 2015, the Media and Public Relations wing of the Police
Headquarters in Dhaka issued a statement condemning newspaper reports on
extrajudicial killings which cited Odhikar, a member organisation of OMCT and
FIDH, and BAMAK. The Press Release, which is entitled "Police did not
commit extrajudicial killings. Statements of Odhikar and BAMAK are unlawful;
only subversive campaigns", affirms that the statements made by the
two organisations “contravene the existing laws of Bangladesh, which is
synonymous to challenging Rule of Law and the judicial system”[1].
The Police Press Release further states that questioning the activities
of the police threatens the reputation of the police and amounts to defamation and a criminal act,
and may be considered as a subversive activity.
“This new attack
against independent civil society in Bangladesh is completely unacceptable and
deepens the ongoing crackdown against critical voices inside the country. The
scrutiny of governmental activities by NGOs is not a challenge to rule of law
as affirmed in the statement; on the contrary, such questioning and scrutiny is
absolutely essential to ensure the full respect of human rights in Bangladesh” said OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock.
The Observatory recalls that Odhikar has been under
extreme pressure since August 2013 when authorities arrested Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Odhikar Secretary,
member of OMCT General Assembly and Final
Nominee for the Martin Ennals Award 2014, on trumped up charges related to his
human rights work. Since then, attacks and harassment against Odhikar have been
constant, including judicial harassment of both Mr. Khan and Mr. Nasiruddin
Elan, Odhikar Director, and surveillance and repression against Odhikar,
its staff, and their relatives[2].
“We fear another wave of repression and persecution
against Odhikar and other independent organisations in Bangladesh.  The
language of this Police press release indicates an abuse of existing laws to
repress legitimate human rights work, which violates international human rights
law” stated FIDH President
Karim Lahidji. “We therefore call on the EU and other foreign donors to
call for the immediate end to the crackdown on civil society, and to express
that free expression and association are necessary for the deepening of their
relations with Bangladesh”.
This smear campaign takes place in an already
repressive context for civil society due to the
attempts by the Bangladesh authorities to stifle free expression and to
severely restrict their work. 
The Foreign Donations (Voluntary Activities)
Regulation Act 2014, which was approved by the Cabinet in 2014 and is
currently before the Parliament in order to be passed into law, subjects the work of civil society
organizations to increased control by the government and restricts foreign funding
to Bangladeshi NGOs, which is a violation of human rights standards. 
In addition, the newly proposed Cyber Security Act 2015 aims to further tighten the control of the
authorities over free expression, going beyond the existing Information and
Communication (ICT) Act which already criminalises defamatory and
“anti-State” publications and has been used to target dissenting voices, in
particular human rights defenders.
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders (OBS) was created in 1997 by OMCT and FIDH. The objective of this
programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy to situations of repression
against human rights defenders.
For more information, please contact:
·        
OMCT: Miguel Martín Zumalacárregui: +41 22 809 49 24
·        
FIDH: Arthur Manet/Lucie Kroening: + 33 1 43 55 25 18



[1]               
Unofficial translation.


[2]               For
further information on the case see Observatory's Urgent Appeal BGD 001 / 0813 / OBS 074.5, February
5, 2014: Acts of surveillance and harassment against the staff of the NGO Odhikar, and in particular against Mr.  Adilur Rahman Khan and his relatives 