Malaysia:  Police raid at the offices of Bersih 2.0  and arbitrary arrest of Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, Mr. Mandeep Singh and seven supporters of the Bersih 5 rally
November 18, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Malaysia / 2016 / NovemberMalaysia: Police raid at the offices of Bersih 2.0  and arbitrary arrest of Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, Mr. Mandeep Singh and seven supporters of the Bersih 5 rally

New information
MYS 001 / 1116 / OBS 096.1
Raid of NGOs office /
Arbitrary arrest / Seizure of equipment /
Obstacle to freedom of assembly
Malaysia
November 18, 2016
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a
partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH,
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Malaysia.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been
informed by Suara Rakyat Malaysia (SUARAM) about a police raid at the offices
of Bersih 2.0[1] and the arbitrary arrest of Ms.
Maria Chin Abdullah, Chairperson of Bersih 2.0, and Mr. Mandeep Singh, Bersih 2.0 Secretariat
Manager, as well as seven supporters of the Bersih 5 rally[2].
 
According to the information
received, on November 18, 2016, at about 3pm, Bukit Aman police
raided Bersih 2.0’s office in Petaling Jaya, Selangor State, for suspected
violation of Article 124C of the Criminal Code (‘attempt to commit activity
detrimental to parliamentary democracy’)[3].
 
Police officers prevented Bersih
2.0 staff from leaving the office and stopped lawyers from entering the
premises. They arrested Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah and Mr. Mandeep Singh and took
them to the Petaling Jaya district police headquarters for questioning. The
police also confiscated laptops, phones, and bank and payroll statements from
the Bersih 2.0 office.
 
The arrests of Ms. Maria Chin
Abdullah and Mr. Mandeep Singh and the raid on the Bersih 2.0 office occurs one
day before the Bersih 5 rally.
 
On the same day, in separate
incidents in Petaling Jaya and Kuala Lumpur, police took into custody seven
other Bersih 5 supporters: Mr. S. Arutchelvan, Socialist Party of Malaysia
(PSM) member; Messrs. Ronnie Liu, Andy
Wong and Lee Khai Ming, Democratic Action Party (DAP)
members; Mr. Anthony Loke, DAP Member of Parliament (MP);
and Mr. Mhamad Luqman Nul Haqim and Ms. Anis
Syafiqah, student leaders.
 
The Observatory condemns the arbitrary arrest of Ms.
Maria Chin Abdullah, Messrs. Mandeep Singh, S. Arutchelvan, Ronnie Liu, Andy Wong, Lee Khai Ming, Anthony Loke, Mhamad Luqman Nul
Haqim and Ms. Anis Syafiqah, and calls on the authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release them. The Observatory also urges the authorities to put
an immediate end to the harassment of Bersih 5 organisers and supporters.
 
Background information:
 
Over the past weeks, Bersih 2.0
members, including in particular Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, have been subjected
to harassment and threats.
 
In October, Ms. Maria Chin
Abdullah received a number of death threats. On October 17, 2016, she received
violent messages on her mobile phone that threatened her, her sons, Mr. Mandeep
Singh and former Co-Chair of Bersih Ms. Ambiga Sreenevasan, and warned her of reprisals if
she proceeded with organising the November 19 Bersih 5 rally. The messages
claimed to be from the ‘Islamic State Malaysia’.
 
On November 11, 2016, Ms. Maria
Chin Abdullah received photoshopped images of herself, her three sons, Mr.
Mandeep Singh and Ms. Ambiga Sreenevasan, being beheaded by ISIS on her mobile
phone. She subsequently lodged a police report on the incident.
 
Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah has also
been subjected to harassment by the authorities. On October 29, 2016, she was
arbitrarily arrested under Article 11 of the 1984 Printing Presses and
Publications Act for distributing Bersih 5 leaflets in Kota Marudu, Sabah
State. She was brought to Kota Marudu district police headquarters for
questioning and subsequently released on bail. Several other individuals have
also been threatened with arrest under the 1984 Printing Presses and
Publications Act and the 1948 Sedition Act for distributing the same leaflets.
 
On November 4, 2016, Ms. Maria
Chin Abdullah was briefly detained for questioning at the Bukit Aman police
headquarters over allegations that Bersih 2.0 received foreign funding, which
the police claimed was in violation of Article 124C of the Criminal Code
(‘attempt to commit activity detrimental to parliamentary democracy’). She was
released on the same day pending further investigations. During questioning,
the police officers told her that she would be summoned after the November 19
rally.
 
Authorities have also threatened
Bersih 2.0 with legal action in relation to the November 19 Bersih 5 protest.
On November 3, 2016, Home Affairs Minister Ahmad Zahid Hamidi warned Bersih 5
organisers that they would face legal action if the rally went ahead. Mr. Zahid
claimed Bersih 5 did not comply with the 2012 Peaceful Assembly Act because the
rally venue was among the locations prohibited by the Act. Bersih 5 organisers
maintain that the planned November 19 rally complies with the legal
requirements under the 2012 Peaceful Assembly Act, including the requirement to
notify the authorities 10 days before the demonstration.
 
In addition, other Bersih 2.0
members have been threatened several times. In October 2016, a number of local
Bersih 2.0 coordinators were summoned by the police for questioning in the
States of Johor, Penang, Selangor, Negeri Sembilan, and Perak, over a Bersih 5
convoy, which travelled from Melaka to Negeri Sembilan from October 6 to 8,
2016.
 
Bersih 2.0 members also
regularly receive threats from the pro-government ‘red shirts.’ On October 8,
2016, participants of a Bersih 5 convoy were attacked with eggs and firecrackers,
and physically assaulted. ‘Red shirt’ leader Jamal Yunos has said that they
would continue to gather, legally or illegally, and use physical force against
Bersih 5 participants.
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Malaysia asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological
integrity of Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah and Mr. Mandeep Singh, as well as of other
members of Bersih 2.0, and of all human rights defenders in Malaysia;
 
ii. Release Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah, Messrs. Mandeep Singh, S. Arutchelvan, Ronnie Liu, Andy
Wong, Lee Khai Ming, Anthony Loke, Mhamad Luqman Nul Haqim and Ms. Anis
Syafiqah, immediately and unconditionally, as their detention
is arbitrary since it only aims at sanctioning their legitimate human rights
activities;
 
iii. Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at the judicial
level, against Ms. Maria Chin Abdullah and Mr. Mandeep Singh, all Bersih 5 supporters as
well as of other members of Bersih 2.0 and of all human rights defenders in the
country so that they are able to carry out their work without hindrance;
 
iv. Ensure in all circumstances that all human rights defenders in
Malaysia are able to carry out their legitimate human rights activities
including the organisation of peaceful and unarmed assemblies without any
hindrance or fear of violence;
 
v. Comply with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998,
in particular with its Articles 1, 5(a), and 12.2;
 
vi. Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other
international human rights instruments signed or ratified by Malaysia.
 
Addresses:
 
Dato’ Sri Mohd Najib bin Tun Abdul Razak,
     Prime Minister of Malaysia, Fax: +60 3 8888 3444, Email: ppm@pmo.gov.myMr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Minister of Home
     Affairs of Malaysia, Fax: +60 3 8889 1613 / +60 3 8889 1610, Email:
     webmaster@moha.gov.myTan Sri Razali Bin Ismail, Chairman of
     the Human Rights Commission of Malaysia (SUHAKAM), Fax: +60 3 2612 5620,
     Email: humanrights@suhakam.org.my; hasmyagam@suhakam.org.myH.E. Mr. Amran Mohamed Zin, Ambassador, Permanent
     Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland.
     Fax: +41 22 710 75 01, Email: malgeneva@kln.gov.myEmbassy of Malaysia in Brussels, Belgium, Fax:
     +32 2 762 50 49, Email: malbrussels@kln.gov.my
 
Please also write to the diplomatic representations of Malaysia in your
respective countries.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, November 18, 2016
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by FIDH and OMCT. The
objective of this programme is to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of
ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism
implemented by international civil society.



[1] The Coalition for Clean and Fair Elections (Bersih) is a non-partisan,
civil society campaign created in 2006 and endorsed by over 60 Malaysian
non-governmental organisations, which seeks to reform the electoral system in
Malaysia to ensure free, clean, and fair elections and to promote the respect
of democratic rights.


[2] The Bersih 5 has been organised amid corruption allegations involving
Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak, in connection with misappropriation of
funds by the debt-ridden state-owned investment firm 1Malaysia Development
Berhad (1MDB).


[3] Article 124C of the Malaysian Criminal Code states that “Whoever
attempts to commit an activity detrimental to parliamentary democracy or does
any act preparatory thereto shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to 15 years.” 