Cameroon:  Assassination of Eric Ohena Lembembe, the investigation remains at a standstill
July 11, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cameroon / 2014 / JulyCameroon: Assassination of Eric Ohena Lembembe, the investigation remains at a standstillAssassination of Eric Ohena Lembembe, the investigation remains at a standstill2 pages / 158 KBDouala-Geneva-Paris-Yaoundé, July 11, 2014. A year after the murder
of Eric Ohena Lembembe, a journalist and human rights defender committed to
protecting the rights of the lesbians, gays, bisexuals, transgender and
intersex people (LGBTI) in Cameroon, the working of justice remains at a
standstill. Alternatives Cameroun, ADEFHO, CAMFAIDS, REDHAC, MDHC and the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint FIDH and OMCT
programme, denounce the dysfunctions of the justice system in this case and
fear that they are a sign of the lack of political will to shed light on the
circumstances of this assassination.

 
When it comes to reviewing
the progress of the justice system's work, the evidence is overwhelming:
bungled investigation, blocked instruction and disdain and even intimidation of
the victim's relatives. Initially assigned to the police station of the 1st
district of Yaoundé, the investigation was then carried out by the National
Security Central Administration, before finally being transmitted to an
investigating judge who, one year after the murder, has only summoned Eric
Ohena Lembembe's mother, sister and brother in a procedure and by means of
actions which contain numerous irregularities: no photo nor fingerprint has
been taken at the scene of the crime; the medical certificate indicating the
nature of the death does not mention the burns and other injuries visible on
Eric Lembembe's body, etc. 
 
Simultaneously, the family
and relatives of the victim are facing what can be qualified as intimidation.
Several friends as well as Eric Lembembe's family were placed in custody by the
police at the very beginning of the investigation; the relatives and witnesses
summoned by the investigating judge have yet never been heard despite the
attempts and reminders of the lawyers of the civil party, etc.
 
“The Cameroonian judiciary must
absolutely undertake a fair and honest investigation on Eric Lembembe's murder”,
declared Dominique MENOGA NANGA, founder of CAMFAIDS.
“Claiming that Eric is responsible for his own murder is insulting. Nobody
deserves to die because of his identity or that of the person he loves”. 
 
In January 2014, the Observatory undertook
an international fact-finding mission on the situation of the LGBTI rights
defenders in Cameroon and has noted the fragile environment and the
intimidation aiming at defenders of the right to health and the human rights of
LGBTI people, in a context of criminalization of homosexuality. This mission
also met with several witnesses, relatives of the victim and justice actors in
order to review the progress of the investigation of Eric Lembembe's death. A
mission report will be published in the weeks to come. 
 
Eric Ohena Lembembe was the
Executive Director of Cameroonian Foundation for AIDS (CAMFAIDS). He was
working in collaboration with several organisations such as Alternatives
Cameroun and the « Association pour la défense des homosexuel-les »
(ADEFHO). He had contributed in particular to the preparation and the
dissemination of a report published by Human Rights Watch in March 2013 and had
addressed recommendations during the Universal Periodic Review of Cameroon in
front of the UN Human Rights Council in May 2013. He also contributed to the
blog Erasing 76 Crimes and had taken part in the writing process of the
book From Wrongs to Gay Rights. Eric
Ohena Lembembe was found murdered in his home, at Yaoundé, on July 15, 2013.
According to the testimonies, he was beaten to death by his attackers, his neck
and feet were apparently broken, his face, his hands and his feet burnt with an
iron. 
 
“It
is a particularly heinous and violent crime which targeted a man committed to
defending the rights of a vulnerable part of the Cameroonian population. We
repeat that justice must be particularly exemplary concerning hate crimes”, declared Karim Lahidji, FIDH President, and Gerald Staberock, OMCT
Secretary General. 
 
Our organisations fear that
the attitude of the police and judiciary authorities in this affair is a
reflection of these institutions' disregard for the respect and protection of
LGBTI people's human rights in Cameroon. “The Cameroonian authorities'
inertia in this case is all the more worrying that it might reinforce the
sentiment of impunity of the authors of the crimes and persecutions against
LGBTI people, and feed the stigma and discrimination against these people and
the defenders of their rights”, added Michel Togue, a lawyer at
the Bar of Cameroon and Legal Advisor for CAMFAIDS. 
 
Alternatives Cameroun, ADEFHO, CAMFAIDS, MDHC, the Observatory and
REDHAC renew their call to the competent Cameroonian authorities to conduct an independent,
effective, rigorous, impartial and transparent investigation in order to
identify the perpetrators, bring them before an independent, competent and
impartial court in accordance with international and regional human rights
protection instruments, and to apply criminal, civil, and/or administrative
sanctions as provided for by the law. 
 
For more information, please contact: 
·       FIDH: Arthur Manet: + 33 1 43 55 25 18
·      
OMCT: Delphine Reculeau:
+ 41 22 809 49 39
·     
CAMFAIDS: Maître
Michel Togue: + 237 22 69 22 56 