Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: Harassment of activists/ Judicial proceedings
May 25, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2001 / MayKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: Harassment of activists/ Judicial proceedingsURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY   New Information KGZ 001 / 0005 / OBS 036.12 Harassment of activists/ Judicial proceedings KYRGYZSTAN 25th May 2001   The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, an FIDH and OMCT venture, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  New Information :  The Observatory has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) of  the outcome of several members of the KCHR’s trials at the Dgalal Abad Court, including Eden Korgoldoev, the head of KCHR in Jalal-Abad region. Eden Korgoldoev is the brother of Albert Korgoldoev, the former KCHR coordinator for the Jalal-Abad region, who had to flee his country to Austria last February as he was facing charges based on a faked criminal case and risking up to 5 years of imprisonment.  According to the information received, Eden Korgoldoev was accused under Administrative Code of the Kyrgyz Republic articles 371, paragraph 1, and 392, for “Violation of the established order for organizing and conducting gatherings, meetings, street processions and demonstrations” and “Disobedience to the lawful orders and demands of home affairs’ departments and other persons, organizing the duties in security of the public customs”. The prosecution did not call any witnesses to the stand during the trial, which was held on May 17th, 2001. Eden Korgoldoev was found guilty of the charges brought against him and fined 2000 soms. He was reportedly fined the maximum amount due to his being an official, according to Judge Akmatovich, who presided over the trial. The Observatory believes that these events are linked to his activities as a Human Rights Defender, and those of his brother Albert Kolgoldoev.  According to the information received, KCHR members Sariev Medet, Sudakov Alexander, Kadyrbekov Abdymamat and Nujnov Semen Semenovich were also tried by the Dgalal Abad Court, on May 18th, 2001, under articles 371 and 392, for their participation in a peaceful demonstration on May 1st, 2001. Sariev Medet and Sudakov Alexander were reportedly fined 1300 soms, while Kadyrbekov Abdymamat and Nujnov Semen Semenovich were fined 1000 soms.  The Observatory is concerned about the Kyrgyz authorities’ continuing harassment of Human Rights Defenders and their families, and condemns the use of arbitrary sanctions, either through prison sentences, or as in this case, punitive fines, as a means of pressuring Human Rights Defenders into discontinuing their activities.  Brief Reminder of the situation:  The Observatory was informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) of renewed harassment against Albert Korgoldoev’s family, who have remained in Kyrgyzstan, and other KCHR members in the Jalal-Abad region.  Eden Korgoldoev, Albert's brother, has also been threatened, having replaced Albert at the head of KCHR in Jalal-Abad ; he was arrested, along with four other KCHR members during peaceful 1st of May demonstrations.   Action requested:  Please write to the Kyrgyz Authorities demanding that they :  i.	Ensure the protection of defenders of human rights in Kyrgyzstan according to Article 12-2 of the Declaration on defenders of human rights which states that : "The State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the present Declaration." ii.	ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9 1998 (Declaration concerning the rights and responsibilities of individuals, groups and institutions to promote and protect universally recognised human rights and fundamental liberties ) in particular its Article 1 which provides that “ Every person has the right, individually or collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human rights and fundamental liberties at the national and international level. ” iii.	guarantee the effective respect of fundamental rights and liberties in accordance with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international and regional Pacts and Covenants ratified by Kyrgyzstan.  Addresses:  The President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Askar Akayev, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205  Fax: + 996 (312) 218 627 ; E-mail:ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su  Geneva-Paris, 25th May 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken, quoting the reference number given above.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their time of need. The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the French Republic.  To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line  Tel : FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 ;  OMCT : +41 22 809 49 39 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 