Thailand:  Human rights lawyer Sirikan Charoensiri summoned to appear before the Public Prosecutor
May 10, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Thailand / 2016 / MayThailand: Human rights lawyer Sirikan Charoensiri summoned to appear before the Public Prosecutor

New
information
THA 001 /
0715 / OBS 055.5
Ongoing judicial harassment 
Thailand
May 10, 2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Thailand. 
 
New
information:
 
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the ongoing judicial
harassment against Ms. Sirikan “June” Charoensiri,
a human rights lawyer with the organisation Thai Lawyers for Human Rights
(TLHR)[1],
in connection with her work representing 14 activists of the Neo Democracy
Movement (NDM). 

 (c) TLHR
According
to the information received, on April 27, 2016, Ms. Sirikan “June” Charoensiri was
summoned to
appear before the Public Prosecutor at the Subdistrict 3 Court in Dusit,
Bangkok, at 10 am on May 12, 2016. Ms. Sirikan faces accusations of
“failure to comply with official orders”[2] (Article 368 of the Criminal Code) and
“concealing evidence” (Article 142) as a result of a lawsuit filed by Ms.
Sirikan against Thai police for “malfeasance” in June 2015 (see background
information). The Prosecutor will then decide whether to proceed
further with the case or not. If indicted, Ms. Sirikan could face a punishment of up
to three years in prison and/or fine of up to 6,000 baht (approximately 153
euros).
 
The
Observatory strongly condemns the ongoing judicial harassment against Ms.
Sirikan, which aims to hinder her legitimate work as a human rights lawyer, and
calls on the Thai authorities to immediately and unconditionally drop all
charges against her.
 
Background
information:
 
On
June 26, 2015, police arrested 14 activists of the Neo Democracy Movement (NDM)[3]
pursuant to an arrest warrant issued by the Bangkok Military Court. All were
charged with violating the Head of the National Council for Peace and Order
(NCPO) Order No. 3/2015, which bans gatherings of five or more people, and
Article 116 of the Thai Criminal Code (“sedition”). On July 7, the Bangkok
Military Court ordered the release of the 14. However, the charges against them
remain pending. Ms. Sirikan together with seven other TLHR lawyers assisted the
14 students at the Bangkok Military Court.
 
On the night of June 26-27, 2015, after Ms.
Sirikan had finished her
duty of providing legal assistance to the 14 activists, more than
10 police officers stationed by the Bangkok Military Court, including Pol. Maj.
Gen. Chayapol Chatchaidej, commander of the Sixth Division of Metropolitan
Police Bureau, requested access to Ms. Sirikan's car in order to search for the
mobile phones of the activist students. Following Ms. Sirikan's refusal due to
the lack of a court warrant and relying on the special protection of lawyers
and of the lawyer-client confidentiality, the police officers impounded Ms.
Sirikan’s car overnight.

 
At
12:45 pm on June 27, Ms. Sirikan filed a complaint against Pol. Maj. Gen. Chayapol Chatchayadetch and
others for “malfeasance” (Article 157 of Thai Criminal Code)
for illegally impounding her
car. While Ms. Sirikan was in the process of filing the complaint, a police
team arrived at the site of her seized car at 3:30 pm with a search warrant.
Officials from the Office of Police Forensic Science accompanied the police to
conduct the search.
 
Upon
presentation of the search warrant, Ms. Sirikan, who went back on the spot,
agreed to open her car. Equipment found in the car included TLHR’s case files,
personal computers of the seven TLHR lawyers and personal belongings of the
student activists including mobile phones. Five mobile phones belonging to the
students were confiscated and placed into a sealed envelope, which was turned
over to the custody of the Office of Police Forensic Science.
 
Ms.
Sirikan subsequently returned to the Chanasongkram police station in Bangkok to
file a second complaint against Pol. Maj. Gen. Chayapol Chatchaidej and his
subordinates for “malfeasance”, despite being threatened that the police would
then file a counter suit against her.
 
On
June 28, 2015, Metropolitan Police Commissioner Pol Lt Gen Srivara
Rangsipramkul told reporters that the police had recovered important evidence
from Ms. Sirikan’s car and that the police were considering whether to press
charges against her.
 
On
June 29, 2015, police visited the house of Ms. Sirikan’s parents in her
hometown and asked her mother to identify her in various photos and asked about
her daughter’s background.
 
On
February 2, 2016, Ms. Sirikan received a police summons to report to Bangkok’s
Chanasongkram police station on February 9, 2016, to hear criminal charges
filed against her under Articles 172 (“filing a false police report”) and 368
(“failure to comply with official orders”) of the Criminal Code. 
 
On
February 9, 2016, Ms. Sirikan appeared at the Chanasongkram police station in
Bangkok and was formally charged with “failure to comply with official orders”
(Article 368 of the Criminal Code) and with “concealing evidence” (Article
142). 
 
Moreover,
a second case brought against Ms. Sirikan on the alleged charges of “providing
false information concerning a criminal offence likely to cause damage to
others or the public”[4] (Articles 172 and 174) is
yet to be proceeded, due to the inability of the inquiry officer to indicate
the alleged false statements or information that she has been accused of
reporting to the police. If the charges were to be further proceeded, Ms.
Sirikan could face imprisonment of up to five years and a fine of up to 10,000
baht (approximately 253 euros).
 
Actions requested:
 
Please write to the authorities of Thailand asking
them to:
 
i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and
psychological integrity of Ms. Sirikan “June” Charoensiri as well as of all human rights defenders in
Thailand;
 
ii. Immediately and unconditionally drop all charges
against Ms. Sirikan, and put an end to all acts of judicial harassment against
her, the 14 NDM activists above-mentioned and all human rights defenders in
Thailand;
 
iii. Comply with the national and international
legislation safeguarding the independence of lawyers and protecting them from
unlawful interference in their professional activities;
 
iv. Repeal the Head of the National Council for Peace
and Order (NCPO) Order No. 3/2015 banning gatherings of more than five people;
 
v. Guarantee that the exercise of freedom of
expression and assembly are not prosecuted under Article 116 of the Thai
Criminal Code;
 
vi. Put an end to the prosecution of civilians in
military courts in accordance with international human rights law that prohibits
governments from using military courts to try civilians when civilian courts
are functioning;
 
vii. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on December 9, 1998, especially its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
viii. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights
standards and international instruments ratified by Thailand.
 
Addresses:
 
·    
Gen
Prayuth Chan-ocha, Prime Minister of Thailand, Fax: +66 (0) 2 282 5131
·    
Don
Pramudwinai, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax: +66 (0) 2 643 5320; Email: minister@mfa.go.th
·    
Gen
Paiboon Khumchaya, Minister of Justice, Fax: +66 (0) 2 953 0503
·    
Pol
Gen Somyot Poompanmoung, Commissioner-General of the Royal Thai Police, Fax:
+66 (0) 2 251 5956 / +66 (0) 2 251 8702
·    
Ms.
Wat Tingsamit, Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission of Thailand;
Email: help@nhrc.or.th 
·    
H.E. Mr. Thani Thongphakdi,
Ambassador, Permanent Mission of
Thailand to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 715 10 00 /
10 02; Email: mission.thailand@ties.itu.int
·    
H.E.
Ms. Busaya
Mathelin, Ambassador, Embassy
of Thailand in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 648 30 66; Email: thaibxl@thaiembassy.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic mission or
embassy of Thailand in your respective country.



[1] TLHR is an organisation set up after
the 2014-coup to provide legal aid to civilian arrested and/or prosecuted by
military, and monitor and document post-coup human rights situations and
violations throughout Thailand.


[2] Article 368 states: "Whoever,
being informed of an order of an official given according to the power invested
by law, refuses to comply with the same without any reasonable cause or excuse,
shall be punished with imprisonment not exceeding ten days or fined not
exceeding five hundred Baht, or both. If such order is an order authorized by
law requiring a person to assist in carrying on the activities in the function
of an official, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment not exceeding
one month or fined not exceeding one thousand baht, or both."


[3] NDM is an organisation advocating
for the restoration of democracy, for the end of trials against civilians
before military courts, and for the respect of human rights and freedoms. The 14
activists were: Mr. Rangsiman Rome, Mr. Wasant Sadesit, Mr. Songtham
Kaewpanphruek, Mr. Payu Boonsopon, Mr. Apiwat Suntararak, Mr.
Rattapol Supasophon, Mr. Supachai Pookhlongploy, Mr. Apisit
Sapnapaphan, Mr. Panupong Sritananuwat, Mr. Suvicha Pitungkorn,
Mr. Pakorn Areekul, Mr. Chatupat Boonyapatraksa, Mr. Pornchai
Yuanyee and Ms. Chonticha Chaengreo.


[4] Article 172 states: “Whoever, giving
any false information concerning a criminal offence, which may likely cause
injury to the other person or the public, to the Public Prosecutor, official
conducting cases, inquiry official or any official who has the power to
investigate the criminal cases, shall be punished with imprisonment not
exceeding two years or fined not exceeding four thousand Baht, or both.” 