Azerbaijan:  Sport For Rights: Joint Statement: Meydan TV Director Emin Milli Threatened for Critical Reporting on European Games
June 29, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Azerbaijan / 2015 / JuneAzerbaijan: Sport For Rights: Joint Statement: Meydan TV Director Emin Milli Threatened for Critical Reporting on European GamesAzerbaijan_2015.06.29_SFR_Statement2 pages / 62 KB​Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. 


 
On 26 June, Meydan TV Director Emin Milli reported that he had
received a threat from the Azerbaijani Minister of Youth and Sport, Azad Rahimov,
in connection with his critical reporting on the European Games, which
concluded on 28 June in Baku. 
 
Former political prisoner Milli heads Meydan
TV, a Berlin-based online television station that provides alternative news
coverage of Azerbaijan. During the European Games, Meydan TV’s materials were
widely used by the international media, including stories on the Azerbaijani
bus driver who crashed
into three Austrian swimmers, and the interview by a national television
station of a fake British
tourist – both of which were highly embarrassing to the ruling regime.
 
Milli himself also gave more than 20 interviews on the games to the
international media, and authored a popular piece for The Daily Beast, How Much Corruption Can One Game Hide?,
which was critical of President Ilham Aliyev – whom Milli has stated he holds
responsible for the threat against him.
 
According to Milli, the following threat reached him through an
intermediary on behalf of the Sport Minister: 
 
"What harm
has [the] Azerbaijani state done to you? We will get you wherever you are and
the state will punish you for this smear-campaign against the state that you
have organized. You will get punished for this. You will not be able to walk
freely in Berlin or anywhere else. You must know this". 
 
As members of the Sport for Rights campaign, we resolutely condemn
the threat against Milli, which constitutes a serious violation of Milli’s
rights under Azerbaijani and international law. The threat also contradicts the
Olympic Charter, which provides for press freedom and human dignity.
 
Sport for Rights calls on the Azerbaijani authorities to put an end
to their ongoing attempts to silence critical reporting, and to take immediate
steps to improve fundamental freedoms in the country, including by releasing all
the journalists and human rights defenders currently behind bars for political
reasons.
 
The campaign further calls on the European Olympic Committees to
speak out, publicly condemning the threat against Milli, as well as the broader
human rights crackdown taking place in the country.
 
Finally, Sport for Rights calls on the German authorities to provide
Milli with immediate and full protection in light of this serious threat
against him.  
 
Supporting organisations:
 
ARTICLE
19
 
Civil
Rights Defenders
 
Committee
to Protect Journalists
 
Freedom
Now 
 
Helsinki
Foundation for Human Rights
 
Human Rights House Foundation
 
Index on Censorship
 
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the
framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
 
International
Partnership for Human Rights
 
NESEHNUTI
 
Norwegian
Helsinki Committee
 
PEN
American Centre
 
People
In Need
 
Platform
 
Polish Green Network
 
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), within the framework of
the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 