China:  Immediately and Unconditionally Release Huang Qi & Ensure Access to Prompt Medical Care for all Detained Human Rights Defenders
November  5, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / China / 2018 / NovemberChina: Immediately and Unconditionally Release Huang Qi & Ensure Access to Prompt Medical Care for all Detained Human Rights Defenders





Chinese authorities must
immediately and unconditionally release citizen journalist and human rights activist
Huang Qi, a group of 14 NGOs said on November 5, 2018. 
 
Huang Qi (黄琦), the founder and
director of 64 Tianwang Human Rights Center, is not receiving adequate medical
care in detention and his health has seriously deteriorated, according to his
lawyer who visited him
on October 23. Huang’s condition is so serious that there is an immediate
threat to his life. 
 
The Chinese government must
immediately and unconditionally release Huang, who has been detained solely for
the peaceful exercise of his right to freedom of expression, and end its policy
of denying prompt medical treatment to prisoners of conscience, which is a form
of torture. Several human rights defenders and ethnic and religious minorities
have died
in detention in recent years due to a lack of prompt medical treatment,
including Liu Xiaobo, Cao Shunli, Yang Tongyan, and Tenzin Delek Rinpoche,
intensifying fears that Huang Qi might suffer the same fate without urgent
intervention. 
 
Huang suffers
from a chronic kidney disease which requires daily medication, hydrocephalus (accumulation of fluid in the brain), heart disease and other
illnesses. Huang told his lawyer during the
October meeting that Sichuan authorities had purposely understated the dire
state of his health and had tried to cover up his actual condition. In
particular, Huang’s blood pressure was actually much higher than previously
revealed, with a reading done on October 18 and 19 in the detention facility
measuring 221/147 mm Hg, a reading so high that it qualifies
as a “hypertensive crisis” (a normal reading should be no higher than 140/90 mm
Hg). Huang has also reported to his lawyers different forms of torture and other
ill-treatment to which he has been subjected to in the past two years,
including extended
interrogations, prolonged periods of being forced to stand, and beatings.
 
Authorities have repeatedly
rejected applications for release on medical bail despite Huang’s heath condition
continuing to deteriorate. He faces charges of “illegally providing state
secrets to foreign entities” and “leaking state secrets” due to his work with
64 Tianwang Human Rights Center, which documents and publishes reports on enforced
disappearances, trafficking, human rights violations and complaints against government
officials. Huang faces the possibility of life imprisonment. His 85-year-old
mother has been campaigning
for his release, fearing he may die in prison. Last month two of his associates
received
suspended prison sentences and were released, but authorities have continued to
hold Huang. The UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention issued
an opinion in April 2018 that declared Huang’s detention arbitrary, but the
Chinese government continues to ignore the Working Group’s recommendation that
Huang be released and compensated.
 
Lawyers representing Huang Qi have also faced retaliation.
One of his lawyers, Sui Muqing, was disbarred in February 2018 for defending
human rights defenders, such as Huang. Huang’s current lawyer, Liu Zhengqing, received
a notice in October that he is under investigation for giving Huang cigarettes
during a meeting in July. Liu faces suspension of his law license or a large fine.

 
Tomorrow, during China’s 3rd Universal Periodic
Review, UN Member States should raise the continued pervasive use of torture and
other ill-treatment in China, including tactics like denying medical care for
human rights defenders, and make clear calls on the Chinese government to end
such practices.
 
Background
 
Mianyang City police in
Sichuan Province initially detained Huang Qi on November 28, 2016 and arrested
him the following month on charges of “illegally providing state secrets to
foreign entities.” A trial scheduled for June 20, 2018 was suspended without
any official reason provided. In October 2018 police added an additional charge
of “leaking state secrets.” He is currently being held at Mianyang City
Detention Center. 
 
Huang Qi established
China’s first-known human rights monitoring website in 1998, disseminating
reports about Chinese individuals who had been trafficked and disappeared.
Huang has served two prison sentences, totalling eight years, in reprisal for
his human rights work, and was often tortured and otherwise to ill-treated. Born in 1963, Huang Qi graduated
from Sichuan University and was formerly a businessman. His work in citizen
journalism has received international awards, including two from Reporters
Without Borders, which awarded 64 Tianwang the Press Freedom Prize in 2016, and
honored Huang in 2004 with the Cyber-Freedom Prize.
 
This statement is endorsed by:
 
Amnesty International
Association of Taiwan Journalists
China Human Rights Lawyers Concern
Group
Chinese Human Rights Defenders
(CHRD)
Freedom House
Frontline Defenders
Human Rights Watch
FIDH, in the framework of the
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
International Service for Human
Rights 
Reporters Sans Frontières/Reporters
Without Borders
Safeguard Defenders
Taiwan Association for Human Rights
The Rights Practice
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), in
the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders 