Bangladesh:  Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan still arbitrarily detained
August 16, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Bangladesh / 2013 / AugustBangladesh: Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan still arbitrarily detained

 
TAKE ACTION!
 
Please
take action to call for the release of human rights defender ADILUR
RAHMAN KHAN! To do so, kindly copy the enclosed letter and send it to the addresses
provided. Kindly inform us of any action undertaken at omct@omct.org,
quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. Thank you for taking action!
 
· Ms.
Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad
Bhaban, Tejgaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bd
· Mr.
Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, Minister for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs,
Bangladesh Secretariat Building 4, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com; minister@mha.gov.bd;
· Barrister
Shafique Ahmed, Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry
of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bd
· Mr. Hasanul Haq Inu, Honourable Minister, Ministry of
Information, Building # 4 (8th floor), Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh.
E-mail: minister@moi.gov.bd
· Mr.
Hasan Mahmud Khandaker, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters,
Phoenix Road, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Email: ig@police.gov.bd 
· H.E.
Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh to the United Nations in Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva,
Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46 16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.int
· Embassy
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000
Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 646 59 98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be 
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Bangladesh in your respective
country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in
Bangladesh.
 
 
Your Excellency,
 
I have been informed by the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT) about the ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of the human
rights non-governmental organisation Odhikar, a member of OMCT General Assembly
and Executive Committee Member of Forum Asia.
 
On August 10, 2013, at 10.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was
arrested by eight or nine men in plain clothes who said they were of the Detective Branch of
Police (DB) as he was returning at his Gulshan residence in Dhaka with his
family. The men, who brought a white microbus apparently belonging to the
United Commercial Bank and a blue and silver coloured mitsubishi pajero, asked
Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan to follow them. They did
not present any warrant of arrest and did not inform neither his family nor Mr.
Rahman
Khan why they were arresting him and where they were taking him. 
 
The
Dhaka Metropolitan Police subsequently confirmed the arrest to the media,
adding that Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan has been arrested under the
Information and Communication Technology Act. The arrest was allegedly
made on the basis of a general diary filed by the police with Gulshan
police station, in relation to the fact-finding report issued by Odhikar about
the killing of 61 people during an operation carried out on May 5-6,
2013 by law enforcement agencies against Hifazat-e Islam activists at the Dhaka’s
downtown
Motijheel area. 
 
After
Odhikar released on June 10, 2013 its fact-finding report on the human rights
violations perpetrated at the Hefazot rally in Motijheel on May 5-6, 2013, the
Information Ministry sent a letter to Odhikar on July 10, 2013 asking
for the names, family names and addresses of the 61 deceased people. In its reply
letter sent to the Information Ministry on July 17, 2013, and concerned for the
security of victims' families, Odhikar requested those concerned to form
an independent impartial commission headed by a retired judge, where Odhikar is
willing to submit the names of the 61 victims killed.
 
On
August 11, 2013, at around 1.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was brought
before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Court (CMM), where the complaint against him was read by the Public
Prosecutor. The complaint, which was only handed over to his lawyers after Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan was presented before the Court,
was signed by the Dhaka Metropolitan Police. The police lodged two General Diaries
against him on August 10, 2013, one (General Diary number 268, dated August 10)
by the Detective Branch of Police (North) under Section 54 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure and the other (General Diary number 514, dated August 10) by
the Gulshan police station. Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was also charged under clauses 1 and 2 of Section
57 of the Information and Communication Technology Act 2006 for publishing
false images and information and disrupting the law and order situation of the
country. The complaint also alleges that there would be reasonable suspicion
that Mr. Khan is also directly and indirectly liable for other cognizable
offences. The Public Prosecutor sought a ten-day remand against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan while his lawyers
sought bail. The Magistrate, Judge Amit Kumar Dey, rejected the bail petition and placed Mr.
Khan on a five-day remand for interrogation in connection with
publishing a “false report” on casualties during a crackdown on a rally by the
Islamist organisation Hefazat-e Islam on May 5-6, 2013 (See background
information). Mr. Khan was then
taken back to the Office
of the Detective Branch (DB) of Dhaka Metropolitan Police at 36 Minto Road, in
Dhaka.
 
Furthermore, on August 11, 2013, the Odhikar
office was searched by DB police between 8.20 pm and 9.00 pm.
They inspected the files and documents and then seized three laptops and two
CPUs from Odhikar's office.
 
On 12 August 2013, the High Court of
Bangladesh stayed the five-day remand order to interrogate Mr. Adilur Rahman
Khan and asked police to send him to jail.  A High Court vacation bench
comprised of Justice Borhanuddin and Justice Kashifa Hossain, however, allowed
the Detective Branch to interrogate Mr. Khan at the Dhaka Central Jail gate
premises, if necessary.  The court passed the order after hearing a writ
petition filed by Mr. Khan, challenging the legality of the remand order
granted by Judge Amit Kumar Dey of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate’s Court.
 
On 13 August 2013, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was sent to Dhaka Central
Jail by the CMM, in accordance with the order issued by
the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh. Three hours later,
he was transferred to Kashimpur Jail number 1,
on the outskirts of Dhaka city. Although his lawyers applied for "division"
in the jail, the application was summarily rejected.
The Observatory is concerned that this might be an indication that the judicial
process against Mr. Khan might not be independent. Mr. Khan’s legal team now
plans to appeal to the Sessions Court against the refusal of the application
for “division”.
 
On August
15, Mr. Khan's wife went to visit him. As Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan has not been granted division, he shares
a cell with four other inmates. They have basic mattresses, which are riddled
with bed bugs and share a toilet. Food is bought from the jail canteen with
their own funds.
 
Furthermore, the Government would be planning to close down
Odhikar, accusing it of being an
anti-State organisation. It is to be further feared
that other members of Odhikar might be arrested in connection with the case
filed against Mr. Khan, for interrogation, if it is required.
 
I express my deepest concern
about Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan's arbitrary detention, which
seems to merely aim at sanctioning his peaceful human rights activities. Accordingly,
I call upon the authorities in Bangladesh to
guarantee in all circumstances his physical and psychological integrity as well
as to release him immediately and unconditionally.
 
More generally, I call upon the authorities in
Bangladesh to put an end to any kind of harassment - including
at the judicial level - against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, all members of
Odhikar and all human rights defenders in Bangladesh; as well as to conform with the provisions of the United Natinos Declaration
on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on December 9, 1998.
 
I thank you for your attention to
this urgent matter.
 
Sincerely yours,

New information
BGD 001 / 0813 / OBS 074.3
Arbitrary detention / 
Judicial harassment
Bangladesh
August
16, 2013
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), has received
new information and requests your urgent intervention in the following
situation in Bangladesh.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable
sources about the ongoing arbitrary detention of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, Secretary of the human
rights non-governmental organisation Odhikar and a member of OMCT General
Assembly[1].
 
According
to the information received, on August 13, 2013,
Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was sent to Dhaka Central Jail by the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrates Court (CMM), in accordance
with the order issued by the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of
Bangladesh on August 12 (see background information). Three hours later, he was transferred to Kashimpur Jail number 1, on the
outskirts of Dhaka city. Although his lawyers applied for "division"
in the jail, the application was summarily rejected[2].
The Observatory is concerned that this might be an indication that the judicial
process against Mr. Khan might not be independent. Mr. Khan’s legal team now
plans to appeal to the Sessions Court against the refusal of the application
for “division”.
 
On August
15, Mr. Khan's wife went to visit him. As Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan has not been granted division, he shares
a cell with four other inmates. They have basic mattresses, which are riddled
with bed bugs and share a toilet. Food is bought from the jail canteen with
their own funds.
 
The Observatory reiterates
its deepest concern about Mr.
Adilur Rahman Khan's arbitrary detention,
which seems to merely aim at sanctioning his peaceful human rights
activities, and calls upon the authorities in
Bangladesh to guarantee in all circumstances his physical and psychological
integrity as well as to release him immediately and unconditionally.
 
Furthermore, the Observatory is concerned by information it
received according to which the Government would be planning to close down
Odhikar, accusing it of being an
anti-State organisation. It is to be further feared that
other members of Odhikar might be arrested in connection with the case filed
against Mr. Khan, for interrogation, if it is required.
 
Accordingly, the Observatory urges the authorities of
Bangladesh to put an end to the harassment against Odhikar, a prominent human
rights NGO that since its inception in 1994 has been showing its commitments
towards a just and proper cause of human rights. Activities of Odhikar include
reporting, advocacy and fact-finding activities on violations considered “sensitive”
- such as disappearances, torture, political violence, etc. As a result of
these activities, Odhikar is under constant watch by the Government[3].
 
Background information:
 
On August 10, 2013, at 10.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was
arrested by eight or nine men in plain clothes who said they were of the Detective Branch of
Police (DB) as he was returning at his Gulshan residence in Dhaka with his
family. The men, who brought a white microbus apparently belonging to the
United Commercial Bank and a blue and silver coloured mitsubishi pajero, asked
Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan to follow them. They did
not present any warrant of arrest and did not inform neither his family nor Mr.
Rahman
Khan why they were arresting him and where they were taking him. 
 
On August 11, 2013, at 2:00 am, Odhikar defenders went to
the Gulshan police, where the police present denied having any case against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and claimed that they
learnt of his arrest from the media. Odhikar defenders also went to the DB
office at
12:30 am on August 11, where the sentries denied them entry.
 
The
Dhaka Metropolitan Police subsequently confirmed the arrest to the media,
adding that Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan has been arrested under the
Information and Communication Technology Act. The arrest was allegedly
made on the basis of a general diary filed by the police with Gulshan
police station, in relation to the fact-finding report issued by Odhikar about
the killing of 61 people during an operation carried out on May 5-6,
2013 by law enforcement agencies against Hefazat-e Islam activists at the Dhaka’s
downtown
Motijheel area. 
 
After
Odhikar released on June 10, 2013 its fact-finding report on the human rights
violations perpetrated at the Hefazat rally in Motijheel on May 5-6, 2013, the
Information Ministry sent a letter to Odhikar on July 10, 2013 asking
for the names, family names and addresses of the 61 deceased people. In its
reply letter sent to the Information Ministry on July 17, 2013, and concerned
for the security of victims' families, Odhikar requested those concerned
to form an independent impartial commission headed by a retired judge, where
Odhikar is willing to submit the names of the 61 victims killed.
 
On
August 11, 2013, at around 1.20 pm, Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan was brought
before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Court (CMM), where the complaint against him was read by the Public
Prosecutor. The complaint, which was only handed over to his lawyers after Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan was presented before the Court,
was signed by the Dhaka Metropolitan Police. The police lodged two General
Diaries against him on August 10, 2013, one (General Diary number 268, dated
August 10) by the Detective Branch of Police (North) under Section 54 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure and the other (General Diary number 514, dated
August 10) by the Gulshan police station. Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan was also charged under clauses 1
and 2 of Section 57 of the Information and Communication Technology Act 2006
for publishing false images and information and disrupting the law and order
situation of the country. The complaint also alleges that there would be
reasonable suspicion that Mr. Khan is also directly and indirectly liable for
other cognizable offences. The Public Prosecutor sought a
ten-day remand against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan
while his lawyers sought bail. The Magistrate, Judge Amit Kumar Dey, rejected the bail petition and placed Mr.
Khan on a five-day remand for interrogation in connection with
publishing a “false report” on casualties during a crackdown on a rally by the
Islamist organisation Hefazat-e Islam on May 5-6, 2013. Mr. Khan was then taken back to the Office of the Detective Branch (DB) of
Dhaka Metropolitan Police at 36 Minto Road, in Dhaka.
 
Furthermore, on August 11, 2013, the Odhikar
office was searched by DB police between 8.20 pm and 9.00 pm.
They inspected the files and documents and then seized three laptops and two
CPUs from Odhikar's office.
 
On August 12, 2013, the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh stayed the five-day
remand order to interrogate Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan and asked police to send him
to jail.  The High Court however allowed the Detective Branch
to interrogate Mr. Khan at the Dhaka Central Jail gate premises, if necessary. The court passed the order after hearing a writ
petition filed by Mr. Khan, challenging the initiation of proceedings under Section 54 and the legality of the remand order granted by Judge Amit Kumar Dey of the CMM.
 
Action requested:
 
Please write to the authorities in Bangladesh, urging them to:
 
i. Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, of all Odhikar members as well as
of all human rights defenders in Bangladesh;
 
ii. Release Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan immediately and
unconditionally as his detention is arbitrary since it only aims at
sanctioning his human rights activities; 
 
iii.
Put an end to any kind of harassment - including at the judicial level -
against Mr. Adilur Rahman Khan, all members of Odhikar as well as all
human rights defenders in Bangladesh;
 
iv. Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 9,
1998, especially:
-       
its Article 1, which states
that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”, as well as
-       
its Article 12.2, which
provides that the State shall “take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de facto
or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a
consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of his or her rights”; 

v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with international human rights standards and
international instruments ratified by Bangladesh.
 
Addresses:
 
Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister,
     Office of the Prime Minister, Gona Bhaban, Old Sangsad Bhaban, Tejgaon,
     Dhaka, Bangladesh. Fax: +880 2 8113243, Email: info@pmo.gov.bdMr. Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, Minister
     for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat Building
     4, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: mkalamgir@yahoo.com;
     minister@mha.gov.bd;Barrister Shafique Ahmed, Minister
     for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and
     Parliamentary Affairs, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Email: info@minlaw.gov.bdMr. Hasanul
     Haq Inu, Honourable Minister, Ministry of Information, Building # 4 (8th
     floor), Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh. E-mail: minister@moi.gov.bdMr. Hasan Mahmud Khandaker,
     Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Phoenix Road,
     Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh, Email : ig@police.gov.bd
H.E. Mr. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador, Permanent
     Mission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations in
     Geneva, 65 rue de Lausanne, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: +41 22 738 46
     16, E-mail: mission.bangladesh@ties.itu.intEmbassy of the People’s Republic of
     Bangladesh in Brussels, 29-31 rue J. Jordaens, 1000 Brussels, Belgium,
     Fax: +32 2 646 59 98; Email: bdootbrussels@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or
embassies of Bangladesh in your respective country as well as to the EU diplomatic missions or embassies in Bangladesh.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, August 16, 2013
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, an OMCT and FIDH venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22
809 49 29
·       Tel and fax
FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80



[1] Mr. Adilur
Rahman Khan has also been the Deputy Attorney
General during the erstwhile four-party alliance government.


[2] If division had been granted, Mr. Khan would have
been entitled to his own cell, a bed, and the privileges of using writing
material and having a separate light, a chair and table, as per Chapter 35 of
the Jail Code. 


[3] See
for instance Observatory Urgent Appeal BGD 001 / 0311 / OBS 039, issued on March 22, 2011. 