Myanmar (ex-Burma):  Release of Mr. Tin Maung Kyi, member of MDCF
August 21, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Myanmar (ex-Burma) / 2015 / AugustMyanmar (ex-Burma): Release of Mr. Tin Maung Kyi, member of MDCF

New
information
MMR
005 / 0813 / OBS 072.2
Early
release / Arbitrary detention /
Judicial
harassment
Burma / Myanmar
August 21, 2015
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of
the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Burma / Myanmar.
New
information:
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources of the release of Mr. Tin Maung Kyi,
a member of the Movement for Democracy Current Force (MDCF), a community-based
organisation that advocates against land-grabbing and other human rights
violations.
According to the information received, Mr.
Tin Maung Kyi was released in a mass presidential amnesty of 6,966 prisoners on
July 30, 2015. Only 13 of those released were political prisoners.
However, other MDCF members remain behind
bars. In particular, MDCF leader Mr. Htin Kyaw remains in detention,
serving multiple prison sentences totalling 13 years and four months, handed
down in 2014 for exercising his right to peaceful assembly (see background
information). 
MDCF member Mr. Zaw Win also
remains in prison, serving a one year and six month sentence (see background
information).
The Observatory
welcomes the release of Mr. Tin Maung Kyi, and thanks all the individuals,
institutions, and organisations that intervened in his favour. However, the
Observatory deeply regrets that he was arbitrarily detained for over one year
before being released.
The Observatory strongly condemns the detention and judicial harassment
of Messrs. Htin Kyaw and Zaw Win, which
merely aim at sanctioning their peaceful human rights activities, and calls for
their immediate and unconditional release.
The Observatory also urges the Burmese authorities to implement the decision of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, issued in
November 2013, calling for the release of Mr. Htin Kyaw after concluding that his detention was arbitrary (see background
information).
Background
information: 
Mr. Htin
Kyaw was first detained in
2007 for leading demonstrations calling for improved healthcare and education,
lower prices for basic food commodities, and religious freedom. 
On November 17, 2008, he was sentenced to 12 years and
six months in prison and then released in an amnesty in January 2012. 
He continued his activism and was re-arrested on
August 2, 2013, for organising a protest against land grabs.
In October and November 2013, courts in various
jurisdictions sentenced him to at least 33 months in jail.
In November 2013, the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention determined that his detention was arbitrary and urged the
government to release him[1].
On December 11, 2013, he was released in a
presidential amnesty but authorities re-arrested him the same day on sedition
charges. He was eventually released in another presidential amnesty on December
31, 2013[2].
In
early May 2014, Messrs. Htin Kyaw, Tin Maung Kyi, and Zaw Win were arrested for
a series of protests between February and May 2014, during which they distributed leaflets
critical of the government and called on Members of Parliament to resign. From
June 24 to September 11, 2014, 10 different townships courts in Rangoon
sentenced Htin Kyaw to a total of 10 years and six months in prison under
Article 505(b) of the Criminal Code for his involvement in the protests.
In June and July, 2014, three
different township courts in Rangoon sentenced Messrs. Tin Maung Kyi and Zaw
Win to a total of one year and six months in prison under Article 505(b) of the
Criminal Code for their participation in the above protest.
In 2014, Mr. Htin Kyaw
was also sentenced in relation to his land rights activities. For example, on
June 4, 2014, Rangoon’s Kyauktada Township Court sentenced Mr. Htin Kyaw to
three months in prison under Article 18 of the Act on the Right to Peaceful
Assembly and Peaceful Procession for protesting forced evictions in Rangoon’s
Hlegu Township. On July 9, 2014, Rangoon’s Bahan Township Court sentenced him
to an additional three months in prison under Article 18 of the same law, after
the authorities contended his attempt to meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi on
April 3 to discuss a land eviction case constituted an unauthorised protest.
From
June 4 to October 30, 2014, Mr. Htin Kyaw received 14 sentences under Article
18 of the Act on
the Right to Peaceful Assembly and Peaceful Procession and Article
505(b) of the Criminal Code in connection with his peaceful protest activities[3].
His sentences totalled 13 years and four months in prison.
Actions
requested:
Please
write to the Burmese authorities, urging them to:
i.              
Guarantee in all
circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of all human rights
defenders in Burma, including Messrs. Htin Kyaw, Zaw Win, and Tin Maung Kyi;
ii.             
Immediately and
unconditionally release Messrs. Htin Kyaw and Zaw Win since their detention is
arbitrary as it only aims at sanctioning their legitimate human rights
activities;
iii.           
Put an end to all acts
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Messrs. Tin Maung Kyi,
Htin Kyaw and Zaw Win, as well as against all human rights defenders in Burma /
Myanmar;
iv.            
Comply with all the
provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in
particular with its: 
-       
Article 1, which
stipulates that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
-       
Article 5(a), which
foresees that “for the purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms, everyone has the right, individually and in association
with others, at the national and international levels: to meet or assemble
peacefully”;
-       
Article 12.1, which
states that “everyone has the right, individually and in association with
others, to participate in peaceful activities against violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”;
-       
Article 12.2, which
provides that “the State shall take all necessary measures to ensure the
protection by the competent authorities of everyone, individually and in
association with others, against any violence, threats, retaliation, de
facto or de jure adverse discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the
rights referred to in the present Declaration”;
v.             
More generally, ensure
in all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and with the
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Burma /
Myanmar. 
Addresses:
·      
U Thein Sein, President
of Myanmar, President Office, Office No.18, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR
·      
Lt Gen Ko Ko, Minister
for Home Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No. 10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR
·      
U Win Mra, Chairman of
the Myanmar National Human Rights Commission, 27 Pyay Road, Hline Township,
Yangon, Republic of the Union of Myanmar; Email: chmyanmarnhrc@gmail.com
·      
Dr. Tun Shin, Attorney
General, Office of the Attorney General, Office No. 25, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR;
Email: ago.h.o@mptmail.net.mm
·      
U Tun Tun Oo, Chief
Justice, Office of the Supreme Court, Office No. 24, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR; Email:
scunion@mptmail.net.mm
·      
Maj Gen Zaw Win,
Director General, Myanmar Police Force, Ministry of Home Affairs, Office No.
10, Naypyitaw, MYANMAR
·      
H.E. Mr. Maung Wai,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative to the
United Nations in Geneva, Avenue Blanc 47, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland. Fax: +41
22 732 89 19, +41 22 732 73 77, Email: mission@myanmargeneva.org
·      
Embassy of Myanmar in
Brussels, Boulevard Général Wahis 9, 1030 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 (0)32 2
705 50 48, Email: mebrussels@skynet.be
Please
also write to the diplomatic representations of Burma in your respective
countries.


[1]                 For more information, see
Observatory Press Release, issued on February 5, 2014.


[2]                 Idem.


[3]                
Other demonstrations included the distribution of anti-government
leaflets and calling on members of Parliament to resign. 