Uganda:  African Gay Human Rights Defender honored with world human rights award in Geneva
October 11, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Events / Uganda / 2011 / OctoberUganda: African Gay Human Rights Defender honored with world human rights award in Geneva

 
PRESS RELEASE
11 October 2011
 
African Gay
Human Rights Defender honored 
with world
human rights award in Geneva 
 
On
Thursday 13 October Kasha
Jacqueline Nabagesera will be presented with the
Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights Defenders (MEA) during a ceremony in Victoria
Hall in Geneva, starting at 18h00. 
Kasha is the 20th Laureate of this prestigious award.
 
Kasha Jacqueline Nabagesera is the founding director
of Freedom and Roam Uganda, a lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT)
rights organization. The situation of LGBT community is extremely difficult and
dangerous in many countries like Uganda where LGBT people are threatened,
imprisoned, attacked and even murdered on the simple ground of their sexual
orientation. On 26 January one of her colleagues, gay activist David Kato, was murdered following the
publication of a “gay list” by the Ugandan tabloid Rolling Stone calling for
their hanging; on this list Kasha Jacqueline’s name also appears. Kasha continues
to find the courage to appear on national and international media at the risk
of her life. The Chairman of the Martin Ennals Award for Human Rights
Defenders, Hans Thoolen, described Kasha as “an
exceptional woman of rare courage, fighting under death threat against
homophobia”. During the one-hour ceremony, exclusive and penetrating images shot in Uganda will
demonstrate the work of the Laureate. Djenka Flow will perform African music in
her honour. The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights will
present the award. The event is co-organised with the City of Geneva, the human rights capital of the world, and the Geneva
City Councillor, Sandrine Salerno, will conclude the evening.
 
“The award for Kasha is a
stark reminder of the serious threats that those defending the rights of
lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transgenders face in so many parts of the world.
They deserve our active support”, said Gerald Staberock, Secretary General
of the OMCT, the organisation hosting the MEA.
 
The MEA, a unique collaboration among 10 of the
world's leading human rights organizations, is the award of the whole human
rights movement and sometimes referred to as the Nobel prize for human
rights. The JURY is composed of the following NGOs: Amnesty
International, Human Rights Watch, Human Rights First, International Federation
for Human Rights, World Organization Against Torture, International Commission
of Jurists, German Diakonie, International Service for Human Rights, Front Line
and HURIDOCS.
 
For previous
laureates and Patrons of the MEA, see: www.martinennalsaward.org the newly
designed website.
 
A press
conference will take place on 13 October 2011 at 11h00 a.m. at Palais Eynard in
Geneva
 
For further
information please contact:  Luis
Marreiros, Coordinator MEA     
Tel. +41 22 809 4925, marreiros@martinennalsaward.org
 
For use of the film
images : please contact the True Heroes Foundation  info@trueheroesfilms.org 