Colombia:  Joint Open Letter to Secretary Hillary Clinton on the situation of Principe Gabriel González
October  5, 2011
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Colombia / 2011 / OctoberColombia: Joint Open Letter to Secretary Hillary Clinton on the situation of Principe Gabriel GonzálezOctober 4, 2011

 

 
The Honorable Hillary 
Clinton
Secretary of 
State
Washington, 
D.C.
 

 
Dear Madam 
Secretary,
 
We support the U.S. government’s role in 
promoting the rule of law in Colombia, but much work still needs to be done to 
protect human rights defenders from prosecutorial abuse and uncorroborated 
charges. We write you as human rights activists to urge you to continue to 
monitor Colombia’s human rights performance, and to use U.S. leverage to 
alleviate violations as they occur.
 
While there are many human rights 
defenders at risk, we would like to bring to your attention human rights 
defender Principe Gabriel González, who is imprisoned today 
under the codes of yesterday’s discredited criminal justice system. González was 
a prominent student activist and, as a Regional Coordinator for the Political 
Prisoners Solidarity Committee, he worked to expose ill-treatment of Colombian 
political prisoners. His advocacy led to his own arrest in 2006 when he was 
detained on unsubstantiated charges of rebellion and association with FARC 
guerillas. A trial court acquitted him of all charges and went so far as to say 
the prosecution should never have brought them in the first place. Nevertheless, 
the prosecution appealed the court’s decision to the Superior Tribunal of 
Bucaramanga which in March 2009 overturned the acquittal and sentenced González 
to seven years imprisonment. He was re-arrested in August when the Supreme Court 
declined to hear his case on jurisdictional 
grounds.
 
González’s case raises concern about 
Colombia’s commitment to the rule of law. In 2007, the prosecution elected to 
try González under Colombia’s old criminal procedure code that inappropriately 
permitted the use of uncorroborated witness statements. Of his two accusers, one 
could not identify González and the other admitted to providing a statement 
under duress. The prosecution’s case would never have proceeded to trial, let 
alone conviction, under the new criminal procedure code enacted in 2004 that 
changed Colombia’s criminal justice system to an accusatory one. González’s 
conviction does not hold up to Colombia's own due process standards, and the 
trial judge was right to acquit him of all charges.
 
We respectfully ask the U.S. Department 
of State to raise the case of Principe Gabriel González with President Santos, 
and encourage González’s unconditional and immediate release on the grounds that 
due process standards – a centerpiece of the new system - have not been met in 
this case. Furthermore, we encourage an Embassy representative to meet with 
González in prison to show that the United States supports the ongoing struggle 
for human rights in Colombia, regardless of trade agreements. Finally, we ask 
that the U.S. Embassy continue to monitor González’s case and condition, and 
call upon the Colombian government to guarantee his safety while in 
prison.
 
González’s ordeal is not unique. His 
case is emblematic of the many human rights defenders in Colombia who are still 
being persecuted through the courts as a way to intimidate and silence their 
work. Colombia has a long way to go to protect and promote human rights, and 
human rights defenders like González deserve your 
support.
 
We thank you for your consideration and 
look forward to your response.
 
Sincerely,
 
Colombia Support 
Network
 
Freedom 
House
 
Front Line 
Defenders
 
George Washington University Law 
School’s International Human Rights Clinic
 
Human Rights 
First
 
Latin America Working 
Group
 
The Observatory for the Protection of 
Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the World Organisation Against 
Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation of Human Rights 
(FIDH)
 
U.S. Office on 
Colombia
 
Washington Office on Latin 
America
 
 
CC:      Ambassador P. Michael 
McKinley
            Under Secretary of State Maria 
Otero
            Assistant Secretary of State Michael 
H. Posner
            Ms. Amanda Porter, U.S. Embassy, 
Bogotá
            Ms. Barbara Rocha Williams, Office 
of Andean Affairs
            Ms. Kimberly Holbrook, Bureau of 
Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor 