Iran:  Human rights defender Nasrin Sotoudeh freed!!
September 19, 2013
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Iran / 2013 / SeptemberIran: Human rights defender Nasrin Sotoudeh freed!!

Paris-Geneva, September 19, 2013. The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation
for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT),
welcomes the release on September 18 of prominent human rights defender and
lawyer Nasrin Sotoudeh.
 
Ms. Nasrin Sotoudeh
is known for defending juveniles facing death penalty, prisoners of conscience,
human rights activists and children victims of abuse, and for being a member of
the Defenders of Human Rights Centre (DHRC). She is also the co-recipient of
the 2012 prestigious Sakharov human rights prize awarded by the European
Parliament.
 
Ms.
Sotoudeh was arrested on September 4, 2010 and sentenced on January 9, 2011 to
11 years of imprisonment for allegedly “acting against national security”,
“propaganda against the system”, “collusion and gathering with the aim of
acting against national security” and “membership in an illegal organisation”.
On September 14, 2011, her sentence was reduced to six years’ imprisonment and
10 years’ ban on practising law. During her detention, Ms. Sotoudeh was held for long periods in solitary confinement and
denied contact with her family and lawyer. She repeatedly went on hunger
strike to protest her prison conditions and
violations of due process. Since her arrest, the Observatory had constantly
called for the release of Ms. Sotoudeh, whose detention was solely aimed at
sanctioning her human rights activities, and had referred the case to the
United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention for a decision on that
issue.
 
According
to the information received, on September 17, several other prisoners of
conscience were also released, including Ms. Mahboubeh Karami, human
rights activist and member of the One Million Signatures Campaign that seeks
for the end of discrimination against women in Iran, and Ms. Jila
Karamzadeh-Makvandi, supporter of the Mourning Mothers of Laleh Park. There
are also as yet unconfirmed reports about the release of Messrs. Issa
Saharkhiz, a journalist and founding member of the Iranian Association for
the Defence of Freedom of Press, and Ahmad Zeidabadi, also a journalist
and Secretary General of ADVAR TAHKIM.
 
“I
am happy to learn about the release of Nasrin Sotoudeh, who has been
arbitrarily detained over the past three years in particularly harsh
conditions. I hope her release sends a positive signal towards ending the
harassment of all human rights defenders and political prisoners in the
country,” FIDH President Karim Lahidji said today.

“Although we welcome the release of Nasrin
Sotoudeh and several other political prisoners, Iranian President Hassan
Rouhani should now continue to take concrete steps towards ending systematic
human rights abuses in his country, in particular when he addresses next week
the United Nations General Assembly’s 68th session in New York”,
OMCT Secretary General Gerald Staberock urged today.

The Observatory calls upon the Iranian authorities to immediately and
unconditionally release all human rights lawyers and defenders currently
detained in Iran in relation to their human rights activities, to cooperate
with UN human rights mechanisms - including by allowing
the UN Special Rapporteur on human rights in Iran and other UN Special
Procedures to visit the country - and to fully
conform with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders. 