Occupied Palestinian Territory :  Palestine: arbitrary arrest and detention of seven members of the Islamic Jihad movement by the Palestinian National Authority (PNA)
December  4, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Occupied Palestinian Territory  / 2001 / DecemberOccupied Palestinian Territory : Palestine: arbitrary arrest and detention of seven members of the Islamic Jihad movement by the Palestinian National Authority (PNA)Case PAL 041201 Arbitrary arrests and detention    The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Autonomous Palestinian Territories.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment (LAW), a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrest and detention of seven members of the Islamic Jihad movement by the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) in the Autonomous Palestinian Territories.  According to the information received, on November 28th, 2001, seven members of Islamic Jihad were arbitrarily arrested, while 22 other persons affiliated with the same group, all from the Jenin refugee camp, were summoned for police investigation.  The names of those who were arrested are as follows:  1.	Abdul Hakeem Masalma 2.	Hussein Masharka 3.	Ayoob Abu Arkoob 4.	Bilal Al Hashlamoon 5.	Rafeek Al Shwiki 6.	Rafi Madiya 7.	Rafeek Al Atrash  The International Secretariat of OMCT is gravely concerned about the arbitrary arrest and detention of the above-mentioned seven persons, as they have yet to be charged with any internationally recognized criminal offense. OMCT remains gravely concerned about the new wave of detentions by the PNA, which appear to be a result of external pressure on the PNA to arrest Intifada activists.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in the Autonomous Palestinian Territories urging them to:  i.   order the immediate release of Abdul Hakeem Masalma, Hussein Masharka, Ayoob Abu Arkoob, Bilal Al Hashlamoon, Rafeek Al Shwiki, Rafi Madiya and Rafeek Al Atrash in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; ii.  guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the Autonomous Palestinian Territories in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  ·	President Yasser Arafat, Palestinian Authority, Al-Muntada, Gaza, Fax: 00 972 7 282 2365 ·	Mr. Freih Abu Meddein, Minister of Justice, Ministry of Justice, Abu Khadra Building, Omar El Mukhtar Street, Gaza, Fax: 00 972 7 286 7109 ·	Mr. Khaled Al-Qidreh, Attorney General for the State Security Courts, Police Headquarters, Gaza, Fax: 00 972 7 282 4253  Geneva, December 4, 2001  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 