Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan : harassment against KCHR members and its chairman M. Ramazan Dyryldaev
April 29, 2003
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2003 / AprilKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan : harassment against KCHR members and its chairman M. Ramazan DyryldaevURGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY  KGZ 001/0403/OBS 020 Harassment Kyrgyzstan 29 April 2003   The Observatory for the protection of human rights defenders, a joint  programme of FIDH and OMCT, requests your urgent intervention in the  following situation in Kyrzgystan :  Description of the situation:  The Observatory has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human  Rights (KCHR) of new acts of harassment against KCHR members and in  particular its chairman M. Ramazan Dyryldaev.   According to the information received, on April 21 2003, officers  from the State Department on Organized and Economic Crime (GUBEP)  came to Vladimir Tihonov's house, a KCHR employee, to find the  whereabouts of M. Dyryldaev. M. Tihonov was not at home. Already in  January 2003 an officer had come for the same purpose.   From March 29 to April 10, several men were seen around the house of  Ramazan Dyryldaev's brother Igraim, after M. Dyryldaev spent several  nights at his brother's house. Furthermore, on April 22 2003, the  KCHR released an information stating that the Kyrgyz authorities  tried to eliminate M. Dyryldaev. Indeed the President of KCHR has  been taking some precautions and has been moving from one relative's  house to another since his house and office are under surveillance.   The Observatory notes that on December 17 2002, militia officers of  the National Security Council (KGB) came to the KCHR office to ask  questions under the excuse that there was a robbery at neighbouring  apartment. As a result, KGB agents took a book of protocol and  financial documents of the KCHR.   Furthermore, on March 26 2003, former employees with unknown people  came to the KCHR office and tried to take computers and information,  but other employees came on time to prevent them from doing so. Those  unknown people who were helping them were presumably officers of the  Ministry of Interior or SNB because they were in uniforms. On April  21, M. Dyryldaev was accused by former employees of financial  misdoings. All these acts are part of a discrediting campaign against  the KCHR, increased especially since M. Dyryldaev had criticized the  Kyrgyz leadership during the hearings at the European Parliament on  February 12 2003.  These acts against the KCHR, notably against Ramazan Dyryldaev are  part of a constant strategy of harassment against human rights  defenders in the course of their duties. Such acts constitute a  flagrant obstacle to the rights of human rights defenders guaranteed  by the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, according to which,  in particular "every person has the right, individually or  collectively, to promote the protection and fulfilment of human  rights and fundamental liberties at the national and international  level"(article 1) and "everyone has the right, individually or in  association with others, to solicit receive and utilize resources for  the express purpose of promoting and protecting human rights and  fundamental freedoms through peaceful means"(article 13).  Action requested:  Please write to the Kyrgyz authorities urging them to:  i. Put an end to the harassment directed at the Kyrgyz Committee for  Human Rights and M. Ramazan Dyryldaev and ensure that they be allowed  to carry out their work without obstacles;  ii. Put an end to any kind of reprisals against Kyrgyz human rights  defenders  iii. Ensure the implementation of the provisions on the Declaration  on Human Rights Defenders adopted by the UN general Assembly on  December 9 1998 in particular under article 1, mentioned above, as  well as its article 12.1 which stipulates that "everyone has the  right, individually or in association with others, to participate in  peaceful activities against violations of human rights and  fundamental freedoms";  iv Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in  accordance with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other  international instruments ratified by the Kyrgyz Republic.    Addresses:  ·   Mr Askar Akayev, President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya  Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996 312 218  627, Email: ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su ·   Mr. Nikolai Tanaev, Prime Minister; fax: 996 312 661 382, e-mail:  pmoffice@mail.gov.kg  ·   Mr. Daniyar Narymbaev, Minister of Justice, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika,  720040, g. Bishkek, ul. Orozbekova, 37; e-mail:  minjust@bishkek.gov.kg  Paris - Geneva, 29th April 2003  Kindly inform the Observatory of any action undertaken quoting the  code number of this appeal in your reply.  The Observatory, an FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the  protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete  support in their time of need.  The Observatory was the winner of the 1998 Human Rights Prize of the  French Republic.   To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line: Tel and fax: FIDH : +33 (0) 1 43 55 20 11 / 43 55 18 80 Tel and fax  OMCT : (+ 41 22) 809 49 39 / 809 49 29 E-mail : observatoire@iprolink.ch 