Egypt:  Provisional release of Mr. Alaa Abdel Fatah and Mr. Ahmed Abdel Rahman
March 24, 2014
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2014 / MarchEgypt: Provisional release of Mr. Alaa Abdel Fatah and Mr. Ahmed Abdel Rahman​













New information
EGY 002 / 1113 / OBS 095.3
Release / Judicial harassment
Egypt
March
24, 2014
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint
programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and
the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and
requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in Egypt.
 
New information:
 
The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the
provisional release and ongoing judicial harassment faced by Mr. Alaa Abdel
Fatah, civil and political rights activist, blogger and member of the
“No to Military Trials for Civilians” movement[1],
and Mr. Ahmed Abdel Rahman[2].
 
According to the information received, on March 23, 2014, the 16th
terrorism circuit of South Cairo Criminal Court[3]
ordered the provisional release of Messrs. Alaa Abdel Fatah and Ahmed Abdel
Rahman on a bail of LE 10,000 each (approximately EUR 1,042). 
 
The hearing of the case was adjourned to April 6, 2014, when the
Prosecution is going to present testimonies and evidence against Messrs. Alaa
Abdel Fatah and Ahmed Abdel Rahman as well as 23 other individuals accused of
“blocking roads”, “assembling illegally”, “protesting without a permit”,
“acquiring weapons during a protest”, and “attacking and injuring a public
servant” and “stealing his personal wireless device”, in relation to a case
connected to a dispersed Shura Council protest of November 26, 2013 (See
background information). They face up to five years in prison.
 
The Observatory welcomes the provisional release of Messrs. Alaa Abdel
Fatah and Ahmed Abdel Rahman and thanks all the persons, institutions and
organisations who intervened in their favour. However, the Observatory regrets
that the two were arbitrarily detained for nearly four months, and remains
deeply concerned about their ongoing judicial harassment. The Observatory
considers this trial to amount to judicial harassment for their activities as
human rights defenders, and calls upon the Egyptian judicial authorities to
unconditionally drop all charges.
 
Background information:
 
On November 26, 2013 at least nine members of the “No to Military Trials
for Civilians” group, including Ms. Mona
Seif, co-founder of the “No to Military Trials for Civilians” movement,
nine journalists and seven lawyers were arrested by police forces in Cairo, as
they were demonstrating near Tahrir Square. In an effort to pressure the
members of the Constitutional Committee to vote against Article 198, the “No to
Military Trials for Civilians” group had called for protests to be held on
November 26, ahead of the vote, in front of the Shura Council (where the
committee holds its meetings). Tens of protesters joined the call at 4pm on
Kasr Al Aini street, however thirty minutes later, security forces issued a
warning to the protesters to immediately end their protest, which reportedly
remained peaceful. The protesters refused to leave and security forces opened
water canons against them. Security forces and policemen in plain cloth
simultaneously arrested protesters and journalists.
 
On November 28, 2013, security operatives raided Mr. Abdel Fatah's
residence. Although they produced no search warrant, they searched the premises
and carted away computers and telephones. When challenged for not being
authorised to conduct a search, they beat Mr. Abdel Fatah and his wife up while
their two year-old son slept in the next room. 
 
Egyptian authorities issued a warrant for Mr. Abdel Fatah's arrest after
they accused him of incitement and involvement in the calls for protests by the
“No to Military Trials for Civilians” movement, which was protesting Article
198 of the draft constitution that allows for civilian trials before military
courts. Mr. Abdel Fatah was then placed under pre-trial detention.
 
On December 9, 2013, Mr. Abdel Fatah and 24 other individuals were
referred to the Cairo Criminal Court with charges of “blocking roads”,
“assembling illegally”, “protesting without a permit”, “acquiring weapons
during a protest”, and “attacking and injuring a public servant” and “stealing
his personal wireless device”. 23 were released on bail on December 4, 2013.
Mr. Abdel Fatah and another individual arrested in the vicinity of the
demonstration, Mr. Ahmed Abdel Rahman, were detained in Tora Prison. The court
did not set a trial date until mid-March 2014. 
 
On January 5, 2014, North Giza Criminal Court sentenced Mr. Alaa Abdel
Fatah, Ms. Mona Seif and Mr. Ahmed Abdallah, member of the 6 April Youth Movement and
co-founder of the Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms, a group which
documents and denounces human rights violations to a suspended sentence
of one year in prison on charges of “arson”, “theft”, “damage to property”,
“violence” and “danger to public safety”. The charges were based on allegations
that Mr. Fatah, Ms. Seif and Mr.
Abdallah participated in the
attack on the campaign headquarters of former presidential candidate, Mr. Ahmed
Shafiq, on May 28, 2012. The jail term was suspended for three years and
therefore should any of the defendants be found guilty of additional charges
within this time, this one-year term would be added onto any subsequent
sentences. The three human rights defenders filed an appeal against their
sentence.
 
The conviction was based solely on the evidence of so-called
eyewitnesses who were either agents of the government or persons with criminal
records or with criminal investigations pending against them. Furthermore, only
one of the said eyewitnesses was available for cross-examination and he
testified that he did not see Mr. Fatah in possession of any weapons or
committing violence. He also admitted that he could not recognise the other
defendants.
 
On March 19, 2014, the prison authorities moved Mr. Alaa Abdel Fatah from
his cell to an unknown location. The authorities then failed to explain the
rationale of this unusual measure and failed to account for his whereabouts.
His lawyer then found out after he met him on March 22 that he was moved by the
prison police to a “disciplinary” cell and returned to his normal cell on March
21. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:
 
i.      Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
of Mr. Abdel Fatah, Mr. Ahmed Abdel Rahman, Ms. Mona Seif and Mr. Ahmed
Abdallah and all human rights defenders in Egypt;
 
ii.      Order an immediate, thorough, transparent investigation into the
above-mentioned allegations of ill-treatments against Mr. Abdel Fatah and his wife in order to identify all those responsible, bring them before an
independent tribunal, and apply them the sanctions provided by the law;
 
iii.    Put an end to all acts
of harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Abdel Fatah, Mr.
Ahmed Abdel Rahman, Ms. Mona Seif and Mr. Ahmed Abdallah and all human rights
defenders in Egypt;
 
iv. Comply with all the provisions of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, in particular with:
- its Article 1, which provides that
“everyone has the right, individually and in association with others, to
promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”;
- its Article 5 (a): “For the purpose of
promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, everyone has
the right, individually and in association with others, at the national and
international levels (a) To meet or assemble peacefully”;
 
v. Ensure in all circumstances respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human
rights standards and international instruments ratified by Egypt. 
 
Addresses
 
·       
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Adly Mansour, Abedine
Palace, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 23901998
·       
Prime Minister Mr. Ibrahim Mehleb, Magles El Shaab Street, Kasr El Aini
Street, Cairo, Egypt. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. Email: primemin@idsc.gov.eg
·       
Minister of the Interior, General Mohamed Ibrahim, Ministry of the
Interior, El-Sheikh Rihan Street, Bab al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: moi1@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794
5529
·       
Minister of Justice, Mr. Neir Othman, Ministry of Justice, Magles El
Saeb Street, Wezaret Al Adl, Cairo, Egypt, E-mail: mojeb@idsc.gov.eg, Fax: +202 2795 8103
·       
Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Hisham Barakat Dar al-Qadha al-Ali, Ramses
Street, Cairo, Egypt, Fax: +202 2577 4716
·       
Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National Council For Human Rights,
Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email: nchr@nchr.org.eg
·       
H.E. Ms. Wafaa Bassim,
Ambassador, Permanent
Mission of Egypt to the United Nations in Geneva, 49 avenue Blanc, 1202 Genève,
Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: +41 22 738 44 15
·       
Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, 19 avenue de l’Uruguay, 1000 Brussels, Belgium,
Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.be
 
Please also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in
your respective country.
 
***
Paris-Geneva, March
24, 2014
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the
protection of Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in
their time of need. 
 
To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25
18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49
39 / + 41 22 809 49 29



[1]
This movement was set up in 2011 and denounced human rights abuses committed in
particular by security forces and the army during the rule of the Supreme
Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) after the fall of former President Mubarak.


[2] Mr. Ahmed Abdel Rahman is a passer by who was arrested by the police
after he intervened to protect female protesters. Mr. Ahmed Abdel Rahman is
also detained in Tora prison.


[3]
After June 30, 2014, the judiciary created separate circuits for terrorism
offences to ensure a quick handling of such cases. Initially aimed at
addressing terrorism offences, such courts have be used in politically
sensitive cases. Mr. Alaa Abdel Fatah and the other 24 were referred to a
terrorism circuit by an administrative decision. However, so far, defence
lawyers have not been able to check this decision. Judges sitting in the
terrorism circuits are reputed as being very conservative. 