Sudan:  Release of Ms. Rawa Jaafar Bakhit, Ms. Nahid Jabrallah, Ms. Amel Habani, Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa, and Mr. Mohamed Abdallah Aldouma.
February 21, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Sudan / 2018 / FebruarySudan: Release of Ms. Rawa Jaafar Bakhit, Ms. Nahid Jabrallah, Ms. Amel Habani, Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa, and Mr. Mohamed Abdallah Aldouma.

​ URGENT APPEAL - THE OBSERVATORY 
 
New
information
SDN
002 / 0218 / OBS 017.1
Incommunicado
detention /
Ill-treatment
/
Arbitrary
detention /
Release
Sudan
February 21, 2018
 
The Observatory for the Protection
of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of FIDH and the World Organisation
Against Torture (OMCT), has received new information and requests your urgent
intervention in the following situation in Sudan.
 
New information:
  
The Observatory has been informed by the African Center for
Justice and Peace Studies (ACJPS) about the release of Ms. Rawa Jaafar
Bakhit, advocate for the rights of displaced families, Ms. Nahid
Jabrallah, Director of the Sima Centre for Training and Protection of Women
and Children’s Rights based in Khartoum, Ms. Amel Habani, award-winning
journalist and Coordinator in the No Oppression Against Women Initiative in
Sudan, Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa, human rights lawyer and Mr. Mohamed
Abdallah Aldouma, Chairperson of the Darfur Bar Association.  
 
According to the information received, on February 12, 2018,
Ms. Rawa Jaafar Bakhit was released from the Omdurman Women’s Prison, in
Khartoum where she had been detained incommunicado since January 17,
2018.  
 
In addition, on February 18, 2018, Ms. Nahid Jabrallah, Ms.
Amel Habani and Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa were released following a National
Intelligence Security Service (NISS) press conference atKober Prison in
Khartoum Bahari, where they had been transferred earlier on the same day for
that occasion. All three were previously held at the Omdurman Women’s Prison,
in Khartoum where they had been detained by the NISS. Ms. Nahid Jabrallah and
Ms. Amel Habani had been arrested in Khartoum on January 16, 2018 while they
were taking part in peaceful protests. Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa had been
arrested on January 31, 2018, in Khartoum Bahri at a police/NISS checkpoint in
the main street targeting the people heading to join a protest. Ms. Nahid
Jabrallah and Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa were detained incommunicado and acts of
ill-treatment against Ms. Amel Habani had been reported during her
interrogation. 
 
Furthermore,
on February 19, 2018, Mr. Mohamed Abdallah Aldouma was released from Kober
Prison where he was transferred three hours before from Shalla prison, North
Darfur, after more than a month of arbitrary incommunicado detention. 
 
The Observatory was also informed of the ongoing
incommunicado detention of Mr.Salih Mahmoud Osman, Vice-Chairperson of
the Darfur Bar Association, Mr. Amjed Fareed, blogger and human rights
defender, Mr. Ahmed Jadeen, journalist with Aljareeda newspaper
and Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim, freelance journalist. They are reportedly
all detained in relation to their participation to nation-wide peaceful
protests against rising commodity prices, which has resulted in the arrest of
several human rights defenders and civil society leaders. Yet no information
about charges levelled against them have been disclosed to date. 
 
The Observatory fears that these arrests and detentions
occur in reaction to nation-wide demonstrations that began on January 6, 2018
and were set off by the announcement of Sudan’s 2018 budget and the lifting of
subsidies and measures, effectively tripling Sudan’s U.S. dollar exchange rate
and increasing the price of basic commodities. Sudanese authorities have
carried out a campaign of massive arrests and detentions, including political
party leaders, journalists, students, human rights defenders and other
individuals for their involvement in the protests[1]. The police and the NISS have used
excessive force to disperse and arrest protesters, including the reported use
of tear gas and beatings with sticks and water hose pipes[2].
 
The Observatory strongly condemns and reiterates its
concerns over the ongoing incommunicado detention of Mr.Salih Mahmoud Osman,
Mr. Ahmed Jadeen and Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim, which significantly enhances
vulnerability to ill-treatment.
 
The Observatory urges Sudanese authorities to immediately
and unconditionally release them, as their detention is arbitrary and clearly
aims at punishing their peaceful and legitimate human rights activities and in
the meantime to guarantee their physical and psychological integrity and their
right to a fair trial, including unhindered access to their lawyers and
families.
 
Background information: 
 
On January 16, 2018, Ms. Nahid Jabrallah and Ms. Amel Habani
were arrested in Khartoum as they were taking part in such peaceful protests.
Both remain were detained by the NISS at the Omdurman Women’s Prison, in
Khartoum. Moreover, Ms. Nahid Jabrallah was detained incommunicado since her
arrest despite particularly delicate health conditions as she was involved in a
car accident prior to her arrest.  
 
Acts of ill-treatment against Ms. Amel Habani have been
reported as she was allegedly beaten with an electric rod during interrogation.
On January 29, 2018, she was allowed a visit from her mother and her two
children in the presence of NISS agents but was denied a visit from her husband
and did not have access to her lawyer while detained. A constitutional appeal
contesting the lawfulness of her detention was filed on February 5, 2018 on her
behalf against the Government of Sudan and the NISS and is still pending to
date. 
 
On
January 17, 2018, Ms. Rawa Jaafar Bakhit and Mr. Mohamed Abdallah Aldouma were
arrested as they were taking part in other protests in Omdurman. Mr. Mohamed
Abdallah Aldouma was detained at Shalla prison, in North Darfur, where he was
transferred on January 26.

 
On January 18, 2018, Mr. Amjed Fareed was arrested from his
home in Khartoum and has since been detained incommunicado within the NISS
premises in Khartoum. 
 
On January 31, 2018, Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa was detained
in Khartoum Bahri at a police/NISS checkpoint in the main street targeting the
people heading to join a protest and was further detained incommunicado the
Omdurman Women’s Prison, in Khartoum.  
 
On the same day, Mr. Ahmed Jadeen and Mr. Mohammed
Abdulmonim were arrested in Khartoum Bahri while they were covering protests.
Both journalists had been monitoring and documenting cases of detainees in
connection with the protests. They are being detained at the NISS political
section in Khartoum Bahari. 
 
On February 1, 2018, Mr. Salih Mahmoud Osman was arrested
from his office in Khartoum and has been detained incommunicado within the NISS
premises in Khartoum since. 
 
Actions requested:
 
Please
write to the authorities of Sudan asking them to:
 
      
i.         Guarantee the physical and psychological
integrity of Mr. Salih Mahmoud Osman, Mr. Ahmed Jadeen and
Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim, as well as of all human rights defenders in Sudan;
 
     
ii.         Immediately and
unconditionally release Mr. Salih Mahmoud Osman, Mr. Ahmed
Jadeen and Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim, and all detained human rights defenders in
Sudan as their arbitrary detention is merely aimed at
punishing them for their legitimate human rights activities;
 
    
iii.         In the meantime, guarantee
the right to due process and fair trial of Mr. Salih
Mahmoud Osman, Mr. Ahmed Jadeen and Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim, including the
unhindered access to their lawyers and family;
 
    iv.        
Carry out an immediate, independent and impartial investigation into alleged
above-mentioned acts of ill-treatment against Ms. Amel Habani in order to bring
all those responsible before a competent tribunal
in accordance with international standards;
 
      
i.         Put an end to all forms of
harassment, including at the judicial level, against Mr. Mohamed Abdallah
Aldouma, Mr.
Salih Mahmoud Osman, Ms. Rawa Jaafar Bakhit, Mr. Ahmed Jadeen, Mr. Mohammed Abdulmonim, Ms.
Nahid Jabrallah, Ms. Amel Habani and Ms. Hanan Hassan Khalifa, and all human
rights defenders in Sudan so that they are able to carry out their work without
hindrance or fear of reprisals;
 
     
ii.         Conform with the provisions
of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on December 9, 1998, especially Articles 1, 6(c)
and 12.2; and
 
    
iii.         More generally, ensure in
all circumstances the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with
international and regional human rights instruments ratified by Sudan.

Addresses:




·       H.E
Mr. Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir, President of Sudan, Fax: +249183783223; Email:
info@presidency.gov.sd
·       Dr Idris
Ibrahim Jameel, Minister of Justice, Fax: +24983791544
/ +249183764168 / + 249183770883; Email: moj@moj.gov.sd
·       Mr.
Ibrahim Ahmed Ghandour, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Fax:+249183772941
·       Gen.
Dr. Hamid Manan Mohamed, Minister of Interior, Fax: +249183779383 /
249183776554; Email: ministry@mfa.gov.sd
·       Advisory
Council for Human rights, Rapporteur, Fax: + 249183770883 
·       H.E.
Mr. Mustafa Osman Ismail Elamin, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Republic
of Sudan United Nations in Geneva, Fax: +41227312656 / +41227161970; Email: mission.sudan@bluewinch.ch,
·       Embassy
of Sudan in Brussels, Fax: +3226483499; Email: sudanbx@yahoo.com 
 
Please
also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Sudan in your respective
country.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, February 21, 2018
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply.
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was
created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the FIDH.
The objective of this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations
of repression against human rights defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members
of ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by
international civil society.
 
To
contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:
·      
E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org
·      
Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29
·      
Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80 





[1]           
For more information, see the Joint
open letter concerning the crackdown on peaceful protests and the wave of
arbitrary arrests and continued incommunicado detentions by Sudanese government
forces, February 14, 2018.
[2]            
For more information, see for instance ACJPS
Statement, February 7, 2018 and OMCT Press Release, Sudan: Escalating
government crackdown on protesters sparks greater safety concerns,
January 30, 2018. 