China:  Press Release: Release prominent women's rights defenders
March 19, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / China / 2015 / MarchChina: Press Release: Release prominent women's rights defendersChina_WHRD_PR_2015.03.192 pages / 142 KB
Paris-Geneva,
March 19, 2015 – The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
called on the Chinese authorities today to immediately and unconditionally
release five women's rights defenders detained ahead of
International Women's Day, as their detention seems only aimed at sanctioning
their legitimate and peaceful human rights activities. In the interim, their
right to a fair trial should be fully respected.
 
On March
6-7, 2015, nine prominent women's rights and gender equality defenders were
arbitrarily detained (for more information, see The Observatory’s Urgent Appeal of March 13).
Five of these defenders, namely Ms. Li Tingting, also known as “Li Maizi”, Manager of the LGBT
program at the Beijing Yirenping Center; Ms. Wu Rongrong, Founder and
Executive Director of the Weizhiming Women’s Center in Hangzhou; Ms. Zheng
Churan, also known as “Datu,” staff member of Yirenping based in Guangzhou;
Ms. Wei Tingting, Director of LGBT rights organization Ji’ande in
Beijing; and Ms. Wang Man, Beijing-based coordinator for the Global Call
to Action Against Poverty (GCAP), remain in detention in Beijing but
have not yet been formally charges with any crimes.
 
During the
first six days of their detention, all five defenders were denied access to
their lawyers. Since then, four of the defenders have been allowed contact with
their lawyers: Li Tingting on March 12, Wu Rongrong on March 16, Zheng Churan
on March 17, and Wei Tingting on March 18. Wang Man has apparently still been
denied access to her lawyer. 
 
After their
meeting on March 16, Ms. Wu Rongrong's lawyer reported that her medical
condition is not suitable for continued detention and that she did not receive
proper medical care in prison, including having her medication confiscated. Ms.
Wu Rongrong, who suffers from diabetes and severe digestion issues, was
demanded by the police to sleep on the floor. Likewise, Ms. Wei Tingting and
Ms. Zheng Churan, who are both severely near-sighted, have not been allowed
access to their glasses.
 
“All five women's rights defenders
must be released immediately, or at a minimum be presented with formal charges
if they are to be detained,” said Karim
Lahidji, FIDH President. “If they are charged, they should benefit from
decent conditions of detention and from unhindered access to their lawyers.”
 
Rallies have
been organised worldwide in support of the five detainees. On March 18, 2015
marches took place in New Delhi, India, in Seoul, South Korea in front of the
Chinese Embassy, and in New York City, USA, in front of the UN headquarters
where the 59th session of the Commission on the Status of Women
(CSW) is taking place. The main focus of the CSW is “the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, including current challenges that affect its
implementation and the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of
women.” Several NGOs have also called for a rally in support of the five
detained defenders on March 21 in Hong Kong.
 
“The Observatory has recorded a high
number of attacks against women's rights defenders ahead of the celebration of
Women's Day. Discriminatory practices against women's rights defenders cannot
be tolerated”, said Gerald Staberock, OMCT Secretary
General.
 
In addition,
representatives of the European Union and the United States have
publicly called for the release of the five activists.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) was
created in 1997 by FIDH and the World Organisation Against Torture
(OMCT). The objective of
this programme is to intervene to prevent or remedy situations of repression
against human rights defenders.
 
For more
information, please contact :
FIDH : Lucie Kroening (French /
     English / German / Arabic) - Tel: +33 6 48 05 91 57 (Paris) / Arthur Manet
     (French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +33 6 72 28 42 94 (Paris)OMCT : Miguel Martín
     Zumalacárregui (French / English / Spanish) - Tel: +41 22 809 49 39
     (Geneva) 