HRC 31 - Statement - Interactive Dialogue with the UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders
March  4, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / 2016 / MarchHRC 31 - Statement - Interactive Dialogue with the UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights DefendersHUMAN
RIGHTS COUNCIL
31st
session - March 4, 2016
Item 3:
Interactive dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human
Rights DefendersOral statement that the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), within the framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, could not deliver on 4th March 2016 due to time constraints.Please check against delivery
Mr.
President,
OMCT and FIDH, within the
framework of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders,
thank Special Rapporteur Michel Forst for the submission of his second report
to the Human Rights Council, in a context of increased repression and stigmatisation
of human rights defenders around the world.
Mr. Forst, you recall in your report the numerous
threats faced by human rights defenders worldwide, in an
increasingly hostile and shrinking environment. Could you please mention
some of the worst country situations in terms of the safety of defenders as
well as of the closing of civil society space, as documented in your annual report on communications?
You also mention that several States have introduced
legislation that provides a framework for the protection and promotion of the
work of defenders, such as in Brazil, Colombia, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico
or the Philippines. Yet those countries are also where human rights
defenders continue to face harsh repression. Yesterday,
prominent Honduran human rights defender Berta
Cáceres was assassinated. Mr.
Forst, what measures should be taken by these States to ensure that such
mechanisms effectively protect defenders?
We also take note of your recent mission report on Burundi.
Considering the serious deterioration of the human rights situation since
November 2014, we call on your mandate to continue to closely monitor attacks
on human rights defenders and their families; to urge the Government of Burundi
to immediately end such violations and bring those responsible to justice; and
to make recommendations for action to the UN Human Rights Council and, where
necessary, the UN Security Council.
On a more general note, we remain alarmed by the
number of States that persistently deny visits or fail to confirm specific
dates despite their commitment, such as Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Mexico,
Peru, the Philippines and Saudi Arabia. We are also
concerned by the lack of replies to your communications. Mr. Forst, could we
obtain clarification on which States fail to respond and what are the reasons?
Last but not least, our organisations remain
particularly worried by the
scale of attacks against economic, social and cultural rights defenders, in
particular land rights defenders, in countries such as in Brazil, Burma,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Colombia, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru,
the Philippines, Sierra
Leone and Thailand.
We therefore call on member and observer States of the
Council to work towards the adoption of a strong resolution on economic, social
and cultural rights defenders, which would inter alia:
- Highlight the legitimate
work carried out by human rights defenders, and the need for their protection
from harassment and attacks; 
- Denounce impunity of
attacks and urge States to hold those responsible to account;  
- Create and maintain a
safe and enabling environment for human rights defenders.  
Thank you. 