Kyrgyzstan:  Kyrgyzstan: arbitrary arrests, detention, beatings and harassment of demonstrators following a recent series of political demonstrations around the country
May 17, 2002
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Kyrgyzstan / 2002 / MayKyrgyzstan: Kyrgyzstan: arbitrary arrests, detention, beatings and harassment of demonstrators following a recent series of political demonstrations around the countryCase KGZ 290102.11 Follow-up to case KGZ 290102 Arbitrary arrests and detentions/Torture  Geneva, May 17th, 2002  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Kyrgyzstan.  New information  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR), a member of the OMCT network, of the arbitrary arrests, detention, beatings and harassment of demonstrators, including several members of the opposition and human rights defenders, following a recent series of political demonstrations around the country.  According to the information received, two members of Ar-Namys’s party, Rayimkulov Baymurza and Esenbek Osmonov, were arrested on April 30th, 2002, at the Kyrgyz-Kazakh border when they were returning from a Kurultai (People’s Congress) meeting in Bishek.  They were detained for three days during which period they were repeatedly tortured, before being released on May 3rd, 2002.  Both men were allegedly beaten by Bakyt Kozubekov, a National Security Serviceman, who had conducted their arrests.  Mr. Baymurzy and Mr. Osmonov were reportedly carrying a videotape of the events in Aksy that showed the Kyrgyz police opening fire against a peaceful demonstration.  The videotape was confiscated together with 2,000 leaflets on the decisions taken at the Kurultai.  Ryskeldi Mombekov, a KCHR coordinator has also been recently arrested for distributing leaflets (see appeal observatory KGZ 002/0502/OBS032).  According to reports, on May 13th, 2002, in the village of Kochkor, a demonstration  in which an estimated 3,000 people were participating, was violently dispersed by the Kyrgyz authorities.  The demonstration was part of a series of protests held around the country involving over 20,000 demonstrators in total.  Deputy chief of the District Police Department Turat Imankulov was reportedly in charge of the operation in Kochkor and, together with Head of Police Shermatov and about a hundred policemen and Special Forces, led operations in which protestors were beaten, arbitrarily arrested and their banners and leaflets were confiscated.  Kabylbek Jumabaev, deputy coordinator of KCHR, was severely beaten by T. Imankulov and other officers.  Following this attack Imankulov threatened Jumabaev with firing his wife who is a public worker.  The police reportedly sent provocateurs to encourage demonstrators to fight against each other.  According to the information received, on May 13th, 2002, in a demonstration in front of Jogorku Kenesh, the Kyrgyz parliament, over a thousand police officers blocked the way of the demonstrators, and a violent clash between protestors and the police ensued.  During these events, Jyldyz Niazova was wounded in both knees and Ulukuman Janyzakovich Sartov was injured on the back of his head.   According to the report, on May 14th, 2002, Aziza Abdrasulova, the chairwoman of “Erkindik” Party, was kicked in the abdomen by lieutenant colonel Subanov, a Commander of a Guards regiment of the Minister of the Interior.  Subanov had reportedly received the order to attack Ms. Abdrasulova from the Deputy Minister of Interior Dubanaev.  Ms. Abdrasulova, who was assaulted in front of the Jogorku Kenesh, lost consciousness and had to be hospitalised.  She is especially weak since she has been taking part in a political hunger strike since May 10th, 2002.  Police lieutenant colonel Isaev threatened to shoot other demonstrators and hungers strikers.  According to the information received, as protests continued on May 14th, 2002, Ulukman Sartov, was arrested and subsequently beaten by policemen from the Pervomaysakiy Regional Department of Interior (ROVD) when he was taking part in a demonstration in Bishek (see OMCT appeal: KGZ 160502.CC).  In the region of Talas, the head of the Kara-Buura area and a large number of policemen prevented citizens from joining demonstrations.  Buses holding hundreds of policemen from the Special Forces of Police (OMON) were sent to stop protests in the south of the country.  The government publicly threatened mass protestors.  According to reports, higher education students are also being subjected to repression, as they are not allowed to read independent opposition newspapers concerning the Kyrgyz-Chinese border issues.  Esenkulov N., Akynbaev R., Akylbekov M., and Rysbaev A., who are students at the Kyrgyz State National University, were threatened with expulsion and are now reportedly being closely watched after the police caught them reading an opposition newspaper.  Students are not allowed to meet with members of the opposition and have been intimidated with threats of incarceration if they join the demonstrators.  Asel Davletbaeva, a student of the Kyrgyz Technical University, was denied the right to stay in her hostel because she was distributing opposition newspaper “Res Publica.”   According to reports, during a peaceful meeting in Bishek on May 16th, 2002, over 90 demonstrators were arrested, among them were the following people:  Chairman of KCHR Ramazan Dyryldaev, KCHR lawyer Mamasadyk Jakyshev, KCHR coordinator for Naryn Region K. Bulatov, KCHR lawyer Alexandr Fomenko, chairlady of the Communist Party Klara Ajibekova, Deputy Azimbek Beknazarov, Radio freedom journalist J. Temirbaeva, editor-in-chief of “Agym” newspaper Eshimkanov, chairman of Human Rights Defending Movement of Kyrgyzstan Tursunbek Akunov, member of the “Erkindik” party Adurasulova, as well as several other members of the Kyrgyz Parliament, the “Ar-Namys” party, and 20 residents of Aksy District (see appeal observatory KGZ 002/0502/OBS032).  Police Department Head colonel Kalyspek Tenizbaev and deputy lieutenant colonel Talant Isaev reportedly gave the order to arrest all participants in the demonstration, including women, children and senior citizens.  Policemen who refused this order were reportedly beaten up and eventually forced to obey.  Several of the arrested were reportedly women who had come to see the Aksy tragedy procession.  The police beat the women and other demonstrators and as a result several of them fainted.  Ulukman Sartov suffered a broken rib.  Some demonstrators had to be hospitalised.  Gunshots were reportedly heard although more details have not been provided.  Policemen were reportedly ordered to leave their responsibilities all over the country in order to participate in stopping these demonstrations.  According to the information received, many of the arrested persons had been engaged in a hunger strike for over a week and were therefore very weak.    Detainees were reportedly not allowed food or water and were denied access to the bathroom during several hours.  According to the report, some of the arrested were to face administrative detention for 15 days, and trials would take place on the night of May 16th, 2002.  During that night many detainees were beaten and as a result some had to be hospitalised.  KCHR lawyer Jakishev M. was taken to hospital # 4.    According to the report, on 16th, May 2002, the Kyrgyz Republic’s Parliament voted for the immediate release of the people arrested at the square in front of the Parliament, but the Interior Minister T. Akmataliev ignored the verdict of the legislative assembly because he had reportedly received President Akaev’s personal order to arrest them.  Demonstrations that day continued with over 17,000 protesting in different parts of the country.  According to the information received, on May 17th, 2002, a march of about 500 people was violently dispersed by policemen of the Leninskiy Regional Department of the Ministry of Interior (ROVD).  The demonstrators were on their way to the Gorkiy Monument from Osh bazaar when the police attacked them and arrested 80 protesters who are currently being held at Leninskiy ROVD.  R. Dyryldaev was released on May 17th, 2002, after 16 hours of detention, and was prosecuted for violating public rules.  Deputy Beknazarov was also reportedly released on May 17th, 2002, along with an un-named journalist, but most of the arrested persons are thought to remain in detention, giving rise to fears for their physical and psychological integrity.  The International Secretariat of OMCT strongly condemns the Kyrgyz authorities’ use of excessive force against demonstrators, and their use of arbitrary arrests, beatings, detention and/or harassment against persons currently engaged in protests as a way to halt political opposition, in violation of their rights to the freedoms of expression and association, amongst other things.  OMCT is also gravely concerned for the security of human right defenders who continue to be harassed by the authorities, recalling in particular, that members of KCHR continue to be the object of persecution by the Kyrgyz authorities.    Brief reminder of the situation  According to the information received, these series of demonstrations are part of a larger political context which has emerged since the arrest of M. Beknazarov, Chairman of the Committee of Judicial and Legal Affairs of the Legislative Council of Parliament, on January 5th, 2002, after he had criticised the Government’s policy concerning the transfer of Kyrgyz territories to China and Kazakhstan (see OMCT appeals KGZ 290102 to KGZ 290102.10). After his arrest, many demonstrations were organised calling for M. Beknazarov’s release, which eventually occurred on March 18th, 2002.  Demonstrators are now protesting against the Kyrgyz-China border treaty ratified on May 10th, 2002.  They are also demanding the truth concerning the identification of the perpetrators responsible for the violent repression of the demonstration that took place on 17th March, during which 6 people were killed and 40 injured.  Additionally, they are calling for an end to political persecution and for the resignation of President Askar Akaev and the Interior Minister.  Action requested :  Please write to the authorities in Kyrgyzstan urging them to:  i.	order a thorough and impartial investigation into the reports of these events, in order to identify those responsible, bring them to trial and apply the penal, civil and/or administrative sanctions as provided by law; ii.	take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all persons arrested in connection with these events; iii.	order that all persons arrested in connection with this affair, be released immediately in the absence of valid legal charges or, if such charges exist, bring them before an impartial and competent tribunal and guarantee their procedural rights at all times; iv.	put an immediate end to the harassment of the persons who are engaged in protests; v.	guarantee adequate reparation to all protestors who have been injured by the authorities in relation with this case; vi.	guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with national laws and international human rights.  Addresses :  ·	Mr Askar Akayev, President of the Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyzskaya Respublika, 720003 g. Bishkek, Prospekt Chuy, 205, Fax: 996 312 218 627, Email: ghpress2@rhl.bishkek.su ·	Mr. Kurmanbek Bakiev, Prime Minister, Fax: 996 312 218 627 ·	Mr. Temirbek Akmataliev, Minister of the Interior, Fax: 996 312 663 031, 996 312 288 788, mail@mvd.bishkek.gov.kg ·	Mr. Jakyp Abdyrahmanov, Minister of Justice, Fax: 996 312 663 044, injust@bishkek.gov.kg  Please also write to the embassies of Kyrgyzstan in your respective country.  Geneva, May 17th, 2002  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 