Congo, Democratic Republic:  D.R. Congo'Democratic Republic of Congo: 80 detainees risk unfair trial
August 24, 2001
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Congo, Democratic Republic / 2001 / AugustCongo, Democratic Republic: D.R. Congo'Democratic Republic of Congo: 80 detainees risk unfair trialCase COD 170500  The International Secretariat of OMCT requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in Democratic Republic of Congo.  Brief description of the situation  The International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by the Comité Action pour le Développement Intégral (CADI), a member of the OMCT network, of the detention and torture of Byamungu Lufungula.  According to the information received, since 13th April 2000, Doctor Byamungu Lufungula, specialist in pharmacy from Bukavu, has been detained by the National Intelligence Agency (l'Agence Nationale de Renseignements).   According to the information received from Congolese human rights defenders, Doctor Byamungu Lufungula has been tortured and has not been allowed visits.  According to further sources, the doctor was arrested for having treated a man identified by the Congolese Democratic Colation (RCD-Goma) as a member of the Mai-Mai.  Furthermore, he is accused of being the author of subversive publications and links with Mgr. Emmanual Kataliko, Archbishop of Bukavu, currently detained in Butembo (see appeal COD 150200).  Lufungula has also been subjected to death threats if he did not admit such accusations.  Action requested  Please write to the authorities in Democratic Republic of Congo urging them to:  take all necessary measures to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Byamungu Lufungula and order his immediate release; guarantee an immediate investigation into Byamungu Lufungula’s detention and all allegations of torture, identify those responsible and apply appropriate sanctions; guarantee the respect of human rights and the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with international human rights standards.  Addresses  Me Joseph Mudumbi, Chef du Département de l'Administration du territoire du R.C.D. Goma - République Démocratique du Congo, N  télécopie : 00 871 761 850 629 ou  632.  Me Jean-Marie Emungu Ehumba, Chef du Département de la Justice, Réformes institutionnelles et Droits humains du R.C.D. Goma - République Démocratique du Congo N  télécopie : Idem.  Please also notify :  The President Laurent-Désiré Kabila. Présidence de la République, Kinshasa-Ngaliema, République Démocratique du Congo. Fax (+ 243) 880 02 120   Mr Mwenze Kongolo, Minister of  Justice, Ministère de la Justice, BP 3137, Kinshasa Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.   Mr Gaetan Kakudji, Minister of the Intérieur, Ministère de l'Intérieur, Hôtel du Conseil exécutif, Kinshasa - Gombé, République Démocratique du Congo.  Geneva, May 17, 2000  Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply. 