Cambodia:  Environmental activist Ven Vorn's conviction upheld by Court of Appeal
September 29, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Cambodia / 2016 / SeptemberCambodia: Environmental activist Ven Vorn's conviction upheld by Court of Appeal

New
information
KHM 003 /
1015 / OBS 084.3
Sentencing /
Judicial harassment
Cambodia
September
29, 2016
 
The
Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the
World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, has received new
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in
Cambodia.
 
New
information:
  
The
Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the Court of Appeal’s decision to uphold the conviction
of Mr. Ven Vorn,
an Areng Valley environmental activist and a community leader for the
indigenous Chong minority in Koh Kong Province.
 
According to
the information received, on September 21, 2016, the Court of Appeals upheld
the conviction and one-year suspended sentence of Mr. Ven Vorn. In a brief
verdict, the defendant's appeal was reportedly rejected without justification.
 
During a
previous appeal hearing, held on September 9, 2016, the Presiding Judge upheld
the arguments brought by the prosecution while ignoring defence arguments[1],
and repeatedly asked why Mr. Ven Vorn decided to appeal his conviction despite
being handed a suspended sentence entailing no jail time.
 
The
Observatory recalls that on March 3, 2016, the Koh Kong
Provincial Court found Mr. Ven Vorn guilty of “harvesting timber
products and/or non-timber forest products without a permit” (Article 98
of the Forestry Law) and sentenced him to a one-year suspended prison
sentence. Mr. Ven Vorn was released on the same day from Koh Kong Provincial
Prison, where he had been detained since his arrest on October 7, 2015 (see
background information). 
 
The Observatory strongly condemns the Court of Appeal’s decision to uphold the conviction
of Mr.
Ven Vorn as well as the arbitrary detention to
which he was subjected, as they only aim at
sanctioning his legitimate human rights activities. 
 
The
conviction of activists involved in high-profile cases and their release on
suspended sentences has become an often-used tactic by the Cambodian
authorities to criminalise legitimate activism.
 
The
Observatory calls on the Cambodian authorities to put
an end to all acts of judicial harassment against Mr. Ven Vorn as well as all
human rights defenders in Cambodia.
 
Background
information:
 
On September 2, 2015, 17 persons, including Mr. Ven
Vorn, were arrested outside Koh Kong Provincial Court. They were picketing
to demand the release of the three jailed activists, Messrs. Sim
Samnang, Tri Sovichea, and San Mala, who had been involved
in protests against a hydroelectric dam. Mr. Ven Vorn was subsequently
released.
 
On
October 7, 2015, Mr. Ven Vorn was re-arrested and sent to Koh
Kong Provincial Prison. The arrest followed the decision of Investigating Judge
Mr. Min Makara, who had questioned Mr. Ven Vorn on the same morning and charged
him with “harvesting timber products and/or non-timber forest products without
a permit” (Article 98 of the Forestry Law) and “destruction of evidence”
(Article 533 of the Criminal Code). 
 
Both of the
above-mentioned charges related to the construction by Mr. Vorn and a group of
local activists of a small visitor centre and community meeting place for local
activists involved in a campaign against the proposed construction of a
hydropower dam in the Areng Valley. According to activists and
environmental groups, the hydropower dam poses a threat to their land,
livelihood, and the natural environment. For this project, Mr. Vorn and others
had purchased approximately 10 cubic metres of wood from a vendor in 2014,
which authorities claimed had been procured by the vendor through illegal
logging.
 
On February
17, 2016, Mr. Ven Vorn appeared before the Koh Kong Provincial Court to
hear charges of “harvesting timber products and/or non-timber forest
products without a permit” and “destruction of evidence” (Article 533 of the
Criminal Code). The court dropped the charge of “destruction of
evidence” due to a lack of evidence. Mr. Ven Vorn faced up to five years
of imprisonment and a fine of up to ten million Riel (about 2,250 Euros).
 
Mr. Ven Vorn
had been previously questioned on April 3, 2015 at the Koh Kong Provincial
Court in relation to the same alleged illegal logging incident before being
released on the same day.
 
Actions
requested:
 
Please write
to the authorities of Cambodia asking them to:
 
i. Guarantee
in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Ven Vorn
as well as of all human rights defenders in Cambodia;
 
ii. Put an end to all forms of harassment, including at
the judicial level, against all human rights defenders in the country so that
they are able to carry out their work without hindrance;
 
iii. Comply
with all the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, in
particular with its Articles 1 and 12.2;
 
iv.
Guarantee the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance
with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other international human
rights instruments signed or ratified by the Kingdom of Cambodia.
 
Addresses: 
 
· Mr.
Hun Sen, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: +855 23 360666 / 855
23 880624 (c/o Council of Ministers), Email:
leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh / cppparty@gmail.com
· Mr.
Sar Kheng, Minister of Interior and Deputy Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23 212708
· Mr.
Ang Vong Vathna, Minister of Justice of the Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855 23
364 119
· Mr.
Prak Sokhon, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Cambodia. Fax: + 855
23 216 144 / 855 23 216 141, Email: mfaic@mfa.gov.kh
· Mr.
Sok An, Deputy Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, Fax: +855 23 882 065,
Email: leewood_phu@nida.gov.kh
/ info@pressocm.gov.kh
· Mr.
Keo Remy, President of the Cambodian Human Rights Committee, Fax: +855 12 81 37
81 / +855 23 21 11 62 or +855 23 88 10 45 (c/o Council of Ministers)
· Mr.
Bun Hun, President of the Cambodian Bar Association, Fax: +855 23 864 076,
Email: info@bakc.org.kh
· Ambassador
Mr. Ney Samol, Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Fax: + 41 22 788 77 74, Email: camemb.gva@mfa.gov.kh
 
Please also
write to the diplomatic representations of Cambodia in your respective
countries.
 
***
Geneva-Paris, September 29, 2016
 
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the
code of this appeal in your reply.
 
The Observatory for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders (the Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World
Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme
is to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights
defenders. OMCT and FIDH are both members of ProtectDefenders.eu, the
European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international
civil society.  



[1] The prosecution based its arguments merely on the fact that police
reports, according to which Mr. Ven Vorn ordered four people to log wood (see
background information), were accurate. As for the defence, it argued that 1)
Mr. Ven Vorn did not cut the logs himself, and was therefore not subject to
Article 98 of the Forestry Law ; that 2) even if he had cut the logs himself
(which no one argued), Mr. Ven Vorn would have a right to do so as an
indigenous person, as stated in Article 40 of the same Forestry Law; and that 3)
Mr. Ven Vorn used the timber he purchased to build a community center which
aimed to preserve the ancestral land of the indigenous people, not for personal
gain. During the same hearing, the Judge eventually reprimanded Mr. Ven Vorn
for having requested a third party to conduct the logging, despite claiming to
be an environmental activist, and considered Mr. Vorn's statement that he
purchased the timber as a "confession". 